Mamata Banerjee planning to murder BJP's Arjun Singh, claims Mukul Roy

Hours after Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Arjun Singh suffered head injuries during a protest in North 24 Parganas district in West Bengal, senior leader Mukul Roy alleged that West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee was trying to murder the BJP MP.

BJP MP from Barrackpore Arjun Singh sustained a head injury during a clash between his party activists and the police at Shyamnagar on Sunday. Arjun Singh, whose clothes were splattered with blood, claimed that the Trinamool Congress (TMC) cadre and a top cop had attacked him.

Speaking to India Today TV, Mukul Roy blamed Mamata Banerjee for the attack and alleged that it was a pre-planned conspiracy by the chief minister. He has also demanded that an FIR be filed against Mamata Banerjee.

"This is a pre-planned conspiracy by Mamata Banerjee. She wants to kill Arjun Singh. An FIR should be filed against her. She is the police minister yet she remains mum and makes her police tweet. She did this deliberately," Mukul Roy said.

Police have, however, said that it was the BJP MP who had provoked violence during the protest. It also said that Arjun Singh had provoked his supporters to attack police when the officers requested him not to cause inconvenience to the general public by blocking the road in Jagaddal area.

"Today some hooligans led by Arjun Singh, MP and his MLA son forcibly blocked the road in Jagaddal area of Barrackpore. CP along with other officers requested him not to cause inconvenience to the general public. He didn't listen and provoked his supporters to attack police," the Bengal police, in a statement, said.

It added, "Several policemen including the Commissioner are injured in the attack by hooligans. A pistol has been snatched and a bomb was thrown aiming at police from the roof of the house of Arjun Singh. The MP also got an injury on the head by a brick thrown by his supporters. Police have brought the situation under control."

BJP leader Samik Bhattacharya attacked the West Bengal government and said it has failed to maintain law and order in the state. "The state government has failed to maintain law and order. The constitutional machinery is on the verge of collapse. A competent authority should take care of it," he said.

The Trinamool Congress blamed the BJP MP, saying that "Arjun Singh got injured in the bombs that were hurled by his own goons".

West Bengal minister Jyotipriyo Mullick said, "A total of 165 of our party offices have been captured. The sentiments of our boys are attached with these offices so they went to retain it but Arjun Singh's criminals went there and began hurling bombs and firing shots."

"Arjun's goons began attacking the police following which police had to lathi-charge. Arjun got injured by the splinters of his own bombs. No one touched him. Why is an MP indulging in such goondaism? No anti-socials will be allowed in Barrackpore," he said.
