Fact Check: No, this woman was not shot by the Indian Army and she is not a Kashmiri

With very little information coming out from Kashmir, social media is full of speculations and fake news claiming to portray the situation in the Valley.

A disturbing video, in which a woman is seen bleeding profusely, is doing the rounds on social media with the claim that Indian Army shot down a Kashmiri student. The video shows a semi-conscious girl in a pool of blood while people surrounding her are heard asking each other to call the ambulance and police.

Facebook page Free Kashmir’ shared the video with the caption, Indian army shot down a Kashmiri student. If world cannot resist on such brutalities, it's better to close UNO and all the other organisations made to bring justice and peace. (The video not attached as it shows grim violence towards a minor)

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the video has nothing to do with Kashmir. The video is from Saharanpur in Uttar Pradesh where a jilted lover shot a school girl in her legs in December last year.

The post, shared by Free Kashmir’ on Sunday, has been shared more than 600 times till the time of filing this story. This page is followed by almost 4,500 Facebook users.

With a combination of InVID tool and keyword search, we found the viral video in a Zee News report. As per the report, on December 3, 2018, a jilted lover named Jitu fired four bullets in the legs of a Class 9 girl in Qutub Sher area of Saharanpur.

Jitu was arrested on December 7 and he reportedly told police that he was having an affair with the girl but her family had arranged her marriage with someone else. This made him angry and he shot four bullets at the girl’s leg so that she becomes disabled and her marriage is cancelled.

We also found a Dainik Bhaskar report describing the same incident.

Therefore, it can be concluded that an old video from UP has been passed off with the misleading claim that Indian Army shot down a Kashmiri student.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Indian Army shot down a Kashmiri student Conclusion The video is from Saharanpur in UP where a school girl was shot in the legs by her jilted lover. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
