So many PMs came and gone but none had courage to take such decision: Amit Shah on Article 370 abrogation

Amit Shah I @AmitShah | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Shah said Maharashtra will be the first state in the country where elections will be held after withdrawal of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir Jammu and Kashmir has become "part of India completely" only because of PM Modi

Solapur: Setting a tone for upcoming Assembly elections in Maharashtra, Union Home Minister and BJP president Amit Shah on Sunday raised the abrogation of Article 370 and also launched a blistering attack on Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and NCP chief Sharad Pawar.

Addressing a gathering in Solapur, Shah said Maharashtra will be the first state in the country where elections will be held after withdrawal of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

"I ask Rahul Gandhi and Sharad Pawar to make their stand clear on our decision to abrogate Article 370 and 35 (A) of the Constitution before they go for campaigning in Maharashtra," Shah said.

Last month, the Centre had announced bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories, which was later approved by Parliament.

"Maharashtra would be the first state where elections will be held after the decision of abrogation of Articles 370 and 35 (A) was taken in the both houses of Parliament. This election will decide whether people are with us or not on this decision," he said.

The BJP chief further said Jammu and Kashmir has become "part of India completely" only because of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

"So many prime ministers came and gone but none had the courage to take such a decision,” he added,

Shah said the BJP has always stood with the country on national issues, adding, “I had hoped similar response from the Opposition during abrogation of the Article 370.”

Earlier today, while addressing a gathering in Silvassa, Shah slammed the former Congress president and other Opposition leaders for questioning the Narendra Modi government over its move to revoke Article 370.

"The Congress opposed the move to abrogate Article 370. Even today, any statement given by Rahul Gandhi is lauded in Pakistan. His statement is even included in Pakistan’s plea. Congress should be ashamed that their statements are being used against India,” he said.

The home minister had also urged the Opposition leaders to “rise above their party politics” and support the Modi government-led Centre over the J&K issue.

Recently, Pakistan wrote a letter to the United Nations over Kashmir in which it quoted Rahul as saying that "people were dying in Jammu and Kashmir." However, the Congress leader strongly condemned Pakistan for instigating violence in Jammu and Kashmir and had asserted that Kashmir was an internal matter of India.
