The Shillong Times

Army jawan killed as Pak violates ceasefire along LoC

Jammu: An Army jawan was killed on Sunday as Pakistan violated ceasefire by resorting to mortar shelling and small arms firing on forward posts and villages along the Line of Control in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir, officials said. The soldier, manning a forward post, was killed in the firing from across the border in Shahpur-Kerni area of Poonch sector, an Army official said. Further details of the incident were awaited, he said. The ceasefire violation by Pakistan comes a day after Army Chief General Bipin Rawat visited the troops on the LoC in the twin districts of Poonch and Rajouri, and reviewed the prevailing situation and operational readiness of the units of White Knight Corps. Earlier, Jammu-based based Army PRO Lt Col Devender Anand said, “At about 1300 hours, Pakistan initiated ceasefire violation by firing of small arms and shelling with mortars in Poonch sector. The Indian Army is retaliating befittingly.” According to the officials, the firing from across the border was intense and was still continuing when last reports were received. Seven people, including five soldiers and a 10-day-old baby, were killed and several others injured in frequent ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the LoC in the two districts since July. The chief of Army staff (COAS), who was on a two-day visit to Jammu and Kashmir, on Saturday visited forward areas along the LoC in Poonch and Rajouri districts. (PTI)



UP doctor stitches up patient under mobile torchlight

Firozabad: The deplorable condition of medical care in Uttar Pradesh was highlighted again on Sunday with a photograph posted on social media showing a doctor treating a patient under the flashlight of a mobile phone at the District Combined Hospital in Shikohabad area in Firozabad district. A power cut and a backup failure reportedly led the doctor to give the patient, injured in a road accident, stitches under a mobile flashlight. According to the reports, owing to the rampant power cut in the area, even the inverter backup had got discharged leading to a complete blackout in the government hospital where the incident occured last week. A relative of the patient, who had received the stitches under mobile phone torch light said: “It was completely dark inside due to the power cut. The doctor had to treat the patient using a cell phone torch.” Meanwhile, the doctor on duty at the time, Abhishek, said that he was helpless and has to treat patients in whatever manner possible when there are no other options. “There was no power supply in the hospital and the backup had also failed. We are treating patients under mobile torchlight in such situations,” he said. (IANS)



Man gets 3 years in jail for abetting wife’s suicide

Thane: A tribal man from Talasari in Maharashtra’s Palghar district was sentenced to three years in jail for abetting the suicide of his wife. Pradeep Laxman Bhoye (30) was also fined Rs 20,000 by Assistant Sessions Judge S Tambe in his order on Saturday, additional public prosecutor Ujjwala Moholkar said. “Bhoye used to harass and beat up his wife Darshana (22) as he blamed her for not having children. Fed up of the torture, she set herself ablaze on May 10, 2017,” Moholkar said. Bhoye was found guilty under sections 306 (abetment to suicide), 498A (husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code, she added. (PTI)



Bus-truck collision leaves 4 dead

Jaipur: Four persons were killed and as many were injured when a bus collided with a truck while overtaking it in Rajasthan’s Pali district, police said on Sunday. The accident occurred on Ahmedabad-Jaipur national highway near Jhootha Gaon on Saturday night when the bus was on its way to New Delhi from Sanchor, said assistant sub-inspector Mangi Lal posted at Raipur Police Station of the district. The deceased were identified as Ankit Khandelwal (26), Chautharam (27), Sapna (9) and Taruna (10). He said that the injured were undergoing treatment at a hospital in Beawar town of Ajmer district. Bodies were handed over to the family members after post mortem and a case was registered against the bus driver, he added. (PTI)



Truck rams into jeep, 3 dead

Chitrakoot: Three people died while two were severely injured when a speeding truck rammed into Dial 100 police jeep in Rajapur area, police said here on Sunday. Police sources here said that three policemen and a villager met with the accident when a speeding truck rammed into a dial 100 police jeep near Mahua village at Kamasin-Rajapur road late on Monday night. Sources said police constables Safiq Ahamd, constable Hiresh Pal and home guard were changing tyre of their vehicle late Saturday night with help of local residents Ramsalone and Ashok when a speeding truck rammed into their vehicle. The impact was so strong that vehicle was badly damaged and three policemen and two villagers were severely injured. Injured were rushed to the district hospital where constable Hiresh Pal and villager Ashok were declared brought dead while constable Safiq Ahmad and home-guard Gyan Singh were referred to Prayagraj hospital where Gyan Singh succumbed to his injuries. (UNI)
