Forty years and counting for this scientist's 'eureka' moment; One who shoots photons everyday

Stripped to the bone and devoid of context, Dipankar Das Sarma ’s work could be seen as rather monotonous — like bricklaying, perhaps. He comes to work around 11 am, and starts shooting particles of light — photons — at a sample material kept inside a small vacuum chamber. When the photon hits the material, it releases an electron. He measures the kinetic energy of the emitted electron. Then he sends another photon to excite another electron from the sample and measures itsenergy. Then the next, and the next, and the next… The next day, the next month, the next year and so on for the rest of his working life.It’s worth remembering that nobody can even see what he does. An electron is hopelessly tiny. If you divide a centimetre in a billion equal parts, 28 resulting parts would approximate the size of an electron. Why is someone spending an entire career carrying out a mind-numbingly repetitive exercise at subatomic scale? We’ll get to that in a moment.Sarma, now 63, has been at it for some four decades. The Indian Institute of Science in Bengaluru, where he is now a professor in the Solid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, has been home to most of his work. He came there to do a PhD under the Bharat Ratna laureate chemist CNR Rao. Now of course his students do some of the work. During these four decades, he has been building equipment that can measure an electron’s energy more and more accurately. Building such equipment in the 1990s required a lot of ingenuity in the face of scarce resources.Now he has two electron spectrometers in his lab, built two decades apart. That’s the equipment that excites electrons in the atoms of a material, and then measures the energy of the emitted electron. By measuring its energy, scientists can learn how closely electrons in a material interact with each other. This affords us a better understanding of the properties of a material. In some ways, it’s the most fundamental way we are trying to understand the materials that inhabit our world.While Sarma’s work is fundamental in nature, the applications it spawns are numerous. Electron coherence, the name scientists have given to the way electrons interact, has applications in nearly every area of modern life. Touchscreens, superconductors, computer hard disks, solar cells have all emerged as a consequence of advanced understanding of electron coherence. Two decades ago, Sarma figured out how resistance of some materials change in magnetic fields, spurring more research worldwide in this area. It could one day lead to better magnetic storage devices.About 100 years ago, when physicists first understood what atoms are made of, they hadn’t quite bargained for the complexity of larger atoms.Modern quantum mechanics describe the hydrogen atom well—it has a proton and an electron. The next most complex molecule, helium, which contains two protons, two neutrons and two electrons, is too complicated for physicists. Complexity increases with the number of protons and the number of attendant neutrons and electrons. The largest atom found in nature, uranium, has 92 protons and electrons.Proton number is not the only reason for atomic complexity. When a bunch of atoms come together to form matter, the electrons inside behave in ways that are hard to understand.Materials that ought to be insulators sometimes turn out to be good conductors of electricity, and those that ought to conduct electricity well tend not to do so. For example, oxides of the so-called transition metals like titanium and nickel have no reason to be insulators, but they do not let electrons flow and thus do not conduct electricity. The key to such behaviour lies in better understanding electrons and their interactions.By knocking off electrons one by one from atoms, scientists can learn a great deal about how materials are organised at the atomic scale. The amount of energy with which an electron comes out depends on two things--its location within the atom and its reaction to other electrons. Scientists know where the electrons are coming from, and so knowing the kinetic energy tells them how closely it was interacting with other electrons. Using equipment like Sarma's electron spectrometers and some sophisticated calculations, material scientists can probe matter with exquisite precision. The questions they are able to answer in their labs hold the key to advancements in our devices, consumer technology and much else.One of Sarma's current interests is the quantum spin liquid , a state in which material behaves in a disorderly way at very low temperatures. Quantum spin liquids have now been attracting the attention of physicists due to their unusual properties, which may one day be useful for developing devices with new capabilities.Sarma and his students are also trying to understand how transition metals, seemingly in a fit of absentmindedness, suddenly start behaving like conducting metals at higher temperatures. They are also interested in the behaviour of the so-called double perovskites, compounds of transition metals that show extraordinary promise as future solar cells.Materials are used in all kinds of engineering, and modern technology rests on our understanding of how they behave at a fundamental level. Understanding electron coherence is at the heart of understanding matter. Advances in electron coherence will drive 21st century technology.That's perhaps what still drives Sarma to return day after day to his lab, to a lifelong pursuit that he can't quite explain to most people he meets.( Theoretically Speaking is a fortnightly peek into notable projects and people in Indian science)
