Pakistan cheering Rahul Gandhi, Congress should be ashamed: Amit Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Sunday launched a scathing attack on the Congress and its former president Rahul Gandhi, and other opposition parties for questioning the move to abrogate Article 370, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Addressing a gathering in Silvassa in Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the Home Minister said that his rivals must rise above their parties and back Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led central government over the issue.

The BJP strongman said Article 370 and Article 35A were roadblocks in the complete integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India, adding that the mandate given by the people of the country made Prime Minister Modi abrogate the same in the first session of Parliament itself.

Shah said the move had opened the path for the development of Jammu and Kashmir. "It was the last nail in the coffin of terrorism. All citizens, barring a few, have supported this move by the government," he said.

PAWAR SLAMMED Launching a scathing attack on the opposition, Amit Shah said that NCP chief Sharad Pawar was also crying over the repeal of Article 370



He accused the NCP and the Congress of not doing enough for the development of Maharashtra and sought an account of the development works carried out during their tenure in the state

Launching an attack on Rahul Gandhi, the Home Minister said, "The Congress opposed the move to abrogate Article 370. Even today, any statement given by Rahul Gandhi is lauded in Pakistan. His statement is even included in Pakistan's plea. Congress should be ashamed that their statements are being used against India."

Opposition leaders, including Rahul Gandhi, have been targeting the government since the announcement to abrogate Article 370 was made by Shah in Rajya Sabha.

The Congress was left red-faced recently after Pakistan quoted Rahul Gandhi in its letter to the United Nations on the issue of the prevailing situation in Jammu and Kashmir. In the letter, Pakistan had mentioned that even Rahul Gandhi was saying the people were being killed in Jammu and Kashmir.
