Amit Shah takes a dig at Congress and NCP, says ‘except Pawar, Chavan everyone will join BJP’

Solapur | Jagran News Desk: BJP President and Home Minister Amit Shah on Sunday took a dig at the Congress and the NCP over ‘influx’ of party leaders joining the ruling party ahead of the assembly elections in the states.

“If the BJP opens its door completely, except Sharad Pawar and Prithviraj Chavan, no one will remain in their respective parties,” said Shah who was in Solapur to attend the conclusion of the second leg of the ''Mahajanadesh Yatra'' launched on August 1 by Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis.

Sharad Pawar is the president of the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) while Prithviraj Chavan is a former chief minister from Congress.

Also Read | India to get consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav today, says Pakistan

Both the parties, especially the NCP, have witnessed a number of desertions to the ruling Shiv Sena and BJP.

Earlier in the day, Shah also slammed former Congress President Rahul Gandhi and said he should be ashamed as his criticism of the abrogation of Article 370 is being cited by Pakistan.

“Congress has opposed abrogation of Article 370. Even today, the statement Rahul Gandhi gives is being praised in Pakistan. His statement has been included in Pakistan's petition at the UN. Congress should be ashamed that their statements are being used against India,” said Shah in an attack on Gandhi.

This came after Pakistan quoted Rahul Gandhi in its letter to the United Nations on the issue of the prevailing situation in Jammu and Kashmir. In the letter, Pakistan had mentioned that even Rahul Gandhi was saying the people were being killed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Also Read | INX Media Case: SC to hear Chidambaram's plea against remand today

Shah also defended the government’s decision to revoke Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir and said that it has opened the road for developments in the Valley.

“With this decision of removal of Article370, the road for development has opened in Jammu and Kashmir. The last nail in the coffin of terrorism has been put, the task of integrating Jammu and Kashmir with India has been done. Everyone is with the government on this decision but some people are opposing it,” said Shah.

(With PTI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
