DNA Edit: JKLI ahoy – Local Kashmiri lads are signing up for Indian Army

Propaganda cuts both ways. It is therefore mandatory that truth needs to come out in its full glory. For far too long, Indians in the mainland have been fed subversive publicity that all Kashmiri Valley Muslims are anti-India. Reiterated by stereotyped narratives over the years, this untruth has come to be believed hook, line and sinker. In reality, the situation is different. Yes, political leaders in the Kashmir Valley have spread this canard over the decades, and extracted huge concessions from New Delhi without saying a good word for India. But the common man on the street, the shikarawallah and the peasant, who has not been the beneficiary of the goodies meant from him, has not entirely believed the lies handed out to him. That is precisely why it is the local Kashmiri who has been at the forefront of fighting Pakistan-sponsored militants, suffering huge casualties in the bargain.

Despite the extremist fringe of brainwashed youth involved in stone-pelting, by and large, the average Kashmiri — starting with 1947 — has stayed with India, joining Indian security forces and hitching his/her fortunes to this country. Last week, there was fresh evidence of this commitment. As many as 575 local young men joined the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry (JKLI) regiment of the Army. Their induction, coming after the Centre’s move to abrogate the special status of the erstwhile state under Article 370, serves as a strong rebuttal to the naysayers who had claimed that the decision has sent J&K into a spiral of turmoil for a long time to come. Their passing out parade as JKLI recruits at the Bana Singh Parade Ground in Srinagar on Saturday, also mocked at reports in the Western media of disaffection among local youth against the Indian government.

The induction ceremony in full Army regalia was attended by parents of several cadets who had arrived in Srinagar from all parts of J&K and Ladakh. The passing out parade was attended and reviewed by a Lieutenant General rank officer and cadets interviewed were thrilled with the prospects of starting a new life and serving the country. There were many among them, who were second generation recruits, inspired by their fathers. In fact, a cursory look at the history of the JKLI would tell us the extent of propaganda that has been on evidence in J&K in general and the Kashmir Valley in particular. JKLI’s regimental centre is situated at Srinagar’s Airport Complex at Avantipur with a winter setup near Jammu. The regiment mostly consists of volunteers from J&K and roughly 50% of its troops are Muslims, while the rest represent other ethnic groups.

JKLI is one of the most decorated regiments of the Indian Army having won one Param Veer Chakra and three Ashok Chakras. The regiment was set up in 1972 after consistently good performances in many war theatres. Apart from the Army, local Kashmiris have always joined the state police in large numbers and have borne the brunt of Pakistan-sponsored extremism. Maybe, post the abrogation of the special status, the real story will come out now.
