In A First, Indian Army To Deploy 'Integrated Battle Groups' Along Border With Pakistan: Report

highlights The Integrated Battle Group will have around 25,000 troops.

The special group will be commanded by Major General-ranked officer.

Yol-based IX Corps will be reorganised to form Integrated Battle Groups.

New Delhi:

For the first time in the history of independent India, the Indian Army is set to put in motion its grand reorganisation exercise by the end of this year. If everything goes as per the plan, the International Border along Pakistan will see the deployment of ‘Integrated Battle Groups’ of the Indian Army by December. This development gains significance in the backdrop of the ongoing tension with Islamabad over Kashmir.

With Pakistan continuously ratcheting up its rhetoric on Kashmir since abrogation of Article 370, there has been spike in the intelligence inputs over terror attacks in India. Keeping this in mind, the Indian Army has set the ball rolling for the reorganisation exercise, which will see the constitution of the Integrated Battle Groups, which can be deployed at faster pace. To begin with, the Army will position the IBGs at the Western Front. Later, similar group will be positioned at the Eastern Front. This crucial development was reported by The Hindustan Times on Monday.

Also Read: BSF's Elite 'Creek Crocodile Commandos' Deployed At Harami Nala To Thwart Pakistan's Plot

According to the report, Rajnath Singh-led Ministry of Defence has already cleared the project. As part of the plan, Yol-based IX Corps will be reorganised to form the Integrated Battle Groups, the HT reported. The Himachal Pradesh-based IX Corps is army’s youngest corps, which was raised ten years ago in 2009. It is part of Chandimandir, Western Army Command, the HT report said.

The entire reorganisation exercise is helmed by army chief General Bipin Rawat. “The international border portion of J&K Kashmir will see reorganisation first followed by others, making the Indian army a leaner and meaner fighting unit,” Rawat was quoted as saying by the HT. Commanded by a Major General-ranked army officer, the Integrated Battle Group will have around 25,000 troops, the HT report said.

Also Read: Pakistan Ready For 'Conditional Bilateral' Talks With India, Says Shah Mehmood Qureshi

Meanwhile, as many as 139 terrorists have been killed by the Indian Army in Jammu and Kashmir in the first eight months of this year, defence sources said on Saturday. However, during these operations, the 26 security forces personnel, belonging to various ranks, have also been martyred.

The report states that maximum number of terrorist-initiated incidents (22) in Jammu and Kashmir were reported in the month of May and security forces managed to neutralise as many as 27 terrorists in this period- the highest number for any calendar month in the year 2019.

The total number of terrorist-initiated incidents across Jammu and Kashmir from January to August have been recorded at 87. In the last week of July, Indian Army used Bofors howitzers to foil an attack by Pakistan Army's BAT on forward post in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir. More than four BAT commandoes had been gunned down by while they were attempting to infiltrate the LoC.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
