Bike-born assailant murders 'exorcist' in UP's Allahabad

When the villagers working nearby heard the gunshots, they ran to the bridge (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Lalta Prasad was going to Khakapur with a youth for an exorcism When they were on their way, the youth allegedly shot Prasad in the chest and fled The police have said that they are trying to identify the accused

Allahabad: A man was allegedly shot dead in Allahabad's Pratapgarh on Sunday. The incident took place under the limits of the Fatahanpur police station. The deceased has been identified as Lalta Prasad. Following Prasad's death, the police registered an FIR against an unidentified person.

It is being alleged that Prasad was last seen with a bike-borne man. A resident of Narayanpur Kala, 40-year-old Lalta Prasad had been working as an exorcist for the last ten years.

Abhishek Singh, Superintendent of Police (SP) Pratapgarh said that at around 11 am on Sunday, a youth had asked Prasad to go to Khakhapur village for an exorcism. An on-call exorcist, Prasad agreed to the job and decided to accompany the youth.

According to a report, the unidentified youth was riding the bike. When the vehicle reached the Bari Nahar bridge in Fatahanpur, the youth asked Prasad to get off the two-wheeler. As soon as Prasad got off the bike, the accused allegedly shot him in the chest. Following this, the youth fled the spot.

When the villagers working nearby heard the gunshots, they ran to the bridge. They called the police and informed them about the incident. The cops took Prasad to the hospital where he was declared brought dead.

The police then lodged an FIR in relation to the incident and formed a team to investigate the case. During interrogation, the family members of the 40-year-old deceased said that they had been seeing a man near Prasad's house for three days. A police officer familiar with the case said, "It is clear that the man was doing a recce with the intent to kill. We are probing his motive." No arrest has been made yet and further investigation is underway.

Man shot dead outside office in Noida

A similar incident came to light from Sector 60 of Noida, Uttar Pradesh in June this year where two bike-borne men shot dead a man. The deceased was employed at a private company. He was returning from his office after finishing his night shift when the accused shot him.

At around 7.30 am in the morning, the deceased Mohammad Imran was walking towards the bus stand near his office in Sector 60 when the unidentified accused shot him. When Imran's colleagues rushed out of the office when they heard a commotion. Imran was lying in a pool of blood and was immediately rushed to the hospital but was declared brought dead.
