Ireland Has Made A National Policy To Plant 220 Lakh Trees Each Year To Fight Climate Change

Significant long-term changes in the weather conditions around the globe as impacts of global warming and climate change are very much visible all around us and governments, NGOs and concerned organisations are looking at ways to overcome the impending crisis.

In a landmark move, the Ireland Government has decided to plant a staggering total of twenty-two million (220 lakh) trees every year in the country over the next two decades to battle climate change. In total, the plan is to have 440 million (4,400 lakh) trees by 2040.

They had earlier published a climate action plan in June and proposed 8,000 hectares of new forest every year to minimize their carbon footprint but the number of trees involved in such forests wasn’t specified.

afp/representational image

In its latest calculations, it suggests this will involve 2,500 conifers or 3,300 broad-leaf trees for every hectare planted. The target is for 70 per cent conifers and 30 per cent broad leaves.

“The climate action plan commits to delivering an expansion of forestry planting and soil management to ensure that carbon abatement from land-use is delivered over the period 2021 to 2030 and in the years beyond,” a Department of Communications Climate Action and Environment spokeswoman was quoted as saying in the Irish Times.

“The plan sets out key actions to be taken by the Department of Agriculture.The target for new forestation is approximately 22 million trees per year. Over the next 20 years, the target is to plant 440 million.”

So what does this mean?

unsplash/representational image

This ambitious plan that seeks to plant new forests and introduce greenery in the country, thereby reducing the carbon footprint and in the long term counter global warming means a significant shift in the use of farming land in Ireland.

The climate action report of the government already shows that there is a lack of enthusiasm and excitement among the farming community for forestry. The reasons are simple: those engaged in farming do not wish to have their lands covered under the forests as they depend on agricultural produce to meet their livelihood.

A key part of the Irish government’s plan, therefore, will be to persuade farmers to designate some of their holdings for tree-planting in the future.

Challenge ahead

Past examples from other countries, including India, have shown that the authorities face more challenges in pursuing such programmes than anticipated at the time of their formulation. But awareness is the key and once people are actually made aware of the climate change and impact of pollution, along with how forests help in overcoming their implications, they can very well be involved in the movement.

unsplash/representational image

While farming community remains sceptical of such programmes almost everywhere, it should also be noted their opposition is primarily because they depend on the land for their livelihood. The Irish government, therefore, has before it a daunting task of encouraging forestry among them in a manner that both the environment and the farmer’s rights and livelihoods can be protected.

And they are doing it with government-organised town-hall-style meetings that are being held throughout the country to encourage communities to support the targets.

Also proposed under the plan, is a massive increase of electric vehicles (EVs), up by an average of 100,000 annually over the next decade, to reach almost one million EVs by 2030.
