Pakistan now tries ban on airspace and Afghan trade route

By Dr. Ankit Srivastava, Chief Editor

Pakistan Minister for Science and Technology Fawad Chaudhry announced recently that the federal cabinet was considering restoration of a complete ban on the use of Pakistani airspace for Indian flights. The Minister revealed on Twitter that a blanket ban on the use of Pakistani land routes for India’s trade with Afghanistan was also suggested during the cabinet meeting and the legal formalities for these decisions to take effect were under consideration. “Modi has started we’ll finish!” Chaudhry wrote, in a reference to India’s amendment of the constitutional provision related to Article 370 and the status of Jammu and Kashmir.

The Minister’s tweet came a day after Prime Minister Imran had shared Pakistani government’s strategy on Kashmir through a national address. Imran vowed that Pakistan “will go to any lengths” to support the cause of the oppressed Kashmiri people. During the cabinet meeting Imran is stated to have reiterated Pakistan’s support for Kashmiris.

Pakistan is miffed with Modi for his revocation of Article 370. Since then Pakistan has been desperately trying all it could to push terrorists into Kashmir valley. Islamabad feels that terror incidents and subsequent Indian action to maintain law and order will drag Kashmir back into the centre-stage of world psyche once again.Revocation of Article 370 of the constitution now enables people from the rest of India to acquire property in Kashmir for setting up factories and business establishments. That will lead to growth of business, economic development and employment scenario.

But Pakistan, Indian political opposition and their vested interests try to misguide the common Kashmiris that the move is an attempt to dilute the demographics of Muslim-majority Kashmir with Hindu settlers. Even Indian move to bifurcate the state into two Union Territories to be directly ruled by New Delhi for better and effective governance is criticised vehemently for no valid reason. Pakistan angrily slammed Indian decision, expelled India’s ambassador, suspended bilateral trade, and took the matter to the United Nations Security Council.

Islamabad observed a ‘Black Day’ on August 15 to display solidarity with the people of Kashmir to downgrade India’s Independence Day celebrations. Imran has pledged to take up the responsibility of raising voice of the Kashmiri people at every forum of the world. “I will be the ambassador of your cause across the globe,” he said.

Pakistan has literally gone nuts trying to keep up the tempo of hostility or even taken it to several notches higher. It is adamantly shutting down all avenues and removing all ladders that could help improve the relationship at any point of time in future.

Is Pakistan now hell-bent on fighting India to the finish? In that eventuality it should rest assured of the hostility being reciprocated from Indian side as well. Disrupting trade route to Afghanistan irks Kabul which is not going to like this. Opening trade route to India has been a long-pending demand of Kabul which Pakistan has blocked from time to time.

Besieged with impotent anger some Pakistanis are yelling like: close it, good riddance, go ahead, good luck, just do it, good decision, lets play, this step should have been taken decades ago, and why is it still open. Such blind anger could be counterproductive. Good sense should prevail. Imran needs better advisory.

Pakistan may feel its route is to west and India’s route should run east only. But in the highly multilateral and interdependent world of today that’s not possible. India would prefer to trade with Afghanistan in the West and much beyond, straight with ex- Soviet Republics.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Email: ankits@newdelhitimes.com

Twitter: @ankitndt

Like this: Like Loading...
