Gujarat: 22-year-old woman's body found tied to pole in Vadodara; police probe on

Reportedly, the deceased lives in a hut near the spot where her body was found tied to the poll. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The deceased was identified as Varsha Mohaniya The police also found a mobile phone near the body which had around 30 calls made to the same number Mohaniya had shifted to the city around two months ago from Dahod

Vadodara: A 22-year-old woman was found dead in Manjalpur area of Vadodara city (Gujarat) on Sunday morning. The woman's body was found tied to an electricity pole with a dupatta. The deceased was identified as Varsha Mohaniya.

The investigating officer said that there are no injury marks on the body but a post-mortem has been conducted to know the exact cause of death. Meanwhile, the police also found a mobile phone near the body which had around 30 calls made to the same number. The probe in the case is underway and the cops trying to obtain the call records of the woman. Reportedly, the deceased lives in a hut near the spot where her body was found tied to the pole.

According to a report, Mohaniya had shifted to the city around two months ago from Dahod, in search of a better paying job. Also, she had recently got engaged to a boy from her village. However, the cops have registered a case of accidental death and further probe is underway.

Bodies of young couple found hanging from tree in Uttar Pradesh's Barabanki

In a similar case reported Uttar Pradesh, bodies of a young couple were found hanging from a tree in Barabanki district in August last week. The bodies were discovered by locals who immediately alerted police an investigation was launched into the matter. The victims were identified as Shivam Yadav and Soni. The deceased male - Shivam Yadav was the son of Safdarjung resident Om Chandra Yadav, while Soni's father Lalji is a resident of Thakurpur village in Ghazipur.

Reportedly, their bodies were found near the Sarai Kayasthan village off the Ayodhya highway, in an area which falls under the limits of the Safdarjung police station. Police officials found a brand-new motorcycle not far from where the bodies were discovered by locals. An officer said that it was a TVS make motorcycle but had no number plate which suggests that it may have been bought fairly recently. However, the investigation in the case was underway.
