No scope of talks with a country that openly practises terrorism: EAM S Jaishankar slams Pakistan

EAM S Jaishankar | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights EAM S Jaishankar says Pakistan openly practices terrorism He asserts talks and terror cannot go together He reiterates communication blockade was necessary in Kashmir

London: India on Monday slammed Pakistan for openly practising terrorism while reiterating that a dialogue was not possible till Islamabad curbed the financing and recruitment of terrorists on its soil. In an interview with an international media organisation, External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar said Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s recent idea of bilateral talks was a nonstarter.

The minister was commenting on an opinion piece written recently by Imran Khan on Kashmir and published in American daily, the New York Times. In his article, Khan had called for urgent talks as a "nuclear shadow" hovered over South Asia.

Dismissing the Pakistan PM’s opinion piece, Jaishankar said he hasn't had the time to read it. Jaishankar have the interview to POLITICO last week when he was in Brussels.

"Terrorism is not something that is being conducted in dark corners of Pakistan. It's done in broad daylight," the minister reportedly said, while adding that Pakistan "openly practises terrorism".

The bilateral talks between India and Pakistan were suspended in the wake of the January 2016 attack on an Indian Air Force base at Pathankot. The attack was carried out by Pakistan-based terrorists.

The minister, meanwhile, also commented on the issue of Kashmir and said security restrictions imposed in the region ahead of revocation of special status early last month would be further eased in the “coming days”.

Justifying the communication blockade in Kashmir, Jaishankar said the measures were necessary to stop the activation of "terrorist assets" and to prevent "people who are doing violence to contact each other".

"How do I cut off communications between the terrorists and their masters on the one hand, but keep the internet open for other people? I would be delighted to know. I would suggest to you that in the coming days you will see an easing up progressively," Jaishankar said.

He added that the number of extra security forces in Kashmir would also be reduced and the extra police would be sent back to their original duties soon. "Frankly they have other jobs and other things to do," Jaishankar said.

Tensions have risen between India and Pakistan ever since New Delhi on August 5 scrapped Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Since then, Pakistan has been making failed attempts to raise the Kashmir issue at various international fora.

The world has openly come out to support India’s assertion that the decisions taken by New Delhi on Kashmir are an internal matter and it was high time Pakistan accepted the reality.
