Arrest of two Pakistani nationals in Gulmarg signifies continuous cross border infiltration attempts

Nazeem Khokhar is on the left, Khaleel Ahmed Kayani is on the right | Photo Credit: Times Now

When Ajmal Kasab was caught during the 26/11 terror attack in Mumbai, there was no way anybody would believe that Pakistan was not responsible for planning and carrying out the attack in which over 160 people, including foreign nationals, lost their lives. The arrest of Nazneen Khokhar and Khaleel Ahmed Kayani, both Pakistani nationals, in Gulmarg in late August is further evidence that despite the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) monitoring Islamabad's actions and the United Nation Security Council (UNSC)'s refusal to criticise India for the abrogation of Article 370, infiltration is continuing.

Khokhar is 25, son of Mohammed Arif Khokhar of Tedaban village, Khurshidabad tehseel and Forward Quetta district of Pakistan. Khaleel Ahmed Kayani is 36, son of Abdur Aziz of Rawalpindi. They were part of a group of seven terrorists, including three Afghans, who speak only Pushtu, were pushed in. They were asked to attack a Indian Army border post and then, enter Jammu and Kashmir.

Khokhar, was recruited and trained in the use of the AK-47 assault rifle and grenade launchers in April. He was trained at Regibazar camp, in Khurshidabad. He was motivated to join a terrorist group after hearing Hafiz Sayid, not the Lashkar chief, but a local imam with the same name. Sayid told Khokhar he was obliged to help the people of Kashmir after the abrogation of Article 370. He was recruited by a local commander: Khokhar said his name was Nadeem. This was in early August

Kayani was trained in Kotli, a well-known terror camp and then, moved to the launch pad, where. he said, there were about 15-20 other terrorists. The three Afghans--Amzad, Ehsaan and Sarfaraz-- speak only Pushtu and were brought in by two Pakistan Army officers in mufti. The group was told that if they were spotted on the Indian side of the line of control, the should say they were bakarwals or herdsmen and were there to cut grass.

The group of seven crossed several army posts-- Jholi, Bangi and Sankara-- and with the help of Noor, the guide, crossed a nullah and into J&K with AK-47s and magazines. This is clear evidence, defence sources said, that the Pakistan Army remains involved in supporting terrorists being pushed into India. Shortly after the terrorists crossed into J&K, Indian Army soldiers apprehended them close to Gulmarg. It is not often that terrorists are apprehended; the others of the group, including the Afghans, are still at large.

Indian security forces have learnt, after the interrogation, that there is a large weapons dump very close to the line of control. Finding it is now top priority.
