Road accidents kill 8 in 6 districts

Wreckage of the police van after being hit by the covered van on the Dhaka-Chittagong highway in Comilla on Sunday, September 1, 2019 Dhaka Tribune

In Narayanganj, At least one was killed, and two others injured in a head-on- collision between two trucks on Sunday





At least eight people were killed, and many others injured, in separate road accidents across the country from Sunday to Monday.

The accidents took place in Thakurgaon, Comilla, Narayanganj, Habiganj, Gazipur, and Rajshahi.

In Thakurgaon, an elderly man was killed after a goods- laden truck hit his cycle on Thakurgaon- Panchagarh highway around 7 pm yesterday.

The deceased was identified as Pabaruddin,70, resident of Madarganj village under Awaliapur union of the district’s Sadar upazila.

According to eyewitnesses and police, A goods laden truck coming from Panchagarh hit Pabaruddin’s cycle when he was returning from Vulli Bazar in the evening, leaving him dead on the spot. The driver and helper managed to flee the scene, the truck was seized.

In Comilla, at least three people, including an Assistant Sub-inspector(ASI) were killed when a covered van ran them over on Dhaka-Chittagong highway yesterday.

The accident took place near Baburchi Bazar in Syedpur area of Chauddagram upazila.

The deceased ASI was identified as Akhtar of Chauddagram Miabazar Highway police outpost. He hailed from Comilla’s Barura upazila.

The other two deceased were the covered van’s helper Sumon, son of Babul from Nandi village of Chandraganj upazila of Lakshmipur district, and Fahad, son of Saleh Ahmed from Senbagh Upazila of Noakhali district.

Mia Bazar highway police outpost In-Charge Abul Kalam Azad confirmed the matter.

In Narayanganj, At least one was killed, and two others injured in a head-on- collision between two trucks on Sunday.

The accident happened near Barpa area in Rupganj upazila.

Rupganj police station Sub-inspector Khairul Islam confirmed the matter.

The deceased, identified as Raju is the son of Ramjan Patawari from Dhakhin Mandali area of Lakshmipur district.

In Habiganj, one Chatra league leader was killed, and two others injured in a road accident in Madhabpur upazila.

The deceased is identified as Moudud Ahmed, organizing secretary of Madhabpur Upazila Chatra League. He is the son of Fazlur Rahman from the upazila’s Dharmapur village.

KM Ajmirujjaman, ,Officer in charge of Madhabpur police station, said: “Moudud Ahmed along with two people were standing in front of the maingate of the Upazila complex. At one point, a speeding microbus hit, and injured them critically.’’

Later, they were rushed to the Upazila Health Complex, where duty doctors declared Moudud Ahmed dead. The injured are currently being treated, he added.

In Gazipur, a man was killed in a head- on-collision between a truck, and an Easybike at Pubail area on Monday morning.

The deceased was identified as Easybike driver Mannan, 44, son of late Lal Mia from Lashiara village of Kasba upazila of Brahmanbaria district.

Confirming the matter, Sub inspector(SI) Saiful Islam of Pubail police station of Gazipur Metropolitan police, said ‘’ A cement laden truck collided head on with an Esaybike in Taltia area, leaving Easybike driver Mannan dead on the spot.’’

In Rajshahi, a police constable died while undergoing treatment at Rajshahi Medical College Hospital around 6 pm on Sunday.

He was admitted to the hospital after being hit by a speeding motorcycle in Godagari upazila on August 31.

The deceased police constable was identified as Abu Bakar Siddik, who hailed from Manda Thana of Naogaon district.

Additional Superintendent of Rajshahi (Sadar) police, Iftekhar Alam confirmed the matter.

Our correspondents Zakir Mostafiz, Thakurgaon; Masud Alam, Comilla; Shamima Rita, Narayanganj; Md Noor uddin, Habiganj; Raihanul Islam Akand, Gazipur; Dulal Abdullah; Rajshahi contributed to this report
