India hits back: 3 Pak army men killed, 2 hurt; 5 posts decimated - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

2 more Indian Army jawans injured

Shells land close to houses, religious place

Sanjeev Pargal

JAMMU, Sept 2: In view of continued ceasefire violations by the Pakistan army, the Indian troops launched major counter attack targeting Pakistan’s forward posts which were raining mortars and firing on civilian areas at Shahpur and Sabjian sectors of Poonch, killing three enemy troops and injuring two others and damaging their at least five forward posts, which were being used for gathering militants to push them into the Indian territory.

Click here to watch video

While an Army soldier was martyred yesterday in Shahpur sector, two others sustained injuries in Pakistan army’s mortar shelling and firing in Sabjian sector on the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district today.

A religious place was among few structures which sustained minor damage in Shahpur and Sabjian sectors of Poonch leading to panic among the people who had to take shelter in bunkers and their houses. Some of the villagers who had gone to their fields for routine work were stranded for some time and returned to their houses only when shelling and firing stopped.

Two Army jawans who were injured in Pakistan shelling and firing in Sabjian sector today have been identified as Sepoy Kunda Naresh and Sepoy Sunil Kumar Singh. They were immediately evacuated from the firing site and rushed to the Army hospital where they were responding to the treatment.

Last night, Grenadier Hemraj Jat, 23, had attained martyrdom in Pakistan firing in Shahpur sector. He hailed from village Bhadoon, Roopangarh in Ajmer district of Rajasthan and is survived by his mother Dhaka Devi.

“Grenadier Hemraj Jat was a brave, highly motivated and sincere soldier. The nation will always remain indebted to him for supreme sacrifice and devotion to duty,” a Defence spokesman said.

Body of the martyr was sent to his native town with full military honours today. His cremation will take place tomorrow.

“The Indian troops retaliated effectively and launched major counter action to silence the Pakistani guns which were targeting forward posts of the Army as well as civilian locations,” sources said, adding that at least three Pakistan army men were killed and two others injured in retaliatory action of the Indian Army.

Five forward posts of Pakistan army across Shahpur Kirni and Sabjian were hit and damaged extensively. These posts were being used by the Pakistan army to target forward Indian posts and civilian areas.

There were reports that Pakistan army had mobilized armed militants in these forward posts to facilitate their infiltration into this side. Reports indicated that Pakistan army has brought number of militants close to their forward posts on the LoC with a view to push them into Jammu and Kashmir for terror acts in the aftermath of abrogation of special Constitutional provisions of Jammu and Kashmir.

A Defence spokesman said the Indian Army responded to Pakistan shelling and firing strongly and effectively causing damage to major Pakistan army defences.

A total of four Army jawans have attained martyrdom in Pakistan shelling and firing in the twin border districts of Rajouri and Poonch since August 5 when fresh tension erupted along the LoC with ceasefire violations aggravated by Pakistan since August 5. A civilian has also been killed in the shelling at Mendhar.

Inputs revealed that with three latest casualties of Pakistan army, at least 17 Pakistani troops have been killed in retaliatory action of the Indian Army on the LoC. In addition, number of Pakistani posts have been destroyed.

Meanwhile, panic has gripped the people living along LoC in Poonch and Rajouri districts with Pakistan army directly targeting civilian areas. According to sources, number of mortar shells fired by the Pakistan army have exploded close to civilian houses in Shahpur and Sabjian sectors in which the locals had very narrow escape.
