Cops who were seen sharing a meal with accused suspended

In a major breakthrough Pune police commissioner K Venkatesham has suspended a sub-inspector and constable attached with Chaturshringi police station and another constable attached with Kothrud police station after they were spotted lunching with an accused who had a case registered against him in Chaturshringi police station. The case came to light when Mirror reported the incident first on August 9. Departmental inquiry revealed that, in a misuse of position, the trio had also accepted money from the complainant instead of acting on his complainant.



Sub-inspector Tukaram Phad, constable Pravin Khaladkar of Chaturshringi police station and constable Avinash Sawant of Kothrud police station have been suspended in the matter. Taking cognisance of the incident, senior police inspector Bhaskar Jadhav of Chaturshringi police was also transferred to the control room of Pune police.



A Pune-based developer who allegedly fell prey to an attempt to murder by his wife and her friend last month spotted the investigating officer and other cops lunching with the accused, Nimesh Pawar, in Chaturshringi police station where he had filed an FIR against him in July 2019. When he went to file a complaint against Pawar, Chaturshringi police asked him to shell out Rs 10 lakh instead of registering an FIR under section 307 (attempt to murder) and reduced the gravity of the offence and lodged an FIR under section 506 (2) (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code.



Probing the matter, the developer apparently figured out the plot to kill him was hatched by his wife and Pawar, following which he filed an additional statement with Chaturshringi police, submitting all possible evidence about an alleged relationship between his wife and Pawar.



On August 7, when the complainant visited the police station, he was left shell-shocked to spot the cops sharing a meal with Pawar inside the station. He clicked pictures of the scene and lodged a complaint with Venkatesham. The top cop immediately handed over the investigation to the crime branch, initiating departmental inquiry into the allegations made by the complainant. The inquiry corroborated the allegations made by the complainant, revealing that constable Khaladkar accepted Rs 5.50 lakh on behalf of Jadhav. Investigation further revealed that Sawant took Rs 5 lakh from the complaintant at Faraskhana police station.



While issuing the suspension order to the trio, Venkatesham said, "It is mandatory to register the name of every visitor in the 'seva application' provided to each police station, but the cops did not register the name of the complainant when he visited the station. They were spotted having food with the accused by the complainant himself," adding that the act has brought disrepute to the police force.


