8-year-old, father killed after truck crashes into auto-rickshaw near India Gate in Delhi

An 8-year-old girl and her father were killed and two others injured after a dumper truck ran over auto rickshaws and pedestrians on Delhi’s Man Singh Road near India Gate early on Tuesday. The driver of dumper truck was arrested by the police.

The driver of the dumper truck lost control and hit the road divider and ran over autos and pedestrians standing near the footpath before stopping on the Rajpath lawns, police said. The 24-year-old truck driver, Raman, who fractured his arm in the accident was arrested from the spot and sent for medical examination and alcohol test.

“We received information around 12.20 am regarding the accident near India Gate on Man Singh Road. A team rushed to the spot and found that one dumper had entered Rajpath lawns (south side) after hitting several vehicles and crossing over the footpath,” said a senior police officer.

The dead have been identified as Kewal Diwan, 42 and his daughter Manya. Those injured have been identified as Deepak Kumar, 27 , the driver of the auto rickshaw that was hit and Ram Singh, 24, a labourer. The three auto rickshaws and a scooty that the truck hit were completely smashed.

Meanwhile, the police are still probing the incident in north Delhi’s Model Town where a car rammed through people on Sunday night. Video footage of the incident shows people clinging on to the car’s bonnet as the driver tried to escape the area.

The Police received information of the incident in Old Gupta Colony only after a man approached them on Monday with injuries to his limbs.

“Kamal is a resident of north Delhi’s Sabzi Mandi and was passing by when he was hit by the reversing car,” said Vijayanta Arya, deputy commissioner of police (north-west) [DCP].

The DCP said that the car and its driver remain to be identified. The 40-second long video shows a car amidst a crowd of people in the market of what police said was Sunday night. Police said that the driver appeared to be involved in a quarrel with some passersby.

Soonn, the car accelerates, hitting people in the process, it pauses briefly before reversing at high speed. The car hit several people before hitting a vehicle
