Former BSP MLA arrested for engineer's murder

On directions of the High Court, Barabanki police finally arrested former Bahujan Samaj Party MLA from Bansgaon Vijay Kumar in connection with murder of National Informatics Centre (NIC) engineer Shikhar Srivastava, whose body was found in January 2015.

However, Kumar’s wife Mridula Anand, who is the District Inspector of Schools (DIOS) in Gonda, also an accused in the case, is still on the run. Kumar had won 2012 Assembly election from Bansgaon in Gorakhpur but lost the last Assembly elections. Kumar was later produced before the local court in Barabanki on Friday from where he was sent to jail.

The sensational killing of engineer Shikhar Srivastava of National Informatics Centre (NIC) was transferred to Barabanki police for investigations after the High Court last year took cognizance of unnecessary delay made by the crime branch of Criminal Investigation Department (CB- CID) in nabbing the executors. Then in-charge of Badosarai police station (Barabanki) Shyam Narain Pandey said that the High Court had directed them to once again probe the murder of Srivastava. He said that the complainant was asked to record his statement.

Earlier, on January 19, 2015, Shikhar Srivastava alias Raja, son of Bahraich district Congress committee vice-president Dinesh Gandhi, was abducted in Lucknow. Later, the abductors murdered him and threw his body at Bardari village near Badosarai in Barabanki. The victim’s identity was ascertained on the basis of cell phones recovered from the spot after which his father lodged an abduction-cum-murder case against five persons, including BSP MLA from Bansgaon (Gorakhpur) Vijay Kumar and his wife Mridula Anand, with Badosarai Kotwali police.

It was alleged that Mridula, during her posting as District Inspector of School at Bahraich, took Rs 3.5 lakh from Shikhar for providing him the job of a teacher. After failing to get the job, Shikhar started demanding the money back. Later, he was found murdered. After a probe, Barabanki police arrested Toofani Ram, the gunner of the BSP MLA, along with block pramukh Rajendar Kumar and Ram Singh. The police, however, failed to arrest BSP MLA and his wife and claimed that they were 'absconding’.

The police also recorded the statement of officers and personnel at DIOS office in Bahraich to extract the truth. The cops also raided the MLA’s residence at Nishatganj and Gomti Nagar. But later, the Barabanki police developed a cold feet and the state government transferred the probe to CB-CID.

Since then, the CB-CID had not taken any action after which victim’s brother Shivam Srivastava approached the High Court and prayed that the probe be transferred to Barabanki police hoping for some concrete action. Now after a year, the former MLA was finally arrested on the intervention of the High Court.
