Delhi Police arrests five people for kidnap, murder of 91-year-old man; main accused was senior citizen’s domestic help-India News , Firstpost

Five people were arrested on Monday for allegedly kidnapping and killing a nonagenarian, who was stuffed in a refrigerator and taken away from his house in south Delhi's posh Greater Kailash-1 area, police said.

New Delhi: Five people were arrested on Monday for allegedly kidnapping and killing a nonagenarian, who was stuffed in a refrigerator and taken away from his house in south Delhi's posh Greater Kailash-1 area, police said. Krishna Khosla, a 91-year-old retired government employee, and his domestic help, Kishan, were missing since Sunday morning, they said.

Several teams were formed to trace the duo and on Monday, the domestic help and four of his accomplices — Deepak Yadav, Pradeep Sharma, Sarvesh, and Prabhudayal — were arrested, a senior officer said.

During interrogation, the domestic help revealed that he had strangled his employer and had planned to kidnap the elderly man a month ago, police said, adding that a team is on the job to recover Kishan Khosla's body.

The accused has said that the body is dumped in a pit at a house in Sangam Vihar that had been rented a few days ago, police said.

Kishan also said that he was fed up with the taunts and abuses of his employer, sources said.

The businessman son of Kishan Khosla found his mother, Saroj Khosla (87), unconscious when he visited the flat on Sunday morning and informed the police.

Besides the refrigerator, jewellery and cash were also missing from the residence Kishan Khosla, the officer said.

Saroj Khosla complained that their domestic help mixed some sedative in tea on Saturday night. The domestic help belonged to Bihar and lived locally at Sangam Vihar, he said.

The tempo used to carry the refrigerator was recovered from outside Pradeep Sharma's house. The refrigerator has also been found, police said.

The security guards of the area claimed that they saw the domestic help carrying the fridge in a tempo along with his accomplices. He told the guards that he was taking the fridge for repair when they questioned him, they said.

The couple was living in a rented first floor flat of a building in Greater Kailash-I for the last few months. They have two sons one of whom lives in Australia while the other is a businessman who resides in a nearby area, police said.
