Thanks to Double engine: Amit Shah

The BJP president Amit Shah kick-started the election campaign for the party in Uttarakhand for the high-stake general election while assuring thousands of party workers who gathered at Prade Ground that the Narendra Modi Government is all set to return to power. He also averred that the party is invincibly committed to a magnificent Ram temple being built at Ayodhya. Lashing out at the Congress, he said that it has been putting obstacles in the path of Ram Temple construction and asked its president Rahul Gandhi to clear his stand on the matter.

Shah was in Dehradun on Saturday to address ‘Trishakti Sammelan’, a mega conclave of booth level party workers at Parade Ground.

In his inimitable style, the BJP president stated that he himself had worked as a booth in-charge of the party way back in 1982. “The BJP is the only party where a humble worker who was once engaged in pasting party posters later became its president. This is the reason behind the momentous growth of the party to become the biggest political party of the world. While most of the parties are following the dynastic system of succession, it is the BJP alone which can boast of making a chaiwala the Prime Minister of the country,’’ he said.

Terming Uttarakhand as figuring in the priority list of PM Modi, Shah said that the double-engine Government has put the State on the fast track of development and expressed hope that the State would become a model State in no time in every index of development.

He said that Modi with his vision has started the ambitious all-weather road project to connect the revered char dhams.

Launching a scathing attack on the opposition parties, Shah said that while Modi says remove poverty, corruption and diseases the leaders of the alliance have only one slogan-remove Modi from power by hook or by crook. Referring to the interim budget, the BJP president said that it has brought cheers on the faces of every person of the country. “It has taken the shine off the face of Rahul Gandhi. The UPA Government in 2009 waived off farm loans to the tune of Rs 57,000 crores which benefitted three crore farmers while the BJP-helmed NDA Government has earmarked Rs 75,000 crore which would benefit 12 crore farmers under the scheme of depositing Rs 6,000 every year into the account of the farmers,’’ he said.

Continuing with his blistering attack on the Congress, Shah accused the party of steadfastly ignoring the defence sector during its ten year tenure at the Centre. He said that the Modi Government has allocated Rs 3 lakh crore for the armed forces in the Budget which is the highest ever since independence. He said that for the first time, 12 crore labourers of unorganised sector have been brought under a pension scheme.

Taking a jibe at the Congress, Shah said that while BJP has implemented one rank one pension (OROP) scheme Congress can too boast of another OROP. “It means only Rahul only Priyanka,” he said.

He also invoked the former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for his famous statement of 15 paisa out of one rupee sent by the Government reaching the intended beneficiary. “Now by introducing direct benefit transfer (DBT) scheme, Modi Government has ended corruption in the system and saved about money to the tune of Rs 1lakh crores in the process,” he claimed.

Shah exhorted the party workers to take a pledge to ensure even a bigger mandate this time than what it had received in 2014 election.“ The victory in these elections is an imperative both for Bharatiya Janata Party and Bharat (India) to take the country forward on the path of development,’’ he affirmed.

In his address, the Chief Minister, Trivendra Singh Rawat, said that the decision of the Modi Government to send Rs 6,000 every year into the account of the farmers having less than 2 acres of land would benefit 92 percent of the farmers of the State. He exuded confidence that BJP would make a clean sweep of all the five Lok Sabha seats of the State.

The workers were also addressed among others by the Union Minister for social justice and empowerment Thawar Chand Gehlot, State party in-charge Shyam Jaju, the national joint general secretary Shiv Prakash, the State party president Ajay Bhatt, the former Chief Minister Vijay Bahuguna, Haridwar MP Ramesh Pokhariyal ‘Nishank’, national general secretary Teerath Singh Rawat and Tehri MP Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah aside from Cabinet Ministers Satpal Maharaj and Madan Kaushik.
