Breaking News September 3: Adityanath Approves Proposal To Transfer Land To Atal Bihari Vajpayee Medical University

New Delhi:

A Delhi Court on Monday extended the CBI custody of former finance minister P Chidambaram by one day in the INX Media corruption case. Special Judge Ajay Kumar Kuhar will now hear at 3:50 PM today the interim bail plea of Chidambaram, who was produced before the court on the expiry of his 3-day CBI custody granted on August 30. In a major boost to the Indian Air Force’s combat capabilities, eight US-made Apache AH-64E attack helicopters are set to be inducted into the IAF today. Air Chief Marshal B S Dhanoa will be the chief guest during the induction ceremony, which will take place at the Pathankot Air Force station.



Here are all the LIVE Updates:

11:00 pm: Chandrayaan-2 to be broadcast live on National Geographic on September 6.

10:30 pm: Sikh girl who converted to Islam in Pakistan to return home soon.

10:00 pm: Congress to launch statewide protest in Karnataka against arrest of senior leader DK Shivakumar by ED in money laundering case.

9.30 pm: Power Tariff raised by up to 12 per cent for the financial year 2019-20 in Uttar Pradesh.

09:00 pm: Congress reacts to Shivakumar's arrest by ED. Terms it as political vendetta by the BJP.

08:30 pm: Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar arrested by ED in money laundering case.

08:00 pm: PM Narendra Modi leaves for two day visit to Russia.

07:30 pm: Samajwadi Party patron Mulayam Singh Yadav supports party MP Azam Khan in land grabbing case.

07:00 pm: P Chidambaram to remain in CBI custody till Thursday.

06:30 pm: Rupee logs biggest single day fall against US Dollar in 2019.

06:00 pm: Domestic help who abducted and murdered 91-year-old landlord in Delhi's Greater Kailash, arrested.

05:30 pm: Israeli PM Benjamin Netanyahu cancels visit to India.

5.00 pm: Vice President Venkaiah Naidu and senior BJP leader Murli Manohar Joshi at condolence meeting of Late Arun Jaitley.

4.30 pm: Sensex crashes by 770 points on dismal macro data, Nifty PSU bank down by 5.3 per cent.

4.15 pm: BJP President Amit Shah, BJP working president JP Nadda and party leader Dharmendra Pradhan met Former Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, Jagmohan in Delhi as a part of BJP's Sampark Abhiyan.

4.00 pm: Cabinet meeting chaired by CM Yogi Adityanath today approved the proposal to transfer of land to Atal Bihari Vajpayee Medical University that will be constructed in 50 acre area near Chak Gajaria farm in Lucknow.

3.45 pm: Chief Minister of Punjab, Captain Amarinder Singh met Union Home Minister Amit Shah in Delhi, today.

3.30 pm: Punjab CM Captain Amarinder Singh on alleged forceful conversion of Sikh girl in Pakistan: We've very strongly reacted to it. I have publicly reacted to this to the Prime Minister of Pakistan. Govt of India, as I understand, have taken steps in the matter.

3.00 pm: Court sends businessman Ratul Puri to judicial custody till 17th September in bank fraud case.

2.45 pm: The Supreme Court on Tuesday extended the CBI custody of former Union Minister P Chidambaram till Thursday. The CBI told the top court that it does not want any further custody of the senior Congress leader and he should be sent to Tihar under judicial custody.



2.25 pm: Kartarpur is the "Madina" and Nankana Sahib is the "Makkah" of the Sikh community, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has said and assured that his government will issue multiple and on-arrival visas to Sikh pilgrims coming from India and other countries, according to media reports on Tuesday.

2.10 pm: Exorcists advised a Nashville school priest to ban the Harry Potter books, over fears the popular children’s novels could be used to summon spirits. Reverend Dan Reehil contacted exorcists in Rome and the US, who recommended removing the fantasy novels from St Edward Catholic School’s library in Tennessee.

Launched in 1997, the series of books spins an epic tale of good and evil focused on the adventures of the eponymous bespectacled young wizard as he struggles against the dark wizard Lord Voldemort.

1.45 pm: Eight students of a primary school in central China were killed and two others injured in a brutal knife attack carried out by a man, released recently from jail, state-run media reported on Tuesday. The incident happened at around 8:00 am on Monday at Chaoyangpo grade school in the town of Baiyangping at Enshi county at Hubei province, on the first day of the new academic year, according to the Global Times.

1.40 pm: A man allegedly committed suicide by jumping before Delhi Metro train at Noida’s Sector-61 station on Tuesday. Initial reports say that the man used to work as a security guard. The service on the busy Blue Line was partially affected.

1.20 pm: Seven people, including 5 workers and 2 firemen are reported dead in the fire that broke out at the ONGC gas plant in Navi Mumbai's Uran on Tuesday morning. The area nearby has been evacuated by the police as the rescue operations are still underway. The fire which broke out in storm water drainage in Uran Plant was doused within two hours by the firefighters.

1 pm: Rebel AAP MLA Alka Lamba on Tuesday met Congress interim president and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi at her residence. The meeting has added to speculations that the Chandni Chowk MLA is joining Congress ahead of Delhi Assembly polls in 2020.

12.45 pm: The Supreme Court on Tuesday sought responses from two persons for allegedly threatening senior advocate Rajeev Dhavan for taking up the case on behalf of the Sunni Waqf Board and other Muslim parties in the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid land dispute case. "Notice,” said the five-judge Constitution bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi at the start of hearing on 18th day in the land dispute case.

12.15 pm: New Zealand’s Leader of Opposition, Simon Bridges meets JP Nadda, National Working President of BJP, at BJP office. The meeting is being held to strengthen bilateral relations between the two countries.



11.50 am: Amit Jogi, son of former Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Ajit Jogi, was arrested from his Bilaspur home on Tuesday. Amit Jogi has been arrested for allegedly giving false information in affidavits. Jogi has been under the radar after the BJP filed a complaint against him in 2013. Jogi has studied at DU’s prestigious St Stephen's College and Jawaharlal Nehru University. In 2013, Jogi was elected as member of legislative Assembly representing Marwahi in Chhattisgarh. In 2016, he formed the Janta Congress Chhattisgarh with father Ajit Jogi after the duo was expelled from the Indian National Congress for anti-party activities.



11.30 am: Supreme Court's five-judge Constitution bench, headed by Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi, has started hearing the Ayodhya Ram Temple and Babri Masjid land (Title) dispute case. Today is the 18th day of hearing in the case.



11.10 am: Uttarakhand's Badrinath Highway has been blocked at Lambagar slide zone in Chamoli district following landslide.



10.55 am: The first de-orbiting maneuver for Chandrayaan-2 spacecraft was performed successfully today (September 03, 2019) beginning at 0850 hrs IST (India Standard Time), as planned, using the onboard propulsion system. The duration of the maneuver was 4 seconds: ISRO



10.30 am: The Indian Air Force today inducted eight US-made Apache AH-64E attack helicopters during an impressive ceremony at Pathankot fighter base in Punjab on Tuesday. The choppers will give more firepower to the Indian Air Force. Air Chief Marshal B S Dhanoa was the chief guest at the ceremony.



10.15 am: Panitanki Border Out Post (BOP) team arrested five persons at Panitanki check post yesterday, for carrying Indian/Nepalese currency more than the permissible limit. Total amount of Rs. 14,94,500 seized.



9.50 am: Apache helicopter of the Indian Air Force ready to be inducted at the Pathankot Air Base. The Indian Air Force will induct 22 of these choppers acquired from the US.



9.30 am: Two persons dead and three injured after a four-storey building collapsed in Delhi's Seelampur.



9.15 am: The death toll from a massive blast claimed by the Taliban in Kabul has risen to 16 people—all civilians—with scores more wounded, an official said Tuesday. "Sixteen killed, 119 wounded in last night’s attack. The explosion was caused by a tractor filled with explosives,” interior ministry spokesman Nasrat Rahimi said.



9 am: 5 feared dead at ONGC plant fire in Navi Mumbai’s Uran



8.45 am: The Delhi High Court will hear plea on former IAS officer Shah Faesal's detention. Shah Faesal has alleged that he was illegally detained at the Delhi airport on August 14 and taken back to Srinagar, where he has been kept under house arrest.



8.35 am: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi to appear in Mumbai court in connection with a criminal defamation case. The Girgaon Metropolitan Magistrate has issued the summon to Gandhi, holding that prima facie there was a case of criminal defamation against him under section 500 of the Indian Penal Code. The summon has been issued against the Congress leader in connection with a criminal defamation complaint filed by a Maharashtra BJP executive member Mahesh Srimal alleging that Gandhi scion has used derogatory terms against the Prime Minister.



8.30 am: Union home minster Amit Shah will chair the Northern Zonal Council meeting in Chandigarh. Chief ministers of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan and the administrator of union territory of Chandigarh will attend the meeting to discuss the inter-state issues.

The Supreme Court on Tuesday sought responses from two persons for allegedly threatening senior advocate Rajeev Dhavan for taking up the case on behalf of the Sunni Waqf Board and other Muslim parties in the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid land dispute case. “Notice,” said the five-judge Constitution bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi at the start of hearing on 18th day in the land dispute case.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
