Apache AH-64E: What makes it the 'most advanced' attack helicopter in the world - WATCH

Apache choppers inducted into IAF/ Credit: Boeing

Key Highlights The Apaches can attain a maximum speed of up to 279 kmph IAF will operate 22 Apaches by 2020

New Delhi: The Indian Air Force (IAF), on Tuesday, inducted eight Apache AH-64E Guardian attack aircraft in its rotary-wing fleet. Terming the chopper as the most fierce attack helicopter, the IAF chief, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa said that the platform will replace ageing Mi-35 choppers.

According to the information available on the official website of Boeing, the company has sold 2,100 Apaches to 18 countries across the globe. Besides the 279 km/hour speed and the capability to carry a payload of about six tons, what makes Apache a lethal platform, is its ability to integrate an ever-evolving cyber-centric warfare scenario with the dynamic situations on the battlefield.

The Indian version is equipped with enhanced performance, joint digital operability, improved survivability and cognitive decision aiding, Boeing says.

According to a video on the Boeing website, the aircraft simulates the ground situation in the battlefield. The modern technology within the cabin allows the pilots to control other unmanned aerial platforms and fly them from aircraft. The sophisticated sensors within the Apache can spot the enemy anytime during the day or night. And besides enabling the pilot to respond to the enemy positions on the ground, the Apache can transmit the information to the ground soldier, who can then attack the enemy positions and destroy them with his weapons.

When soldiers hear the sound of the rotor, they know that an Apache is there in the air. And then they know that everything is going to be fine - John Schibler, Boeing Chief Engineer, Attack Helicopter Programs says in the video.

Enhanced performance, joint digital operability, improved survivability & cognitive decision aiding; India is set to receive the most modern variant of the AH-64E Apache! KNOW MORE: https://t.co/DdaZyJSNWc pic.twitter.com/QM63g4VBTf — Boeing India (@Boeing_In) February 2, 2019

WATCH Brad Rounding from @BoeingDefense talk about the AH-64E Apache, the world’s most advanced multi-role combat helicopter, and the increased capabilities that it will bring to the @IAF_MCC this year!

KNOW MORE: https://t.co/cwsnXdm2Fl pic.twitter.com/mlYO8j2oqJ — Boeing India (@Boeing_In) February 22, 2019

The Indian version of Apache has been custom-made to suit Indian conditions and the IAF will be operating the chopper in mountainous regions to operate in hostile airspace with ground threats.
