Andhra Pradesh: Suspect in CM Jagan Reddy's uncle murder case commits suicide

Andhra Pradesh

YS Vivekananda Reddy

suicide

death

murder case

A 52-year-old man allegedly upset over being interrogated by police in the sensational murder ofchief minister YS Jaganmohan Reddy's paternal uncle, has committed. Vivekananda was murdered in March this year, a month before the Assembly and General Elections.The state government instituted a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to probe into Vivekananda's murder but, it so far has not established the guilty. It arrested four persons but, they got bail as the SIT failed to file charge sheet in time.The SIT, which has been continuing to question suspects, reportedly summoned S Srinivasulu Reddy of Kasuru village in Simhadripuram block in Kadapa district on Sunday. He consumed excess dose of sleeping pills on Monday and died on Tuesday, while undergoing treatment at Proddutur hospital. Doctors found two suicide notes in his pockets and handed them over to the family members. The letters purported to be written by Srinivasulu Reddy were addressed to CM YS Jagan and relative YS Bhaskar Reddy. He pleaded innocence and alleged harassment by police inspector Ramulu, who plays key role in the SIT.CM jaganmohan Reddy was in Kadapa on Monday, attending his father late YS Rsjasekhara Reddy's 10thanniversary.Srinivasulu Reddy is the brother-in-law of Parameswara Reddy, who has been one of the suspects in Vivekananda Reddy. He recently underwent narco-analysis test in Gujarat.Srinivasulu Reddy's widow Padmavathi appealed to CM jaganmohan Reddy to go through the letter addressed to him and understand the torture Srinivasulu Reddy had undergone.Pulivendula Deputy Superintendent of Police Suryanarayana said the suicide is being probed into from all possible angles.The police are also verifying if the handwriting in the letters is of Srinivasulu Reddy.Vivekananda Reddy's death has been a mystery since beginning. Initially, it was reported that he died of heart attack. But, in less than an hour, his aides found injuries on his head and body, prompting the police to register a murder case. Forensic reports have concluded that he was brutally stabbed to death. There were seven stab wounds on his body.The then ruling Telugu Desam Party (TDP) and YSR Congress entered into a blame game. The high court banned the political parties from making any reference to the murder case till the elections were over. At this juncture, the Election Commission took a significant decision to transfer District Superintendent of Police Rahul Dev Sharma out of Kadapa.
