Knife's edge: The role of IAF's new AH-64E Apache attack helicopters in the Indian military

The Indian Air Force on Tuesday formally inducted eight AH-64E Apache multirole attack helicopters at a ceremony at the Pathankot Air Base. Arguably the most lethal attack helicopter in service today, the AH-64E variant has been formally nicknamed the 'Apache Guardian'. The induction of the helicopters is expected to add significantly to the Indian military's close air support and anti-tank warfare capabilities.

The AH-64E Apache Guardian attack helicopters inducted into the IAF on Tuesday are the first batch of the order placed with US aircraft giant Boeing. A further 14 of them are in line for delivery by 2022. A further six are on order for the Indian Army. The 22 Apaches are meant to replace the ageing Russian Mil Mi-35 attack helicopters in the IAF fleet.

The Mi-35 have served as the Indian military's only attack helicopters so far. They were acquired from Russia in 1991 and underwent an upgradation in 2004. India is also in the process of developing the HAL Rudra, which is an armed version of the HAL Dhruv, and the HAL Light Combat Helicopter (LCH).

The Apaches can be expected to the be the cutting edge of the attack helicopter fleet. The fleet would soon include the ones for which orders have already been placed - 16 Rudras and 65 LCHs for IAF, and 60 Rudras and 114 LCHs for the Indian Army.

The Rudras and LCHs are much lighter and are less armoured than the Apaches, and can be expected to the hammer to the knife's edge that the Apaches will serve as.

Attack helicopters are aimed at offering close air support for ground troops and armoured units. They are especially useful in providing the softening blow to enemy fortifications like bunkers and armoured formations before a ground force can move in. Attack helicopters typically come equipped with machine guns and canons equipped with armour piercing rounds and with high-explosive anti-tank missiles. Some may also come with air-to-air missiles for self defence or air-to-surface missiles for targeted strikes.

The concept of attack helicopters being used to support ground troops is more than just about destroying enemy capabilities. It also has a great deal to do with ensuring that ground forces are pushed into situations after significant harm reduction.

Attack helicopters offer some advantages over operating fighter jets in ground attack roles. Mostly, these advantages are derived from the fact that helicopters can operate a lot closer to the ground and that they can move much slower through the target area, allowing time for better support or targeting capabilities.

The IAF's new Apaches will be stationed at the Pathankot Air Base. A team of pilots and ground staff have already been trained in flying and maintenance operations for the Apaches at an air base in Alabama.

The Apaches are the second US-made military helicopters being inducted into the Indian military this year. In March, the Chinook heavy lift transport helicopters were inducted into the IAF at the Chandigarh Air Force Base.
