Louisville Hindu temple vandalism: More about Hinduism, hate crimes

The vandalism of a Hindu temple in Louisville has brought condemnation this week from officials and commentators in the local, national and international communities.

It also brought together hundreds on Saturday to help clean up the vandalism inside the Swaminarayan Temple, 4032 Bardstown Road, in the Buechel neighborhood.

And the "act of hatred" allegedly committed by a 17-year-old has become an opportunity to discuss Hinduism and the religion's presence around the world.

Related:Hundreds help 'paint away the hate' at Louisville Hindu temple

Here are some more details on Hinduism, the Swaminarayan Temple and past hate crimes against Hindus:

How many followers of Hinduism are there?

Hinduism is the oldest existing religion in the world and third largest in terms of followers, with over 1 billion Hindus in the world. Only Christianity and Islam have more followers. The vast majority of Hindus live in India.

The United States is home to about 3 million Hindus, said Rajan Zed, president of the Universal Society of Hinduism. Hinduism is considered the fourth-largest faith in the U.S., behind Christianity, Judaism and Islam.

Where does the name 'Hinduism' come from?

According to the book "World Religions" by John Bowker, Hinduism comes from the Persian word "hindu" or Sanskrit word "sindhu," which means "river" and refers to people of the Indus River Valley. The Indus River Valley runs through northwest India into Pakistan and is considered the birthplace of Hinduism.

More news:Sandmann lawyer: Letters sent to media, celebrities may precede suits

Do Hindus believe in one god or many?

This is where many misconceptions and myths surrounding Hinduism come in.

The Hindu American Foundation, a Washington, D.C.-based advocacy group for Hindus in the U.S., said the "Hindu understanding of God cannot be pigeon-holed into the Western binary of 'monotheistic' and 'polytheistic.'''

"It it simultaneously neither and both," the HAF said. "Hindu teachings describe one Supreme Divinity or Absolute that is the formless underlying reality, which can manifest and be worshiped through infinite forms."

This aspect of the Hindu faith came up in a previous Kentucky-related incident.

In 2011, then-Kentucky State Senate President and Republican gubernatorial candidate David Williams came under fire after he criticized then-Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear for participating in a Hindu religious ceremony to inaugurate a new manufacturing facility in Elizabethtown.

Williams also expressed hope that Hindus would "open their eyes and receive Jesus as their savior," which drew a strong rebuke from the HAF.

See also:Person with mental illness ordered to get treatment under 'Tim's Law'

How long has the Swaminarayan Temple been in Louisville?

The Swaminarayan Temple has been at 4032 Bardstown Road for about five years, said Raj Patel, a spokesman for the temple.

Before the temple, the building was home to a church, officials said.

The temple is affiliated with Maninagar Shree Swaminarayan Gadi Sansthan, a Hindu sect and "worldwide center for spiritual, cultural and social welfare" located in Ahmedabad, India.

"Our fellow disciples come to our temple to pray, find inner peace, interact and learn from one another, provide good teachings to their children, and practice the highest form of morals and ethics — just as followers of all faiths," Patel said. "Service to society before self, expressing kindness to all, and doing things for the betterment of humanity are some of our key teachings."

The sect of Swaminarayan Hinduism gets its name from devotion to Lord Shree Swaminarayan, a Hindu figure believed by followers to be a manifestation of God, Zed said.

Lord Shree Swaminarayan founded the sect at the end of the 18th century in northern India, according swaminarayangadi.com.

Related:Gov. Bevin calls vandalism of Louisville Hindu temple 'reprehensible'

"Maninagar" refers to an area of Ahmedabad, the largest city in the Indian state of Gujarat, where most Swaminarayan followers are from, Zed said. "Sansthan" translates to "institution" or "organization" in English.

"Lord Shree Swaminarayan instilled into people the ideology of high morals, love and compassion for all, irrespective of caste, creed, color or gender," according to the organization's website. "His sole intention was to rejuvenate the principles of true religion, which were being disintegrated by irreligious and evil practices."

His Divine Holiness Acharya Shree Purushottampriyadasji Swamishree Maharaj is the fifth and current spiritual leader (similar to the pope in Catholicism) of Maninagar Shree Swaminarayan Gadi Sansthan.

Temples belonging to the Maninagar Shree Swaminarayan Gadi Sansthan organization are located in the Americas, Europe, Asia and Africa.

Besides the Swaminarayan Temple in Louisville, other temples in North America that are part of the Maninagar Shree Swaminarayan Gadi Sansthan sect are in Illinois, California, Delaware, Florida, Virginia, Kentucky, Georgia, Tennessee, Ohio and Canada.

Many Swaminarayan Hindus live in the state of Gujarat in India, said Jay Kansara, director of government relations for the Hindu American Foundation.

In January, Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin led a U.S. delegation to Gujarat for an economic development summit.

More headlines:Missing armored car driver was trying to get a new ID, police say

Hate crimes against Hindus in the U.S.

Louisville Metro Police Chief Steve Conrad has called the vandalism of the Swaminarayan Temple a hate crime, but the state or federal authorities will decide whether to treat it as such.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation did not begin tracking hate crimes against Hindu, Sikh and Arab-Americans until 2015.

There were five Hindu victims of hate crimes in 2015, and 15 Hindu victims in 2017, according to the FBI.

Overall, 2017 saw 1,749 victims of religious-based hate crimes, according to FBI figures. Approximately 58 percent of those victims were Jewish.

Examples include incidents in 2015 when Hindu temples in Washington and Texas were vandalized. Later that same year, 40 Hindu flags were burned at a home in Queens, New York.

In February of 2017, a Hindu man from India was shot and killed at a bar in Olathe, Kansas, after the shooter reportedly yelled "get out of my country." The victim's Indian friend was also wounded in the shooting.

The Hindu American Foundation believes many hate crimes against Hindus in the U.S. are not reported.

ICYMI:T. Vaughn Walker, Louisville pastor and history-making professor, dies

Mat McDermott, HAF's director of communications, told the Courier Journal many hate crimes against Hindus tend to reflect more of a "generalized anti-immigrant bias" rather than a specific hatred against Hinduism.

"Sometimes it’s a case of mistaken identity — the Olathe, Kansas shooting, for example, involved Hindus who the shooter thought were Muslim and Iranian," McDermott wrote in an email. "Such mistaken identity doesn’t make the incidents any less heinous, obviously."

The vandalism at the Swaminarayan Temple in Louisville, in which the suspect spray-painted phrases such "Jesus Is All Mighty" and "Jesus Is The Only Lord" on temple walls, seems to have been "motivated out of a sense of religious superiority," McDermott said.

Police have not released a motive for the vandalism, but McDermott said those types of apparent anti-Hindu hate crimes are not as common in the U.S.

To learn more about Hinduism, visit hafsite.org.

Reach Billy Kobin at bkobin@courierjournal.com or 502-582-7030.
