Recession looming in 2019? Here’s the shocking Google Trends data revelation

Recession, certainly, has always been collective aftermath of a number of global and domestic factors. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The whisper around recession has been escalating since the beginning of this year after the fears of a recession in 2019 first surfaced in the mid-2018. The condition has been worsening, day after day, following the slowdown in global economic growth which is catalysing the fears of a recession.

There is no conclusive evidence which can prove that there can be a recession at a particular time, as far as India is concerned, though. With India’s GDP growth sinking to 5 per cent in the first quarter (April-June) of FY 2019-20, the jittery feeling among the domestic as well as foreign investors has soared further. Presently, domestic economic activity has been struggling to get back to its previous growth rate.

Shocking Google Trends revelation!

Whether we are staring at an impending recession in 2019 or 2020 is hard to say with conviction at the moment. But the apprehension of investors and business owners and the disquiet are almost palpable.

According to the long-range data of Google Trends, the worldwide Google searches on the term recession has witnessed an unprecedented rocketing in August 2019. Earlier, the interest around recession peaked to 100 in October 2008 and oscillated between 18 to 100 levels between December 2007 and May 2011.

In August 2019, the interest rose to 63, though it started diminishing after reaching the peak. Looking at the daily data, the interest in recession jumped to 100 on August 15, 2019.

According to Google Trends, the numbers represent search interest relative to the highest point on the chart for the given region and time. A value of 100 is the peak popularity for the term, a value of 50 means that the term is half as popular, while a score of 0 means that there was not enough data for this term.

Why the fear of recession?

The consumption-stricken automakers, NPA-laden banks, debt-burdened NBFCs, undying trade war tussle between US and China, Indian rupee value tumbling beyond 72 per unit US dollar, subdued global growth, and bearish stance of foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) are some of the major factors which are largely responsible for India’s economic slowdown.

A single or a few negative factors can’t bring a disturbance in the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth. Restating the fact that there are no clear or immediate signs of an economic collapse or a recession which can substantiate the argument. It’s just that the fears of recession have been ballooning from a couple of months on the back of negative instances.

Recession, certainly, has always been collective aftermath of a number of global and domestic factors. Whether it was the stock market crash of 2008 or the dot-com bubble in the early 2000s.

For now, factors such as the Argentine peso collapsing to the all-time low value, negative GDP growth of Germany, political intrusion in Hong Kong, back-to-back retaliatory measures by the US administration and China and declining crude oil prices with US WTI slipping below $50 per barrel have also contributed substantially in the global slowdown.
