Rupee Falls To Rs 72 Against Dollar, PM Modi's Tea Stall To Become Tourist Spot + More Top News

The rupee is continuing to go downhill amid reports of economic slowdown. The rupee tumbled by 67 paise to 72.09 against the US currency in early trade, tracking weak opening in domestic equities amid strong dollar demand from banks and importers. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Gujarat To Get A New Tourist Spot. Tea Stall, Where PM Modi Worked Will Soon Welcome Visitors

A stall in Gujarat’s Vadnagar where Prime Minister Narendra Modi used to sell tea during her younger days, will be converted into a tourist spot. Gujarat’s tourism minister has decided to revamp the place. Read more

2) Countering Gender Bias, Indian Army Will Induct 100 Women Soldiers Each Year For Next 17 Years

The selection process for the first 100 women soldiers is underway and their training is expected to start in December this year, said a report by India Today. Training for a period of 61 weeks will be exactly the same as male soldiers. Read more

3) At Least Four People Including Two Firemen Killed In Massive Fire Outbreak At Uran ONGC Plant Near Navi Mumbai

Four people have been confirmed dead after a massive fire broke out at a gas processing unit owned by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) at Uran in Navi Mumbai. Read more

4) VHP-Backed Group Forces Keralites To Take Off Beef From Their Menu In German Festival

The long held debate over food preference among Indians which a recently turned violent in some cases is seeing its traces overseas. The latest incident comes from far off Germany where the group began beef policing against south Indians who were offering beef. Read more

5) After Two Decades Of War, US Will Be Out, Taliban Likely To Be Back In Power In Afghanistan

After almost two decades of deadly deadly war, which killed hundreds of thousands of people on pretext of finishing of Al Qaeda and Taliban, the world is back to square one. The US soldiers are going back home and Taliban are coming back to power. Read more
