Hizbul Mujahideen chief calls for Pakistan military intervention in Kashmir: Who is Syed Salahuddin?

Hizbul Mujahideen chief Syed Salahuddin | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The United States, in July 2017, designated Syed Salahuddin as a global terrorist For decades now, the Hizbul Mujahideen has been carrying out terrorist activities in the Valley, demanding an independent Kashmir or merger with Pakistan Before joining the terror outfit, Salahuddin contested in the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections from the Amirakadal constituency

Hizbul Mujahideen chief Syed Salahuddin, on September 1, said that the Pakistan military should intervene in Kashmir and extend "the much-needed military aid to struggling Kashmiris" if the United Nations does not send peacekeeping troops. The outlandish remarks come in the wake of abrogation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution by the Indian government.

Addressing a gathering in Muzaffarabad, Salahuddin said: "Jihad is the only way to expel India from Kashmir. It’s binding upon the armed forces of Pakistan, the first Islamic nuclear power, to enter India-occupied Kashmir to militarily help the people of the territory," said Salahuddin, as reported by Reuters.

Who is Syed Salahuddin?

The United States in July 2017 designated Syed Salahuddin as a global terrorist. With this, Salahuddin joined the list of global terrorists that boasts of names such as the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) chief Hafiz Mohammed Saeed and fugitive smuggler-terrorist Dawood Ibrahim.

"Designations of terrorist individuals and groups expose and isolate organisations and individuals, and result in denial of access to the US financial system,” a US State Department press statement announced.

Born Mohammed Yusuf Shah, Salahuddin,73, changed his name after taking over as head of the terrorist outfit Hizbul Mujahideen in the late 80s. He also heads United Jihad Council, an umbrella organisation of terror outfits such as Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed that operate out of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK). It is believed that he moved to PoK from Kashmir around 1989.

According to reports, he was arrested in Kashmir for holding violent protests. However, he was reportedly released later. He is known to have then shifted to PoK amid the unrest in the Kashmir Valley.



For decades now, the Hizbul Mujahideen has been carrying out terrorist activities in the Valley, demanding an independent Kashmir or merger with Pakistan. Salahuddin had claimed responsibility for the terror attack on the Pathankot military base in 2016.

Before joining the militant outfit, Salahuddin contested in the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections from the Amirakadal constituency. However, he lost that election.

Salahuddin has time and again mentioned Pakistan’s role in Kashmir violence. He, in a video message, reportedly called for a week-long agitation to mark the first death anniversary of Hizb commander Burhan Wani, who was killed by security forces in July 2016.

He is also said to have close ties with 26/11 Mumbai attacks mastermind - Hafiz Saeed. A photograph of him with Hafiz Saeed surfaced days before Union Minister Rajnath Singh took part in a SAARC meet in Pakistan in 2016. Both Salahuddin and Hafiz Saeed are widely believed to be assets of Pakistan's ISI, and maintain a high or low profile, depending on the instructions they receive.

When Salahuddin was placed on the list of global terrorists, the Pakistan government had called the move "unjustified".
