A climate of fear: It helps autocracy – but those who disagree should persist past our cowardice

A year after the 9/11 attacks, American writer and editor Michael Kinsley made an honest admission. He had stopped himself from writing or publishing some things, regardless of their merit, he said. Ordinary scepticism, any opinion slightly out-of-step, had been silenced in the “patriotic gush and mush” of the times.

Why did Kinsley censor himself? “Sometimes it has been a sincere feeling that an ordinarily appropriate remark is (now) inappropriate … Sometimes it is genuine respect for readers who might feel that way even if I don’t. But sometimes it is simple cowardice.” I suspect that there are many, many of us who can identify with that loss of nerve and second-guessing.

So, bluntly: we live in a polarised nation. Even if most Indians reading this are fully on board with this government’s majoritarian moves, there are sizeable numbers of citizens with different political and social values. They are now cast as pests and enemies, terrorists and termites.

An atmosphere of fear has been created at many levels. Kashmir has been shut off, its leaders jailed, the foreboding gathers. The NRC rhetoric and the threat to bring it to other states, is meant to pitch people into anxiety, and it has – some have even committed suicide. In a liberal democracy, those who don’t see eye-to-eye with the government should be free to advance their views and live peacefully among those they offend. Now, that freedom is under stress.

Most Indians were born after the Emergency. And unlike then, now there is widespread popular encouragement of the state’s actions. Those who are misfits, or non-compliant with Hindutva, stand alone. India was not greatly liberal before 2014 either – minorities, tribals and the poor have always been vulnerable in this republic. But now in Uttar Pradesh, mobs have even killed police officials who stood in their way. From gau rakshaks to online trolls, from investigative action to legal disciplining, from TV channels that behave like birds of prey with anyone who disagrees with the government – this concerted repression did not exist earlier.

“Dar achha hai,” said the prime minister during the Lok Sabha campaign. “Anti-India elements, fugitives, the corrupt, and big leaders are scared of going to jail.” Well, opposition leaders have certainly had investigative agencies turned on them, as if all corruption and crime stacks up on one side. Several of them have later joined BJP. Electoral bonds have drawn heavy blinds over any business-politics collusion.

The point is not your side versus my side, or this and that party – it is the bounds of legitimacy. To what extent will people in the police and administration, courts and media, let partisanship weaken the foundations of their work? The Press Council of India chairman endorsed a communication shutdown in Kashmir. The Bar Council writes in praise of the “bold, magnetic, daring and unparalleled leader” who nullified Article 370. Even the Indian Medical Association had stern words for the journal Lancet, which wrote about the mental health crisis in Kashmir.

Many are ideologically committed to the BJP-RSS programme. Others go along for careerist reasons; they simply follow power. Some fold because it’s easier, they worry about the personal fallout, about their families. Authoritarian governments know the power of fear – how much it lets you accomplish with little effort. You touch one spot, and the chill spreads, everything around it goes dead. Fear keeps people immobilised.

And the fear is pervasive, if you really think about it. After all, right-wing forces everywhere play on their own constituency’s fears of terrorism, of immigration, of losing their traditional status. Activating national insecurity is what lets strongmen act like national security saviours.

It takes many groups to build an environment of fear – elites and collaborators, bystanders and victims – says Corey Robin, a political scientist who has written on the uses of fear. Look at how many opposition leaders are cringing and ingratiating themselves to the government.

Courage – which means persisting in the face of fear – is not just a matter of lone individuals, it also calls for a community. Usually, civil society is the shield against state power. But many NGOs, people like Teesta Setalvad, Indira Jaising, Sudha Bharadwaj, have been in the crosshairs of the state. This weakens the safety net, any wider association to support those who resist. Stoking a visceral rage against people like Arundhati Roy raises the stakes for anyone who might mildly agree with her. By using frames like urban Naxal and tukde-tukde gang, they tar anyone outside their politics.

Forget the fates of those who have opposed the country’s two most powerful men, even a simple disagreement is disciplined. Kannan Gopinathan, an IAS officer, recently resigned because the “clampdown of fundamental rights in Jammu and Kashmir” agitated his conscience. His reputation has been smeared, he has been served a showcause notice.

There are activists, journalists and dissenters who blaze brightly even in this climate of fear, but they are the exception. Middle-class liberals are not the main victims of this dispensation. In fact, we are the first to try and cut deals, to play dead. But as Robin reminds us, every capitulation strengthens power. Let’s not be so eager to govern our own tongues.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
