Maharashtra: 'Problem' tigress E1 recaptured following attack

The first experiment at translocating "problem" tigers from congested landscapes seemed to have hit a hurdle with the state forest department re-capturing a three-year-old tigress who had been released into the wild at the Melghat tiger reserve (MTR) in Amravati. The tigress, which was captured earlier this year in a conflict situation, and named E1, had been blamed for attacking humans, leading to mortality, and cattle kills.



The young adult tigress, captured in Bramhapuri on May 31, after going close to human habitations and blamed for two human deaths, was brought to the MTR and was radio-collared and released into the wild on July 1. The tigress was blamed for attacking a seven-year-old girl, and on August 30, her attack on one Shobharam Chavan at Dadra village in Amravati led to his death.



This led to the forest department issuing orders for chemically restraining (tranquilizing) and capturing the carnivore, who had been unable to mark her territory in the habitat. Accordingly, late on Sunday, the tigress was captured at Golai village in Dharni taluka, by a team of officials.



"The tigress has been shifted to the Gorewada rescue centre at Nagpur. It is too early to say if she can be released again into the wild. This will be based on parameters like her health and the decision of an expert committee," said Nitin Kakodkar, principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF-Wildlife) and Maharashtra's chief wildlife warden.



"We have two months of data on her movements. The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) will analyse this and her behaviour and analyse what went wrong," he explained.

BIG CATS IN FIGURES According to the tiger census, India has 2,226 tigers, up from 1,706 in 2010 Maharashtra has around 190 such big cats, more than the figure of 169 in 2010 Translocation has helped enhance tiger population in reserves like Panna, Sariska

The experiment with this translocation project was to pave the way for further relocations of tigers from congested habitats (with excessive tigers and higher man-animal conflict), to ones with a lower carnivore base. Kakodkar, however, said that the animal had not turned into a man-eater as she did not stalk, kill and eat humans.



"We gave the animal a chance. The easiest solution for us is to put her in a rescue centre. But, we considered it from the animal's point of view," he explained.



However, wildlife expert Jaydeep Das, who is Nagpur's honorary wildlife warden, noted that the idea of shifting a "problem animal" to another habitat was wrong. "Shifting a problem animal from one place to another does not solve the problem but (only) shifts it... She already knew cattle were easy prey, almost like junk food. This could have led to revenge poisoning of the carcass by villagers whose animals were killed," he explained. Otherwise, the around 40 tigers in MTR did not prey on cattle and this incident would lead to resistance from villagers in Melghat after the human and cattle kills.



"There are several tiger reserves in India which have no tiger presence. However, no problem tigers must be relocated, and only tigers who will not pose a problem should be," added Das.



Kakodkar said that despite this experiment not working out the way it was intended, this would not stand in the way of more such attempts. "Every individual (animal) and case is different," he added.



Incidentally, a similar experiment in the past ended in a tragedy. Another tigress from Bramhapuri, who was released in the Bor tiger reserve in 2017, was electrocuted.
