IAF gets firepower with 8 Apache attack copters

editorial@tribune.com

Ravi Dhaliwal

Tribune News Service

Pathankot, September 3

A fleet of eight state-of the-art Apache helicopters was inducted into the Indian Air Force (IAF) at its forward base in Pathankot today. The event was marked by an impressive ceremony presided over by Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa.

The 90-minute formal procedure commenced after representatives of Hindu, Sikh, Muslim and Christian faiths read out prayers from their respective scriptures.

Dhanoa and his colleagues got up to salute one of the Apaches as it flew in front of the dignitaries sitting on the dais. After it landed at the far end of the air base, it was accorded the traditional “water-cannon salute”.

This type of a salute is a tradition being followed since ages to honour military veterans, foreign dignitaries and new planes and helicopters. It typically involves two firefighting engines spraying arcs of water once the plane starts taxiing to a halt after a flight.

Minutes after the water-cannon salute, the commentator announced that “the Apaches had been formally inducted into the IAF”.

Fourteen more such helicopters will be placed at the disposal of the Air Force by March next year.

Boeing AH-64E helicopter is an American twin-turboshaft attack machine with a cockpit meant to seat two. The crew deployed to fly these underwent training at various places in the USA.

Salil Gupte, Boeing India president, and senior officers, including Pathankot Air Force station commander Air Commodore IT Kurien and Army and district administration officials, led by Deputy Commissioner Ramvir, were in attendance during the proceedings.

During his brief speech, Dhanoa said the helicopters were day/night, all-weather contraptions and were easily maintainable even in field conditions.

“Apaches have been an integral part of several battle campaigns on foreign shores. These have been modified by Boeing to suit Indian conditions and as per the exacting standards of the IAF. These will replace the Russian Mi-35 helicopters that are nearing the end of their service life.

“Today, the inventory of the IAF stands upgraded. The choppers also have a canon gun that can fire 1,200 rounds at a time and two pods carrying 19 missiles each. These helicopters are a big boost to the country’s combat capabilities,” Dhanoa said.

A Potent force equipped with advance weaponry

360 degree situational awareness provided to pilots by Longbow fire control radars. It will allow the Indian Air Force a rapid all-weather targeting capability

16 km range radar can pick targets and even small unmanned aerial vehicles. The ‘fire and forget’ Longbow Hellfire missile has the ability to detect and prioritise targets

256 simultaneously moving and stationary targets on land, water and in the air can be automatically searched and located for precision targeting by radars

300 mile is the combat radius of the helicopter which is equipped with advanced weaponry system, including Hydra rockets and a 30 mm chain gun with 1,200 rounds

‘Big boost to country’s combat capabilities’

The (Apache) choppers have a canon gun that can fire 1,200 rounds at a time and two pods carrying 19 missiles each. These helicopters are a big boost to the country’s combat capabilities. These will replace the Russian Mi-35 helicopters. — Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa
