Less than 1% police personnel get in-service training in Gujarat

VADODARA: Heaven forbid, but if a terror strike like 26/11 Mumbai attacks takes place in Gujarat, chances are that most of our 'experienced' police personnel would be caught fumbling with the locks on their firearms. Can't blame them either. Thanks to the miniscule spending o n imparting training to the cops on duty, less than one per cent in Gujarat have received in-service training.In-service training includes training of weapons and explosives training, besides having practical and theoretical knowledge on ballistics, simulation exercise of crime scenes and investigation kit boxes among others.The Status of Policing in India Report 2019 reveals that Gujarat police department spent just 1.24% of its total police expenditure on imparting training to its personnel. As the department’s training expenditure is miserably low, only 0.9% of cops in the state have been able to get in-service training The story isn't any different in neighbouring Maharashtra. Even Mumbai cops could not counter Pakistani terrorists Ajmal Kasab and Ismail Khan when the duo opened fire at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus. Reason: They too had not got any weapons training in a long time.Interestingly, the lower rung cops at constabulary and sub-inspector levels who spend most working hours in the field and need to be actively trained in combat skills are least trained during their service period, states the report prepared by Common Cause and Lokniti programme of New Delhi-based Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS).Police officials at the level of deputy superintendents and IPS ranks are trained more at 43.2% and 32.5%, respectively. Officials at deputy superintendent ranks are trained by the state government.The training of IPS officers, too, is majorly the responsibility of the Centre. By and large, the central government’s role is limited to research, structuring of courses and providing funds, aside from imparting training to IPS officers.Gujarat police department tops the chart when it comes to training its new recruits at the time of joining. However, the matter ends there.For, around 42% of its staff have spent more than 10 years or more in service. And when compared to the pace of changing technology in one decade, the training imparted to them 10 years ago falls miserably short in tackling crime and investigating cases. Gujarat lags pitifully behind in training cops in new technology, cybercrime and forensic. States like Andhra Pradesh, Assam and Bihar among others have better training record of their police force in evolving technologies.A cop, who didn't wish to be identified, lamented that there is little time for training. “We are already reeling under a severe staff crunch for which, we are overburdened and have to work for lengthy hours. If the available strength will be relieved for training then who will replace them?” he asked.
