Bihar mob violence: 2 incidents of child-lifting rumours in one day; mob thrash mentally challenged woman

The incident happened days after a mob attacked a beggar in Nalanda district on suspicion of being child lifter. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The mob damaged their vehicles and also snatched their mobile phones 15 unidentified villagers were booked for an attempt to murder, rioting, criminal assault The incident happened days after a mob attacked a beggar in Nalanda district

Patna: Despite several warnings by the police authorities, mob attacks over rumours of child-lifting continues unabated in Bihar. In a recent case reported from Begusarai, a mob assaulted a mentally challenged woman at Khatopur village on suspicion of her being child-lifter. The woman was rescued from the mob by the local police. The mob thrashed the woman while she was roaming in the village suspecting her as a child-lifter. The incident happened days after a mob attacked a beggar in Nalanda district on suspicion of being a child lifter.

In another such case, being reported from Samastipur, a frenzied mob thrashed half-a-dozen people including two railway engineers and a beggar woman in two separate incidents on Tuesday. Two railway engineers were thrashed in Munnichak-Sarsauna village under the jurisdiction of Bangra police station. The victims were attacked while they were busy conducting a survey for a new rail line project in the city. According to a report, the incident happened around 11:45 am when some villagers surrounded the victims, suspecting them to be child-lifters and began thrashing him. Reportedly, the mob damaged their vehicles and also snatched their mobile phones.

As the situation went out of control, a police control unit was called to tackle the villagers who went on a rampage and attacked the police personnel as well. Local Station House Officer Anil Kumar said that an FIR has been lodged in the case against villagers and 15 unidentified villagers for an attempt to murder, rioting, criminal assault and criminal intimidation. Meanwhile, efforts are on to nab the accused. The police officials stated that both the victim engineers hail from Uttarakhand and are currently undergoing treatment.

How is police dealing with child-lifting rumours?

Acting on the menace, the Bihar government has issued warning to book culprits of mob violence under the Crime Control Act, still the sudden spurt in incidences of violence on child-lifting rumours. This frenzy over child-lifting is fuelling panic among people in the state.
