WATCH | 'Tauba Tauba' Reporter Is Back, Urges Imran Khan Drop Atom Bombs On Delhi

New Delhi:

Remember the ‘Tauba Tauba’ journalist? He is back, and this time with a rant on Kashmir. In a recent video, which is going viral, the reporter has appealed Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan to drop nuclear bombs on New Delhi.

In February, just before to the Balakot airstrike, the journalist had warned that India shouldn’t take “nuclear power Pakistan” lightly and demanded that Pakistan should respond to the tomato embargo by dropping nuclear bombs on India. He soon became a butt of jokes for online and has been known as the ‘Tauba Tauba reporter’.

"In this situation, I would like to appeal to Imran Khan and Pakistan forces that they should immediately attack Kashmir and drop an atom bomb on Delhi. Atom bomb should be thrown on Delhi and other cities of India. This is a Tauba Tauba situation and Indian forces must be taught a lesson that if Kashmir is in sorrow, then every Indian child must feel the pain," the reporter said in the latest video.

Tauba Tauba man is back ðŸ¤£ðŸ¤£ pic.twitter.com/g6Fm6jCaIb — Ankur Singh (@iAnkurSingh) September 3, 2019

His ranting came days after India abrogated Article 370 of the Constitution that gave a special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

"This is a Tauba Tauba situation, today it has been 27 days since the curfew has been imposed in Kashmir. People are waiting for medicines, the sick are waiting to get to the hospital, people are not getting water and electricity, people don't have internet and mobile services. This is Tauba Tauba situation, Indian forces have imposed a curfew for 27 days," he said.

In February, reporting for a Lahore-based news channel, the reporter went on a hilarious tirade against Madhya Pradesh farmers deciding to stop export of tomatoes to Pakistan in protest against the Pulwama terrorist attack.

Evidently not thrilled with the ban, the journalist criticises India by responding "Tamatar ka jawab atom bomb se." However, what catches attention is the repeated use of the phrase "tauba-tauba" throughout the video.

For all the Latest Offbeat News News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
