50-year-old shot dead after scuffle between policeman and criminal

The victim worked as a daily wage labourer. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim Raju was on his way to dinner when he was accidentally hit Incident occurred when a cop wanted to search a criminal for pistol Police arrest three persons in connection with the case

New Delhi: In a tragic incident, a 50-year-old man died after he was hit by a bullet fired by a criminal following scuffle with a policeman in Nand Nagri area of East Delhi on Monday.

The victim has been identified as Raju, who was shot near Tanga Stand. The incident occurred when a policeman named Ajay was on a night patroling duty and spotted a car with four persons inside. Ajay also spotted another person standing beside the car and having a pistol in his pocket.

According to a report, when the policeman approached the man to inquire him, the accused took out the pistol and warned the cop not to move forward.

After this, the policeman got into a scuffle with the accused in an attempt to take away his weapon. During the melee, the criminal pushed away cop and fired at him. But the bullet missed the policeman and hit an elderly man. The victim Raju was on his way to a restaurant when he was caught in the confrontation.

The victim was immediately rushed to a nearby hospital where he was declared brought dead. Raju was hit in the chest.

Later, the policeman managed to snatch the weapon, but not before the criminal slipped from his grip and fled. The other occupants of the car also fled from the spot after firing.

The victim's body was handed over to his family on Tuesday after post-mortem. The victim worked as a daily wage labourer and was going to a restaurant with his nephew for dinner. The man was a native of Aligarh and was working in Delhi for the last 15 years.

As the incident unfolded, the nearby police units were alerted about the presence of criminals in the area. Police have arrested three persons including the owner of the car, a resident of the Pasonda village in Ghaziabad district in Uttar Pradesh.

According to DCP (Northeast) Atul Kumar Thakur, the accused car owner Mukarram has many criminal cases against him. Police are now scanning the CCTV footage of the area to identify the other accused.

In May this year, a bystander was shot dead by criminals after mistaking him a rival gangster.
