Noida: Man's decomposed body recovered; 'Boby Deol' tattoo only lead for police

Police recovered body from Rabupura village of Noida. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Deceased man has a 'Boby Deol' tattoo on his left arm Police recovered body from Rabupura village of Noida Police circulate picture of deceased man in local areas for identification

Noida: Police have recovered a decomposed body of an unidentified man from Rabupura village of Gautam Buddha Nagar district on Tuesday.

The body was badly decomposed and it is believed that the man died around 4-5 days back. Police said that the only identification mark found on the body is a tattoo reading the name of Bollywood star 'Boby Deol'.

According to a report, the body became bloated and skinned peeled off when the villagers tried to remove the slain man. A police officer attached to Rabupura police station said they have circulated the picture of the man in local areas as it is very difficult to identify the man. Police have sent the body for autopsy.

The officer said the body was in very bad shape. Meanwhile, the cops have reached out to local police stations seeking details of complaints of missing persons in their areas.

According to police, they will also approach local village pradhans with the picture of the deceased for identification.

Officials said they will probe the tattoo on the hand of the deceased and whether it was his real name.

Woman's decomposed body found stuffed in bag

In a similar incident in May, a woman's body was found in stuffed bag near a government school in Kota. The clothes of the deceased were partially stripped. The deceased was allegedly tied with wires. The incident came to light after the locals of the area took notice of the bag and the body.

It was alleged that the bag had been lying on the ground for the past three days. The locals spotted the bag after they sensed a foul smell coming from it.

Sub-inspector Vigyan Nagar police station, Hajari Lal said the body of the deceased bore a deep cut under the abdomen. The police are suspecting that the deceased was murdered and then stuffed inside the bag.

Pune: Decomposing body of RTI activist found

In another incident in February this year, the body of Right to Information (RTI) activist Vinayak Shirsat, who was missing from Pune, was found in Tamhini Ghat. The family alleged that Shirsat was murdered. Shirsat had gone missing from the jurisdiction of Bharati Vidyapeeth Police Station since February 5.

The family had registered a complaint suspecting kidnapping. Accordingly, the Bharati Vidyapeeth police started the investigations. His last mobile phone location was traced to a tower in Tamhini Ghat. Taking the cue, police started investigations in the vicinity only to find Shirsat's body on the afternoon of February 11.
