‘Journalist not at fault’: Cook confirms roti and salt were served in mid-day meal at UP govt school

Cook Rukmini Devi confirms roti and salt served in mid-day meal at UP school

Key Highlights Govt school cook confirms salt and roti served to primary school students Govt school cook blames principal, not journalist Journalist has been booked for filming mid-day meal being served to students

Lucknow: Amid a huge controversy in Uttar Pradesh over an FIR registered against a journalist for exposing the shortcomings in mid-day meal scheme, the cook of the government school at the centre of the row has come out to reveal the truth.

Speaking to Times Now, the cook - Rukmini Devi – confirmed that roti and salt were served to the students at the government school as part of mid-day meal on the day the journalist, Pawan Kumar Jaiswal recorded the video. The incident happened last month.

Cook Rukmini Devi said she and another lady Mamata had cooked a meal of roti and salt for the students. “Yes, it's correct that on that day, roti and namak was served; Mamata and I had cooked it,” she said.

Rukmini further said principal Murari was also present in the school on the day the said meal was served to students. The cook said the journalist was not at fault and in fact, the principal should be blamed for the problem.

“It is principal Murari's fault, whatever he gives us we cook it. There were only a few grams of pulses that day,” she told the channel.

The cook also revealed that it was not the first time that such a meal was served. “Yes, once earlier also, rice and salt were served to the students,” she said.

As the row continued to grow bigger, the Uttar Pradesh government yesterday said it would look into the FIR filed against the journalist for shooting a video of schoolchildren being served salt and roti in mid-day meal last month.

"Action has been initiated against all those found prima facie guilty in the entire matter. As far as the FIR is concerned, we are getting it examined," state government spokesperson Shrikant Sharma said.

The video of students being served salt and roti at a government-run primary school in Uttar Pradesh’s Mirzapur district was shared on social media on August 22 and it soon went viral. The video had caused outrage and two teachers were suspended as a result.

This week on Monday, the case took a twist as the police booked the journalist and a representative of a village head, Rajkumar Pal. The police said the duo were booked for alleged conspiracy while adding that the video was deliberately recorded in a well-planned manner to malign the state government.

The FIR was registered under Sections 120B (criminal conspiracy), 186 (obstructing public servant in discharging duty), 193 (false evidence) and 420 (cheating) of the Indian Penal Code.

Shockingly, District Magistrate Anurag Patel suggested that the journalist should not have shot a video of the incident.

"One person was calling another and saying, 'I am making a video (and) I will make it viral. You help me in making this video go viral’. You are a print-media journalist. You could have clicked a photograph if you had felt that something wrong is taking place and publish it. But he did not do this, and hence, his role seems to be suspicious," the DM told reporters.
