New traffic rules inspired by Bharat Ane Nenu? Mahesh Babu fans are curious

The newly-amended Motor Vehicle Acts, which came into effect on Sunday, has received a mixed response from the citizens of India. Many have claimed that the exorbitant fines are atrocious, while others have come out in favour of the new changes.

Amidst all these debates, fans of Mahesh Babu are wondering if the new amendment was inspired by the Telugu star's film, Bharat Ane Nenu, which released in 2018.

Directed by Koratala Siva, the film is about an accidental Chief Minister of undivided Andhra Pradesh played by Mahesh Babu. After the death of his father, circumstances force Bharath to take up his position as CM of the state.

Bharath, who starts his service as a reluctant CM, later turns serious and brings about many radical changes in the state. He implements a new law, which charges exorbitant amounts of fines to people who break traffic rules. Initially, this is met with severe criticism from the public but later citizens realise the good outcome.

Fans of Mahesh Babu took to Twitter to share memes comparing the new rules with Bharat Ane Nenu. Here are some posts:

One user wrote, "I think the government has watched #BHARATHaneNENU over the traffic rules (sic)."

Another user wrote, "These new traffic rules are inspired by #maheshbabu movie (sic)."

A fan named Samuel said, "Some where it's Very Appropriate... Fines are absolutely Good, But What about Facilities Like Roads, Medical Emergencies provided..??? but #Bharat is Best CM."

Some where it’s Very Appropriate... Fines are absolutely Good, But What about Facilities Like Roads, Medical Emergencies provided..??? but #Bharat is Best CM... #BHARATHaneNENU S.A.M. (@joy_samuel79) September 4, 2019

I think the government has watched #BHARATHaneNENU over the traffic rules..???????? Irshad khan (@ikirshad3) September 4, 2019

Bharat Ane Nenu also stars Kiara Advani of Lust Stories fame. Bharat Ane Nenu turned out to be a huge hit. Mahesh Babu follwed the film with another blockbuster Maharshi, which released this year. The Prince of Tollywood is currently shooting for his next film with Anil Ravipudi, called Sarileru Neekevvaru.

ALSO READ | Punjab yet to implement amended Motor Vehicles Act, says decision after meet with stakeholders
