15 gender test rackets busted in Ambala in 2 years

editorial@tribune.com

Nitish Sharma

Tribune News Service

Ambala, February 2

Tightening the noose around the violators of the Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques PCPNDT Act, health officials from Ambala have conducted 15 raids, including inter-state raids in Punjab, Uttarakhand and UP, busting 15 sex-determination test rackets since 2017.

During the raids, 45 persons, including touts, doctors and ASHA workers, were booked. However, all accused are on bail and cases are pending in different courts.

In 2017, seven raids were conducted in Ludhiana, Fatehgarh, Roorkee, Kurukshetra and Ambala. In 2018, seven raids were conducted in Dehradun, Patiala, Sangrur, Mohali, Naraingarh, Sirhind and Jalandhar. A raid was conducted in Saharanpur in January and two touts were nabbed from Yamunanagar.

Lack of coordination among departments have become a matter of concern for health officials who conduct raids, as they sometimes land in unruly situations and have to deal with uncooperative attitude of officials of other states.

“There have been instances in Saharanpur and Punjab, where despite nabbing the accused red-handed, teams had to run from pillar to post to get FIRs registered. The security of the decoy customer is a big responsibility as during raids she not only risks her life, but also of her unborn child for a social cause,” said a health official.Dr Vipin Bhandari, a nodal officer for the PCPNDT, told The Tribune, “Whenever there is a tip-off that someone from Ambala is involved in sex-determination tests, a team is formed and efforts are made to trap the violators. Following strict measures being taken in the state, people are heading towards Uttar Pradesh and Punjab for sex-determination tests. Despite conducting raids and getting cases registered, we are not getting the desired results. There is a need to sensitise other states also, so that such tests could be stopped and sex ratio could improve.”
