KGF 2 shooting to be resumed in Hyderabad, until court case resolves : Bollywood News

The humongous success of Yash-starrer KGF Chapter 1 — in all five languages it was released in — has led to high anticipation levels among cine-goers for Chapter 2. The shooting for the second part of the film has been going on for a few months now. However, the makers had to stop shooting in the Kolar Gold Fields after the court in Kolar passed an order to halt the shooting of the film with immediate effect.

A large part of the Yash-starrer, KGF Chapter 2, is set in the Kolar Gold Fields. The film is to be shot in sets constructed in Hyderabad and Bengaluru. So, the makers decided to resume shoot in Hyderabad until the matter is solved in court.

The order was passed when the court heard a case filed by one of the residents in the area, claiming that the huge sets erected for the shooting of the film caused environmental damage.

KGF part 1 was shot for six months in the Kolar Fields and the team had come back to shoot for the sequel. Reportedly, the producer of the film said that they had only one day of shoot left in Kolar Fields. However, they decided to shoot after the case is resolved. Until then they plan to shoot in the sets constructed in Hyderabad and Bangalore.

The action period drama, produced by Vijay Kiragandur under the banner of Hombale Films, is getting a bigger scale, with Bollywood actor Sanjay Dutt being brought on broad in the role of Adheera. KGF Chapter 2 is expected to be released in Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, and Hindi, in 2020, but a date hasn’t been fixed yet.

Read: On his 60th birthday, KGF: Chapter 2 makers unveil fierce first look of Sanjay Dutt as Adheera

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
