Kashmir our jugular vein, will go to any lengths to protect it: Pak Army spokesperson

As the tensions between India and Pakistan are at an all-time high due to the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan Army spokesperson Asif Ghafoor said that the move was an "immoral" step by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

In a press conference at Pakistan Army headquarters on Wednesday, Asif Ghafoor said that Kashmir was their "jugular vein" and that they would go to any lengths to protect it.

"Kashmir is our jugular vein and we will go to any lengths to protect it," Pakistan Army spokesperson Asif Ghafoor said.

The director-general of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) mentioned former Navy officer Kulbhushan Jadhav and said that India had "indirectly continued to attack Pakistan".

ISPR Press Conference - 4 Sep 2019 https://t.co/f0bdGRaZc2 DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) September 4, 2019

"Recently Modi took an immoral step and repealed Article 370 of the Indian Constitution. This is no longer a conflict of ideologies," local websites quoted Asif Ghafoor as saying.

Asif Ghafoor said that wars are fought with patriotism and not just weapons. He added that Pakistan’s options of response to India's attacks revolved around economy, diplomacy, finance, and intelligence.

"Maybe India thinks that it should take action against us that would weaken us. We want to tell India that wars are not only fought with weapons and economy but with patriotism," Ghafoor said.

Ghafoor also mentioned Article 370 and said that PM Modi-led government had "uprooted Nehru's step for the region", adding that there was no religious freedom in India.

"In India, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Nazi ideology are in power. They endanger minorities including Muslims and Dalits," he said.

Asif Ghafoor also recalled Pakistan PM Imran Khan's call for dialogue over the Kashmir issue.

"We have avoided escalation. Nuclear countries have no room for war," Ghafoor said over rumoured talks of war with India.

Hitting out at Modi, Asif Ghafoor asked why the prime minister spoke to US President Donald Trump if he did not want mediation.

He was referring to Trump's claim that Modi asked him to mediate on Kashmir when they met in June at the G20 meeting in Japan's Osaka.

Asif Ghafoor said the Kashmir issue had gained international attention and any isolated step by Pakistan that might take the attention away from the matter would be cruelty to them.

"Armies protect a nation's sovereignty. When that is threatened, warfighting becomes a compulsion instead of a choice. It is up to India and the rest of the world. How can you think that we can do a deal over Kashmir? We have not agreed to do that in 72 years, why would we do that now?" the ISPR chief said.
