Police

County Sheriff

— A Wells Hollow Road, Yellow Creek Township, man reported at 4:27 a.m. Tuesday there were two men walking round his home. Deputies checked the area and were unable to locate anyone.

— A Kirk Road, Columbiana, man reported at 6:11 p.m. Friday his 16-year-old daughter was being unruly and had left the house walking northbound on Kirk Road. She had returned home before deputies arrived. Her father said she was cursing in front of her grandparents and he had chastised her for that. Then when the family was going to go get dinner and see a movie, she caused issues and they had to return home. The girl admitted she sometimes has problems controlling her mouth and it was decided her mother would come pick her up for the weekend when the mother got off work.

— A brother and sister at a Cream Ridge Road home reported their brother was there and was not welcome at 5:13 p.m. Thursday. Deputies learned the three siblings were part owners of the house, land and property. However, the sister lives there and deputies told the unwelcome brother he could not just enter the home whenever he wanted, but he could use the land and other structures. All three were told this is a civil issue.

— A Hillcrest Road, Yellow Creek Township, resident reported at 2:50 p.m. Friday, someone they have a protection order against climbed through an open window on the back side of the house, damaging the vinyl siding. Deputies did not find the person.

— A woman reported at 8:49 p.m. Saturday the father of her children assaulted her at his Clarks Mill Road, Washington Township, home. He told deputies she was making a false statement and she had actually assaulted him. Neither had any visible marks or injuries and she left with her children.

— A Trinity Church Road, Center Township, woman reported at 7:17 p.m. Monday she had an argument with her live-in boyfriend and he then dumped a can of beer on her. She did not want to pursue charges, but deputies waited while she gathered her belongings.

— A suspicious man was reported walking around a Signal Road, Fairfield Township, property at 11:31 p.m. Thursday. The woman who called said after he left her property, she saw him walking around the neighbor’s property. The neighbor told deputies she did not see anyone there. Deputies checked all the out buildings, but did not find him.

— A state Route 518, Wayne Township, man reported at 9:18 a.m. Friday sometime in the recent past someone attempted to cut the catalytic converter off his 1986 Ford 150 pickup. It was still there, but there was obvious damage done.

Lisbon

— Police were called to Continuing Healthcare on Vista Drive at 7:28 p.m. Friday, where a female patient was threatening staff and throwing food, forks, knives and other items. The woman told police she would rather die than remain in a nursing home. The officer stood by until an ambulance transported the woman to a local hospital to be evaluated,

— A caller reported there was a man staggering his way through town on East Lincoln Way at 9:53 p.m. Friday. Police found the man, who admitted having a few drinks and was trying to walk home to Rogers. The man said he did have a friend in town, so the officer let him off with a warning and gave him a ride to his friend’s home on North Jefferson Street.

— Richard Lipps told police on Saturday that he let Nicole Hilton borrow his phone and now she will not return it. Police went to Hilton’s residence on East Lincoln Way and she denied having his phone. Police advised Lipps this was a civil matter.

— A motorist reported seeing reckless driver coming into town west on U.S. Route 30 at 8:43 p.m. Saturday. Police stopped the driver, who agreed to perform a field sobriety test, which he easily passed. He showed no other signs of being impaired.

— Virginia D. Frantz, East Chestnut Street, reported Sunday her brother’s pit bull ran toward her in an aggressive manner, causing her to fall backward over a swing and into some bushes. Frantz said she had possible injuries to her back, neck and head, plus scrapes on her elbow. An ambulance was called to the scene but Frantz said she would go to the hospital later. Meanwhile, police spoke to her brother, who said the dog got away from him while he was trying to put it on a leash.

— Police came across a woman sitting along the side of the road on Route 154 at 6:29 p.m. Sunday. The woman was suicidal, so an ambulance was summoned to transport her to a hospital.

— An anonymous caller reported there appeared to be a group of underage youths consuming alcohol outside Shenanigan’s Pub at 12:37 a.m. Sunday. Police checked their IDs and determined that everyone was of age.

— Police pulled over a pickup truck with only one operating headlight on North Beaver Street at 1:53 a.m. Tuesday. The driver, Rick Willis Jr., had a suspended license, as did his passenger, Marcus Jarvis. They were told to call someone to pick them up, and while they were waiting Bethany Cianni, the truck owner, called to say the vehicle had been borrowed without her permission.

Columbiana

— Travis J. Beiling, 35, was picked up on an arrest warrant for domestic violence out of the sheriff’s office. He was served with the warrant at a West Railroad Street at 5:57 p.m. Monday.

— Nathan Shultz of Columbiana was cited for driving under suspension following a traffic stop on state Route 7 at 3:14 p.m. Monday.

— Jack R. Veon II, 40, Duquense Street, was charged with dogs running at large at 3:10 p.m. Money.

— Kalyn Pontuti, 25, of Columbiana, was charged with driving under suspension following a traffic stop on state Route 14 at 10:37 a.m. Monday.

— Jennifer Brown, South Vine Street, reported Sunday she and her dog were bitten by another dog. The report was forwarded to the county health department.

Salem

— Police responded at 2:35 a.m. Tuesday to the 900 block of South Lundy Avenue for an attempted suicide after a caller said a person drank bleach and was going to kill himself before he ran up the street. He could not be found, then officers returned to the residence and found the person and the caller, who said the person was in danger. The person denied drinking bleach and refused treatment.

— Brandon McCallister, 22, of 29810 Whitacre Road, was taken into custody early Tuesday on a warrant for failure to appear on an underage consumption charge. He was a passenger in a vehicle involved in a traffic stop at 2:25 a.m. on East State near Highland. The driver was given a verbal warning for two headlights required.

— A man in the 900 block of South Lundy reported Tuesday his live-in girlfriend stole his dog. He had just gotten the dog a few days ago and there was no paperwork or dog license. Officers tried to locate the person and dog but did not find them. He was told it’s a civil matter.

— A domestic was reported at 11:29 p.m. Monday in the 2000 block of Monroe where both parties said it was a verbal altercation with nothing physical occurring. They said they were ok and neither wanted to leave.

— An officer at 10:16 p.m. Monday saw a man stumbling on the sidewalk in the area of West State Street and Dodge Drive and learned he was intoxicated and trying to get home to West Pine Lake Road. He didn’t want to go home due to an argument with his girlfriend. Police gave him a ride to East Fourth Street to stay with a relative. He received a warning for public intoxication.

— Officers at 9:20 p.m. Monday saw an intoxicated man stumbling in the area of North Lundy and East Third Street. He was trying to get home from a friend’s house and had fallen and scraped his knee before police arrived. He declined medical attention and gave officers permission to search his bag. No contraband was found. He was advised to go inside his nearby home for the night and given a warning for public intoxication.

— A man in the 500 block of Continental reported at 8:19 p.m. Monday someone had keys to his residence and would not return them. She was contacted and the keys were returned.

— An audible alarm was reported at 3:39 p.m. Monday in the area of East Sixth and East School streets going off the past two days. The source was located and was a warning indicator on a mobile lift being used to paint a residence in the area. Each time the lift was used, there was a warning tone of successive beeps.

— An officer was flagged down at 3:24 p.m. Monday in the 1300 block of South Lincoln Avenue for two people walking in the road. Nobody was found.

— A man in the 700 block of East Third Street reported at 2:06 p.m. Monday that someone made entry into his locked apartment, with officers finding scratches and evidence of the door being pried open. Nothing was missing. Police were checking with the landlord and maintenance man since a problem with his toilet had been fixed and a neighbor reported seeing a truck and a male leave.

— Police were called at 12:48 p.m. Monday about a civil matter. A woman was told her options while gathering her belongings and told to call if needed. Officers responded to the 1200 block of North Ellsworth Avenue and made contact with both parties and spoke to them about separating and to contact their attorneys.

— Police responded at 12:33 p.m. Monday to a report of a male screaming in an alley on his phone in the 200 block of Rose Avenue. He was located and told to keep his voice down while outside.

— A clerk at Smith Oil in the 900 block of East State Street reported an unknown person in a gray/silver older Ford drove off without paying for $21.86 worth of gasoline.

— An officer at 8:02 a.m. Monday saw a boy standing at the corner in the 1500 block of Southeast Boulevard waiting on the school bus when there was no school. He said his dad hurt his grandmother. The officer made contact with the grandmother, who was fine. She wasn’t aware there was no school and said her son, the boy’s dad, previously made a threat of harming her but she had already documented it.

Leetonia

— Police responded to the 900 block of Cherry Street for a report of an unruly juvenile runaway at 3:48 p.m. Monday. Police had handled a call with the same juvenile and her father on Sunday dealing with unruliness and her refusing to listen. The father said this time he was attempting to leave and his 11-year-old daughter was refusing to get into the vehicle and said she didn’t have to go anywhere. Police conducted a search of the village shops and stores and didn’t find her. The officer returned to the residence and spoke to some neighbors about keeping an eye out for the girl, then contacted the fire department about assisting in the search. While awaiting them, the officer heard shouting from the neighbors and learned the girl was found hiding in the woods behind the residence. She was told to come out and was placed in the cruiser. Pla ns were to take her to Tobin but the officer was advised she could not be taken there due to her age and the circumstances. She left with her father. The day before, the incident occurred at the trailhead near the water department off of Washington Street. The girl told police she didn’t want her father to get rid of her cats so she was refusing to get into his vehicle.

— A woman on West Wilson Street called at 2:19 p.m. Sunday to report that an unknown male with red hair had broken into her residence and stolen her clothes and food, claiming that a female and the male with red hair had stolen a key from her residence and made multiple copies so they could enter.

— A resident in the 60 block of Oak Street reported vandalism at 12:17 p.m. Sunday. Her tires had been cut previously and she suspected a neighbor on Oak Street that she had previous disputes with over a vehicle blocking her driveway. She said this wasn’t the first incident with her vehicle being vandalized since the dispute took place. She said every time her neighbor’s vehicle is home, her vehicle gets vandalized. She also reported having her trash can and a car jack stolen previously, possibly by another neighbor on High Street. The officer made contact with both neighbors and advised them the department had received multiple complaints about thefts and vandalisms and extra patrols would be conducted. They were asked to report any suspicious activity.

— A runaway juvenile was reported at 10:24 a.m. Sunday at the Bureau of Christian Fellowship property on Pearl Street. A man who was known to operate a shelter for homeless and abused women said a 14-year-old girl placed at the shelter left. The girl was found at Family Dollar after police received a report about a distraught female claiming to be a victim of domestic violence. While talking with police, she claimed to have been choked by a female relative for smoking cigarettes, but had no signs of injury. Children Services was contacted and her custodial parent, who is her brother, said she had been disciplined for smoking in their house near a 5-month-old child. He and the girl left without incident.

— Police assisted at the scene of a medical at 8:40 a.m. Saturday in the 300 block of Columbia Street. The female was transported to Salem Regional Medical Center by EMS.

St. Clair Township

— Andrew Hugh Hunley was arrested at 5:08 p.m. Saturday in the 16000 block of Longs Church Road on charges of tampering with evidence, obstruction, failure to comply with police and possession of drug abuse instruments. According to police, the vehicle had attempted to outrun a police officer at speeds of 50 and 60 mph after he activated emergency lights to conduct a traffic stop. Hunley, who was the male passenger, exited the vehicle with a blue bag and allegedly ran into nearby woods with the officer and K-9 Noras in pursuit. A female driver, who was detained at her vehicle, identified the male and eventually took him into custody when police threatened to send in the dog. The blue bag, which had been discarded into heavy brush to impeded its ability to be found, contained a syringe and crushed up suboxone pills.

— Thomas G. Clark was arrested at 6:20 p.m. Friday in the first block of Calcutta-Smith Ferry Road on charges of no license, failure to signal and drug paraphernalia. Officers also found a blue container of alleged Percocet pills, which he didn’t have a prescription for; a cigarette pack containing a burnt glass pipe with choreboy, which is commonly used to smoke crack cocaine; and a white rock substance in the cellophane. Additional charges may be pending depending on lab results.

— Bobby L. Hufstedler was arrested at 7:21 p.m. Sunday in the 49000 block of Berkshire Road on OVI and failure to control charges, after officers were dispatched to an alleged accident. They found Hufstedler, attempted to replace a spare tire after he reportedly admitted to texting and driving. However, upon detecting the odor of alcoho, officers administered field sobriety tests, which he performed poorly on. He also tested with a .123 BAC.

Salem

— Fire personnel responded to Holiday Inn Express on North Cunningham at 6:50 a.m. Tuesday to check on a smoke detector that kept going off even though no hazards were in the room to set it off. Firefighters were unable to reset the alarm panel due to the faulty detector so the alarm was silenced. Hotel personnel were told to have the system serviced.

— Firefighters were called at 5:12 a.m. Tuesday to Jennings and West 10th for a large tree limb in the road. No power lines were involved. The limb was removed from the road and the street department was notified.
