Mumbai rains: Water levels begin to recede; NDRF teams at standby

Mumbai Rains today [UPDATES]: Water levels begin to recede; NDRF teams at standby | Photo Credit: IANS

Mumbai: A day after the routine life was thrown out of gear in Mumbai, the situation is returning to normalcy slowly. The suburban harbour line train services were restored on Thursday. At least 24 flights which were grounded at the Mumbai airport resumed around 1 am on Thursday. On Thursday morning, however, 30 flights stood cancelled and another 118 were getting delayed as of 12 noon. According to a live flight tracking website cited by news agency PTI, 14 incoming and 16 outbound flights were cancelled while 118 flights were delayed, including 86 departures.

NDRF rescue teams remained deployed in Kurla, Parel and Andheri. The India Meteorological Department (IMD) had predicted heavy rains in several parts of the city and suburbs in the next 48 hours. "Mumbai most likely to get continuous rains and showers with the possibility of extremely heavy falls at isolated places in city and suburbs for the next 48 hours," an IMD release read earlier today.

All three major train routes remained stalled, vehicular traffic on roads was hit and as many as 20 flights were cancelled on Wednesday. Meanwhile, in a tragic incident, a 6-year-old boy died after he fell into a gutter last evening in Nala Sopara area of Palghar district. His body was recovered late last night.

Central Railway: Train services have resumed on Kurla to Kalyan route & Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) to Goregaon route. #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/LySrcZiqfv — ANI (@ANI) September 4, 2019

In a separate incident, two on-duty BMC workers were killed after falling in a drain during heavy waterlogging in Goregaon area of the city.

The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued an orange alert with a forecast of “heavy to very heavy” rains in Mumbai and neighbouring areas of Palghar, Thane, Raigad, Ratnagiri and Nashik.
