Shame on IndiGo: Angry flyers slam airline after Delhi flight stays on Mumbai runway for 6 hours

The flight was delayed by more than seven hours.

As Mumbai battled torrential rains on Wednesday, a Delhi-bound flight of IndiGo airlines was delayed by more than six hours at the Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport runway. Several areas in the Maharashtra capital were waterlogged due to incessant rains on September 4. On Twitter, passengers complained about the inconvenience caused due to the delay and slammed the airline.

The flight - 6E-6097 - was scheduled to arrive in Delhi at 5.30pm after departing from Mumbai at 3:15pm. The Indigo flight ended up taking off from Mumbai at 9:55 pm. Passengers, displeased about the delay, posted angry comments on Twitter.

"Passengers are locked in the flight! Why don't u cancel the license of such pathetic airlines? It may lead to mass genocide," a user tweeted, tagging the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) India. Others complained about the lack of drinking water on the flight.

Read these tweets:

Passengers of indigo mumbai-delhi flight, suffering from past 6 hours on mumbai airport. Flight is not taking off nor passengers are allowed to go out.. What the hell is happening here? @IndiGo6E @MumbaiPolice @abpnewshindi Pooja Rathi (@PoojaRathijpr) September 4, 2019

An Indigo flight from Mumbai to Delhi People Stuck in flight from last more than 6 Hours People Don't have even water to drink Some people are Unconscious in flight this is Plane Arrested Shame on Indigo Ravinder Sharma (@Ravinde16395386) September 4, 2019

@DGCAIndia sir what is happening with Indigo flight 6E6097. The passengers are locked in the flight! Why don't u cancel the license of such pathetic airlines? It may lead to mass genocide. #Indian (@_mumbhau_) September 4, 2019

@IndiGo6E



It is still 8:14 pm and the flight is still on ground. Indigo is clueless pic.twitter.com/PCpisJAgrO Subhash Shankar (@subhash1409) September 4, 2019

IndiGo, meanwhile, issued a statement and said, "Due to the unprecedented non-stop rains in Mumbai, there are close to 30 flights on ground. As a result of flooding and water-logging on roads and the subsequent traffic jams, many of our ground support staff, crew and captains have not been able to reach the airport on time. "As a result, the departure flights have also been held up. We are doing everything possible to restore normalcy."

As per a live flight tracking website, an average delay of 65 minutes in flights departing from the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (CSMIA) was reported with 76 per cent outbound flights affected, news agency PTI reports.

ALSO READ: Mumbai rains: 20 flights cancelled, 280 delayed, claims report
