Madhya Pradesh: Man kills aunt, buries her head so she 'does not haunt' his family

He has been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Cod

Key Highlights Accused committed the crime on suspicion that she was performing black magic on the family Incident came to light when villagers, alerted the police that two bodies were lying in the jungle He has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code

Bhopal: A 43-year-old man was arrested for murdering his maternal aunt and her husband in Annupur district of Madhya Pradesh on Wednesday. He reportedly committed the heinous crime on suspicion that she was performing black magic on the family. The accused beheaded his aunt and buried her head in the belief that she won't come back as a ghost to haunt them.

The accused was identified as Shankhu Gond, who told the police that his aunt was a witch. The incident came to light when residents of the village, alerted the police that two bodies were lying in the jungle. The police found out that one of them was 65-year-old Bhagwandin Gond, his body bore several stab injuries and the other body was that of a woman named Beshani Gond. But the police wasn't sure as her head was missing. Meanwhile, the police have sent bodies for an autopsy and began investigations.

According to a report, the police easily found the suspect in the case as the villagers had seen Shankhu with blood-stained weapons and clothes. However, on Wednesday he was arrested by the police. During the preliminary investigation in the case, he admitted that he killed his aunt because she performing black magic on his family. Reportedly, his son had recently fallen ill and his cattle had died too. He thought that his aunt was responsible for everything bad that was happening to his family.

Anuppur additional Superintendent of Police Abhishek Ranjan said that the accused was stalking his aunt on Tuesday and followed her when she went to a nearby forest to relieve herself. He then stabbed her and cut off her head. Later, he realised that his uncle would come looking for her and decided to kill him as well. Meanwhile, he headed to his uncle's house and murdered her in fear of being caught. After committing the crime, he fled the spot and was seen by villagers with weapons and clothes covered in blood.

However, he has been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the case is underway.
