In Rajasthan's sati village, Roop Kanwar still burns bright

DEORALA (SIKAR): As the sati glorification trial finally nears a verdict more than 30 years after 18-year-old Roop Kanwar burnt herself on her husband’s funeral pyre at Deorala village in Sikar district, people of the hamlet continue to accord her a god-like stature.On September 4, 1987, Kanwar had allegedly decided to follow the now abolished sati practice when her husband suddenly died due to an unknown illness within nine months of marriage.Thirty-two years later, the locals, both young and old, though against the sati practice, respect Kanwar and firmly believe that she had done it willingly. However, they all agree that such an act is not acceptable in this day and age.Her in-laws, who were acquitted by the court long ago, have little to say about the present trial or glorification of her death. They have maintained a shrine where visitors from across the state come daily. Kanwar continues to be at the centre of attention in this infamous village with many believing that she is omnipresent.“I did not know her, but her family has told me that after seeing her husband’s body, she cried for few minutes and then immediately started getting ready like a new bride. When the family asked her, she told them that she was going to commit sati. My father- in-law tried to dissuade her but she was adamant,” said Santosh Shekhawat, who is married to Kanwar’s brother-in-law.Her father-in-law Sumer Singh, who was a teacher, remained tight-lipped about the incident and claimed he was not in a condition to talk about it when TOI questioned him about her death anniversary on Wednesday.However, in the rest of the village, sentiments run high when her name is mentioned. Mangu Singh, a relative of the family told TOI, “She was my nephew’s wife, but now she is like my mother. It was a choice which she made and we have immense respect for her. This was the fourth case of sati in our village, but her’s was the last.”According to sources, although police was reportedly informed before she sat on the funeral pyre of her husband, it could not reach on time to save her.Locals concede that such an incident would not be possible now, but the reverence for the deceased is evident. Jawan Singh, a village elder said, “We are absolutely against sati, but this decision came from within her and because of that no one can say or think anything negative about her. She was educated and took the decision on her own.”While the village itself has little to offer to the youth with no prominent development, those who were not even born at the time of her death, have heard stories and few even pay their respects at the makeshift shrine at the cremation ground where she was burnt.One such youth who did not wish to be named said, “Obviously, I know that there is no scope for this now and I wasn’t even born in 1987 but we have grown up hearing her stories. Sometimes, I also go in the evening to light an incense stick there. It is just a matter of faith.”He is not the only one to have this faith and people even from other districts visit the shrine at her in-laws’ house when their wishes are fulfilled. Anita Sharma, who came from Banswara with her few months old baby, told TOI, “This is the first time I am coming here but I had always heard about her. Once I had my baby, I decided to come here.”Following Roop Kanwar’s death, the sati Prevention Act, 1987 came into existence with laws against glorifying this social evil, though people continue to pour in at temples which are associated with this tradition. Thousands of visitors from across the country visit the Rani sati temple in Jhunjhunu, which is around 400 years old, whole the year around. The temple, which was constructed after Narayani Devi, who was from a well to do family, got married to Tandhan Singh when she was 13-year-old.“After ‘gauna’ (when the bride is taken to the husband’s house for the first time), Narayani Devi was travelling in a ‘doli’ accompanied by her husband when the wedding party was attacked by a Nawab’s army. In the attack, her husband was killed and when she saw him fall, she took up the sword and killed everyone including those who were on her side. After this she calmed down and sat on the pyre along with her husband’s body in the middle of the forest. Only one man was alive and he got their ashes to Jhunjhunu and made a shrine at the spot where the temple now stands,” said an official of the temple administration. However, in this temple, there is no idol of Narayani Devi and a ‘trishul’ depicting power is worshipped. The temple complex has rooms as well as dormitories for devotees to stay.
