Tell the world, Indian Muslims are not global terrorists: Modi govt's deradicalisation blueprint

The need to publicise negligible participation of Muslim youths in international terror networks, an unofficial web-based channel with voices from religious leaders, a study on activities of radical elements in jails and combating propaganda on social media are part of the Narendra Modi government's strategy for de-radicalisation and tackling communal disharmony.

India Today has accessed details that are part of a note that lays out the government's plan to deal with growing communal divide, which is being used to radicalise Muslim youths in some cases.

"The negligible participation of Indian Muslims in international terrorist theatres despite a large Muslim population needs to be adequately publicised to help nip radicalisation in the bud. Mainstream forces from the same community should be utilised in countering any instance of radicalisation in any corner of the country," the policy note says.



Sources said there is a need for sustained campaign to tell the world that Indian Muslims are not attracted to ISIS or other global terror groups in a big way.

According to the plan, there is also a need for a detailed study on activities of radical elements in various jails across the country to monitor and counter spread of radicalisation inside prisons.

"Talent spotting should be done within jails apart from religious preachers who visit jails for delivering sermons to lead the de-radicalisation programmes," the note says.

Formation of high security prisons in each state to prevent jails from becoming centres of radicalisation, running extortion rackets, hatching conspiracies and keeping in touch with terrorists and criminals is also a must, source say.

It is also proposed that there should be an Internet-based non official channel of religious leaders to provide right kind of advice and guidance to Muslim youths, who are, at times, misled by propagandist information and provocative videos.

Agencies such as the Intelligence Bureau, state police forces and in some cases, central armed police forces are expected to provide a feedback and be part of the implementation for these measures aimed at combating radicalisation and communal disharmony.



The police across states need to bolster unifying forces and isolate divisive ones by enhancing their capabilities at all levels up to constabulary, the proposal adds.

The practice of police station-level coordination meetings with members of community mainly for addressing communal issues, needs to be increased in scope and reach by promoting the good elements and strictly dealing with bad elements.

Police personnel should become members of social media groups run by protestors or agitators for gaining access to valuable information. "Dedicated teams are required to filter out matters of concern from social media and analyse them," the draft plan says.

On the role of social media on spread of disinformation in mob lynching cases, Union Ministry of Home Affairs must take up issues with representatives of international social media platforms, it says adding, introducing artificial intelligence to remove objectionable contents automatically from social media needs to be explored.
