A Spanish supernatural thriller

Imagine a revolving door and imagine how you’d walk in and out of it! That’s exactly how the two segments of the real and the supernatural are linked between the souls of the indigenous people and the roots of the trees here

Netflix India, on Twitter, has only been making noise about the second season of Sacred Games since its release. It hasn’t thrown the spotlight on other shows and movies much. Oh, they’ve also picked up their microphones to announce the sublime existence of Mindhunter 2, and, their tweeting-spree has included the arrival of Indian films on their platform, as well. But they’ve not bothered to let us know about their Spanish series Green Frontier, which has been shot in the Amazon jungle.

The series, as is common for most of the originals made under the Netflix brand, is divided into eight episodes. It talks about the threats faced by the indigenous communities in the jungle. Well, that’s the summary of the show; however, there are many other things that the creators – Diego Ramírez-Schrempp, Mauricio Leiva-Cock, and Jenny Ceballos – have focused on. It starts off as a crime thriller – some bodies are found amidst the lush green trees of the jungle. And one particular body captures the interest of the lead detective, Helena Poveda (Juana del Río). What’s interesting about the body, strictly from the perspective of science, is that there’s not a trace of blood in it. And Helena soon learns that it is missing its heart.

The show initially tries to beat about the bush by going the traditional way. Helena and her assistant, Reynaldo (Nelson Camayo) try to piece together the clues and wonder if it’s a murder committed as a sign of warning given to her tribe. Also, Helena is a city-dweller. She has come from Bogotá (capital of Colombia) to investigate this case, so the local cops look down upon her. Helena is probably used to men not taking her words seriously, all the time. Hence, she doesn’t shout at them; she just lets them know who the boss is. This is far from how Anjali Mathur (Radhika Apte) reacted in Sacred Games.

Come to think of it, there are several similarities with the saga set in Mumbai. I’m not pointing at the plot, but the manner in which it unfolds is eerily close to what the writers of the Hindi show thought up. The past and the present inter-mingle and they converge at some point in the last few episodes. And the flashback portions reveal the fate of the dead woman (remember how Ganesh Gaitonde killed himself and the show travelled backwards to tell us his story?). Plus, there’s a ton of spiritual connection, too, as Helena is not there just to solve the crime. She’s also there for a karmic reason.

If Ganesh Gaitonde (Nawazuddin Siddiqui) called Sartaj Singh (Saif Ali Khan) to tell him about the bomb because he once shared an acquaintanceship with the latter’s dad, Helena is brought to the jungle to make her understand the truth about her place of birth. And Green Frontier adopts the elements of the supernatural genre to tie all these threads together. However, it wouldn’t be a stretch to call this show a piece of magical-realism since Colombia is popularly known as the home of the Nobel winner, Gabriel García Márquez.

Imagine a revolving door and imagine how you’d walk in and out of it! That’s exactly how the two segments of the real and the supernatural are linked between the souls of the indigenous people and the roots of the trees here. These peace-loving folks worship the jungle, but the outsiders bring guns and violence, and, try to get to the heart of it without giving it the respect it deserves. The term “commercialization” is not explicitly mentioned, but you can read up about the Amazon fires anyway and understand that this tale has more to it than meets the eye.

And before I bid adieu, I’ll leave you with this bit. If this series gets remade in India, the protagonists will be farmers and the jungle will be turned into an agricultural land.

And the villains would be the bosses of filthy multinational companies.
