Punjab: After firecracker factory blast, nearly 12 such illegal units found in Gurdaspur

At least 23 people died and 27 others were injured due to a blast which took place in a firecracker factory in Gurdaspur, Punjab on Wednesday.

The Batala firecracker factory blast incident has exposed the business of illegal firecrackers manufacturing and sale in the highly sensitive border district of Gurdaspur.

Investigations done by India Today revealed that nearly a dozen illegal firecracker units existed in the district out of which two are located in Batala and eight in Kadian area.

We spoke to one such unit owners in Shahbaad area named as Om Prakash whose unit has also been shut.

Om Prakash confirmed to us on camera that he manufactures firecrackers including the rockets, flowerpots and pencil fireworks.

Om Prakash told us that he had got a licence to manufacture crackers way back in 2008 which is under scrutiny after Wednesday's blast. Om Prakash also said that there are eight firecracker units in Kadiyan area besides two in Batala.

The deputy commissioner Gurdaspur Vipul Ujjwal confirmed that there are illegal firecracker units in the district.

Batala police has sealed six illegal units and firecracker stores after the Wednesday blast.

"Licences were only issued to four people to manufacture the firecrackers but there are illegal factories being run in the district. Besides scrutinising the four licences, we are also taking action against the illegal units including the cracker stores. FIRs have been registered against three people," Vipul Ujjwal said.

Learning a lesson from Wednesday's deadly firecracker factory blast which resulted in the death of 23 people, the Gurdaspur district administration has launched a crackdown against the firecracker business in the district.

The illegal firecracker unit, in which a blast took place on Wednesday, was illegal as its licence was cancelled in 2016.

The district police has registered FIRs against three firecrackers unit owners.

The FIRs also include the name of Samadh firecracker unit owner Jaspal Singh who is no more.

Vipul Ujjwal also hinted that more FIRs will be lodged after the scrutiny of documents and licences is over.

The deputy commissioner however refused to comment on the role of the officials who allowed the illegal fireworks units to run.

"I am in the hospital. I do not have requisite papers to tell the exact number of illegal units being run in the district, but yes there are such units. We will be investigating and verifying the four licences issued earlier," Vipul Ujjwal said.

The district administration is tight-lipped about fixing the responsibility of the officials who allowed the unit to run even after two years of the expiry of its firecracker making licence.
