Kuldeep Sengar behind crash, says Unnao survivor

"The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault"

Sengar conspired to kill me, says Unnao survivor

"It was Kuldeep Singh Sengar who conspired to have me killed in the car-truck crash on the Rae Bareli highway. There's little doubt about this," the Unnao rape survivor told TOI over phone from her AIIMS hospital bed on Thursday. It was her first interaction with anyone from the media since the July 28 accident that killed two of her aunts and left her and a lawyer critically injured.She said she had received death threats from an aide of Sengar while visiting the Unnao court for hearings prior to the crash. The mother of the person who allegedly made the threats is a co-accused in the rape case. "The son of Sengar's associate would approach me whenever my guards needed to stand outside the courtroom. He would ask me to withdraw the case against his mother or he would get me killed," she said.The survivor said she had written many letters to police and government authorities about threats to her life from Sengar and his aides. She said she gave the CBI exactly the same details when it recorded her statement at AIIMS a few days ago.The rape survivor, her two relatives and the lawyer were on their way to Rae Bareli jail from Unnao on July 28 when a truck owned by a relative of a former SP leader crashed into their car on NH-31. "I saw the truck coming straight (at us) and ramming into our car. Sengar engineered the accident to kill me. He can go to any extent, even from prison," she said.Her lawyer, who was at the wheel of the car, tried to reverse the vehicle in an attempt to get out of the way, she said. The truck crashed into the car before he could steer the vehicle to safety. "I am still in pain and unable to walk," the girl said.Her mother , told TOI that CBI officers visited her twice in the hospital. "First, they took notes and then they recorded the same statement on video.They kept asking her about the accident and how it happened," she said.The survivor's mother had been taken to court a few days ago to have her statement recorded in the rape case. "Sengar and other accused were produced before me in court and I was asked to identify them," she said. Sengar, who has been expelled by BJP, is currently in CBI custody.
