NCLT nod to JSW’s takeover of bankrupt Bhushan Power

editorial@tribune.com

New Delhi, September 5

Billionaire Sajjan Jindal-led JSW Steel Ltd on Thursday won a bankruptcy court nod for a Rs19,700-crore takeover of Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd, capping a two-year insolvency process initiated by lenders to recover unpaid loans.

The National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) approved its bid, which was recommended by a committee of lenders to Bhushan Power and Steel over rival bids by Tata Steel Ltd and Liberty House Group.

According to the order of the NCLT, Rs19,350 crore will be distributed among financial creditors to settle their Rs47,158 crore of admitted claims. The remaining Rs350 crore would be paid to operational creditor to settle less than half of their Rs733.76 crore admitted claims. Banks would get 41.03 per cent of their outstanding dues as compared a liquidation value of between Rs9,320 crore and Rs9,707 crore, it said. JSW Steel will make an infusion of Rs7,200 crore in the company for improving operations of the company. Bhushan Steel and Power Ltd was dragged to insolvency by lenders led by PNB after the company failed to pay loans within the stipulated time-frame.

The NCLT in its 138-page order also stated that profits made by the company during the two-year insolvency period must be distributed to creditors, in accordance with a ruling by the NCLAT in a case involving ArcelorMittal-Essar Steel India Ltd.

Bhushan Power and Steel will add 3.5 million tonnes a year of capacity to JSW. It had in July 2018 along with partner Apollo Global Management LLC-backed Aion Capital Partners bought Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd under the new bankruptcy process. JSW plans to look for a partner for Bhushan Power, as it did for Monnet, once the deal is completed.

It, however, did not grant JSW certain reliefs sought from statutory authorities under the Income Tax Act and the RBI among others. It also appointed a monitoring panel to oversee implementation of JSW’s resolution plan. — PTI

Rs 19,700-crore acquisition

The move paves the way for JSW Steel, which has the biggest steel capacity in the country, to take control of a steel asset in the East where rival Tata Steel Ltd and SAIL have long dominated

Rs 19,350 cr will be distributed among financial creditors to settle their Rs 47,158 cr of admitted claims

Rs 350 cr would be paid to operational creditor to settle less than half of Rs 733.76 cr admitted claims

The resolution plan
