Pakistan will never leave its Kashmiri brethren alone: COAS

\RAWALPINDI: Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Qamar Javed Bajwa on Friday said Pakistan will never leave its Kashmiri brethren and their cause alone and will keep fighting for them.



Addressing a ceremony at the General Headquarters (GHQ) in Rawalpindi, COAS Bajwa said Pakistan will keep fighting for the cause of Kashmiris till the last bullet and soldier.

“Kashmir is Pakistan's jugular vein and we will never abandon our Kashmiri brethren,” he added.

Calling on the international community to play its part, COAS Bajwa said Pakistan gives the message of peace and today there is an atmosphere of peace in the country. “Pakistan has fulfilled its responsibilities in the war on terrorism and now the responsibility rests with the rest of the world to play its part.”

“A peaceful and strong Pakistan is our destination and we are steadfastly moving towards that end,” COAS Bajwa said, adding the country's armed forces ensured the security of the motherland by rendering sacrifices both in the conventional war and the fight against terrorism.

Pointing out that Pakistan registered unparalleled successes in the war against terrorism, COAS Bajwa said, “Our soldiers stood like a rock wall in the war against terrorists and foiled the nefarious designs of the enemy. They sacrificed their today for our better tomorrow.”

The Army Chief said our fight now is against poverty, unemployment and economic backwardness following successfully confronting the menace of terrorism.

Paying tributes to the martyrs and ghazis, the Army Chief said the entire nation is proud of their courage and resolve. “These sacrifices and courage and resolve of the entire nation is the guarantee of bright future of Pakistan,” he added.

Voicing serious concerns about the Indian occupied Kashmir, General Bajwa said the prevailing situation in the valley and said the Kashmiri population is the victim of the oppression and tyranny of India's Hindutava government.

State terrorism is on the surge in the held valley, COAS asserted.

The Army Chief categorically stated that Kashmir is an unfinished agenda of the completion of Pakistan and it will remain so until the outstanding dispute is resolved in accordance with the UN Security Council resolutions and aspirations of Kashmiri people.

He assured the Kashmiri people that Pakistan will not leave them alone or at the mercy of circumstances. “The hearts of both Pakistanis and Kashmiris beat together.”

Turning to the situation in Afghanistan, General Bajwa said Pakistan will continue with its complete cooperation in the ongoing Afghan reconciliation process reflects our mindset.

“Pakistan has always supported an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. Due to intense diplomatic efforts of the last few months, the destiny of peace appears to be very close in Afghanistan,” COAS said.

He added Pakistan will continue to extend its cooperation for a successful conclusion of this process as peace in Afghanistan guarantees peace in Pakistan.

Earlier, the Army Chief laid a floral wreath at the martyrs’ monument.

Bereaved families of the martyrs were invited to attend the main ceremony.

Pakistan is observing Defence and Martyrs Day in solidarity with the people of Indian occupied Kashmir today.

This year marks the 54th anniversary of the 1965 war with India when the Pakistani forces repelled Indian attacks on Pakistani soil despite being heavily outnumbered. Defence Day is celebrated to pay glowing tribute to the martyrs of that war.

Celebrations kicked-off with a 31-gun salute in memory of the martyrs in capital Islamabad and a 21-gun salute in all the provincial capitals. Offices throughout the country will be closed by 3pm to show solidarity with the Kashmiri people.
