Bear Grylls' request to shoot with special guest at Jim Corbett was cleared in a day

The Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change gave permission to the Man vs Wild special episode with Prime Minister Narendra Modi in one day.

In a reply to the Right of Information (RTI) query, the ministry has said it took a single day to give clearance for the shooting of the Man vs Wild episode at Jim Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand.

The ministry has replied to the RTI filed by a Lucknow-based activist Dr Nutan Thakur.

As per information provided under the RTI, adventurer Bear Grylls presented his application to the Indian Consulate General in San Francisco on February 4.

In his application, Bear Grylls sought permission to shoot at Jim Corbett Park on February 14 and 15.

In the plea to the Consulate General of India, Bear Grylls also gave a 16-member crew list with a list of equipment, which included cameras, audio and drone gears.

Consul Sumati Rao sent an urgent mail on February 7 to the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), informing about Bear Grylls’ request of an adventure into Jim Corbett National Park along with a special guest to learn what India was doing to protect its vast natural resources. She told the MEA that the filming was to begin on February 9.

MEA publicity officer Kailash Bhatt forwarded the mail to the environment ministry on the same day as he sought urgent clearance.

Nishant Verma, DIG (Forest), National Tiger Conservation Authority gave a No objection certificate’ on February 7 itself for Man vs Wild episode to be shot from between February and 9 16, while adding a few conditions.

Applicant Nutan adds that in the official documents, there has been no mention of Narendra Modi. Instead, the documents note that the Man vs Wild episode will be shot with a special guest.

Also read | PM Modi clears air on talking to Bear Grylls in Hindi during Man vs Wild episode

Als read | Man Vs Wild: My position never goes to my head, PM Modi tells Bear Grylls
