Generator Sales Market to Reach US$ 29.9 Bn by 2026; Increasing Investment in Mining and Construction to Remain Key Growth Enabler

PUNE, India, Sept. 6, 2019 /PRNewswire/ -- The global Generator Sales Market is expected to gain momentum from an ever-increasing demand for oil and gas. According to Fortune Business Insights, in a published report, titled, "Generator Sales Market: Global Market Analysis, Insights, and Forecast, 2019-2026," the global market is projected to reach approximately US$ 29.9 Bnby the end of 2026, thereby exhibiting a CAGR of 5.79% in the forecast period. The report also states that the global Generator Sales Market was valued at nearly US$ 19.15 Bn in 2018.

The report further reveals that the rising demand from mining, oil and gas, pharmaceuticals, residential, marine, manufacturing, and other industries will contribute to the global Generator Sales Market growth during the forecast period. Furthermore, rapid development in construction as well as other business units and expansion of mining industry, are likely to boost global market growth. Fortune Business Insights predicts that the global market will not witness tragic decline in sales and growth during the forecast period.

Browse Complete Report Details with Table of Content and Figures:

https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/generator-sales-market-100492

Infrastructural Development to Favor Market Growth in Asia Pacific

The global Generator Sales Market is geographically divided into North America, the Middle East and Africa, Asia Pacific, Latin America, and Europe. Amongst these regions, Asia Pacific is expected to dominate the Generator Sales Market share during the forecast period. This growth is attributable to the rising demand from emerging nations, such as Malaysia, Japan, China, Indonesia, and India. These countries have so far exhibited steady Generator Sales Market growth. This is because of the possession of strong potential of development in pharmaceutical, construction, commercial, and marine.

Asia Pacific is hence considered to be one of the fastest-growing continents in the entire world because of the persistent development in developing countries, namely, China and India. Fortune Business Insights predicts that the demand for diesel generators will rise in these nations due to rising investment towards infrastructural development, which will, in turn, boost the Generator Sales Market in the upcoming years. Moreover, the Middle East and Africa will exhibit rapid growth and will follow the footsteps of Asia Pacific during the forecast period.

Cummins Launches HSK78G Generator Series to Push the Level of Efficiency

Cummins Inc., a provider of engines, filtration, and power generation products, headquartered in the U.S., debuted its new natural gas generator series called HSK78G in March 2019. The series is specially designed to offer reliable power, regardless of the climate, including extreme altitude or extreme heat up to 131 degrees Celsius as well as the source of natural gas. According to the company, its new technology will represent a bold move into the field of natural gas. The HSK78G series models are suitable for several sets of industries, such as manufacturing, hospitals, mining, and shopping malls.

Rolls Royce, a pre-eminent engineering company, based in the U.K., announced in February 2019 that it had signed a contract to offer its MTU diesel generators in order to supply power backup to the nuclear power plant located at Hinkley Point C in Somerset in the U.K. The company stated that it had been using its in-house capability to provide four sets of generators, full system integration, and all controls and instrumentations.

Sample PDF https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/enquiry/request-sample-pdf/generator-sales-market-100492



Earlier, in September 2018, Cummins Inc. declared that it was awarded a contract worth $490.9 million by the United States Department of Defence. Its main aim was to produce diesel-powered generators. According to the contract, Cummins will supply Advanced Medium Mobile Power Sources (AMMPS) generator sets through 2023. These generators will possess carbon emission reduction of 509,698 metric tons carbon dioxide over their expected life.

Fortune Business Insights has profiled some of the prominent companies operating in the global Generator Sales Market. They are Aggreko, Atlas Copco, Wacker Neuson, Cummins Inc., Kirloskar Electric Co. Ltd., FG Wilson, Briggs & Stratton, Caterpillar Inc., MQ Energy Inc., Kohler-SDMO, Honda Siel Power Products Ltd, Yanmar Co., Ltd., Himoinsa, Inmesol S.L, Ingersoll Rand, Rolls-Royce, Wärtsilä, Generac Power Systems, and other key market players.

Speak to Analyst https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/enquiry/speak-to-analyst/generator-sales-market-100492

Table of Content:

Introduction

Research Scope



Market Segmentation



Research Methodology



Definitions and Assumptions

Executive Summary

Market Dynamics

Market Drivers



Market Restraints



Market Opportunities

Key Insights

Key Emerging Trends - For Major Countries



Latest Technological Advancement



Regulatory Landscape



Industry SWOT Analysis



Porters Five Forces Analysis



Value Chain Analysis

Global Generator Sales Market Analysis (US$ Mn), Insights and Forecast, 2015-2026

Key Findings / Summary



Market Analysis, Insights and Forecast - By Fuel Type



Diesel





Gas





Others



Market Analysis, Insights and Forecast - By Power Rating



Below 75kVA





75-375kVA





375-750kVA





Above 750kVA



Market Analysis, Insights and Forecast - By Application



Continuous Load





Standby Load





Peak Load



Market Analysis, Insights and Forecast - By End Use



Mining





Oil & Gas





Construction





Residential





Marine





Manufacturing





Pharmaceuticals





Commercial





Others



Market Analysis, Insights and Forecast - By Region



North America





Latin America





Europe





Asia Pacific





Middle East & Africa

Competitive Analysis

Strategic Recommendations

Continued...

Request for Customization: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/enquiry/customization/generator-sales-market-100492



Browse Related Reports:

Power Rental Market Size, Share and Global Trend By Rating (Below 75 KVA, 75 - 375 KVA, 375 - 750 KVA, Above 750 KVA), By Fuel Type (Diesel, Natural Gas and LPG, Others), By Application (Continuous, Stand By, Peak Load), By End-Use (Mining, Construction, Utility, Events, Manufacturing, Oil and Gas, Others) and Geography Forecast till 2026

Small Hydropower Market Size, Share and Global Trend By Capacity (Below 1 MW, 1 - 10 MW) and Geography Forecast till 2026

Advanced Energy Storage System Market Size, Share and Global Trend By Technology (Solid State Battery, Flow Battery, Thermal Energy Storage, Pumped Hydro Storage), By Application (Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Utility) and Geography Forecast till 2026

Microturbine Market Size, Share And Global Trend By Application (Standby Power, Combined Heat and Power (CHP)), By Power Rating (Up to 50 kW, 51 kW to 100 kW, 100 kW to 200 kW, Above 200 kW), By End User (Residential, Commercial, Industrial) And Geography Forecast Till 2026

About us:

Fortune Business Insights offers expert corporate analysis and accurate data, helping organizations of all sizes make timely decisions. We tailor innovative solutions for our clients, assisting them address challenges distinct to their businesses. Our goal is to empower our clients with holistic market intelligence, giving a granular overview of the market they are operating in.

Our reports contain a unique mix of tangible insights and qualitative analysis to help companies achieve sustainable growth. Our team of experienced analysts and consultants use industry-leading research tools and techniques to compile comprehensive market studies, interspersed with relevant data.

At Fortune Business Insights we aim at highlighting the most lucrative growth opportunities for our clients. We therefore offer recommendations, making it easier for them to navigate through technological and market-related changes. Our consulting services are designed to help organizations identify hidden opportunities and understand prevailing competitive challenges.

Contact us:

Fortune Business Insights Pvt. Ltd.

308, Supreme Headquarters,

Survey No. 36, Baner,

Pune-Bangalore Highway,

Pune - 411045, Maharashtra, India.

US :+1-424-253-0390

UK :+44-2071-939123

APAC :+91-744-740-1245

Email: sales@fortunebusinessinsights.com

Website: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com

Photo: https://mma.prnewswire.com/media/971232/Fortune_Business_Insights_Generator_Sales_Market.jpg

Logo: https://mma.prnewswire.com/media/881202/Fortune_Business_Insights_Logo.jpg
