Mamata Banerjee writes to PM Modi over bank merger, alleges hidden agenda

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has written to Prime Minister Narendra questioning the rationale behind the government's decision to merge 10 PSU banks last week. (Photo: PTI file)

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday shot off a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi opposing the central government's move to merge public sector banks. Raising Bengal bogey to question merger of banks, Mamata Banerjee said the manner in which merger of banks was carried betrays "hidden agenda" of the government to target her state.

Mamata Banerjee said the "unilateral decision" by the Modi government to merge two public sector banks headquartered in Kolkata will "adversely affect the developmental momentum" of the state.

"It appears that this move was made primarily to lower central government's burden of capital infusion into the public sector banks, already reeling under liquidity crunch," said Mamata Banerejee in the letter.

She said, "Our experience of previous merger of State Bank of India and associated banks shows that the bad loans problem has in fact worsened, resulting in lowering of profits and impeding credit growth."

Citing the rich history of Kolkata in banking sector, Mamata Banerjee reminded that the Allahabad Bank was formed in 1865 while United Bank of India was created in 1914 in the city. Mamata Banerjee argued that the move would adversely impact the MSME (micro, small and medium enterprises) sector in Bengal.

"As a result of the state government's persistent efforts at the SLBCs (State Level Bankers' Committees), convened by UBI, West Bengal was ranked No1 in the country in MSME lending by Government of India. Here I may mention that UBI is also the lead bank in 11 vital districts in West Bengal. The merger of UBI with a Delhi-headquartered bank (Punjab National Bank) will destabilise and undermine the significant grassroots role of UBI, at a heavy cost to rural Bengal," Mamata Banerjee argues in the letter.

Mamata Banerjee claimed that a large part of rural Bengal was still out of the banking net and therefore such a major decision would bring disaster for the state economy affecting MSME sector and self help groups (SHG).

The West Bengal chief minister expressed doubt over Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman's assurance that "there will not be a single job loss" due to merger of banks. She said the fate of more than ten thousand employees of UBI and Allahabad Bank is uncertain and many of them will be forced to opt for VRS (voluntary retirement scheme).

Mamata Banerjee termed the decision to downgrade UCO Bank -- headquartered in Bengal -- to a regional bank as "intriguing". She said "this indicates some hidden agenda" to target banking sector in West Bengal.

The government announced merger of 10 PSU banks into four on August 30. After the merger, total number of PSU banks in the country is 12.

Mamata Banerjee's letter to PM Modi can be read hereunder in three pics:

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi over merger of 10 PSU banks

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi over merger of 10 PSU banks
