Is democracy in peril in the land of Magna Carta and the land of Gandhi?

In a move designed to forestall attempts to prevent the United Kingdom from leaving the European Union on Oct 31, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has decided to prorogue--or suspend--parliament. The prospect of a no-deal Brexit alarmed even members of Johnson’s Conservative party to contemplate collaborating with the Labor party to delay or alter the terms of Britain’s long goodbye to Europe.

By abbreviating the length of the session for parliament, Johnson has made it difficult for the opposition to mount an effective campaign before the end of October. He argues that he is simply delivering on the results of the 2016 referendum in which the “leave” vote outnumbered the “remain” vote. Furthermore, parliament has had numerous opportunities to vote on a Brexit deal that his predecessor Theresa May had negotiated—but chose to vote it down each time. Enough, he suggests, is enough.

His critics, including members of his own party, think he has undermined British democracy by choosing to prorogue parliament. A key Scottish leader, a conservative, has resigned in protest.

Democracy also appears to be under siege in one of Britain’s old colonies. In India, which has often been held up as an example of a multilingual and multi-religious society founded on democratic principles, recent actions have raised fears about the country’s commitment to those principles.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was re-elected earlier this year with a large majority, placing him in a strong position to further his party’s goals of nationalism with a decidedly Hindu character. His allies have long sought to promote an ideology based on the supremacy of Hindu culture, displaying contempt for the secular tendencies in Indian society to embrace a multiplicity of religions, particularly Islam. It was a fervent proponent of the Hindu nationalism who shot and killed Mahatma Gandhi in 1948 for being unduly cooperative with Muslims during the freedom struggle.

The Kashmir problem dates back to that period of independence from British rule. Kashmir, a Muslim-majority state, chose to be part of India, but not before it received assurances that its cultural and religious identity would be protected. One such provision prohibited people from other parts of India from owning land in Kashmir.

The Hindu nationalists have always detested this special favor granted to Kashmir. And now Modi has done something about it. He has downgraded Kashmir’s status from a state to a Union territory, permitting Modi’s national government to exercise greater authority in the region, attenuating local democratic control over Kashmir’s affairs.

Modi has also scrapped restrictions on land ownership, raising fears among Kashmiris that the ensuing migration from the rest of India will change the local culture.

Anticipating violent opposition to the announcement, Modi severely curtailed civil liberties in the region. He imposed a curfew, arrested thousands of politicians and activists, and enforced a communication blackout—no Internet, no mobile, not even landline phones. This sort of draconian action has never been seen before in democratic India. The United Nations decried the “collective punishment” meted out to the people of Kashmir. Newspapers deplored the squelching of the freedom of the press. The British medical journal Lancet warned of health problems caused by lack of access to hospitals, doctors and medicines.

In India’s northeast, the government is seeking to advance another goal long sought by the far right. In the state of Assam, the population includes large numbers of migrants, many of whom crossed the border from Bangladesh decades ago and have established lives and raised families since then. But a good number of these migrants are Muslims, and Modi is planning to deport them. But how?

By asking them to prove they are Indians. A National Register of Citizens (NRC) is being updated, with data from 1951-1971 serving as the starting point. If your name is not in the NRC, you will have to produce documents establishing residency prior to 1971. If you are unable to do so, you may be expelled as a “foreigner.”

There are tribunals where appeals can be lodged, but many of the affected are poor, mostly uneducated, eking out tough livelihoods. Hardly the sort equipped to deal with a harsh and unforgiving bureaucracy.

Some four million people discovered their names missing from a draft NRC published in July. Predictably this caused widespread panic. Some committed suicide.

Bangladesh has no intention of accepting any people deported from India. So what will happen to the migrants now deemed to be “foreigners” remains unclear.

The Kashmir and Assam cases are a disturbing sign that India is retreating from its promise of a democratic society with equal treatment for all.

But these episodes, the suspension of parliament in the U.K. and the triumph of the Hindu nationalists in India, may not prove to be of lasting import. Institutions long taken for granted may be under attack, but they are not lacking in resilience. Democracies means elections, and elections means that people can vote for change.

--

Sanjay Paul is an associate professor of economics at Elizabethtown College.
