Indian Man shoots Girlfriend and then Himself in Suicide Pact

He then turned the gun on himself.

An Indian man identified as Ravinder Singh Bunty shot his girlfriend. He then shot himself in what was a suicide pact according to the police.

The incident occurred during the night of Wednesday, September 4, 2019, in Gujran village, two and a half miles from Dirba town in the Punjab district of Sangrur.

Police officers said that Ravinder shot 21-year-old Harbans Kaur in the chest before shooting himself. He had used his brother’s licensed pistol to carry out the suicide.

It was discovered that they had been in a relationship for a while, but two days before their deaths, Harbans left her home without telling anyone.

Ravinder went to an isolated area with his girlfriend where he recorded a video.

He apologised to his friends and family for any pain that he caused and he also told the police not to harass them.

The Indian man also said that his “foes” should not be under the impression that he was “scared” and that he was taking action due to “personal reasons”.

The video then ended. Ravinder used his brother’s gun to shoot his lover in the chest, killing her. He then turned the gun on himself.

Both families became worried and went searching for them. On September 5, 2019, when Ravinder’s father walked to his farm, he saw the couple’s bodies lying in the field.

They immediately alerted the police and officers rushed to the area. The couple’s video went viral on WhatsApp.

It was revealed that Harbans was a final-year university student.

When questioned, the family members denied knowing about a possible relationship between the two.

DSP William Jeji explained that officers had initiated proceedings under Section 174 of the CrPC based on the statements of the family members.

He added that Ravinder was a Jat Sikh while Harbans was a Dalit. It was a possibility that the couple formed a suicide pact out of fear that their parents would not approve of their relationship.

Meanwhile, their bodies have been sent to Sangrur Civil Hospital for an autopsy.

While India is progressing economically and becoming a powerhouse in the world, issues related to relationships and love are still a major taboo.

This tragic case is an example of two people who could not be together because of social differences.

Acceptance of love and marriages of this type are particularly a difficult issue in rural parts of the country.

Patriarchy, traditions, customs and ‘honour’ override the freedom for a person to be with who they want to freely. Hence, cases like this are on the rise due to local societies not allowing such relationships to flourish.
