Katie Salmon shows off her enviable figure in tiny yellow bikini as she holidays in Cape Verde

Fans are used to seeing the beauty in a bikini after she soared to fame on Love Island.

And Katie Salmon, 22, ensured all her assets were in view as she posed on the beach in Cape Verde as she holidays with her pal India Jennings.

Proving that the girls are enjoying their girlie getaway under the African sun the duo put on a sizzling display over the weekend.

Beach babe: Love Island star Katie Salmon, 22, showed off her phenomenal body in a bikini on the beach in Cape Verde over the weekend

Katie showed off her fabulous hour-glass figure in a canary yellow triangle bikini top paired with matching thong bottoms that flaunted her toned physique.

Glowing, the reality TV personality arched her back and popped her hip to showcase her pert bottom and washboard stomach.

The beauty kept her long raven locks braided and shaded the sun from her eyes with aviator style sunglasses.

Girlie getaway: The reality star is enjoying some time away in the sun with her equally glam pal India Jennings

Perky: The star playfully tugged at her bikini bottoms as she posed up a storm on the sand

India, looked every inch of a beach babe in a black swimsuit that featured a cut out detail on the midriff and a high leg design that grazed up her posterior – highlighting her peachy bottom.

The friends playfully tugged at their swimwear as they posed by the sea for snaps.

Katie is certainly no stranger to causing a stir after her Love Island 2016 appearance.

Work it: The raven haired beauty had her hair styled in braids and she donned sunglasses

TV star: Katie is certainly no stranger to causing a stir after her Love Island 2016 appearance

She is best known to viewers of the ITV2 show for pairing up with the late Sophie Gradon on the reality dating series.

Sophie was originally partnered with Tom Powell but later coupled up with Katie after he quit the show.

However, Sophie later dumped Katie and bowed out of the show to be with Tom again, leading Katie to pair off with Adam Maxted. Their romance was short-lived, lasting just two weeks after the series drew to a close.

Uproar: Katie revealed that she was subject to much uproar after her same-sex relationship on Love Island

Katie opened up about the abuse she received from the LGBT community, following her same-sex romance with late Love Island star Sophie.

Speaking on the Victoria Derbyshire programme in September, Katie admitted she was the subject of much uproar after her relationship with Sophie, who was tragically found dead in June aged just 32.

She said: 'In the villa I was so scared because I didn't know what the outside world was thinking, what my family was thinking, what my friends were thinking, so I was really upset that they'd not supported me from my own community.'
