'Our organizer is missing:' Friends remember man slain in Fifth Third shooting

They all went to college together in India. Prudhvi Raj Kandepi was the only electrical engineer in a group of mechanical engineers, but he was also the glue that held the group together after graduation.

Four of Kandepi's friends traveled from across the United States to honor him Friday on Fountain Square at 9 a.m. within minutes of the time the Fifth Third Center was attacked last year.

Kandepi was killed on Sept. 6, 2018, in a shooting that left two more dead and two more wounded. Police also shot and killed the shooter.

They laid white flowers and lit white candles at the base of the Tyler Davidson Fountain Friday.

It was otherwise business as usual at the square; quiet. The brown clad Fifth Third security guards, now armed, were visible but relaxed.

It wasn't until Kandepi's friends arrived that people began to stop.

A woman wiped a tear from her eye as the men stood in silence around their impromptu memorial. After a few moments, she walked up and offered a hug.

Kandepi's manager came down to pay his respects as well.

The 25-year-old was a programmer and consultant for Fifth Third.

His friends say he was "absolutely brutal" at work, a total workaholic, but when he wasn't in the office, he would round up his college buddies for long weekend trips. They took three or four trips together last year before he was killed.

They were together on a road trip on Labor Day just a few days before the shooting.

"He was always camera shy, but he has so many pictures from there," Ajay Maillina said pointed to the picture they propped up by the candles.

The group hasn't traveled much together since Kandepi died.

"He would be the one to mobilize everyone," Srivenkat Poolla said. "Our organizer is missing."

But they did come together and plant a tree in Spring Grove Cemetery for Kandepi. They planned to visit it Friday after leaving Fountain Square.

They had a laundry list of local people who helped them deal with their friend's estate and helped with transferring assets back to his family in India. Kandepi had few relatives in the U.S.

The men said Kandepi was very proud of his job and the apartment he had recently moved into.

They smiled as they recalled him giving a walking tour of Downtown Cincinnati and pointing out the Fifth Third Center from at least eight different angles.

When he moved into his own place, it was another chance to get the group together.

"He just wanted to cook for us and show us his new apartment," Mallina said.

The group vowed to return to Cincinnati every year to honor Kandepi.
