Court convicts 4 for murder of Arunachal Pradesh's Nido Tania

Nido Tania, the son of an Arunachal Pradesh MLA, was killed in the national capital in 2014.

The Saket District Court in New Delhi on Friday convicted four persons and sentenced them to rigorous imprisonment in Nido Tania's murder case.

Nido Tania, the son of an Arunachal Pradesh MLA, was killed in the national capital in 2014.

According to a CBI spokesperson, "The convicts have been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for different prison times. Farman has been sentenced to 10 years with a fine of Rs 20,000, Pawan and Sunder to 7 years with fine of Rs 20,000 and Sunny Uppal to 3 years with fine of Rs 20,000."

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) had registered the case on February 28, 2014 on the orders of the government and took up the investigation of the case which was earlier with the Delhi Police.

It was alleged that Nido Tania was assaulted by a group of seven people on January 29, 2014 in Lajpat Nagar area when he stopped to ask for directions. He succumbed to his injuries the next day.

An autopsy was conducted by a panel of doctors at the AIIMS, who concluded that the cause of his death was cerebro pulmonary edema (fluid accumulation in the lungs) caused by a blunt weapon.

The CBI investigation revealed that Nido Tania was in Lajpat Nagar with three friends on the fateful night. The deceased stopped at a dairy shop to ask for directions to his friend's house but was humiliated and laughed at by the convicts.

"After thorough investigation, it was revealed that seven persons including three juveniles were involved in the assault on Nido Tania. A chargesheet against four accused was filed in the designated court in Delhi. A report was also filed before the Juvenile Justice Board, Kingsway Camp, Delhi against the three juveniles," the probe agency.

The CBI had charged the four accused, all residents of Delhi, for offences related to culpable homicide, illegal confinement and offences under the SC/ST Atrocities Act.

The proceedings against the three juvenile will be carried out by the Juvenile Justice Board in due course.

In 2014, while campaigning for the impending general elections, PM Narendra Modi had called the attacks "a shameful incident for the nation" and had asked the then government to ensure justice in the case.
