Ludhiana MLA Simarjit Singh Bains '' heated exchange with Gurdaspur DC goes viral

rajivbhatia82@gmail.com

Ravi Dhaliwal

Tribune News Service

Batala, September 6

A video clip showing MLA Simarjit Singh Bains using “highly abusive” language against Gurdaspur Deputy Commissioner (DC) Vipul Ujwal has gone viral, leading to resentment among residents and Congressmen over the choice of words used by the legislator.

The incident occurred in the civil hospital when the MLA countered the bureaucrat over the alleged non-identification of the body of one of the persons killed in blasts which rocked a firecracker manufacturing unit here.

Bains brusquely told the DC, “Eh tere baap da office nahi hai. Eh public da office hai te tu public nu hi keh rehan ki bahar jao." (This is not your father’s office. This is an office meant for the general public and here you are asking the public to leave.)

To this, Ujwal replied, “Either mind your language or I am not going to talk to you.”

The video has sparked off widespread condemnation from Congressmen with Cabinet minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa saying that Bains had indeed used “highly derogatory language.”

“The sort of language used by the legislator against an IAS officer speaks volumes of the fact that Bains really does not know how to behave. The man has a knack of churning out wrong words at the right moment and right words at the wrong moment. He should take classes in political ethics and morality. I stand by DC Ujwal. Such words should not be used by people like Bains who are public figures. We have to maintain some decorum. I will be taking up this issue at the highest level,” said Randhawa.

Bains was trying to help one Manjit Singh who was claiming that the administration was not serious in locating the body of his brother Satnam Singh who had lost his life in the blast.

Out of the 23 dead, 21 bodies were identified and subsequently handed over to the kin. There were just two cadavers lying in the hospital mortuary and the DC showed Manjit both of them to ensure he was able to identify his brother.

“However, Manjit started claiming that neither of the two bodies belonged to his brother. Later, he approached Bains who took him to meet the DC. Even as the officer was trying to make the MLA see logic and reasoning, he suddenly went off in a tangent and started abusing the DC,” said an official present.

With Manjit adamantly insisting for nearly 48 hours that the body being shown to him was not of his brother and with the DC resolutely maintaining that the body was indeed of his brother’s, the impasse was finally broken today when the former identified the body through a tattoo and a thread which his brother normally wore on his left hand.
