Supreme Court seeks Centre's reply on petition for doctors' safety

Looking for a legal cure to address the safety of doctors at their workplaces, the Supreme Court on Friday sought response of the Centre on a petition demanding a Central law to protect doctors against attacks and violence in hospitals, medical facilities, and clinics.

The development came close on the heels of a 73-year old doctor who was killed by a mob at a tea estate in Assam's Dibrugarh while he was working at the estate hospital. The petition filed by the Association of Healthcare Providers, India (AHPI) comprising of 56 private hospitals claimed that the attacks on doctors and medical professionals are increasing by the day.

Based on its research, the Association concluded that 19 states have such laws, but their implementation is poor. In states where a special law is absent, law under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) should prevail. However, that too is not being enforced, said senior advocate K Subramanian who appeared for the Association.

The bench of Justices NV Ramana and Ajay Rastogi issued notice on the petition and asked the Central Ministries of Home Affairs, Health and Law to respond. The petition's specific demand for a Central law is what is keen to note.

The petitioner pointed out that the Indian Medical Association (IMA) had drafted a model law titled Protection of Medical Service Persons and Medical Service Institutions (Prevention of Violence and Damages or Loss of Property) Bill, 2017. This law proposed a 10-year jail term and a Rs 5 lakh fine for acts of violence committed against doctors and healthcare professionals.

The cause for such increasing violence, the petition claimed, was the fact that government spending on healthcare is much below the intended requirement. According to the petition, a recent survey of Government hospitals revealed that there is one doctor for every 10,189 patients; one hospital bed for every 2,046 patients; and one State-run hospital for every 90,343 persons. India has a doctors workforce of 10 lakh in government and private sector healthcare institutions.

The trend of violence against doctors is on the rise and even a premier institution such as Delhi's All India Institute of Medical Sciences is not spared. The petition submitted that with modern medicine, treatment is not cheap nor is it 100% effective. "Some patients make it, some patients don't. This should be understood," the petition added.
