The Week in History: September 7-September 13

Staff reports

Aberdeen News

Sept. 7

1940: Nazi Germany began its eight-month blitz of Britain during World War II with the first air attack on London.

1957: The original version of the animated NBC peacock logo, used to denote programs “brought to you in living color,” made its debut at the beginning of “Your Hit Parade.”

2007: Osama bin Laden appeared in a video for the first time in three years, telling Americans they should convert to Islam if they wanted the war in Iraq to end.

Sept

. 8

1892: An early version of “The Pledge of Allegiance,” written by Francis Bellamy, appeared in “The Youth’s Companion.” It went: “I pledge allegiance to my Flag and the Republic for which it stands, one nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”

1935: Sen. Huey P. Long, D-La., was shot and mortally wounded inside the Louisiana State Capitol; he died two days later. (The assailant was identified as Dr. Carl Weiss, who was gunned down by Long’s bodyguards.)

1943: During World War II, Gen. Dwight E. Eisenhower announced Italy’s surrender; Nazi Germany denounced Italy’s decision as a cowardly act.

1974: President Gerald R. Ford granted a “full, free, and absolute pardon” to former President Richard Nixon covering his entire term in office.

Sept

. 9

1776: The second Continental Congress made the term ‘‘United States’’ official, replacing ‘‘United Colonies.’’

1926: The National Broadcasting Co. (NBC) was incorporated by the Radio Corp. of America.

2002: Former Apollo 11 astronaut Edwin ‘‘Buzz’’ Aldrin was confronted outside the Luxe Hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif., by conspiracy theorist Bart Sibrel, who demanded that Aldrin swear on a Bible that he’d actually been to the moon; Aldrin ended up punching Sibrel in the jaw.

Sept

. 10

1912: The jungle character Tarzan made his debut as ‘‘Tarzan of the Apes’’ by Edgar Rice Burroughs was first published in The All-Story magazine. (The novel was published in book form in 1914.)

1962: The U.S. Supreme Court ordered the University of Mississippi to admit James Meredith, a black student.

1987: Pope John Paul II arrived in Miami, where he was welcomed by President and Mrs. Reagan as he began a 10-day tour of the United States.

Sept

. 11

1777: During the American Revolution, forces under Gen. George Washington were defeated by the British in the Battle of Brandywine.

1941: Groundbreaking took place for the Pentagon, now headquarters of the U.S. Department of Defense.

1972: Precision Industries, on U.S. Highway 12 east of Aberdeen, began operations. The company specialized in the welding of aluminum.

2001: Nearly 3,000 people were killed on America’s worst day of terrorism as 19 al-Qaida terrorists hijacked four passenger jetliners. Two planes smashed into New York’s World Trade Center, causing the twin towers to fall; one plowed into the Pentagon; and the fourth was crashed into a field in western Pennsylvania.

Sept

. 12

1953: Massachusetts Sen. John F. Kennedy married Jacqueline Lee Bouvier in Newport, R.I.

1977: South African black student leader Steve Biko died while in police custody, triggering an international outcry.

1994: Northwestern High School considered a $1 million addition to its present facility.

2002: Raising the specter of war, President George W. Bush told skeptical world leaders at the United Nations to confront the ‘‘grave and gathering danger’’ of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq — or to stand aside as the U.S. acted.

Sept

. 13

1974: Officers in the Brown County Sheriff’s office stopped performing “dog catching” services within the county.

1991: Turton Congregational Church hosted a quilt show and tour of local homes as a fundraiser for restoration of the church, which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

1996: Rapper Tupac Shakur died at a Las Vegas hospital six days after he was wounded in a drive-by shooting; he was 25.

1997: Funeral services were held in Calcutta, India, for Nobel peace laureate Mother Teresa.
