4, Including A Baby Girl, Injured After Terrorists Open Fire In J-K's Sopore

highlights All 4 persons including baby girl were from same family.

Family used to live at a house in Sopore’s Dangerpora village, police said.

‘Further investigation is in progress,’ the police spokesman told media.

New Delhi:

In what can be called as another attempt by Pakistan-backed terrorists to disturb the status quo in Jammu and Kashmir, four members of a family including a baby girl were injured when terrorists attacked a house in north Kashmir's Baramulla district, police said on Saturday. "In a merciless act of terrorism, terrorists fired and injured four persons including a baby girl, Usma Jan, at Dangerpora village of Sopore," a police spokesman said was quoted as saying by Press Trust of India. The injured have been hospitalised and their condition is stated to be stable, he said. All injured shifted to the hospital and stated to be stable. "Further investigation is in progress," the spokesman added.

Earlier this week, the Indian Army had confirmed that five civilians were killed in the valley since the landmark abrogation of Article 370. For the first time since August 5 lockdown in Jammu and Kashmir since the abrogation of Article 370 by the Narendra Modi government, the Indian Army on Wednesday gave an exact number of civilian casualties in the region. According to a top military commander, five people were killed in Jammu and Kashmir in last 30 days. This is the first time that there has been any official statement by the Indian administration. On August 5, putting an end to all wild speculations and online and offline rumours, the Narendra Modi government had revoked the Article 370 that gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Last month on August 30th, a 65-year-old man was killed by terrorists in the Parimpora area on the outskirts of Srinagar City. He was a shopkeeper and reportedly killed for keeping his shop open. Earlier, a truck driver was targeted and killed in Bijbehara in Anantnag district by stone-pelting criminals. ‘Asrar Ahmad Khan who was hit by a stone on August 6 was admitted in Soura has lost his life today. This makes it the 5th civilian death in last 30 days and these deaths have happened because of terrorists, stone pelters and puppets of Pakistan,’ Lt General KJS Dhillon said during the presser on Wednesday.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
