NSA Ajit Doval: 'Pak Used Article 370 To Catalyze Terrorism In J&K'

NSA Ajit Doval on Saturday while speaking to the media in New Delhi said that most of the Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was free of restrictions. He also said that Pakistan was trying its best to disrupt peace in J&K. He added that the political leaders in the region were detained to maintain to avoid any law and order issue from happening. He also said that Pakistan-backed terror outfits could use the situation to create violence in J&K

READ | Chandrayaan 2 to help India's future missions: ex-NASA astronaut

Kashmiris support revocation of Article 370: NSA Ajit Doval

"I am totally convinced that majority of Kashmiris support the abrogation of Article 370, they see greater opportunities, future, economic progress and employment opportunities, only a few miscreants are opposing it. No question arises of Army atrocities, only state (J&K) Police and some central forces are handling public order. Indian Army is there to fight terrorists. Out of 199 police station areas in J&K only 10 have prohibitory orders in place, rest have no restrictions, 92.5 percent of the geographical area of J&K is free of restrictions.," he said.

'Operation Topaz by Pakistan': NSA Ajit Doval

"There were many laws for modern and upcoming societies which were denied to people of J&K, right to education, right to property were denied, 106 such laws were taking the protection of article 370 before August 5. It was not a special status, it was special discrimination. Pakistan used article 370 to catalyze terrorism in Kashmir, they launched operation Topaz in 1988 through which they wanted to exploit political space. Modus operandi of operation Topaz was to use the same tactics which Pakistani non-state actors used in Afghanistan"

READ | Virat Kohli hails ISRO's scientists, says 'India is proud of them'

NSA Ajit Doval says Pakistani backed outfits trying to disrupt peace

"Hundred percent landline connections are operational in the state. Pakistan is trying to create trouble, 230 Pakistani terrorists were spotted, some of them have infiltrated, some arrested. We are determined to protect the life of Kashmiris from Pakistani terrorists even if we have to impose restrictions, terror is the only instrument Pakistan has to create unrest. There are Pakistani communication towers 20 kilometres along the border, they are trying to send messages, we heard intercepts, they were telling their men here 'how so many apple trucks are moving, can’t you stop them? Should we send you bangles?'"

READ | "You are our hero ISRO": Lata Mangeshkar, Amitabh Bachchan, Taapsee

Kashmiris who are political leaders detained to maintain peace: NSA Ajit Doval

"They are in preventive detention, there could have been problems in maintaining law and order in case there were gatherings, terrorists would have used the situation. None of them (J&K political leaders) have been charged with criminal offence or sedition, they are in preventive custody till environment is created for democracy to function, which I believe may happen soon. Everything is done according to the framework of law, they can challenge their detention in court."

READ | PM Modi to ISRO: "You will give us several more reasons to smile"

NSA Ajit Doval says 'Relaxation of restrictions depends on Pakistan's actions'

"I think the situation (in J&K) is getting much better than what I anticipated, only one incident has been reported, on 6th August in which one young boy succumbed, he did not die of bullet injury. The post-mortem report says he died because some hard object hit him. In so many days just one incident was reported, we are talking about terrorist infested areas and only one incident. We would like to see all restrictions go, depends on how Pakistan behaves, it’s a stimulant and response situation."

"if Pakistan starts behaving, terrorists don’t intimidate and infiltrate, if Pakistan stops sending signals through its towers to operatives, we can lift restrictions. More than 750 trucks are moving daily from Srinagar, yesterday two militants came, they wanted to target a prominent fruit merchant Hamidullah. They could not find him as he went to offer Namaz or something. They took two of his workers to his home 5 kilometres inside Sopore where they shot at his son Mohammed Irshad and also fired upon his two and a half-year-old daughter Asma Jaan. Both Pakistani militants had pistols and were speaking Punjabi both are absconding. Pakistan is indulging in false and dark propaganda and some uninformed people are taking one or two incidents as public opinion."

READ | PM Modi's advice to students to stay motivated to achieve their goal
