NSA Doval directs authorities to send 2-year-old Kashmiri girl, injured in terror attack, to AIIMS

NSA Ajit Doval | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Two-year-old Kashmiri girl Asma was critically injured on Friday when terrorists attacked her residence in Sopore All four in her family were injured in the attack and were admitted to a hospital The security agencies are in pursuit of terrorists who fled the scene after the attack

New Delhi: The National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval on Saturday asked the authorities to admit the two-and-half-year-old Kashmiri girl Asma Jan to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi for hospitalisation. The 30-month-old girl was critically injured in a terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir’s Sopore on Friday.

The terrorists targeted three others from her family when they attacked their house in a village near North Kashmir’s Sopore town which lies in Baramulla district, officials said on Saturday.

The terrorists barged into the house and opened fire at the family inside the house at Dangerpora village, injuring all four including baby Asma. The injured persons were admitted to a hospital and their condition was initially declared as stable. However, Asma’s condition deteriorated the next day.

The police said that the attackers fled the scene immediately and were being actively pursued by the security agencies. Terming it a 'merciless act of terrorism', Jammu and Kashmir police said that a team has reached the place of attack and a probe has been initiated.

Doval’s statement comes after reports emerged of district authorities saying that they were trying to arrange for the little girl to be airlifted to Delhi for advanced medical care.

Baby Asma of 30 months is among the injured in militant attack on fruits merchants in Sopore. She didn't deserve this. We've put in all efforts to get an air ambulance ASAP to take her Delhi for advanced medical attention. Prayers are requested. — Shahid Choudhary (@listenshahid) September 7, 2019

"Baby Asma of 30 months is among the injured in militant attack on fruits merchants in Sopore. She didn't deserve this. We've put in all efforts to get an air ambulance ASAP to take her Delhi for advanced medical attention. Prayers are requested" Shahid Chowdhary, Srinagar District Magistrate, said in a statement on Twitter.

NSA Doval while addressing a press conference said Pakistan was trying to foment trouble in Kashmir, adding at least 230 terrorists have been spotted in the Valley, some of whom have been arrested.

Doval also apprised the media of the ground situation in Kashmir which continues to be in a lockdown since August 4.

“We are determined to protect the life of Kashmiris from Pakistani terrorists even if we have to impose restrictions, terror is the only instrument Pakistan has to create unrest,” Doval said.


