Gone to fetch dry sticks, woman found murdered with her clothes torn in Kancheepuram

Her body was found on a hillock in the forest (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman's body was found by family members on Thursday night Her clothes were missing, hinting sexual assault Police officers suspect the role of a neighbour who was familiar with the victim

Chennai: A woman was found murdered less than 750 metres from her home in Tamil Nadu's Kancheepuram district in the final hours of Thursday. Family members told local police personnel that she had gone into the nearby forest to grab a bundle of dry wood which she had forgotten earlier in the day. An officer said that none of the victim's gold jewellery was missing, which indicates that this could not have been a robbery gone wrong.

At the time neighbours found her body, the woman was undressed. This has led investigators to believe that she may have been raped by whoever murdered her and abandoned her body in the forest. The victim is survived by her husband and two children who were either at work or school when she went out to collect dry wood from the forest along with her in-laws.

According to a report, the group returned home sometime before dawn but the woman told them that she forgot one bundle of dry wood in the forest and went back to fetch it. When she did not return after several hours, the victim's family members launched a search and found her lying less than 800 metres from her home. Her body was lying on the ground over a hillock in the forest with injury marks around her neck. Her body was also unclothed at the time.

A police officer familiar with the case said that the woman may have been murdered by someone known to her. The culprit must have followed her into the forest knowing fully well that she was alone and took the chance to attack her, added the officer. The exact cause of death and signs of sexual assault will only be determined once the post-mortem report comes out. Family members of the victim are also being questioned to find out whether a personal enmity may have led to the tragedy.

More details are awaited as police continue their investigation into the murder.

A similar incident had surfaced from Thiruporur in Kancheepuram earlier this year when a 45-year-old woman was found dead in her shop one April morning. Police officials probing her death claimed that the victim was strangled during a robbery attempt after taking into account that the jewellery she was wearing went missing since the incident. The woman ran a fancy story near Murugan temple on Sannithi Street in Thiruvanchavadi. Police found the woman's body with injuries on her head and throat.
