Monkey that became student of a school in Andhra village, died in stray dogs attack

langur

school

dogs

Students

Lakshmi, a female langur, that became a part of school.

Lakshmi, a female langur who died in a stray dogs attack

Lakshmi, a femalethat shot to fame by regularly attending classes at a governmentin Kurnool district, was killed in a fierce attack by strayon Saturday afternoon.and teachers were saddened to see their beloved langur lying dead. Unusually, the school declared a half-day holiday after mourning the death of the langur.The two-year-old monkey used to attend classes regularly and sit by the side of students in government primary school at Vengalampalli village of Peapully block. The students named it Lakshmi.According to school principal Syed Abdul Lateef Khan, Lakshmi went out of the school compound during lunch hour today, when stray dogs attacked it.According to the teachers, Lakshmi usually had lunch along with the children. The kids used to bring bananas and fruits for it. However, she chose to go out during the lunch break today. Hearing its screaming and dogs barking, teachers and students ran out of the compound to rescue it but, it was already dead.The langur, along with two others, strayed into the school one day some two months ago (July), from the nearby forests. The other two died very soon under the wheels of cement trucks. Lakshmi never attacked anybody or snatched away anything from any. Thus, the students started liking it. it was eating what they offered and used to stay at nights in the school premises that has trees around.Her bond with the students became so strong that it used to sit in the classes, pay attention to the lessons by the teachers. “She was highly disciplined and was very attentive”, says Lateef. It used to open the students’ books and turn pages, may be imitating the students. Because of Lakshmi, the school started recording 100 percent attendance.Recently, a villager took it, promising to take care of it. However, Lakshmi returned to the school on Thursday.Villagers joined the school staff in performing its last rites on the village outskirts.
