Sunken dredger to be salvaged by owner

There is no oil spill from the vessel, says NMPT

New Mangalore Port Trust (NMPT) Chairman A.V. Ramana on Friday said Mercator Lines, Mumbai, the owner of sunken Hopper Dredger Tridevi Prem, has agreed to salvage the wreck.

Speaking to reporters here, Mr. Ramana meanwhile claimed that there was no oil spill from the vessel as certified by the Coast Guard and Hyderabad-based Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (Incois). Tridevi Prem, abandoned by its crew after water ingress, sunk on September 3 off NMPT.

NITK and MRPL have reported no traces of oil in the water samples collected from the location and sent to them for testing, the chairman said.

Mr. Ramana said the Joint Director General of Shipping, Chennai, has issued a notice to Mercator Lines to remove the dredger’s wreck. The company would have to appoint an agency for the salvage that needs a lot of planning, favourable weather conditions etc. Over a period of time, the wreck would be salvaged, he said.

Meanwhile, the sunken vessel does not pose any threat to other vessels visiting either NMPT or passing through as the Port has already intimated the international maritime agency and others concerned about the incident. The area has already been marked in the international maritime route even as warning booms visible round-the-clock are placed at the site. Moreover, the location is not on the international maritime line, Mr. Ramana added.

He said immediately after the incident, the port sought the assistance of maritime environment expert R.D. Tripathi, who has been camping NMPT since a couple of days. Reiterating no oil spill, Mr. Tripathi said the wreck would not affect the coastal life even if it remains underneath water. The high speed diesel in its fuel tank would get evaporated even if it comes out, he said.

Mr. Ramana said cases were filed against Mercator Lines by the Directorate General of Shipping, the Coastal Police and the local police as well.

To a suggestion of sabotage, Mr. Ramana said one has to read between the lines as the crew of the dredger did not allow the repair personnel to enter the affected chamber. The crew even abandoned these personnel, who had to be rescued later, he said.

A media visit to the location was incomplete following hostile wave conditions post the media interaction.
