Karnataka High Court gives warring couple shot at compromise

bail

Haryana

HC

A techie couple that is having trouble in the marriage has got a chance at compromise after the High Court felt that sending the husband to custody will end any chance of reconciliation.The wife, among other things, has complained that the husband kept quiet while his friends harassed her. “As it is matrimonial differences, if the accused is sent behind bars, there may be bleak chances of compromise between the parties,” the court said, grantingto the husband.The 28-year-old man, who hails fromand his wife are both software engineers working in Bengaluru. The two were married in 2016. Differences arose within four days of marriage. The wife alleged harassement by the husband and his family over dowry.The husband’s brother is alleged to have ill-treated the woman and sexually harassed her, and trying to coax her to sleep with him. The husband is allegedly an alcoholic and would come home drunk late at night with his friends. His friends allegedly misbehaved with her but the husband did “not take any action against his friends and in turn, he supported the said act of his friends”.The wife complained against the husband, his brother and the friends of her husband. All of them except the husband were granted bail by the Sessions Court. The husband was denied bail and therefore he approached the High Court. Thesaid, “It appears that both the petitioner and the victim are well educated and software engineers.” It also noted that the allegation against the husband’s brohter “is more severe than the allegation made against the petitioner (husband)”.The High Court had another reason for granting bail to the husband. It said, “As it is a matrimonial difference between husband and wife, if the accused is sent behind the bars, there may be bleak chances of compromise between the parties. Therefore, Court should always be slow in sending the accused behind bars, particularly when the matrimonial disput eis persisting between the parties and no physical damage has been done to anybody. Therefore, to enable the parties to sit together and find out remedy for their life in future, I find it just and necessary to enlarge the petitioner on bail.”The husband was directed to surrender before the Investigating Officer within ten days and execute a personal bond for Rs 1 lakh and a surety.
