Pakistan is just a decoy, anti India forces are much bigger and powerful

India should move a resolution in the UN to quell the funding of anti-India atrocity reports coming out of Qatar financed BBC and Al Jazeera networks.

Pakistan is a new name invented in 1947. Before that, it was part of Bharat. Even Kabul was Bharat in early 700CE before Islam routed that part of Bharat known as Afghanistan today. After a Hindu Kabul finally fell to Islamic invaders in 1200CE, then the Islamic attacks on Hindu heartland in Moolsthan (Multan) and Purushpur (Peshawar) began to be felt deeply by those Hindu, Buddhist and Sikh communities. The barbarism of Islamic looters extremely ruthless and barbaric, so much so that it was never witnessed and experienced in that part of the world ever before. There was an intense struggle against Islamic invasion in Multan, Purushpur, Sindh, Balochistan, Eastern Afghanistan and Kashmir from 711 CE until 1947. Hindus and Buddhists fought with Islamic invaders for 900 years in what’s known as Pakistan and Afghanistan to save their culture and the honour of their women and children. 900 years of barbaric Islamic rule in India mostly happened in today’s Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. Rest of Bharat was saved by Rajputs, Sikhs, Kshatriyas and most importantly Marathas.

Due to British Machiavellism and Muslim League brinkmanship, the Secular brigade amongst Hindus led by Nehru and Gandhi gave away a part of India in 1947 to make peace with the Muslim community. But their demands never ended, and Kashmir was kept boiling to make more demands for their Islamic homeland. In last 70 years, ever since India gave a part of her land to Muslims, the communities that have been severely exploited in the name of Islam are Balochis, Sindhis, Pashtuns, Ahmediyas and others in Pakistan. The atrocities on those communities include extrajudicial killings, exploitation of their women and children and destruction of their culture in the name of Punjabi Sunni exceptionalism. It is needless to say that the Pakistan experiment has failed. The failure of the division of India on the basis of religion is conspicuously visible in four wars between India and Pakistan, all in the name of Islamic Land expansion. It is very reasonable to demand Balochistan, Sindhustan, NWFP, Parts of Afghanistan to merge with India to help them economically prosper and feel protected under the great constitution of India. Islamic Victimhood propaganda by the Muslim Brotherhood and Qatar financed media has fallen flat on the ground in front of facts from the ground. This is the occasion to call a spade a spade, call their bluff and demand facts. It’s important for India to not only break all relations with Qatar but also to put sanctions on Qatar and all its private business entities. India should move a resolution in the UN to quell the funding of anti-India atrocity reports coming out of Qatar financed BBC and Al Jazeera networks. In addition, India should also put sanctions against the UK for allowing Indian High Commission to be attacked in London under the Patronage of Londonistan mayor – Sad(iq) Khan. It’s time for a very proactive foreign policy. Modi hai to mumkin hai. If the home ministry of India has become so proactive, why not the defense and foreign. I think Hindus have had it enough, it’s high time to stand up and demand reintegration of their lands lost to Islamic invasions. The humiliation by various Islamic rulers on Hindus through destruction of their temples, communities, history and culture cannot be easily forgotten by Hindus.

On the external front, India needs to communicate aggressively by first bringing the entire diaspora of Indians living abroad together on this issue through their offices in different parts of the world.

Bharat the Vishwaguru

Bharat was a Vishwa Guru and the name Bharat itself comes from the Great Emperor who ruled the whole planet. It’s time to show that military prowess of India. Indian Soldiers are considered the best in the planet as proved in World War I and II. British victories in those wars against Germans, Italians, Japanese are the stories of valor not taught to Indians. Sikhs, Gurkhas, Marathas, Rajputs gave their life to defend Bharat. If each Indian child is taught the right history, then they will be proud of their common Sanatana Dharma heritage and that will negate generations of Islamic and Christian humiliation against them. Afghanistan and Burma were snatched away from India by the British in 1919 and 1937 respectively. Pakistan was also snatched away by British in 1947. The same British are now opposing Article 370 removal. Indians should see their game plan.

As far as India is concerned, currently, many parts of India are now becoming islands of Islamic no go zones where Hindus have become second class citizens. The first case is Kerala and the second is Bengal and the third is the North Eastern States. It’s time for Indian administration to proactively look into those regions. Those regions will become a problem shortly because Indian National Congress, has been proactively working towards Balkanization of India in cohorts with British Intelligence and Islamic Terrorism funded from Qatar. Pakistan was used as a decoy to keep Kashmir burning through Islamic terrorism. BJP ultimately thwarted their plans by removing discriminatory temporary provisions such as Article 370 which were actually supporting Pakistani Islamic terrorism against the majority of non-Muslims of India. Again a tall shoutout to PM Modi led bold Government of India.

On the external front, India needs to communicate aggressively by first bringing the entire diaspora of Indians living abroad together on this issue through their offices in different parts of the world. The second freedom struggle has just started. Nationalistic sentiments will also help to drive investments into India by rich NRIs and OCIs. The media organizations such as BBC and other private organizations need to be given show-cause notice for inciting violence against Indians and particularly demonizing Hindus globally. The UNHRC needs to be severely reprimanded for ignoring Hindu, Sikh and Buddhist genocides in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Myanmar.

Note:

1. The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent or reflect the views of PGurus.
