From Indira Gandhi assassination to Jessica Lal murder: 10 cases Jethmalani fought in 7-decade legal practice

Noted lawyer and former Union minister Ram Jethmalani | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Ram Jethmalani passed away on Sunday at the age of 95 He announced his retirement from the legal profession in September 2017 The noted lawyer was known for taking up several controversial cases

New Delhi: Noted lawyer and former Union minister Ram Jethmalani, who passed away on Sunday at the age of 95, had represented scores of high-profile cases in his over seven-decade-long legal career.

The veteran advocate, who fought his very first case at the age of 17 in the court of Sindh after securing a law degree from a college in Karachi, had announced his retirement from the legal profession in September 2017.

Following the announcement, he, however, promised to keep fighting the corrupt forces who have “let down” the nation.

Jethmalani, who was one of the senior-most Supreme Court lawyers, has a number of high-profile cases of corruption and scams to his credit as an advocate. He was known for leaving a lasting impression with his arguments and, had repeatedly proved his mettle in the court room.

Here are 10 high-profile cases that the eminent lawyer fought:

Indira Gandhi assassination case

Jethmalani had represented defendants Satwant Singh and Kehar Singh, who had been awarded death sentence in former prime minister Indira Gandhi’s assassination case.

Rajiv Gandhi assassination case

The senior lawyer had also defended V Sriharan, who was sentenced to death in former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi assassination case. Jethmalani, during the course of hearing of the case in 2015 had courted a controversy by saying that the 1991 suicide bomb attack that killed Gandhi and 18 other was not a crime against India.

Asaram sexual assault case

Jethmalani had also argued for self-styled godman Asaram in a sexual assault case involving a minor girl in his ashram in Jodhpur in 2013. The self-styled godman was accused of sexually assaulting a girl while she was living in his ashram between 2001 and 2006.

Underworld don Haji Mastan

Jethmalani had also appeared for Mumbai’s underworld don and smuggler Haji Mastan.

Jessica Lal murder case

The prominent lawyer had argued for Haryana Congress leader and former Union minister Vinod Sharma's son Manu Sharma in 1999 Jessica Lal murder case.

Sharma, who was sentenced to life imprisonment had shot dead Jessica, a bartender in Delhi for refusing him a drink. The Supreme Court had in 2010 upheld the Delhi High Court’s order awarding life sentence to Sharma.

Arvind Kejriwal vs Arun Jaitley defamation case

The noted advocate, who had represented several political leaders from various parties in corruption cases and scams, had appeared for Delhi Chief Minister and AAP chief Arvind Kejriwal in a defamation case filed by late finance minister Arun Jaitley. The controversial case hogged the limelight after Jethmalani decided to quit as Delhi CM’s counsel and asked for a bill of more than Rs 2 crore.

Amit Shah - Sohrabuddin encounter case

Jethmalani had also appeared for former Gujarat home minister and current Union home minister Amit Shah in several fake encounter cases, including the controversial Sohrabuddin encounter case that took place in the year 2006.

Jayalalithaa disproportionate assets case

The noted lawyer had defended late Tamil Nadu chief minister J Jayalalithaa in the disproportionate assets case worth Rs 66.6 crore in the year.

Kanimojhi 2G scam

Jethmalani had represented late Tamil Nadu chief minister Karunanidhi’ daughter and DMK MP Kanimojhi in the Rs 214-crore 2G spectrum case.

Harshad Mehta stock market scam

The renowned lawyer had also appeared for Harshad Mehta, a stockbroker, who was accused of several financial crimes that took place in the Securities Scam of 1992. Mehta, who was convicted in four criminal cases out of 27 lodged against him, was involved in a massive stock manipulation scheme.

He was convicted by the Bombay High Court and Supreme Court of India for his involvement a financial scam to the tune of Rs 4,999 crore that took place on the Bombay Stock Exchange
