US still supports 'direct talks' between New Delhi, Islamabad: Pak media

Pakistani media on Sunday claimed that the US has told some Muslim organisations that it still supports direct talks between India and Pakistan on the issue of Jammu and Kashmir, the special status of which was revoked by the Indian government last month by abrogating Article 370 of the Constitution.

The Pakistan-based media agency, Dawn, today reported that "a delegation of the US Council of Muslim Organisations (USCMO) met US State Department’s Deputy Assistant Secretary for Pakistan Affairs Ervin Massinga in Washington this week" where the delegation had reportedly conveyed their 'concern' for the state of Jammu and Kashmir and India's decision to end its special status of August 5.

The report added that the delegation also urged the United States to play a more direct role in 'easing tensions' between the two nuclear-armed countries, India and Pakistan.

A September 7 tweet by the American Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs (SCA) read, “The US continues to support direct dialogue between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues of concern—a message stressed in Deputy Assistant Secretary Massinga’s recent meeting with @USCMO leadership. AGW.”

The U.S. continues to support direct dialogue between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues of concern—a message stressed in Deputy Assistant Secretary Massinga’s recent meeting with @USCMO leadership. AGW pic.twitter.com/1RGGEwI9Ty — State_SCA (@State_SCA) September 6, 2019

This comes amid tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad, which were worsened with the abrogation of Article 370 by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led NDA government on August 5 this year.

In the latest development, Pakistan on Sunday violated the ceasefire in Nowshera and Sunderbani areas of Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri. Heavy firing and mortar shelling were reported along the Line of Control (LoC) from the Pakistan side at 10 AM in the morning.

Not just this, Pakistan has frequently violated ceasefire along the Line of Control ever since the Central government announced the decision to abrogate Article 370, withdrawing special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

On Saturday, it had also denied permission for the use of its airspace by President Ram Nath Kovind’s plane. India had condemned the move, calling it a “futile” unilateral action.

Earlier yesterday, National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval had defended the communications restrictions in Jammu and Kashmir saying it is necessary to protect the life of the Kashmiris against Pakistani terrorists. "Terror is the only instrument Pakistan has to create unrest," the National Security Advisor had said.
