Karnataka: Senior IFS officer commits suicide at residence in Bengaluru, police probe on

Meanwhile, Bheemashankar S Guled, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) (northeast) said that the officer was found dead at around 10:30 am | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The deceased was 52-year-old Avtar Singh, from 1990 batch He was posted as the additional principal chief conservator of forests and joint managing director Family members have cited that health issues could be a reason for taking this extreme step

Bengaluru: A senior Indian forest service officer allegedly committed suicide in his apartment in Bengaluru's Yelahanka area on Sunday.

The deceased was 52-year-old Avtar Singh, from 1990 batch- posted at Aranya Bhawan as the additional principal chief conservator of forests and joint managing director, Karanataka Forest Development Corporation. He was reportedly found hanging at his flat in Monte Carlo Apartments on Doddaballapur Road. A news agency reported that the local police believed that severe back pain might have made him take this extreme step. A report stated that family members and sources have cited that health issues could be a reason for taking this extreme step.

However, a case has been registered and the police investigation is underway. Principal chief conservator of forest Punati Sridhar said, It's an unfortunate incident, further denying the reports that Singh was under work pressure. He added, that the incident has nothing to do with workload because there were hardly one or two files to look after because there was not any backlog, he said.

Meanwhile, Bheemashankar S Guled, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) (northeast) said that the officer was found dead at around 10:30 am and a case was registered in the matter. Singh is survived by his wife and two children, the police added. Originally from Haryana, Avtar Singh had a Master of Science degree. A senior official with forest department said that Singh returned after a long break only on Saturday and the entire workplace is in a state of shock.
