'Opponents feared Ram, judges were in awe of him'

By

(The writer is a senior advocate and Congress leader)

Eminent lawyer and former Union minister Ram Jethmalani passes away

On Sunday morning at 7.45am, Ram Jethmalani took a flight to his benefactor from the departure lounge of life. Born on September 14, 1923, he died a few days before his 96th birthday.I remember Ram in his many avatars. He was an extraordinary lawyer with a razor sharp mind who stooped to conquer the many legal battles he fought. He was a voracious leader with a love for literature. His daily routine included a few games of badminton every evening and a drink thereafter, during which he chatted with his friends who came to be energised by his vigour and love for life.He obtained his LLB degree at the age of 17 and started practising law in his hometown in Pakistan. With partition, he moved to Bombay as a refugee and began life afresh. With one paisa in his pocket, he stayed in a refugee camp for a few days and thereafter charted his own destiny. He came to the spotlight as a lawyer when he assisted public prosecutor CM Trivedi in framing arguments in the famous Nanavati trial. He never looked back thereafter.It was a privilege for me when he approached me sometime in 1986 to argue a writ petition filed by him in a proceeding against Swaraj Paul. I remember him sitting by my side instructing me as I argued that case. Since then, we became close friends. He always treated me with great affection.The quality that I most admired in Ram was his commitment to the cause that he took up and his ability to be fearless in defending that cause. Least concerned about what others might say, he always fought to win. He was indefatigable. His conferences would start in the morning and he would sit through the day putting to shame young lawyers who found it tiresome. His mastery over facts and the Evidence Act was legendary. His forensic abilities and originality of mind won him admiration whenever he stood up in court. The opponents feared him and judges were in awe of him. He later developed into a fine constitutional lawyer.He also had the ability to take up unpopular cases. He defended Afzal Guru . Despite public sentiment, he continued to defend Manu Sharma in the Jessica Lal murder case. He was unfazed by criticism when defending Harshad Mehta and Ketan Parekh in the stock market scams . Some of his other famous clients included J Jayalalithaa , Jaganmohan Reddy, B Yediyurappa, Ramdev and Asaram Bapu in the Jodhpur sexual assault case. Very few know that he did a lot of pro-bono work.He had a mercurial temperament. He was a bundle of affection for those who he liked and a fierce enemy for those who he thought harmed him and his reputation. Just as in the law, he was a political maverick. Since 1988, he continued to be in the Rajya Sabha. He could change sides based on his changing perception of political parties. One could have never imagined that Ram would be a candidate against Atal Bihari Vajpayee in the 2004 Lok Sabha election from Lucknow. He had entered politics with the support of the BJP and was very close to LK Advani. Because of his outspoken nature and his criticism of stalwarts in the BJP, he was eventually expelled from the party in May 2013. Eventually, BJP withdrew his expulsion realising that it is better to befriend him than to be the object of his wrath.He never gave up in defending his clients except on one occasion as counsel for Sanjay Dutt who was being prosecuted under TADA. He made several unsuccessful attempts to get him bail. One day, he held my hand and told me that may be, he is not lucky for Sanjay and that it might be better if someone else tried his luck. That is how Dutt Saheb asked me to defend his son. He always believed that his client deserved to get relief from the court and would seldom come to terms if his client was denied relief. That was the nature of his commitment to the cause he represented.He was a giant in the field of law. He charted his own course in life and stuck to the principles that he believed in. He measured others by the yardstick of values that he embraced. He was unconventional in every sense of the word. It is because he always fought against the tide that he was often misunderstood. He was a man with a golden heart who savoured each moment of his life.
