Tihar in tizzy as too many dons cram barracks

Tihar prison complex officials have suggested to the Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) that some of the most notorious inmates should be shifted to states such as Tamil Nadu and Odisha, Mail Today has reliably learnt.

The idea is to break their nexus with gang members, including those on bail or at large.

"A proposal was given in the form of a suggestion to MHA during a recent meeting. No official notes have been exchanged yet," confirmed a superintendent-rank Tihar officer who said was part of the meeting.

The capacity of all 16 jails in Tihar is 5,200, but about 16,000 inmates are currently lodged there, a huge overflow of 207%. About 2,300 of them are on the list of 'deadliest criminals'.

These include murderers, robbers, gangsters, extortionists and kidnappers and have often been found to be active, giving instructions to henchmen, both within and outside the prison complex, and hatching crime.

Some of them are Manjeet Mahal (accused of murders including that of a former MLA, extortions and other heinous crimes in Delhi and neighbouring states), Neeraj Bawana (accused of extorting rich businessmen and realtors in Delhi-NCR. Also facing several cases of murder), Jitender Gogi (allegedly involved in cases of murder, extortion, robbery, car theft and land grab) and Pradeep Solanki (accused of murder and extortion).

CASE STUDIES

Last month, nine notorious criminals of Neeraj Bawana's gang were arrested during a surprise night raid in Rohini. "At Neeraj Bawana's behest, they had assembled in an abandoned house to make plans to rob some fuel stations in the area at one go," said SD Mishra, DCP, Rohini.

Many Tihar dons lead a life of luxury and run their outside operations with ease and comfort, a Mail Today investigation recently exposed. Exclusive documents and call details had showed that these inmates get whatever they want and use cell phones to talk freely to their family members and associates from the prison.

These dons also push other inmates into hardcore crime, jail sources said. "It's not rare to find them picking first-timers for training and recruitment," said a source.

For example, Shahid Hussain was re-arrested recently for planning to extort real estate developers. He confessed that he was in touch with gangster Prince Tewatia lodged in Tihar. Upon his release, Hussain had met Tewatia again during a court hearing, police sources said. Tewatia, they said, asked one of his associates to provide firearms and cartridges to Hussain to extract 'protection money' from realtors.

"Tewatia is a hardcore criminal with many cases of extortion and attempt to murder against him. In jail, both hatched plans to extort builders," said a senior police official in Southeast district.

Likewise, Varun Bhardwaj was first arrested in 2005 in an Arms Act case and sent to Tihar. Today, he is accused of murders. "In jail, he nurtured his crime knowledge after coming in contact with members of the infamous Nandu gang. After being released, he joined the gang and immersed himself into crime," said Anto Alphanso, DCP (Dwarka).

Another case in point is Rohit Kapoor, an auto mechanic wanting to buy his own shop. He wanted quick money and got into petty offences.

"In 2018, he was sent to Tihar Jail where he met criminals Aakash Pundir and Aakash Tyagi and they planned to meet outside, when freed, to commit crime," said Monika Bharadwaj, DCP (West).

Tihar PRO Raj Kumar recently told Mail Today, "We try to keep petty offenders and dreaded criminals in separate cells. But despite the separation, they get time to interact with each other. It is not in our hand to control each and every movement. It also

depends on their will whether they want to get reformed or continue in the crime world."

POSSIBLE HURDLES

DG (Prisons) Sandeep Goel said convicted criminals can easily be shifted to other states but there could be a problem for under-trials as they need to be present here for court hearings.

"If video conferencing is allowed in such cases, it would be possible," he said. He, however, refused to share details of the meeting with MHA officials.

Former Tihar law officer Sunil Gupta also pointed to hassles. "The proposal might seem effective, but there are a lot of complications. It's possible only when the governments in other states accept these inmates. Under-trials can't be shifted anyway," he said.

"Jail authorities must lodge these notorious criminals in high-security wards and not 20 of them in a single barrack," he said.
