Delhi turns into gangland: Goons pump 40 bullets into rival don at Narela streets

Mann was immediately rushed to Raja Harish Chander Hospital where he succumbed. | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The incident happened just 200 metres from a police station in outer Delhi's Narela area. The incident happened just 200 metres from a police station in outer Delhi's Narela area he deceased was identified as 40-year-old Virender Mann alias Kale The gangster was also associated with a political party and had fought the last municipal elections

New Delhi: A gangster was brutally shot dead by a group of assailants, who fired at least 40 rounds on his car in full public view on Sunday. The Narela police station was just around 200 metres from the crime spot.

The deceased was identified as 40-year-old Virender Mann alias Kale, who was with his driver. During the shootout, the driver had sustained severe injuries but Mann succumbed later in the hospital. Meanwhile, the investigating officers in the case stated that they are verifying the driver's role during the attack.

According to a news agency report, the attackers had surrounded Mann's car and then they fired multiple rounds on it. The doctors who saw the victim told the police that he had 20-25 bullet entry wounds on his body. However, the exact number of wounds will be confirmed only after the post-mortem report is released. A senior police officer added that the deceased was involved in 13 heinous crimes, including murder and robberies.

Deputy Police Commissioner Gaurav Sharma said that four-five miscreants came in a vehicle and started firing at Mann's car, who was on his way to meet a relative, near the Narela Industrial Area. It seems he was killed due to some old enmity.

Reportedly, the gangster was also associated with a political party and had fought the last municipal elections from his area. The police officials further mentioned that the shootout took place at 10.45 am on Lampur Road in Narela Industrial Area.

The victim was heading to meet one of his relatives in his car along with the driver.

The police official added that a white car was intercepted by four men travelling in another vehicle when Mann's car was stuck in traffic. This is when the assailants opened fire on him in a full public view. An eye-witness told a media person, that more than 40 rounds were fired on the car.

Mann was immediately rushed to Raja Harish Chander Hospital where he succumbed. However, the local police are currently investigating the case and probing if other gangs have a link with the shootout.
