The Shillong Times

India extends USD 1 mn aid to Bahamas after Hurricane Dorian

New Delhi: Days after the Bahamas faced huge destruction and loss of lives due to Hurricane Dorian, India on Sunday extended “immediate relief” of $1 million to the Caribbean island nation, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said. “We are saddened by the large scale destruction caused in the Bahamas by Hurricane Dorian. In solidarity with the friendly people of Bahamas in this difficult moment, the Government of India is extending an immediate disaster relief of $ 1 million,” MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar tweeted. Dorian made a “catastrophic” landfall in the Bahamas on September 1 as a Category 5 hurricane, with winds reaching 295 km/h. The death toll there is 43 but officials believe that hundreds of bodies were yet to be found in areas flattened by the winds or smashed by storm surges. UN officials said about 70,000 people on the Grand Bahama and the Abcao Islands were in need of assistance. (IANS)



Soldier’s wife murdered

Ranchi: The body of an Army jawan’s wife has been found at Jharkhand’s Lohardagga district on Sunday and police suspect that she was gang raped and later killed. The incident took place at Kundo Barkitoli village situated under Bhandara police station of Lohardagga district. The villagers informed the police that three people had come to meet the woman on Saturday evening from Ranchi. Police suspect that she was gang raped and later strangulated to death. The dead body has been sent for post-mortem. Her husband is posted in Himachal Pradesh in Indian army. “We are investigating the matter. We are also trying to contact the husband of the woman and trying to find out who had come to meet her”, said Sant Kumar Rai, Officer in-charge of Bhandara police station to reporters. (IANS)



Ragpicker killed in explosion

Hyderabad: A ragpicker was killed when a bag he tried to open exploded on a street on Sunday, police said. The man identified as Ali (35) sustained critical injuries in the blast that occurred in Rajendranagar. He later succumbed at the government-run Osmania Hospital. The explosion on a footpath under PVNR Expressway triggered panic while police cordoned off the area. Cyberabad Police Commissioner V.C. Sajjanar visited the blast scene. He told reporters that it was suspected to be chemical explosion. “We are probing it from all angles. We are trying to find out details like where the man found the bag,” he said. A team from the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) has collected samples from the scene of the explosion for analysis. Officials of anti-terror unit Organisation for Counter-Terrorist Operations (Octopus) also visited the area. Bomb and dog squads too rushed to the scene. A police officer said they were scanning the footage from CCTVs in the area. (IANS)



Hand grenade found in Siliguri

Siliguri: The bomb disposal squad of Criminal Investigation Department (CID) on Sunday said to have defused a hand grenade, which was found in Bidhan Market. Police received the information about the bomb in the market on Saturday night. Immediately, the bomb disposal squad of the CID rushed to the spot, which defused the bomb. Subhash Chandra Sigure, an officer with the local Fire Station, said: “The bomb disposal squad defused the bomb.” (ANI)



70 acid attack cases in Odisha

Bhubaneswar: Seventy cases of acid attacks were reported in Odisha between 2011 and 2019, an NGO providing relief to the survivors said. The data was presented at a symposium on “Eradication of Acid Violence” organised on Saturday by the Acid Survivors and Women Welfare Foundation (ASWWF). ASWWF’s Odisha chapter resident representative T N Panda said the organisation has provided support to 10 of the 70 acid attack survivors in Odisha. Anil Dhir, a volunteer, said of the 10, four have been rehabilitated. The organisation’s CEO and vice-chairman Rahul Verma, quoting National Crime Record Bureau (NCRB) data, said 44 per cent of the acid attack survivors in the country are from north India, while 27 per cent are from the east. He said the organisation is planning to set up a psycho-social rehabilitation centre to provide care to the survivors. (PTI)
