Madhya Pradesh: Girl refuses kiss to school friend, pays with her life

Police have arrested 19-year-old accused Raman Singh Sayyam. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim was said to be a close friend of the accused Accused said he went to the jungles with the girl after finishing school Police have arrested 19-year-old accused Raman Singh Sayyam

Jabalpur: In a tragic and shameful incident, an 18-year-old girl student was killed after she refused to be kissed by a teenage boy, believed to be her close friend. The crime took place at Bijapuri village of Jabalpur district of Madhya Pradesh.

The police have recovered the body of the victim from the nearby field. Her school bag was also found lying near her body. The accused, who is identified as 19-year-old Raman Singh Sayyam, was arrested on Saturday. The incident took place on September 5.

According to a report, the body of the victim bore injury marks on the back of the head. The victim was a resident of Kutargondi police station area.

During the course of investigation, the police questioned several people including friends and relatives to zero in on the accused. The police also probed Sayyam, a friend of the deceased girl.

Police said Sayyam allegedly confessed to the crime during the interrogation. According to police, Sayyam allegedly told them that he was a close friend of the deceased and went to the jungles with her after finishing school.

As they sat nearby a canal, the accused tried to kiss the girl, but she pushed him aside. Upset over this, Sayyam allegedly pushed the victim who fell on the stone and became unconscious.

Finding the girl motionless, the accused said he got scared and covered the body of the girl with leaves and ran away home. Police have booked Sayyam under Section 302 (murder) of Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Gang-raped by boyfriend and his friends, student commits suicide

In a similar incident reported on August 31, a 16-year-old girl committed suicide in West Bengal capital Kolkata, a day after she was allegedly gang-raped by her boyfriend and his friends. A student of Class 10, she was rushed to the SSKM hospital in the city where doctors declared her dead on arrival. Based on a complaint by her family, the police arrested the accused.

In their complaint to police, the girl's family members alleged that she had gone to meet her boyfriend. Identified as the prime accused in the case, the boyfriend took her to an isolated field in Purba Medinipur district where his friends took turns raping her. They even recorded a video of the heinous act and threatened to upload it on social media platforms if she were to approach the police and report the crime.
