Everything you need to know about ‘Pose' - the groundbreaking Emmy nominated series

Mumbai: Created by Ryan Murphy, 'POSE' is a revolutionary drama series set in the years of late 1980’s that aims at portraying the juxtaposition of several segments of life and society in New York. The series explores the rise of the luxury universe, the downtown social, the literary scene and the gender-non-conforming ball culture world (LGBTQ subculture).

The must watch series features actors like Mj Rodriguez, Dominique Jackson, Indya Moore & more as dancers and models who compete for trophies for their houses in order to make a mark for themselves.

With a nomination of 6 awards and one honor at the 71st Emmy Awards, here’s a everything you need to know about the series:

1. Steven Canals, the co-creator of the show wrote the first draft of Pose in 2014 and pitched it over 150 times before Ryan Murphy finally gave him a yes!

2. Since hiring authentic and genuine LGBTQ+ actors was highly important for the creators of the show – Ryan Murphy spent about 6 months in order to find the right ones.

3. The series has the BIGGEST cast of Trans actors ever in the history of television with over 140 Trans actors

4. For each talent that came across as a great actor but did not fit the role that they were auditioning for, the creators actually created a new character and wrote a part for them in the series. Angelica Ross’s character - Candy Ferocity, was an outcome of such an arrangement.

5. Angelica Ross began with her acting career only in 2016, before that Ross established herself as a self-taught computer coder, a businesswoman and a transgender rights advocate who also went on to become the Founder of TransTech Social Enterprises – a firm that helps in recruiting transgender people in the tech industry.

6. Dominique Jackson who plays the role of Elektra Abundance had a very rough and traumatic childhood that included sexual abuse and bullying. Having fled at a young age of 18 for not being accepted as transgender by her family, it was only in 1993 that she was introduced to the ballroom scene, which helped her finally settle in the House of Sinclair.

7. Mj Rodriguez (Blanca Rodriguez) and Billy Porter (Pray Tell) both worked as musical theater actors before being cast on the show. Hence, battling it out in the musical duet in “Love is The Message” came to them very naturally.

8. Newcomer Indya Moore (Angel) left her parents at the age of 14 and began with her modelling career with shoots for Dior & Gucci at an age of only 15.

9. The series also stars Evan Peters (a recurring character Tate Langdon, in Ryan Murphy’s American Horry Story) as Stan Bowes who falls for a Trans women.

10. In 2018, Ryan Murphy claimed that all of his profits from the show would be donated towards Trans and LGBTQ charitable organizations.

Pose Season 1 and Season 2 airs in India every Monday to Friday at 9 PM only on Star World.
