Pramila Jayapal’s Vision of Power

“When I came in here, I was kind of stunned at the lack of institutionalized support for progressive ideas and policies,” she said. The Congressional Progressive Caucus Center, which is meant to connect grassroots activists to the Hill, and the CPC Action Fund, the caucus’s 501(c)4, “didn’t exist.”* They do now. She has raised $2.5 million for the two groups. Last year, she insisted that the fund poll progressive priorities in at least 30 swing districts. (This, oddly, had never been done before.) Legislators, she said, are told that to embrace an issue like socialized medicine is political suicide; her job is to convince them that it isn’t.

Each week, she has a list of members she lobbies to support Medicare for All, a bill she wrote. (Once, she told me, Representative Joe Kennedy III watched her wearing down one member, turned to her, and said, “You work fucking hard.”) In January, less than three months after her election as co-chair, she convinced Pelosi to hold hearings on Medicare for All for the first time since a version of the bill was introduced in 2003, but this concession came at a price. Jayapal lent her support to the House Rules package, which included a controversial “pay-go” provision mandating all new spending be offset by cuts. After outcry from members of her own caucus, Jayapal sided with the dissenters, but she still believes “you really need to organize on the inside as well as the outside.” Her comments could be read as a critique of the Squad, but Jayapal was quick to say that that wasn’t her intention. She and Ocasio-Cortez are “pretty close,” Jayapal told me; they both want to make elected officials more connected to those they represent.

In India, she wrote in her book, she felt “rooted” by her networks, by the people she knew. “In the United States, I find I have to work much harder for that sense of rootedness.” For Jayapal, good politics gives people that sense that they are rooted, that they belong. Her job is to provide the maps to get them there.

* Correction: A previous version of this story incorrectly referred to the CPC Action Fund the Congressional Progressive Caucus’s PAC. In fact, it is a 501(c)4 organization.
