Residents in Pak-occupied Kashmir protest against Islamabad's atrocity, one agitator injured in firing

As India continues lifting restrictions in most areas in the Kashmir valley, reports of intensifying protests and unrest in the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) area have come in. One agitator was also injured during the protest when the police fired upon them, reports added.

According to sources, locals at several regions of PoK - including Tatta Pani, Rawalakot, Poonch, Hajira, and Tatrinote - staged a strong protest against the police and the atrocities and illegal occupation on part of the Pakistani army, adding that the protests were aimed at claiming independence for the region. Mobile services have been discontinued in the area, resulting in a communications blackout.

The police were reported to be beating up and firing upon the demonstrators, who had organised the protest in response to arrests made by the police last night. One person was reported to be injured in firing.

#Watch | Protesters in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) chant slogans against illegal occupation by Pakistani Army near the Line of Control (LoC) with India. pic.twitter.com/CvpOaQKEiR — DNA (@dna) September 9, 2019

40 nationalist protestors from the Hajira police station area had been arrested on Sunday for organising a sit-in and raising pro-independence slogans.

Earlier on Saturday, media reports had mentioned the police breaking up several pro-independence marches in the Hajira region of PoK.

Human rights violations are taking place on a large-scale in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), Sindh and Balochistan, said Defence Expert PK Sehgal today.

"If there are human right violations taking place, they are taking place on a large-scale in PoK, Sindh, and Balochistan and not in Kashmir," Sehgal told news agencies.

He had added that Pakistan was desperate to be able to push infiltrators into Jammu and Kashmir.

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval had also on Saturday said that more than 200 terrorists were trying to cross into Kashmir from Pakistan, adding that Islamabad of trying to stoke violence in the region.

Further details are awaited.

(With agency inputs)
