Trouble for Kamal Nath? SIT to reopen 7 anti-Sikh riots cases

With a Special Investigation Team (SIT), set up by the Union Home Ministry, deciding to reopen seven 1984 anti-Sikh riot cases, Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader Manjinder Singh Sirsa on Monday claimed that Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath will also be investigated in one of the cases.

Sirsa, a member of the Delhi Legislative Assembly, said Kamal Nath will become the only sitting chief minister to be arrested in connection with the 1984 riots case.

According to an official notification, seven anti-Sikh riot cases, where the accused were either acquitted or the trial closed, will be reopened by the Special Investigation Team (SIT).

"Due to technical and legal angles somehow he has been escaping for the past 34 years. I believe Kamal Nath will be the only sitting chief minister who will be arrested in connection with the 1984 massacre," Sirsa told ANI.

Speaking about the case registered against Kamal Nath, the SAD leader said, "The Ministry of Home Affairs has issued a fresh notification in connection with the 1984 anti-Sikh riots stating that all the cases which were closed or in which trials have been completed will be opened again."

Sirsa said that the specific case was against Kamal Nath who was a "part and parcel" of the mob that killed two innocent persons in Gurudwara Rakabganj Sahib during the 1984 riots.

Kamal Nath has denied any role in the riots and he was not named in any FIR filed after the riots.

After the notification was issued, Sirsa along with his team submitted the representation to the SIT chief regarding the case against the Chief Minister.

"Now, the SIT has opened this case and issued a notice for the witnesses to come forward and depose before it for the particular FIR no. 601/84, which is lodged against Kamal Nath and his fellows," he said.

Sirsa also said that two prime witnesses in the case are Sanjay Suri and Mukhtiar Singh Singh.

While Singh was the lawyer of a Gurudwara Rakabganj Sahib employee, Suri was press reporter, he said adding that they both are ready to depose.

He said the SIT has given them a specific time to appear before it.

Seeking free and fair trial, Sirsa said: "We want Sonia Gandhi to ask for Kamal Nath's resignation if they want justice to be done."

He also said that security should be provided to the witnesses as there was a "threat to their life".

The notification, issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, said that the SIT has taken up the discharged cases for scrutiny or preliminary enquiry.

The probe team has also issued public notices asking individuals and organisations to come forward with information related to the seven cases.

"This is to inform to all individuals, groups of persons, associations, institutions and organisations that if they have any information in respect of any of the cases, they may contact the officer in-charge of SIT police station," the SIT said.

The SIT, set up in February 2015, comprises two Inspector General-rank IPS officers and a judicial officer.

In the riots which broke out after the assassination of the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards, more than 3,325 people were killed with more than 2,700 deaths taking place in Delhi alone.

Last year, Congress leader Sajjan Kumar was sentenced to life for his role in a case related to the riots.

(With ANI inputs)
