Who was Ram Jethmalani, why was he so popular & some of his most popular cases

Ram Jethmalani, one of India’s most maverick lawyers, passed away, over the weekend. He was among the highest-paid lawyers in the country. But his popularity didn’t just come from winning cases - it was the choice of the cases that gained him his reputation. He was also widely regarded as the doyen of criminal law.

Jethmalani, who passed away just a few days short of turning 96, began practicing law since he was only 17-years-old. He used to live in Pakistan’s Punjab before the partition and came here soon after. Every one of his cases have created headlines in the papers that don’t go away for months and years. It started with the Nanavati case and he then went on to represent some of the country’s most hated men.

He represented gangsters like Haji Mastan as well as scam-sters like Harshad Mehta, Ketan Parekh, Lalit Modi and more. Additionally, he has also represented leaders who have found themselves among controversies like Amit Shah, LK Advani, Jayalalithaa and more.

Among all of the epic cases that late lawyer Ram Jethmalani fought, here are 5 that seem like scripts for literal movies:

5 of Ram Jethmalani's most famous cases

1. KM Nanavati case

You probably know this case, since a movie titled Rustom was based on it.

Indian Navy commander KM Nanavati killed his English-born wife, Sylvia’s lover, Prem Ahuja. When the case first went to court, it was one of the last ones to be heard as a jury trial in India and garnered major media attention. The first time around, the Naval officer was acquitted because the jury felt sympathy towards him. And so, the sessions judge sent the case to The Bombay High Court.

The first time around, it was claimed that Nanavati didn’t commit a pre-mediated murder and only lost his cool, when Prem Ahuja claimed to have no intention of marrying Sylvia or taking care of her two children with her husband. In the retrial, Jethmalani led the prosecution from Ahuja’s side. He pointed out to the judge that the murder was indeed pre-mediated, given that Nanavati had already obtained his gun under false pretexts, that Prem Ahuja’s towel was still intact at the time of his death and that his servant had testified that the entire incident took place under a minute with four rounds fired. The court declared Nanavati guilty and sentenced him to life imprisonment.

This verdict was upheld by the Supreme Court of India, but after 3 years in prison, Nanavati was given a pardon by the Governor of Maharashtra, Vijayalakshmi Pandit.

2. Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi Assassination case

When former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her former bodyguards Beant (Balbir) Singh and Kehar Singh, it was Jethmalani who appeared on their behalf in court. He challenged the medical evidence given to Indira Gandhi by her doctor. Being in this place of defense brought him a lot of criticism, but that didn’t faze him. He said that he was just doing his duty as a lawyer.
