Indian Rape Suspect kills Himself and Blames Girl & Cousins

"Last night around 1 am, he shot a video"

An Indian rape suspect from Sangrur, Punjab, allegedly committed suicide by consuming poison on Saturday, September 7, 2019.

Before he died, he claimed that his accuser and two of her cousins were responsible.

This has prompted the police to investigate the possible role of his accuser and her two cousins.

The man was identified as 32-year-old Bittu Singh. Station House Officer Major Singh explained that he was accused of raping a 22-year-old woman and filming it.

Hours after the alleged incident, Singh went to the woman’s house where he consumed a poisonous substance.

The young woman registered a case against Singh on September 6, 2019. She claimed that after filming the rape, he had threatened to share the videos online if she did not elope with him.

SHO Singh said: “On Friday evening after receiving a complaint from the girl, we registered a rape case against Bittu.”

But a few hours later at around 1 am, Singh made a video of himself.

In the video, he claimed that the woman and her two cousins Bikkar Singh and Tarsem, as well as their wives, should be held responsible if anything were to happen to him.

He sent the video to his friends on WhatsApp. Singh then went to his accuser’s house.

SHO Singh added: “Last night around 1 am, he shot a video, shared it on WhatsApp with his friends and went to the girl’s house.”

Singh entered the woman’s house by climbing a wall. When the girl’s family saw him, they informed the police. But when the police arrived, Singh was found lying unconscious.

SHO Singh explained:

“When Bittu scaled the wall and entered the woman’s house, her family informed the village panchayat and police.”

Singh was rushed to Sunam Hospital where he later died.

Police officers spoke to the Indian rape suspect’s family who claimed that their son was beaten up before being forced to consume poison.

Based on the family’s statement, officers at Dirba Police Station registered a case of murder against the woman and her two cousins.

SHO Singh said: “We have registered a case against the girl and her cousins under Section 302 IPC, as Bittu’s relatives have alleged that he was beaten up by the suspects and later forcibly administered poison.

“We are conducting further investigations.”

The Times of India reported that Singh’s body was taken for a post-mortem to be conducted. Officers are still waiting for a report to determine the cause of death
