DMK-led alliance takes up water distribution issue, but skips Siruvani

The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam-led Secular Progressive Alliance called for a bandh on September 27 at a meeting it held at the DMK office on September 7. The bandh was to condemn the Coimbatore Corporation awarding drinking water distribution maintenance contract to a French company and revising property tax.

The Alliance of which the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and Communist Party of India are members, however, did not discuss the Kerala Government’s stand on reducing the storage level in Siruvani Reservoir, a drinking water source for the city.

Though the full reservoir level in the Siruvani Reservoir is 49.50 feet, the Kerala Government had allowed the water level to not surpass 45 feet saying that after the 2018 floods, it had taken a decision to reduce storage level in all reservoirs, Siruvani included.

But Tamil Nadu has been asking for an exemption for Siruvani saying that the water is used only for drinking and not irrigation.

The very day - September 7 - the Thanthai Periyar Dravidar Kazhagam (TPDK) called for a press meet to announce a protest against the Kerala Government for its stand on Siruvani.

The outfit said its members along with those from Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi and a few others would block the Kerala State Road Transport Corporation buses leaving the Tiruvalluvar Bus Stand in Gandhipuram on September 10.

Incidentally, the TPDK participated in the meeting the DMK had called.

Asked why the DMK did not take up the Siruvani issue at the meeting and if his outfit took it up because the former failed to do so, TPDK general secretary K. Ramakrishnan said the DMK could have skipped the issue because of the presence of the CPI(M), which rules Kerala. “The DMK would not have wanted to embarrass its allies.”

DMK’s Coimbatore urban district in-charge and Singanallur MLA N. Karthik said that for the DMK that had always fought for the State’s interest, the presence of Left parties would not have been a deterrent. “It is just that the Secular Progressive Alliance wanted to focus on these two issues alone.”

Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam district secretary R.R. Mohankumar said the omission of Siruvani issue from the meeting agenda was not deliberate.

CPI(M) district secretary V. Ramamoorthy said that there was no problem now because of the reduced storage level and if at all there would be a problem it would be only during summer 2020. But he hastened to add that the party was particular that the Kerala Government should, as per agreement, release the agreed quantity to Coimbatore and if need be, the party would not hesitate to take up the issue. Mr. Karthik said that the DMK would also take up the issue and also take the CPI(M) and CPI on board on the issue.
