Lodges, guesthouses becoming safe haven for flesh trade?

Five rackets busted, 10 women rescued in last few weeks; CCTV cameras must for these rented accommodations, says DCP

The back-to-back busting of flesh trade rackets operating from the guesthouses and lodges in the city has brought to the fore the question that whether these rented accommodations are becoming safe havens for the organisers of the illicit trade.

A raid on a lodge in Allipuram area under II Town police station limits on August 26 night, which busted a high-profile flesh trade racket served as a wake-up call as the case threw light on how the racket organisers have been bringing women from various places such as Mumbai, Goa, Bengaluru and Kolkata to the city to run their trade.

Raids intensified

Since then, the police, along with City Task Force (CTF), have been conducting raids on lodges and guesthouses on Beach Road, Pandurangapuram, Allipuram, Seethammadhara and a few other areas. And the result is not less than disturbing.

“In the last few weeks, five such rackets have been busted and 10 women from various cities have been rescued. In one case, guesthouse belonging to a retired police officer from Odisha was raided. However, we are yet to ascertain his involvement in the case,” Deputy Commissioner of Police (Zone I) S. Ranga Reddy said.

Since the drive was launched, three guesthouses and two lodges have been seized, and those representing the managements have been booked under various cases after they were caught ‘red-handed’ organising flesh trade on their premises.

The police have also written a letter to the official of Revenue Department for the seizure of two more guesthouses.

The III Town Police, during raids, seized two guesthouses—one on Beach Road and another at Pandurangapuram— on September 4.

Visitor Monitor System

“The racket organisers reportedly have contacts with their counterparts in other major cities. Before the women arrive in the city, rooms would be booked in their name. They come to city as tourists. Customers will get in touch with the organisers online,” said Three Town Inspector G. Rama Rao , who is investigating the case.

A senior police officer said that though they maintain the Visitor Monitor System (VMS) at all lodges, guesthouses and dormitories, these women would check in, claiming themselves as visitors.

“In most of the cases, lodge management run the racket,” he said.

Seizure of properties

DCP Ranga Reddy said that the police were not only booking cases, but also seizing the properties after the rackets were busted.

“If a case is booked, the offenders come out on bail and resort to the illegal activities again. So, we have started seizing the property. The move would act as a deterrent as the property owners have to undergo legal tangles,” the DCP said.

He also added that it was mandatory for all hotels, lodges, guesthouses to install CCTV cameras on their premises and maintain the VMS.
