Non-bailable warrants against Pakistan ISI officials in 26/11 Mumbai attacks case

The Mumbai special court has issued non-bailable warrants (NBW) against two Pakistani officials accused in the 26/11 terror attack in Mumbai.

The two accused Major Abdul Rehman Pasha and Major Iqbal have been wanted in the case since 2008, but no NBW was issued against them until now.

Special public prosecutor Ujjwal Nikam moved the application saying that the role of the two Pakistani ISI officials was revealed during the testimony of David Headley in 2016.

Headley who is lodged in a US prison had visited Mumbai in September 2006 and informed his handlers from Pakistan, including Major Iqbal, about his recce of Taj Hotel in southern Mumbai. He had taken many pictures and videos of the city which had helped the ISI and militant organisation Lashkar-e-Toiba in planning their attacks.

Headley had said in his testimony through video conferencing after turning approver and being pardoned by the court that it was Pasha and Iqbal who had supplied him with the finances to travel to India and conduct the recce. Iqbal had given USD 25,000 while Pasha had given USD 80,000. These officers of Pakistan had also given Headley targets to survey such as the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and the National Defence Academy.

It was Headley who confirmed the address and contact details of both these Pakistani officers and now NBWs have been issued against them.

In 2008, 10 terrorists came to Mumbai from Pakistan via the sea and created horror on the streets and important installations including the Taj Hotel. The attack lasted for three days during which nine terrorists were killed and one Ajmal Kasab was later hanged. While Kasab who was sentenced to death, another accused Abu Jundal who was deported later is currently facing trial.

The trial is currently stayed by the Bombay High Court as Jundal's lawyer Abdul Wahan wanted some travel documents of the police officers who had gone to bring Jundal back to the country. The trial court had allowed that but the Delhi Police went to appeal at the high court against that order and since last year the trial has been put on hold.

While lawyers concerned in this case questioned how an NBW could be issued by the court when there is a stay on trial, Nikal said that there was no issue of legality as the court is seized of the matter.

Also Read | NIA in touch with US to extradite David Headley, Tahawwur Rana

Also Watch | Hafiz Saeed threatens to wage war against India: Is it time to declare Pakistan state sponsor of terrorism?
