Woman journalist faces ‘harassment’ by forces

Woman journalist faces ‘harassment’ by forces

JAMMU, Sep 9 (Agencies): A woman journalist in Kashmir was allegedly heckled and harassed by police in Srinagar on Sunday.

According to a report in the Telegraph, Rifat Mohidin working with Chandigarh based The Tribune was in the line of duty when the “police rained its batons on her car as she sat inside, crying through it all”. It happened when she just asked the policemen not to be rude to her.

“I had never before heard the kind of abuses they hurled at me. They battered my car with their batons, although the windows were spared. I started crying but none dared come to my rescue. I’m still in shock. I have already had a tough time convincing my family that I was safe as a journalist even during these times. If I tell them what happened today, they might not allow me to continue,” Rifat was quoted by The Telegraph.

Rifat said that on her way, she was stopped at 15 points even though it was just a 3km stretch from Rajbagh to the Media Centre.

“At Jahangir Chowk, the security forces were adamant that I should return. I urged them not to be rude to me. This infuriated them and what followed was hell. For several minutes they kept hitting my car and abused me and my family. “I told them I had a curfew pass but they would not listen. I did not know what to do. Eventually, one CRPF man was kind enough to ask me to drive on. I parked my car somewhere and was in tears all the way to the media centre.” she told The Telegraph.

Previously, a woman journalist who works for an international TV channel was abused at by the forces, when they saw the cameraman accompanying her filming a few shots at Nowhatta in Srinagar’s old quarters.

Kashmir Women Journalist Association condemned these incidents and said in a statement that “journalists in the region often face disrespect and abuses at the hands of government forces. The Association highly condemns the tactics used by government forces and calls for stern action by the police department. We also call upon the police department to issue a circular saying that journalists should be allowed to perform their job hassle-free.”

The Association pointed out that a few men were harassed and beaten up by the forces in Zadibal when they were covering processions during Muharram. This phenomenon of journalists receiving harassment and misdemeanour by government forces, is highly condemnable. Despite valid ID proof and curfew passes, journalists are not being allowed free and smooth movement, the association said.

Meanwhile, The Network of Women in Media, India (NWMI) has also condemned “the shocking attack and intimidation of a woman journalist” on 8 September while she was travelling on duty in Srinagar, Kashmir.

“We also condemn the attack by the J& K police on four photojournalists covering a Muhharam procession in Hasnabad area of Srinagar on September 7. One of them was reportedly hit by pellets in the head and back, others had their cameras damaged by the police,” it said in a statement.

NWMI also endorseed the statement issued by the Kashmir Women Journalists Association, Kashmir and said, in its statement, that it stands in solidarity with our colleagues in Kashmir who are carrying out their duty amid severe restrictions on mobility and an almost-complete communications clampdown since August 4, 2019, the day before Article 370 granting special status to Jammu and Kashmir was abrogated in the Indian Parliament.

NWMI deplores this “latest attempt to harass and attack journalists” carrying out their duty. An NWMI-FSC report, ‘News Behind the Barbed Wire’ released last week has documented in detail the effect of the prolonged communication blockade on the media in Kashmir.

“Acts such as the attack on a woman journalist and photojournalists, only confirm our misgivings over the manner in which the state and its agencies are seeking to control the narrative. This is taking on alarming and dangerous proportions. The government and the security forces must immediately desist from using force against journalists,” the NWMI added.

It also demanded that the blockade on communication be lifted forthwith. It is incumbent upon the government and its agencies to ensure an enabling environment for the media to move freely and without fear of reprisal in the pursuit of its professional duties.
