Just 1 psychiatrist for 562 mentally ill patients in 101 prisons across Karnataka

Karnataka jails

NIMHANS

Bangalore

psychiatrist

We badly need seven more psychiatrists. The state government has sanctioned the recruitment of six psychiatrists but till date these posts remain vacant – Top official from the Prisons Department

Parappana Agrahara

Bengaluru

It’s a mind-field out there inThe memory of this unfortunate incident at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS) from August 2015 is still fresh and chilling. The Garuda Force (anti-terror squad) had to shoot and neutralize Vishwanath, a 22-year-old patient undergoing treatment at, when he snatched a gun from a security guard and opened fire. The police overpowered him and records say that Vishwanath shot himself. According to the Prison officials, Vishwanath was suffering from a psychiatric condition and serving a life term at Parappana Agrahara jail.When prisoners suffer mental health conditions, it becomes the responsibility of the state to treat them while they serve their sentence. While it’s sentence twice over for the prisoners, not having access to good psychiatric treatment makes it much worse.Incidents like the one involving Vishwanath are not rare and could happen anytime again. According to documents available withMirror, there are 562 prisoners with mental illness undergoing treatment at prison hospitals across Karnataka’s jails but there is only oneto treat them.The prison authorities had to bring Vishwanath to NIMHANS regularly since there were no facilities to treat prisoners with mental health issues at the prison. It is almost four years since the incident, and the state government is yet to depute either psychiatrists or fill up the vacancies at the prison hospitals across the state.Among the prisoners at Parappana Agrahara, 27 prisoners suffer from acute mental illnesses. Such prisoners are admitted to other hospitals for treatment.“We badly need seven more psychiatrists. The state government has sanctioned the recruitment of six psychiatrists (GO No. HD 19 PRE 2019, dated 25.07.2019) but till date these posts remain vacant,’’ says a top official from the Prisons department. The official said that the government had sanctioned one post for a psychiatric social worker but that too has remained vacant. Among the 20 posts for assistant surgeons, 14 are vacant.The prisons department, as per the government order (No. HD PRA 2011/dated 05.02.2013), had taken measures to appoint nine retired government medical officers on contract basis at Mysuru, Belagavi, Kalaburagi, Vijayapura, Dharwad, Bidar, Raichur and Mangaluru prisons. It is said the Additional Director General of Police and Inspector General of Prisons had submitted a list of staff required in all the prisons of the state. This includes seven chief medical officers, 26 assistant surgeons, seven psychiatrists, 26 staff nurses, 20 pharmacists, 47 male/female nursing assistants and five laboratory technicians for all prisons in the state. The state government has sanctioned only 53 posts – seven chief medical officers, six psychiatrists, 20 staff nurses and 20 psychiatric counsellors. It is yet to take a decision on creating 47 male/female nursing assistant posts and five laboratory technician posts.There have been 526 deaths in prisons across the State from January 1, 2012 to May 31, 2019. Among the 526 deaths, 65 are unnatural deaths, most being suicides, including Vishwanath shooting himself at NIMHANS, according to the documents available with Bangalore Mirror.According to Rabbi Jayakaran of Peacemakers, an NGO that works with women prisoners, research has shown that mental health care intervention at the correctional centres is crucial. Jayakaran said that effective mental health care intervention for prisoners demands a highly networked team of mental health professionals and support services. “Although several NGOs do collaborate with the Department of Prisons, the current strength of the mental health care team at theCentral Prison requires to be scaled up in order to adequately meet the mental health care needs of the prisoners in Karnataka,” he said.
