Army finds abandoned boats, warns of terrorist attacks in southern India

The Army has received credible inputs that there could be a Pakistan-sponsored terror attack in the southern part of India and peninsular India, a top Army commander said on Monday.



The threat became more pronounced after the Army recovered a few abandoned boats from Sir Creek area in Gujarat that overlaps and crisscrosses with Pakistani waters.



Of late, Pakistan is known to have redoubled troop deployment in the creek area to a very high level, which is unusual given the inhospitable condition of the marshlands.



"We have got many inputs that there may be a terrorist attack in southern part of India and peninsular India," Lt Gen S K Saini, GOC-in-C of the Army's Southern Command.



Lt. Gen. Saini said, aware of Pakistan's overtures and enhanced threat perception, the army has undertaken measures for capacity building and capability development in the Sir Creek area, a 96-km tidal estuary on the border of India and Pakistan.



"We are taking precautions to ensure that any designs of inimical elements or terrorists are stalled and they do not get the success they are wishing," he said, speaking on the sidelines of an event at the Army Law College in Pune.

Unusual Pak movement Army says Pakistan has redoubled troop deployment in the creek area to a very high level which is unusual

The area is inhospitable due to marshlands. Earlier, reports said JeM was training terrorists in deep-sea diving to launch an attack on India

Asked about the changing dynamics and threats emanating from a neighbouring country, he said any conflict which is in the sub-conventional domain has got both external and internal dimensions.



"In the case of J&K, the external dimension is much more pronounced than the internal dimension. We have a very clear-cut policy based on which have been resolving insurgencies.



"The government takes a comprehensive view of every conflict and undertakes political, economic, social and diplomatic measures to resolve it. The Army's role is to create conducive conditions for such initiatives by the government," Lt. Gen. Saini said.
