Uri to Manikarnika, 6 Bollywood movies to watch out for in January 2019

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Uri to Manikarnika, 6 Bollywood movies to watch out for in January 2019

After the blockbuster year of 2018, fans, as well as filmmakers, are gearing up for 2019 which has a long list of movies that have excited the fans much. The gone by year witnessed 13 Bollywood movies that breached the 100 crore mark and with 2019 knocking on our doors, it is expected that it will also start with the bang. In the first month of the year, there is an exciting line-up for the fans to watch out for. From Kangana Ranaut’s much-awaited movie Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi to Vicky Kaushal’s Uri: The Surgical Strike, January is loaded with different concepts and breath-taking performances.

So let’s have a look at all the Bollywood movies releasing in January 2019 that you shouldn’t miss-

The Accidental Prime Minister – January, 11

Starring Anupam Kher and Akshaye Khanna, The Accidental prime Minister is undoubtedly the most awaited film of the year. Based on Sanjay Baru’s book which goes by the same name, this political drama tells the story of former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh and his tenure as PMO. The film has been directed by Vijay Gutte with Hansal Mehta as the creative producer. It features Anupam Kher as Manmohan Singh, German actor Suzanne Bernert as former Congress president Sonia Gandhi, Ahana Kumra as Priyanka Gandhi, Arjun Mathur as Rahul Gandhi and Akshaye Khanna in the role of Sanjaya Baru, who was the former media advisor to Dr Singh.

Uri – The Surgical Strike January, 11

Vicky Kaushal became a household name in the previous year with stellar performances in Bollywood films like Raazi and Sanju. The actor is all set to start the New Year with his film Uri which is based on 2016 surgical strikes carried out by the Indian Army. The trailer of the film has already created quite a buzz and it would eb interesting to see Vicky Kaushal in a new light. traces 2016 surgical strikes carried out by the Indian Army. Uri also features Paresh Rawal, Yami Gautam and popular TV actor Mohit Raina among others.

Amavas - January, 11

Nargis Fakhri bounces back on the big screen with the film Amavas and the trailer has already given goosebumps to many. The actress will be seen opposite Sachiin Joshi in the film that features all the markers of tacky horror: a beautiful woman, a haunted house and a secret that will destroy it all.

Thackeray - January, 25

After winning hearts with his performance in web series called Sacred Games, Nawazuddin Siddiqui is back to leave his audience awestruck with his film Thackeray. The actor will be seen essaying the role of the late Shiv Sena supremo Bal Thackeray in the biopic. Also starring Amrita Rao, the film has been directed by Abhijit Panse.

Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi - January, 25

After witnessing a number of controversies, Kangana Ranaut starrer Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi is all set to hit the screens this January. The historical drama tells the story of how Rani Laxmi Bai fought with the east India Company for her land and people. The movie will also be Kangana Ranaut’s directorial debut in Bollywood. Fans have showered much praise on the trailer and the same is expected for the film.

Cheat India - January, 25

Emraan Hashmi starrer Cheat India is another film that has left the fans excitement with its unique concept. The film is about education racket and scams in several entrance exams. Hashmi features as the kingpin of the racket, Rakesh Singh. He has a team of brilliant students who write exams for other candidates seeking admission in good institutes. In return, he takes only cash with full guarantee of the seat.

Which film are you most excited to be released in January 2019?

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
