Two teenagers killed in a day in Limbayat

SURAT: Two offences of murder were registered at Limbayat police station on Sunday.Police booked Ajay, Gaurav alias Bappi, Ravi and two unidentified persons for the murder of Sahil Joshi, 18, a class XII student, at a pan shop in Godadara at around 8.15pm on Sunday. Postmortem revealed that Joshi had died of choking. He had sustained serious injury in his windpipe after he was punched in throat. Police investigation revealed that Joshi had gone to the pan shop with his friend Himanshu Vaishnav, 18. At the same time, Ajay entered the shop. Joshi was arguing with Vaishnav over some issue and used abusive language. Meanwhile, Joshi threatened Vaishnav and Ajay intervened and challenged him.The accused and the victim did not know each other, but Ajay jumped in after listening to the arguments between the two friends. Ajay challenged Joshi, saying, “Why don’t you hit me?” This started an argument between the two and Ajay called his friends. After Ajay’s friends arrived, they attacked Vaishnav and Joshi with the latter collapsing on ground during the fight and subsequently died.“We have rounded up some suspects and they will be arrested once we gather evidence. There was no previous rivalry among the two and they did not know each other either. However, Ajay joined an argument between friends and this led to a fight between them,” said a police officer of Limbayat police station.Family members of Joshi refused to accept his body after postmortem at SMIMER hospital on Monday. They were angry with police for not taking action against the culprits but later accepted the body when assured that no one will be spared.In another murder in the city, Satish alias Batko Rathod, 17, a labourer, was stabbed multiple times by Jimmy, a youth, on Sunday night. The accused stabbed the victim over personal animosity. Rathod died during treatment in a hospital. Police are yet to arrest the accused.“Some suspects have been rounded up. The accused will be arrested soon. Jimmy had attacked the victim over Rathod’s fight with another person in the past,” police said.
