Southern states on alert after inputs of terror threat

editorial@tribune.com

Pune /Hyderabad, September 9

The Army has received inputs that there may be a terror attack in southern part of India, a top Army Commander said on Monday.

Some abandoned boats have been recovered in the Sir Creek area, Lt Gen SK Saini, GOC-in-C of the Army’s Southern Command, told reporters at an event near Pune. “We have got many inputs that there may be a terrorist attack in southern part of India and the peninsular India,” he said.

The Army has taken measures in the Sir Creek region, keeping in mind the enhanced threat perception, he said. Kerala Police DGP Lokanath Behera, meanwhile, asked all district police heads to maintain high alert across the state. The DGP directed personnel to maintain heightened vigil at bus stands, railway stations, airports and places where people gather in large numbers.

“Security will be tightened at all places where people come out in huge numbers to celebrate Onam,” a police release said. A defence spokesperson in Chennai said the “northern most point of the Army’s southern command includes some parts of Gujarat also. The word south from southern command GOC does not mean Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka only. It includes complete southern peninsula and parts of Gujarat.”

In Andhra Pradesh, security along the 974-km-long coastline has been beefed up following threats of a possible terror attack in south India, a top police official said.

In particular, security has been beefed up at Tirumala, the abode of God Venkateswara and the Satish Dhawan Space Centre at Sriharikota.

“Security has also been stepped up at vital installations in the state by deploying the AP Special Protection Force,” Additional Director General of Police (Law and Order) Ravi Shankar Ayyanar said.

In Tamil Nadu, a senior police official said the state has been on high alert for the past one month following intelligence inputs indicating intrusion of suspected terrorists. — PTI
