Citing atrocities against minorities in Pakistan, Sikh leader from Imran Khan's party seeks asylum in India

Baldev Kumar has reached Punjab and sought political asylum in India | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Days ago, a Sikh girl was forcefully married to a Muslim man in Pakistan's Punjab province Kumar alleged that the atrocities against minorities have increased after India's decision to abrogate Article 370

Ludhiana: At a time when Pakistan PM Imran Khan is attempting to internationalise the Kashmir issue claiming human rights violations by India against Kashmiris, his party leader Baldev Kumar has sought political asylum, claiming that minorities are unsafe in Pakistan. According to reports, Kumar, a leader of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party, reached Khanna in Punjab two days ago.

Kumar has claimed that minorities are being targetted in Pakistan. Kumar also cited that recently, a party leader was brutally killed for political reasons and corroborated the recent case of forceful conversion of a Sikh girl to Islam.

"Not only minorities but even Muslims are not safe there (Pakistan). We are surviving in Pakistan with a lot of difficulties. I request the Indian government to give me asylum here. I will not go back," he told news agency ANI.

Days ago, a Sikh girl was allegedly converted to Islam and forcefully married to a Muslim man in Pakistan's Punjab province. While the governor of the province Chaudhary Muhammad Sarwar met the girl and urged her to return, she refused to reunite with the family citing threat to life.

According to reports, Kumar, 43, is a former MLA from Barikot reserved seat in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan. Talking to a news publication, Kumar alleged that Imran Khan had failed to deliver on his promise of 'Naya Pakistan'. Kumar further claimed that atrocities against minorities in Pakistan had increased further after India decided to abrogate Article 370.

According to a PTI report dated March 3, Kumar had moved court after he was prevented from taking oath in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly for his alleged role in the murder of a Sikh legislator in 2016. The legislator Sardar Soran Singh was shot dead by unknown assailants in 2016, following which Kumar was declared the MPA-elect. While he was prevented from taking oath for his alleged role in the murder, he moved court challenging the decision of the Speaker.

In India, Kumar has claimed that he was falsely accused in the case.
