Coal mafia hatched plan to kill SAIL boss for cancelling Rs 100 crore coal deal

SAIL chairman Anil Kumar Chaudhary was seriously injured after he was attacked by four men near the HUDCO complex.

Delhi Police's Crime Branch has cracked the case of the attack on SAIL Chairman Anil Kumar Chaudhary last month. Police have arrested coal mafia and contractor AK Singh in connection with the attack.

According to police, AK Singh was out to take revenge on the SAIL after he cancelled a Rs 100-crore coal deal between him and the Steel Authority of India.

Ashok Kumar Singh was arrested from his residence in southwest Delhi's Vasant Kunj on Friday for hatching a conspiracy against the SAIL chairman who rejected his contract over poor quality coal supplied by his son's company.

SAIL had made an advance payment of Rs 30 crore to AK Singh's son's company for the coal deal, however, even after sampling the coal twice, it was found that the quality was not upto the mark.

Chaudhary ordered for the deal to be cancelled and this triggered AK Singh who resolved to take revenge on the SAIL boss.

On August 7, Chaudhary was attacked with iron rods and cutters on his head, neck, knees and legs. He received several injuries and cut marks on his body.

Chaudhary's car was hit by another car with four occupants. As he and his driver came out of the car, one person from the other vehicle caught the driver by his neck and the other three assaulted Chaudhary.

On hearing the commotion, policemen who were patrolling nearby rushed to the spot and nabbed two of the attackers. They then led to the other attackers, which ultimately revealed the plot hatched by Ashok Singh.

"I have been maintaining my stand that this was not a case of robbery or road rage but a conspiracy to kill me. And it has been proved with their arrest. I am still recovering. I have received internal injuries. It may take a month although I have joined office," the SAIL chairman told PTI over phone.

The assailants were hired on contract to kill Chaudhary for a price of Rs 6 lakh. They were paid Rs 2 lakh as advance to complete the contract.
