Murder he wrote: Cops find Chugani’s diaries

black magic

Colaba

Anil Chugani

Shanaya Hathiramani

Ashoka Apartments

Morocco

Inhuman

Evil and Aghori Practices

Chugani has been booked for murder and under various sections of Maharashtra's anti-superstition law

Journals mention plan to kill twins to breakspell; his estranged wife refuses to visit the police station, saying she wants nothing to do with him.resident, who was arrested for allegedly throwing three-year-oldfrom his seventhfloor flat inon Saturday, had written about killing the girl and her twin in his diaries, the Colaba police said on Monday. They said they found three diaries in the 43-year-old’s home. In them, he wrote that a woman inhad performed ‘black magic’ on him and that the only way to break the spell was to kill the twins, the police said. Chugani will be in police custody until September 13.A police official, who did not wish to be named, said Chugani has a habit of writing down everything. “Even if he sees a butterfly he writes about it. He writes down which TV programmes he has watched. He also wrote that he had pain in his legs and blamed it on black magic. Elsewhere he wrote that the heavy rains were just to cause him trouble.”The official added that Chugani’s diaries mention a woman called Zubeda who worked with him in Morocco and performed black magic on him. “He claims that he had a revelation – that God told him that killing a set of twins would rid him of the spell. He then started searching for twins with a plan to kill them,” the official said.The Colaba police contacted Chugani’s wife Kashish, whom he married in 2010. The two lived with his parents in Morocco until January 2019. However, she refused to go to the police station. After they returned to India, Kashish had moved in with her father in Andheri and cut ties with her husband, the police said. “She said she is not interested in being in touch with him anymore,” said the official. The police suspect that Chugani suffers from a mental illness but said that only a psychiatric test could confirm this.The police said they were sure it was a case of murder. To strengthen their case, they now plan to throw a sack that weighs as much as Shanaya did from the seventh floor of Ashoka Apartments to see where it lands.After initially booking Chugani under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code, the police will now add sections under the Maharashtra Prevention and Eradication of Human Sacrifice and otherand Black Magic Act, 2013.On Saturday, Chugani had told his childhood friend Prem Lal Hathiramani, 44, that he would take Hathiramani’s three children to his home in Colaba as he was feeling lonely. Hathiramani also sent his house help Kakuli Mandal with his three children – Jai, 6, and three-year-old twins, Shreya and Shanaya – as they were going to his house for the first time.“Chugani offered the kids chocolates and at 7.15 pm, on the pretext of washing Shanaya’s hands, he took her to the bedroom and threw her from a window of his seventh-floor flat,” said a police official. The girl fell 20 feet from the building, onto a parked car. Passers-by rushed her to St George Hospital, where she was declared dead.Chugani panicked after the incident, locked himself in the bedroom and informed the police that a girl had ‘fallen’, police said. Despite the maid knocking the door repeatedly, he did not open it. However, the police soon reached the spot and arrested Chugani.
