As Pakistan takes Kashmir to UNHRC, India dispatches heavyweight team to counter claims - What to expect

India and Pakistan will battle it out at UNHRC

Key Highlights Pakistan PM Imran Khan has also said that he will raise the Kashmir issue at UNGA on September 27 UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet had, on Monday said that she was "deeply concerned" about "human rights of Kashmiris" New Delhi has always rejected third party intervention in Kashmir issue and maintained that its decisions in Kashmir are India's internal matter

New Delhi: India is all set to battle it out with Pakistan over Kashmir at the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) session on Tuesday. The Indian side has deployed a heavy-weight team to counter Pakistan's claims regarding the Kashmir issue at the UN body. The Indian delegation will consist of Ajay Bisaria, the India High Commissioner to Pakistan who was sent back after Pakistan downgraded diplomatic ties, and Vijay Thakur Singh, Secretary East.

According to agency reports, the delegation recently met UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet and explained to her India's position on Jammu and Kashmir in light of the abrogation of Article 370.

The Pakistani delegation will be led by Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. Qureshi has already reached Geneva and is expected to lead the charge on Kashmir. On Monday, Qureshi took to Twitter and said that Pakistan will 'definitely' speak on Kashmir at the UNHRC session.

"Pakistan will speak definitively at the UNHRC Session in Geneva on the continued Indian atrocities in #Kashmir. As High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet said: The People of Kashmir must be consulted and engaged in any decision-making processes," he said in a tweet.

On Monday, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet had said that she was "deeply concerned" over the "impact of recent actions" by New Delhi on the "human rights of Kashmiris".

While Pakistan has been attempting to internationalise the Kashmir issue, India has maintained that Kashmir is India's internal matter and rejected the intervention by any third party including the United Nations.

Pakistan PM Imran Khan, who has already warned the international community of 'consequences' for ignoring the Kashmir issue, has vowed to raise the matter on September 27 at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). PM Narendra Modi will also be addressing the UNGA on the same day as Pakistan PM.


