The Shillong Times

Son chops father into pieces over PUBG argument

Belgaum (Karnataka): In a shocking incident, a son killed his father for not allowing him to play PUBG game. The incident took place at Siddheshwar Nagar under Kakati police station at 5 am on Monday morning.

The deceased has been identified as Shankar, while the accused as Raghuveer Kumbar. Police said Kumbar killed Shankar by cutting him in pieces. “Raghuveer Kumbar killed his father Shankar for cutting internet connection. He was beaten badly before death for taking his phone and not allowing him to play PUBG game,” police said. “Shankar was sitting in the house at the time when his son attacked him. He locked up other family members in a room and killed his father by cutting him in pieces. The son has been taken into custody,” said the Belgaum police. The deceased Shankar had retired from police service just three months ago. Further investigation is on. (ANI)



Metro services hit after woman attempts suicide on tracks

Kolkata: Metro services were partially hit for a brief period on Monday morning after a woman, in her mid-twenties, jumped on the tracks in front of an approaching train at Central metro station, police said. The woman, however, was rescued and admitted to Calcutta Medical College and Hospital, where she is being treated for the injuries that she received after jumping on the tracks, a senior police officer said. “The incident happened at around 8:15 am when a Kavi Subhas-bound train entered the station. Services on both directions between Dum Dum and Maidan stations were suspended till 8:36 am. However, it resumed after the woman was rescued,” a Metro official said. She was injured and in a semi-conscious state after jumping on the tracks, the official said. An officer of Bowbazar police station said they are probing the incident and trying to talk to the woman. “We have also sought CCTV footages from the Metro railway authorities,” he said. (PTI)



4 hurt in UP communal clash

Bareilly (UP): Four persons were injured when two groups belonging to different communities clashed at Khailam village here over a religious procession, police said on Monday. The clash took place on Sunday when the “pagdhar yatra” was passing in front of a religious place. Some people shouted slogans during the procession and the groups clashed with sticks, resulting in injuries to four people, police said. “Pagdhar yatra” is taken out after “devi puja”. A complaint in this regard has been given to police by the locals. The probe into the matter is on. (PTI)



Car plunges into drain, 4 dead

Sehore (MP): Four employees of a Bhopal-based automobile dealer were killed in the early hours of Monday after their car fell into a drain in spate in Madhya Pradesh’s Sehore district, police said. The incident took place in Jatakheda village between 4-5am and bodies of the four have been recovered while search for a fifth occupant, a woman, was underway, an official said. “They are employees of a Maruti Suzuki car dealer and were going to a training programme in Indore. Possibly the driver lost control of the car on the Bhopal-Indore Highway due to high speed,” Additional Superintendent of Police Samir Yadav said. He identified the dead as Naseem Khan, Sayog Pratap Singh, Ajay Acharya and Farhan, and the missing woman as Nisha Talreja Pillai. (PTI)



Man held for giving triple talaq

Kasaragod (Kerala): A 34-year-old non-resident Keralite was booked by police here for allegedly giving triple talaq to his wife through WhatsApp. The FIR was registered against BM Ashraf, a native of nearby Kudlu village, on Sunday night based on a complaint lodged by his 29-year-old wife, hailing from Shiribag, police here said. According to the complaint, the accused, on March 15, had said talaq three times through a voice message sent via WhatsApp, they said. “The accused was said to be in the Gulf when the incident happened. As per the wife’s complaint, the talaq message was sent to her brother’s phone having WhatsApp account,” a police official told PTI. (PTI)
