Capital among top 8 cities with maximum elder abuse: survey

Neglect from family members is a major concern, says NGO

The Capital ranks among the top eight Indian cities with high percentages of elder abuse, a survey by an NGO revealed.

The neglect faced by the elderly from their children, relatives or close ones, is a major concern regarding the safety of senior citizens, the HelpAge India survey stated.

Chief Executive Officer Helpage India Mathew Cherian said social engagement is very necessary for the security of senior citizens living alone in the city.

“We are in touch with many Residents Welfare Associations [RWAs] and have requested them to keep a check on senior citizens living here. There should be a team of residents to ensure regular visits to the house where the elderly stay,” said Mr. Cherian.

The HelpAge India, which has a helpline, also coordinates with the police to ensure the safety of senior citizens.

Recent cases

In January, the police arrested a masseuse and apprehended her juvenile son for allegedly murdering an elderly couple in south Delhi’s Mount Kailash apartments.

On January 18, the juvenile had murdered the couple — Virender Khaneja and Sarala Khaneja. Their bodies were detected after eight days in a semi-decomposed state. The case came to fore when the victims’ son, settled in abroad, could not contact them and requested a relative to visit their house.

The killer managed to sneak into the high-security flat located on the ninth floor and also flee with the robbed items after the crime.

“I met Sarala a month ago for a short time. In high societies, neighbours do not interfere in each other’s lives. In 2017, I had gone to pay my condolences when their younger son died due to illness,” said a next-door neighbour.

Meanwhile, police said the domestic helps in the building are verified.

‘Collective responsibility’

“It is the collective responsibility of society to take care of senior citizens living alone in their neighbourhood,” said an officer.

In November 2018, the police arrested a 51-year-old driver in connection with the murder of a senior citizen in south-east Delhi’s Sarita Vihar.

In September 2018, two women, including a senior citizen, were brutally murdered by a plumber and his three associates in outer district’s Mianwali, the police said, adding that the accused have been arrested.
