Chandragupta Maurya star Faisal Khan shares pic of going bald after leg surgery; calls himself a 'warrior'

Faisal Khan goes bald after his leg surgery | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Faisal Khan goes bald after his leg injury and shared a post on Instagram Known for his lead role in the popular show Chandragupta Maurya, Faisal Khan recently suffered a leg injury on while shooting for a scene The actor was also a participant on Nach baliye 9 alongside Muskaan Kataria

Faisal Khan, who is popular for his lead character in the television series Chandragupta Maurya, recently suffered a leg injury while he was shooting for a scene where he was riding a horse. He was admitted to the hospital and underwent a surgery in his right led. Over the last few weeks, the actor had also been making waves for performing spectacularly well with his partner Muskaan Kataria in Nach Baliye 9.

However, due to Faisal's injury, Muskaan had to give a solo performance, which was quite heart-touching. While the actor has been advised for bed rest for a few months, Faisal recently shared an Instagram post after his surgery where he is seen to have gone bald. Sitting in a wheelchair at the hospital, Faisal, 22, can be seen sporting a bald look.

What seems to be daunting about this post is his caption. He wrote, "I have been fighting since I was a child. I am not a Survivor, I am a Warrior"

Check out Faisal's photo below:

Faisal and Muskaan were one of the top-performing jodis on Nach Baliye 9. They were the first duo to have received a Hi-5 from all the judges. Faisal had earlier shared a picture from the hospital bed, where he talked about how Nach Baliye 9 was his return to the stage and he described the experience as an "adrenaline rush". For the uninitiated, Faisal is also a dancer who had won the reality show Dance India Dance Li'l Masters. He had also participated in Dance Ke Superkids and DID Dance Ka Tashan.

In the post that he shared on August 30, he wrote, "Sometimes, destiny takes the lead against your wishes and unfortunately, you cannot control it. Nach Baliye was my return on to stage, reliving adrenaline rush of performing on stage again, dancing and doing what so love the most! And this time no longer as a child but rather as an adult!"

"Ask me what an addiction dance is, ask me what an addiction the stage is and I shall tell you every minute in the next two months shall be incomplete, as I am without dance in my life! Keep us in your prayers," he further wrote.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates!
