ED raids DK Shivakumar’s aide in connection with money laundering case

ED raids DK Shivakumar’s aide in connection with money laundering case

The ED has recovered various documents from the residence of Shivakumar's aide Anjaneya Hanumantha and is questioning him.

news Crime

As part of the probe against former Karnataka minister and Congress strongman DK Shivakumar, the Enforcement Directorate on Monday night raided Karnataka Bhavan employee Anjaneya Hanumantha.

Anjaneya is one of the other accused named in the money laundering case against Shivakumar. ED officials have earlier said that Anjanayeya, along with three other close aides of the former minister, is among those who helped Shivakumar in the alleged hawala transactions made to the Congress high command. During the Tuesday raids, the ED has recovered various documents at Anjaneya's house and is questioning him in this regard.

Read: Setback for DK Shivakumar, court sends K'taka Cong leader to ED custody till Sep 13

The raids on Monday night at Anjanayeya’s RK Puram residence came after he was questioned for three days over the Rs 8.83 crore cash found at the DK Shivakumar's residence in New Delhi's Safdarjung Enclave in 2017. Shivakumar continues to be in ED custody till September 13.

Meanwhile, the ED has issued a summons to DK Shivakumar’s daughter Aishwarya in connection with the case, say reports. She has been asked to appear before the ED on September 13. The other two accused who have been named as associates in the case are Sunil Kumar Sharma, owner of Sharma Transport; Rajendra N, an employee of Sharma Transport; and Shivakumar’s business associate Sachin Narayan.

Sources in the ED say they are also probing an alleged transaction in which Shivakumar had bought 60% of the solar park at Ballari's Hagaribommanahalli. Sleuths also want to confirm if the transaction was allegedly carried out by Shivakumar by misusing his position as Energy Minister in the Siddaramaiah government.

Shivakumar was arrested on September 3 in New Delhi after he was called in for questioning for four days. His bail was rejected by a special ED court on September 4 and has been remanded in custody till September 13.

The arrest of the high-profile Congress leader came days after the CBI arrested former Union Finance Minister P Chidambaram in connection with the INX media case.
