'Your gory record speaks for itself': India intensifies offensive against Pak at UNHRC

'Your gory record speaks for itself': India intensifies offensive against Pak at UNHRC

India strongly hits back at Pakistan after it raises Kashmir at UNHRC.

India and Pakistan battled it out over Kashmir during the ongoing 42nd UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) session in Geneva on Tuesday.

Both the countries deployed their big guns for the "diplomatic offensive."

The Indian delegation is led by Ajay Bisaria, the India High Commissioner to Pakistan who was sent back after Pakistan unilaterally downgraded ties, and Vijay Thakur Singh, Secretary East.

The delegation had recently met the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, and briefed her about the situation in Jammu and Kashmir since after the abrogation of Article 370.

From Pakistan's side, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, who is on a three-day visit to Geneva, represented Islamabad at the UNHRC session.

On Monday, Qureshi in a tweet said Pakistan will speak "definitively" at UNHRC sessions over the Kashmir issue.

India and Pakistan on Kashmir issue at UNHRC: Live updates

Pakistan’s gory record speaks for itself. This rhetoric will not distract international attention from Pakistan’s persecution & elimination of religious and ethnic minorities – be it the Christians, Sikhs, Shias, Ahmadiyas and Hindus.

Some Pakistani leaders have even gone as far as calling for jihad to encourage violence in Jammu & Kashmir and third countries, in order to create a picture of genocide which even they know is far from reality: Vimarsh Aryan, First Secretary MEA

We're not surprised at Pak's hysterical statements with false narratives aimed to politicise and polarise this forum. Pak realises that our decision cuts away ground from under its feet by creating obstacles in its continuing sponsorship of cross-border terrorism: India at UNHRC

Article 370 was a temporary provision of the Indian Constitution, its recent modification is within our sovereign right and entirely an internal matter of India: Vimarsh Aryan, First Secretary MEA at UNHRC

The world has suffered greatly due to cross border terrorism. We must speak out, silence emboldens terrorists and supporters: Secretary (East) MEA

Preventative measures are needed to maintain peace: Secretary (East) MEA, Vijay Thakur Singh at UNHRC in Geneva on Jammu & Kashmir

My govt is taking affirmative actions to promote socio- economuc justice. These policies will be applicable to J&K. Government's recent decision will end gender different, will provide development in J&K:

Secretary (East) MEA, Vijay Thakur Singh

We wish to reiterate that this sovereign decision, like other legislations passed by Parliament, is entirely internal to India. No country can accept interference in its internal affairs, certainly not India: Secretary (East) MEA at UNHRC

As a result of recent legislative measures (abrogation of Article 370) progressive policies will now be fully applicable to our citizens in J&K and Ladakh. These will end gender discrimination, better protect juvenile rights and make applicable rights to education, information and work: India at UNHRC

India has suffered greatly on account of state-sponsored terrorism. This country (Pak) conducts cross-border terrorism as a form of alternate diplomacy: Secretary (East) MEA at UNHRC

One delegation has given a running commentary with offensive rhetoric of false allegations and concocted charges against my country. World is aware that this fabricated narrative comes from epicentre of global terrorism, where ring leaders were sheltered for years: India at UNHRC

My Government is taking affirmative action by adopting progressive policies to promote socio-economic equality & justice: Secretary (East) MEA, Vijay Thakur Singh at UNHRC in Geneva on Jammu & Kashmir

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi on Tuesday referred to Jammu and Kashmir as an "Indian state" following his speech at the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) session in Geneva.

His statement to the media created quite a furore on social media with Twitterati mocking the minister over the gaffe.

Read full story here

15:45 IST | Tuesday | September 10, 2019

Pak's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi begins his argument by raising the alleged human rights violation in Kashmir, demanding a joint investigation by the UNHRC.

15:30 IST | Tuesday | September 10, 2019

A leaked page from Pakistan's 115-page dossier, which will be submitted at UNHRC by Pak's Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi is circulating in Pak media circles. The leaked page of the document shows quotes by Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and National Conference's Omar Abdullah on Article 370.

(With inputs from ANI)
