Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

WASHINGTON (AP) — John Bolton, the hawkish national security adviser, is out of the Trump administration. Bolton had strong disagreements with President Donald Trump on Iran, Afghanistan and many other global challenges. The sudden shake-up comes at a trying moment for Trump on the world stage, with the president facing pressing decisions on a host of foreign policy issues. It also marks the latest departure of a prominent voice of dissent from the president's inner circle.

FAYETTEVILLE, N.C. (AP) — President Donald Trump is taking credit for turning around a faltering Republican congressional candidate and hoisting him to victory in a North Carolina special election. Trump wrote on Twitter late Tuesday that Dan Bishop was down by 17 points three weeks ago, but after the 9th Congressional District candidate asked Trump for help, "we changed his strategy together." There's no evidence from public polling that Bishop ever trailed Democrat Dan McCready by such a large margin.

JERUSALEM (AP) — The Israeli military says that it intercepted two rockets launched from the Gaza Strip toward the southern city of Ashdod. The rocket fire interrupted a Likud party campaign rally where Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was speaking.

JEKYLL ISLAND, Ga. (AP) — A Coast Guard officer says it could take "weeks, if not months" to remove a cargo ship that overturned while heading to sea from a port on the Georgia coast. Coast Guard Cmdr. Norm Witt told news reporters Tuesday that marine salvage experts are working on a plan to remove the 656-foot-long Golden Ray from St. Simons Sound near the Port of Brunswick. Asked how that would be done, he said: "We don't have all the answers right now."

WASHINGTON (AP) — The proportion of Americans without health insurance edged up in 2018 _ the first increase in nearly a decade after coverage had significantly increased under President Barack Obama's health care law. The Census Bureau also said in an annual report Tuesday that household income rose last year at its slowest pace in four years and finally matched its previous peak set in 1999.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
