Pune police search residence of DU professor in Elgar Parishad case: A look back at the Bhima-Koregaon event

Bhima-Koregaon case | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Activists and intellectuals organised a programme on December 31, 2017, and January 1, 2018, at the Shaniwarwada fort in Pune to honour the Mahar community Mahar community, a Dalit community that Bhim Rao Ambedkar belonged to, fought alongside British Army to defeat Peshwas In the wake of the event, police booked several people, including Gujarat MLA Jignesh Mevani, JNU student Umar Khalid, for allegedly giving “provocative speeches”

The Pune police on Tuesday carried out searches at the residence of a Delhi University professor, Hany Babu, in connection with the Elgar Parishad case. According to reports, the police seized some books from his house. However, the police have not arrested or named him as an accused in the case.

Following the searches, Babu's wife, Jenny Rowena, claimed that the police seized his laptop, mobile phone and pen drives along with other articles and searched their residence without a warrant.

Taking to Facebook, Rowena wrote, “Today, the Pune police entered our house at 6.30 in the morning. They said that Hany Babu (my husband) who teaches at Delhi University English Department, is involved in the Bhima Koregaon case and for this they could search the house without a search warrant. They searched the house for up to six hours, took three books and his laptop, phone, hard disks and pen drives. They just left now.(sic)”

The police have so far arrested 23 people in connection with the case, alleging they are associated with the outlawed CPI-Maoist group. The police have also claimed that the Elgar Parishad, which was held in Pune's Shaniwar Wada on December 31, 2017, was organised with the support of Maoists.

What is Elgar Parishad case?

A group of activists and intellectuals had organised a programme on December 31, 2017, and January 1, 2018, at the Shaniwar Wada fort in Pune's Bhima-Koregaon to honour the Mahar community – a Dalit group Ambedkar belonged to – who, according to some historical accounts, had fought alongside British Army to defeat the Peshwas.

The venue also held significance as it was a seat of power for the Peshwas who headed the military front of the Maratha empire. Besides, Bhima-Koregaon, according to some historians, is considered significant as the battle of Bhima-Koregaon was fought on 1 January 1818 here.

In the wake of the event, police booked several people, including Gujarat MLA Jignesh Mevani and JNU student Umar Khalid, for allegedly giving “provocative speeches” at the Shaniwar Wada event on 31 December 2017 that led to people resorting to violence and arson in the Bhima-Koregaon village premises the following day.

According to reports, during the 1 January 2018 event, stone-pelting and violence took place in Bhima-Koregaon and adjoining villages.

The Bhima-Koregaon violence took place exactly 200 years after a major battle between the British (East India Company) and the Peshwas (part of the Maratha Confederacy that stood up to the British colonisers) had taken place here in 1818. The British built a victory pillar here, crediting the Mahar community for assisting the British to beat the Maratha army and the villagers and other members of the Dalit community celebrate this day as a victory over the upper-caste Peshwa community.

Bhima Koregaon has another significant monument - the samadhi of Govind Gopal Mahar in Vadhu Budruk, located about four kilometres from Koregaon Bhima. Govind Gopal Mahar, a Dalit had braved by Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb's wrath when he defied all warnings to the contrary and gathered the body parts of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj's son Sambhaji Maharaj after he was tortured for 40 days and finally killed by Aurangzeb in 1689.

There has been a dispute for the last few years about who conducted the last rites of Chhatrapati Sambhaji Maharaj. Just a few days before the violence, someone had vandalised Govind Gopal Mahar's samadhi. The incident found (an allegedly provocative) mention in the Elgar Parishad meeting at the Shaniwar Wada on 31 December 2017. On 1 January 2018, as per the police, all elements to light up this tinderbox came together.

Arson and clashes between two groups, one of them being of the Dalits who were moving towards the Bhima-Koregaon victory pillar to celebrate the victory of the British East India Company broke out that New Year's Day in 2018.

A 28-year-old youth named Rahul Fatangale from Nanded (not belonging to the Dalit community) also died in the violence.

Besides, the police last year arrested prominent activists and lawyers under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act including Sudhir Dhawale, Shoma Sen, Mahesh Raut, Gadling, Rona Wilson, P Varavara Rao, Sudha Bharadwaj, Arun Ferriera, and Vernon Gonsalves.

Last month the Bombay High Court asked Gonsalves, an accused in the case, to explain why he kept "objectionable material", such as a copy of "War and Peace" and some other CDs, at his home. Initially, it was reported the court's comments referred to Leo Tolstoy’s classic 1869 novel about Russia during the Napoleonic wars. However, it was later clarified that the book seized from Gonsalves’ house was not Leo Tolstoy’s iconic work "War and Peace" but Biswajit Roy’s "War and Peace in Junglemahal: People, State and Maoists".
