Trump fires NSA Bolton citing differences

I informed John Bolton last night that his services are no longer needed at the White House. I disagreed strongly w… https://t.co/P9awoBGUZs — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 1568131105000

I offered to resign last night and President Trump said, "Let's talk about it tomorrow." — John Bolton (@AmbJohnBolton) 1568131803000

WASHINGTON: US President Donald Trump abruptly fired his national security advisor John Bolton- the third person to occupy that post in three years- saying he (Trump) disagreed with many of his (Bolton) suggestions.“I informed John Bolton last night that his services are no longer needed at the White House. I disagreed strongly with many of his suggestions, as did others in the Administration, and therefore I asked John for his resignation, which was given to me this morning. I thank John very much for his service. I will be naming a new National Security Advisor next week,” Trump tweeted on Tuesday morning, ringing yet another turnover in his ever-changing team that has seen dozens of such departures.Bolton challenged Trump’s version of him being fired, suggesting that he had offered to quit first. “I offered to resign last night and President Trump said, ‘Let’s talk about it tomorrow.’” he tweeted. Apparently, the only thing Trump wanted to talk was to tell Bolton not to let the door hit him on the way out because the President simply and unceremoniously announced the firing over Twitter in the morning.Apparently, the only thing Trump wanted to talk was to tell Bolton not to let the door hit him on the way out because the President simply and unceremoniously announced the firing over Twitter in the morning.Trump did not elaborate what issues he and his third national security advisor disagreed over, but Bolton has long been regarded in Washington as an uber-hawk over everything from North Korea to Iran to the Taliban, always itching for precipitate action, which was anathema to Trump.In fact, it was something of a mystery how and why Bolton swallowed Trump’s outreach towards North Korea's Kim Jong Un and more recently the Taliban, given his past positions, although the most recent meltdowns on both friends must have filled him with vicarious pleasure. Washington scuttlebutt also centered on turf battles between Bolton and secretary of state Mike Pompeo.Just minutes before Trump went public with the firing, Bolton tweeted, “As we reflect this week on the horrific 9/11 attack, it’s important to remember how far we’ve come in combatting radical Islamist terrorist groups but also how much work is left. We stand strong against regimes that sponsor terror & encourage violence against the US & our allies.”Clearly, he was opposed to Trump’s Taliban outreach through his special representative for Afghanistan Zalmay Khalilzad, and although the expected finale in Camp David bombed, Bolton was not behind the prospective deal.Bolton’s firing adds to New Delhi’s headaches at a tricky time because he spoke frequently to his Indian counterpart although he was never hands on with the Indian portfolio and frequently delegated matters to his team. But then, an NSA who didn’t have the US President’s confidence would not have been of much use to India either.
