Monkey bites MP on leg as three of his staff quit over violent primate attacks

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

A politician in India had to be taken to hospital after being bitten on the leg by a monkey, the MP has revealed.

Rakesh Sinha, an MP for the ruling BJP, said he was attacked by the primate at his home in Delhi.

It comes as three of his staff were forced to quit after being chased or clawed by monkeys.

The MP's home is in a leafy area of the city with large fruit trees, home to a population of wild monkeys.

Speaking to Hindustan Times, Rakesh said: "On August 28, I was stepping out of my house when a big monkey attacked me at the gate and bit me on my leg."

(Image: Getty)

He was rushed to hospital where he was given a rabies shot.

Rakesh revealed he and his staff have been under attack from aggressive monkeys in recent months.

"My residential bungalow has been known to harbour monkeys due to a sprawling green campus," he said.

"The previous resident, MP Narendra Jadhav, had warned me about this."



So far, at least three staff members have quit due to monkey attacks.

(Image: Getty)

"At night, the simians jump on the roof and throw things creating a scary situation," Rakesh went on.

As well as biting, some of the monkeys have chased staff members, snatched their food and even grabbed work files.

A government employee said it is nearly impossible to sit in parks in the area.

"The monkeys move in huge groups, including small children," he said.



"I once saw an elderly couple scared for their life after being surrounded by a huge monkey group."

(Image: Getty)

He added: "The authorities must find a solution to this problem without being cruel to the animals."

A Delhi-based vet urged people not to feed monkeys bananas, as it encourages them to stay.

Occasionally, the monkey infestation in Delhi can turn deadly.

In 2007, a group of monkeys pushed then-deputy mayor of Delhi, SS Bajwa, off a terrace, where he fell to his death.
