Ceasefire violated 92 times this month

In August, there were 307 ceasefire violations, out of which 258 happened after the Centre nullified Article 370 and divided J&K into two union territories. (Photo: PTI)

New Delhi: The Line of Control between India and Pakistan has been on the boil with 92 violations of cease-fire just in the first week of September.

Tensions at the LoC have heightened since the abrogation of Article 370 that gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Overall, there have been 350 cease-fire violations between India and Pakistan since August 5. These include frequent exchanges of fire and artillery between the two countries.

In August, there were 307 ceasefire violations, out of which 258 happened after the Centre nullified Article 370 and divided J&K into two union territories.

July had seen the second highest ceasefire violations in 2019 at 296. In June, there were only 181 ceasefire violations between the two countries.

In fact, six houses were partially damaged in heavy shelling on civilian villages along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir’s Poonch district early Tuesday. Pakistani army heavily shelled forward posts and civilian areas along the LoC in Mankote, Balakote and Mendhar sectors of Poonch district. In the firing and shelling in Uri sector of north Kashmir on Monday, two persons, including a jawan, were injured.

According to sources, Pakistan has been indulging in ceasefire violations to provide cover and push terrorists into the Valley. Pakistan is desperate to disturb peace in the valley through terror activities to internationalise the issue and show that things are out of control in Kashmir.

Around 14-15 launch pads across the LoC are full of terrorists, who are trying to cross over into the Valley for carrying out terror activities. Sources said that almost every day, Indian army is foiling attempts by Pakistani-supported terrorists to cross into Jammu and Kashmir.

Pakistan is also planning to replace the local commanders of LeT and Jaish with Afghan terrorists to increase terror activities in Jammu and Kashmir.
