No terrorists’ intrusion into city: Top cop

Coimbatore: City police commissioner Sumit Sharan on Tuesday said there was no intrusion of six LeT terrorists into Coimbatore as claimed by a military intelligence issued on August 22 afternoon and a CISF alert sounded on the same day evening.

“We got military intelligence which claimed that a group of LeT members were travelling towards Coimbatore. Following the alert, we tightened the security in the entire city. But we can say, there was no terrorist movement in the city,” Sumit Sharan told TOI.

When asked about the alert issued by the CISF which claimed that six terrorists were seen in Coimbatore, he said, “The alert claimed that six terrorists were seen in Coimbatore. But the CISF did not mention who had seen the terrorists and where exactly they were seen in Coimbatore. It was a wrong alert. We had taken up the issue with the director general of CISF.”

Police sources claimed that the CISF authorities had agreed that they issued the alert to their respective team members in airports. They also promised the Tamil Nadu senior police officials that such mistakes won’t happen again.

However, the city police are keeping a tight vigil as yet another alert has been issued on September 9 that terrorists may target southern states.

In the afternoon of August 22, military intelligence issued an alert to the state home department that one Pakistani national and five Sri Lankan Tamil Muslims had entered Tamil Nadu via sea from the island nation. The alert said the terrorists have disguised as Hindus by smearing ash on their foreheads and camping in Coimbatore. One of the terrorists has been identified as Iliyas alias Anwar from Pakistan, the alert said.

On the same day, Directorate General, Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), New Delhi, issued an alert and shared the information through MAC (Multi-Agency Centre). The alert said the terrorists were last seen in Coimbatore on August 21 evening, disguised as Hindus with tilaksmeared on foreheads.

Shrine of Velankanni in Nagapattinam district, Defence Services Staff College (DSSC), Wellington in the Nilgiris district, Air Force Station, Sulur , Sabarimala shrine in Kerala and other sensitive places are the targets of the terrorists, the alert said adding that there are chances of attack during Velankanni shrine festival between August 29 and September 8.

Following the two alerts, the city police deployed 2,000 police personnel across the city and conducted vehicle checks and inspected lodges. Commando police personnel from Chennai were brought to the the district and they conducted checks at malls, temples.

Additional director general of police (ADGP - law & order) Jayanth Murali camped in the city for two days. Over 10,000 police personnel were deployed in the eight districts coming under the west zone. On August 25, the security was relaxed, and normalcy returned to Coimbatore. But the police were not able to collect any details about the LeT members.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
