Police drop murder charge in Tabrez Ansari lynching case

Do you know why lynching after lynching is recorded & shared by culprits? Why each lynching is successively more gr… https://t.co/gtTEH3eYa7 — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) 1568050879000

JAMSHEDPUR/RANCHI: The family of Tabrez Ansari, the 22-year-old Jharkhand youth who was attacked by a lynch mob at Seraikela in June, has gone to court against police for scaling down the murder charge against 13 accused to culpable homicide not amounting to murder.The petition filed in the district chief judicial magistrate’s court by Tabrez’s wife Shaheena Perveen challenges the police’s interpretation of “cardiac arrest”, the medical cause of death mentioned in the post-mortem report, as ruling out a fatal attack on the youth.Kartik S, the Seraikela-Kharsawan SP, said police had approached Jamshedpur ’s MGM Hospital for “a second opinion” on the post-mortem report after doubts were raised about the conclusions of the Ranchi-based Scientific and Forensic Laboratory, which too had attributed Tabrez’s death to cardiac arrest on the basis of a viscera examination.“Based on the (second) report, we have converted the murder charge (Section 302 of the IPC) into culpable homicide not amounting to murder (Section 304) as the post-mortem concluded that Tabrez died of cardiac arrest,” the district police chief said.Tabrez had been targeted by a mob on June 17 after being suspected of being involved in a motorbike theft. In a video that went viral, the mob is seen hitting him repeatedly and demanding that he chant “Jai Shri Ram”. He died in hospital four days later. Of the 13 accused named in the FIR, two are still absconding.Asaduddin Owaisi, chief of the AIMIM, tweeted: “Do you know why lynching after lynching is recorded & shared by culprits? Why each lynching is successively more gruesome than the previous one? ...Because there’s a higher chance that the prosecution will do its best to do a shoddy job.”In another tweet, he said: “One of the accused had asked with surprise ‘ye mara nahi ab tak?’ Does anyone believe that Tabrez’s tormentors did not want him to die?”Union minister Smriti Irani said “these incidents” had also happened in other states, mentioning two ruled by Congress. “Law and order is a state subject.”Altaf Hussain, the lawyer representing Tabrez’s wife, said she filed a petition challenging the chargesheet.
