Delhi: Man strangled by wife, her paramour in front of one-year-old daughter

Sagar allegedly strangled Sonu with a nylon rope. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim's wife was constantly in touch with her paramour Woman's lover Sagar confessed to police about killing Sonu Sagar allegedly strangled Sonu with a nylon rope

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, a woman along with her paramour strangled her husband to death in front of her one-year-old daughter in Samaypur Badli area of northwest Delhi in the early hours of Monday. The victim has been identified as Sonu.

After the killing, the woman feigned ignorance about the circumstances that led to her husband's death. During the course of the investigation, police nailed lies of the woman after scanning her phone records.

According to a report, the woman's call details show that she was continuously in touch with her paramour Sagar, who is also her neighbour.

Police said the victim's brother informed them about his murder. According to police, the victim Sonu went to bed around midnight, however, his wife claimed she did not hear or see anyone entering the house.

DCP (Outer-North) Gaurav Sharma said the police scanned the accused wife's phone records and came to know that she was constantly talking to Sagar during the night of the murder.

Police then called Sagar for interrogation where he allegedly confessed to murdering Sonu with the help of his wife.

Sagar told the police that the two had an affair and were planning to elope in the coming days.

According to police, the wife of the victim helped Sagar to sneak into the house where the accused strangled Sonu with a nylon rope.

Sonu's wife raised alarm about the murder around 7 in the morning. The woman stayed next to Sonu's body the entire night, said police.

IAS officer booked for allegedly 'murdering' wife

In a similar incident this week, an FIR was registered against an IAS officer posted as Director of the State Urban Development Agency (SUDA) for allegedly murdering his wife.

The case was filed under IPC Sections 302 (murder) and 201 (causing the disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information) against IAS Umesh Kumar Singh at Chinhat police station in Lucknow in connection with his wife Anita Singh's death. 42-year-old Anita died of bullet injuries on September 1 at the IAS officer's residence in Lucknow's Chinhat area.

The case was filed on the complaint of victim's cousin, who alleged that the officer had relations with other women due to which his sister was not happy and he (Umesh) used to beat her.
