Jammu And Kashmir: Top LeT Terrorist Asif Killed In Encounter In Sopore

Jammu & Kashmir: The LeT terrorist Asif was responsible for recent shootout and injuries to three family members of a fruit trader in Sopore. The injured also included a young girl Asma Jan. He was also responsible for shooting at a migrant labour Shafi Alam in Sopore https://t.co/6r8r7RuvJE — ANI (@ANI) September 11, 2019

A top-ranking terrorist of the Lashkar-e-Taiba terror outfit, Asif, has been neutralised in an encounter by the security forces in Jammu and Kashmir's Sopore on Wednesday, the police sources said. The neutralised terrorist was responsible for the recent attack on a fruit trader's family in Sopore that left three injured, including the two-and-a-half-year-old baby. He was also responsible for shooting at migrant labour Shafi Alam in the same area. During the encounter today, two police personnel also sustained some injuries. As per the report, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval had ordered that the toddler be airlifted to AIIMS, New Delhi, for better medical treatment. The attack was an attempt by Pakistan-backed terrorists to prevent the return of normalcy in the Valley by intimidating the locals.Earlier on Monday, Sopore Police arrested eight terrorist associates who were involved in threatening and intimidating locals by publishing posters in the valley on the behest of LeT affiliates. Those arrested have been identified as Aijaz Mir, Omar Mir, Tawseef Najar, Imitiyaz Najar, Omar Akbar, Faizan Latief, Danish Habib, and Showkat Ahmad Mir who are accused of preparing the threatening posters and circulating them in the locality. As per intial investigation carried out by officers in the case, it is learnt three of the eight terrorist associates affiliated with LeT were principal architects of offence. All incriminating materials have been seized by the police. Meanwhile, last week, there were reports of terrorist groups threatening locals in the Kashmir valley against opening shops and schools through posters put up in various areas, the Army said. Women have also been threatened against going out through these posters.
