LeT terrorist, responsible for Sopore attack that injured 2-year-old, gunned down in encounter

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Asif was responsible for the recent terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Sopore in which four people including a 2-year-old girl were injured Two police personnel also sustained injuries in the gunfight The terrorists barged into the house and opened fire at the family injuring all four including baby Asma Jan

Sopore: A top-ranking LeT terrorist was gunned down in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir’s Sopore on Wednesday. Two police personnel also sustained injuries in the gunfight.

The terrorist, identified as Asif, was responsible for the recent terrorist Sopore in which four people including a 2-year-old girl were injured.

Speaking to media, Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbag Singh said: "LeT's Asif had created a lot of terror in Sopore. Over the last 1 month he was very active. He made use of Over Ground Workers to print posters threatening civilians not to open shops and not to go for their day-to-day activities."

"Today morning on specific information, nakas were laid. He (Asif) was challenged to stop but he didn't. He threw grenade at our parties in which two of our police personnel were injured; they are out of danger," he added.

The toddler and three members of her family were injured after terrorists attacked their house in Dangepora village near North Kashmir’s Sopore town in Baramulla district.

On September 7, the terrorists barged into the house and opened fire at the family, injuring all four including baby Asma Jan. They were immediately rushed to a nearby hospital for treatment. However, the child was shifted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi on the direction of National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval after her condition deteriorated.

"Baby Asma of 30 months is among the injured in a militant attack on fruit merchants in Sopore. She didn't deserve this. We've put in all efforts to get an air ambulance ASAP to take her Delhi for advanced medical attention. Prayers are requested," Shahid Chowdhary, Srinagar district magistrate, had said in a statement on Twitter.

The police said that the attackers fled the scene immediately, adding a probe has been initiated.

Doval, while addressing a press conference on September 7, said: "More than 750 trucks are moving daily from Srinagar yesterday two terrorists came, they wanted to target a prominent fruit merchant Hamidullah Rather. They could not find him as he went to offer Namaz or something. So they took two of his workers to his home five kilometres inside Sopore where they shot at his son Mohammed Irshad and also fired upon his two and a half-year-old daughter Asma Jaan."

"Both Pakistani terrorists had pistols and were speaking Punjabi, both are absconding," the national security advisor had further said.

Doval also apprised the media of the ground situation in Kashmir which continues to be in lockdown since the abrogation of Article 370 that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

“We are determined to protect the life of Kashmiris from Pakistani terrorists even if we have to impose restrictions, terror is the only instrument Pakistan has to create unrest,” Doval said.
