Top Lashkar Terrorist Asif Gunned Down In Jammu And Kashmir's Sopore

highlights Two police personnel were also are injured in the encounter.

Situation tense in the region since the abrogation of Article 370.

Pakistan has been desperate to push terrorists to upset peace in Valley.

New Delhi:

In a major success for Indian security personnel, top Lashkar-e-Toiba terrorist Asif was neutralised in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir’s Sopore on Wednesday. According to latest reports, Asif was responsible for a recent shootout and injuries to three family members of a fruit trader in Sopore. The injured also included a young girl Asma Jan. He was also responsible for an attack on a migrant labour Shafi Alam in Sopore. Two police personnel were also are injured in the encounter.

The situation has been tense in the region since the abrogation of Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir. According to Indian Army, five to seven Pakistani terrorists and regulars were killed near the LoC last month and the Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) of the Indian Army had conveyed the same to his Pakistani counterpart.

Meanwhile, as many as 139 terrorists have been killed by the Indian Army in Jammu and Kashmir in the first eight months of this year, defence sources said on Saturday. However, during these operations, the 26 security forces personnel, belonging to various ranks, have also been martyred.

The report states that maximum number of terrorist-initiated incidents (22) in Jammu and Kashmir were reported in the month of May and security forces managed to neutralise as many as 27 terrorists in this period- the highest number for any calendar month in the year 2019.

The total number of terrorist-initiated incidents across Jammu and Kashmir from January to August have been recorded at 87. In the last week of July, Indian Army used Bofors howitzers to foil an attack by Pakistan Army's BAT on forward post in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir. More than four BAT commandoes had been gunned down by while they were attempting to infiltrate the LoC.

Meanwhile, in view of the Army's warning of a possible terror attack in the southern part of India, an alert has been issued to all districts across Kerala with police officials being directed to intensify vigil and searches. "An alert has been issued to all districts of the state, following Army's warning of a terror attack. Police across the state have been directed to maintain vigil at public places," Kerala Director General of Police (DGP) Loknath Behera told media on Monday.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
