Patwari attacked with sharp weapons, stable

Ludhiana: A revenue officer (patwari) was attacked by four assailants in his office at Thareeke village on Tuesday morning. The assailants, who came on two bikes, attacked the patwari with sharp-edged weapons and escaped from the spot.

On hearing the screams, people reached the office of the patwari and rushed him to a private hospital on Ferozepur Road. His condition is stated to be stable.

The officer has been identified as Deepak Singla, 27, of Sardulgarh, Mansa district.

The police said he was earlier posted at Bhundri village of Ludhiana Rural and Tuesday was his first day of new posting at Thareeke village. The CCTVs installed near the locality have captured the assailants.

Inspector Sukhdev Singh, SHO at Sadar police station, said the officer had sustained injuries in his head, neck, arm, hand and leg. He was attacked repeatedly with sharp-edged weapons and had a deep injury on his neck.

“Deepak Singla came to the office around 9pm. At 10:45am, he was alone in the office when the assailants attacked him. The CCTV footage has captured the four assailants on two bikes. Two of them carried weapons. They barged into the office and attacked Singla and escaped on their bikes within a minute,” he said.

Additional deputy commissioner of police (ADCP-2) Jaskiranjit Singh said during initial inquiry it was found that the assailants argued with the officer before attacking him.

“It seems that the accused were known to the officer and there was some personal enmity. As on the first day, it is unlikely that someone will attack a revenue official,” he said.

Sadar police have registered a case against unidentified accused under sections of 307 (attempt to murder), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 186 (obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 333 (whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant) and 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
