Chennai: ‘Rejected lover’ throws acid on girl after she refuses to talk to him

Police have sent the accused to jail. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Girl student attacked with acid by jilted lover Accused is also a student of the same college Police have sent the accused to jail

Chennai: In yet another case of crime against women, a jilted lover allegedly attacked a girl student with acid after she rejected his advances. The accused has been identified as Muthamizhan, a student of in Cuddalore district of Tamil Nadu.

The student has been arrested and sent to jail on Tuesday. Meanwhile, the victim, who has suffered burn injuries on her face, has been admitted to Rajah Muthiah Medical College and Hospital in Chidambaram. The victim is also said to be a student of the same college as the accused.

According to a report, the accused, who is a resident of Kuthalam near Mayiladuthurai, was in a relationship with the girl until recently. But the girl broke up with the youth and stopped interacting with her.

The accused is a second-year student of Bachelor of Physical Education (BPEd) at the varsity.

The report further suggested that the accused tried to forcibly talk to the girl in the university campus, but she refused to speak to him. The girl also tried to slap the youth when he tried to start a conversation with her.

Irritated after being spurned by the girl, the accused attacked the girl with acid injuring her on face and hands. Hearing the student's screams, a passerby rushed to help the victim and took her to hospital.

The same man also allegedly thrashed the accused on the spot. He sustained injuries during thrashing and was admitted to the same hospital for first aid.

Chidambaram police have initiated a probe after filing a case against Muthamizhan, said DSP Karthikeyan.

16 members of a family attacked with acid for resisting molestation, 8 critical

In a similar incident on August 28, a family was attacked with acid, seriously injuring eight persons. The attack took place after the family opposed attempted molestation of a girl member by some youths of the village in Bihar's Vaishali district.

Family members of Nand Kishore Bhagat had had a tiff with some people. Later, members from both groups came to blows, said Vaishali Deputy Superintendent of Police Raghav Dyal. But on August 28, a group of people forcibly entered the house of Nand Kishore and attacked the family living in Daudpur village with acid.

Eight members, including two women, were seriously injured and were been admitted to a government hospital in Hajipur.
