After TMC grand rally, Left Front takes up same stage in protest

Exactly 15 days after TMC supremo and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee put up a rally at the Brigade Parade Ground to oust the Modi government, the Left Front on February 3 launched an attack on both the BJP and TMC. The front however refrained from commenting on whether they will form an alliance with Congress in the forthcoming Lok Sabha polls.

Addressing the gathering at the rally ground, CPI(M) national general secretary Sitaram Yechury referred to the alleged vote loot in Bengal and said, "So far it had been the voice of protest and looking at the sea of people present here I can say that if there is any further attempt to stop people from casting their votes, there will be a fire of counteraction."

Training his guns at Prime Minister Narendra Modi he alleged that the Central government had been involved in a lot of corrupt practices and that the sops in the Interim Budget announced on Friday were lollypops to general people to entice them to vote for Modi government once again. "We don't want a chowkidar who sells dreams. The people of Bengal are the masters and they will change the chowkidar because his principles are anti-people," he said.

He also cited a report of National Sampling Survey Organisation saying that the country had seen the highest number of unemployment in the last 45 years. "In the budget it has been told that a pension of Rs 3000 a month to the working class will be given. Those who are 30 years of age will deposit Rs 100 every month for the next 30 years to avail of the pension. The value of Rs 3000 at that time will be that of Rs 70. So it turns out to be another 'jumla' of the present government," Yechury said.

Calling the PM as an abbreviated form of 'pocket maar' he said that 'pocket maar' looted the country for five years and was assisted by the chief minister in Bengal. "Both of them engage in a mock fight. You will have to change both," he said.

He alleged that the BJP government had only been favouring a handful of industrialists in their fraudulent deals, who, in turn paid the BJP through electoral bonds.

The state secretary of CPI(M) Surjyakanta Mishra spoke in the same vein saying that not only people will have to remove the two but would also have to convince people that only the Left was an alternative.

Party MP and politburo member Md Salim alleged that the BJP and the TMC had an under the table settlement. "The time has come to get together not to fulfil anyone's dream of becoming the Prime Minister but to save the country. While Modi has fooled the people of India, Mamata has done the same in Bengal," he said.

He sent a note of warning for the Congress which is likely to form an alliance with the TMC in the Lok Sabha elections. "When the TMC was created the Congress leaders had said that a party has been created to take on the Left Front but now as Modi aims at creating a Congress-free India, the TMC here is hell bent in making Bengal Congress-free," he said.

Salim said that the TMC and the BJP were going soft on each other in a symbiotic manner. "The TMC has not done any investigation about the communal clashes in Bengal and the BJP has gone soft on the chit fund probe. If the Left returns to power, there will not be any 'tour package to Bhubaneswar' for offenders. They will be convicted and every penny of their property will be used to repay those who have lost their money in the chit fund companies," Salim lashed out.

There was a speculation about the presence of former Chief Minister Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee at Brigade on Sunday but owing to ailment, he could not get up the stage but stayed inside a vehicle within the ground.
