Top LeT Terrorist Who Killed Civilians In Kashmir Neutralised

Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbagh Singh confirming the death of a top-ranking Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorist, Aasif Maqbool Bhat from Sopore district stated that the encounter gave a 'sigh of relief' to the area. Asif was responsible for spreading terror through threatening posters and a recent shootout and injuries to three family members of a fruit trader, including a little girl. The Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorist was also responsible for killing the migrant laborer in Sopore.

Jammu and Kashmir DGP narrated how the terrorist was intercepted and eventually neutralised. He further noted how before being killed, the terrorist hurled grenades at security personnel, thus injuring a few

Dilbagh Singh said, "One more militant has been killed. The militant of LeT Aasif Maqbool Bhat has been killed today. He had created a lot of terror in the area of Sopore, and over the last month he was very active. He was responsible for printing posters threatening people to not go for trading, not to open shops, go for day-to-day activities. We were watching those activities and after these people and 8 people who were indulging in these activities were apprehended by Sopore Police along with the computers and other instruments for printing those threatening letters. Along with two other militants, three of them created terror in the village."

READ| Pakistan & Terrorism: 6 Freudian slips by Pak leaders on Osama, Hafiz Saeed & Masood Azhar that give it all away

"We were following him, tracking him. Today morning on specific information, police were at the nakas and when the fellow came, he was forced to stop, but he did not. He hurled a grenade, in which a couple of our Police were injured but they are out of danger. In the encounter in which the militant was neutralised, he is the same militant who fired at the family members, injured 4 of them including a little girl. He is the same militant, who along with his associates went to a migrant's home and shot him leaving him injured. This person was very active in Sopore, with his killing the area gave a sigh of relief. We know his associates and in the near future we can take care of him as well," he added.

LeT chief Hafiz Saeed

Lashkar-e-Taiba chief Hafiz Saeed was declared as a terrorist by the Indian government on September 4, under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 1967. Even the US has announced a bounty of US$10 million on the 26/11 Mumbai attacks mastermind, who is currently sheltered by Pakistan.

Days ahead of Pakistan PM Imran Khan's visit to Washington, Hafiz Saeed was taken into a custody by Punjab Counter-Terrorism Department in Lahore authorities in a sham terror crackdown. The Trump administration had raised their doubts over the intention.

"We've seen this happen in the past. And we have been looking for sustained and concrete steps, not just window dressing. Quite frankly, the previous arrest of Hafiz Muhammed Saeed hasn't made a difference and the LeT has been able to operate. So we're monitoring the situation. Pakistan really needs to prove that this time they are something different," a senior administration official told reporters Friday.

READ| UAPA bill: P Chidambaram opposes amendments citing individual liberty, says 'Gautam Navlekha isn't Hafiz Saeed'

In a video accessed by Republic TV, Hafiz Saeed was seen around lawyers and officers of the Punjab CTD, following his arrest. In the video, he can be seen leaving Pakistan's Gujranwala Court after being sent to 7 days of judicial custody.

Here's an account of the times Hafiz Saeed was arrested by Pakistan:
