India: Woman, lover kill husband, try to make it look like suicide

Dubai: A woman in the India state of Andhra Pradhesh murdered her husband with the help of her boyfriend and a friend and tried to make it look like suicide. The police have arrested the trio.

According to Indian media reports, the accused Dalli Jyothi, along with her boyfriend S. Bharat Kumar, an ex-offender and his friend G. Bhaskar Rao, allegedly killed D. Satish Kumar, a 32-year-old havildar (a rank, equivalent to a sergeant) in the Indian Army.

How they killed the husband

According to Commissioner of Police RK Meena: “On August 18 night, Jyothi allegedly laced alcohol with sedatives and served it to Satish who fell asleep after consuming it. Then, she called her 24-year-old boyfriend Bharat, who reached her house, along with his friend Bhaskar. The trio allegedly strangled Satish with a dupatta and then hanged the body from a ceiling fan with a saree in a bid to make it look like a suicide.”

On August 19, Jyothi, 26 called the police and claimed that Satish Kumar ended his life by hanging himself from a ceiling fan, after a heated argument between them. Initially, police registered a case of unnatural death under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CRPC) after the soldier was found hanging in his house here on August 19. “Jyothi, in her complaint, claimed that Satish was an alcoholic and suspected her fidelity, which led to frequent arguments between them. After an altercation on August 18 night, he ended his life,” added the commissioner.

Jyothi, daughter of an ex-servicemen, married Satish in 2010 and has two children. She allegedly developed an illicit affair with Bharat and the duo decided to eliminate Satish and live together.

After being warned against the illicit relationship, the woman hatched a plan to kill her husband.

How the police cracked the case

According to an article on thehindu.com, few days after the case was registered, the police received a phone call from senior officials of the Indian Army, seeking a copy of the post-mortem report so that they could release the compensation to Satish’s family. “The Army personnel also know that it would take around 15 days for the post-mortem report to be issued. But, we received the call just three days after the incident. We came to know that Jyothi contacted the Army officials seeking immediate release of the compensation. Suspecting something fishy, we investigated further,” said RK Meena.

He further said that Call Data Records (CDR) suggested that Jyothi had made several phone calls to a number on the day of the offence. “This gave us a clue. The accused confessed to have committed the crime during interrogation,” said Meena.

Jyothi, daughter of an ex-servicemen, married Satish in 2010 and has two children. She allegedly developed an illicit affair with Bharat and the duo decided to eliminate Satish and live together.
