CBI team out to question police chief detained by Kolkata cops

Mamata vs Modi



Mamata Banerjee

West Bengal

Narendra Modi

Amit Shah

Kolkata Commissioner of Police Rajeev Kumar and Mamata Banerjee

Rahul, Andhra CM support Didi



BJP says Mamata making a mockery of democracy



An all-out war broke out between the Centre and the Mamata Banerjee government on Sunday, with thechief minister beginning a sitin protest at a city landmark over the CBI’s attempt to question the Kolkata Police chief in connection with chit fund scams, insisting it stifled the spirit of “Constitution and federalism”.In a dramatic showdown with the Modi government, a furious Banerjee began a sit-in right in front of the Metro Cinema to protest “insults” she faced at the hands of Prime Ministerand BJP chief, hours after a CBI team that had gone to question Kumar was detained in a rare face-off between the police establishments of the Centre and the state.Banerjee, one of the prime movers behind the effort to cobble together an anti-BJP alliance ahead of the Lok Sabha polls, claimed the CBI knocked on the doors of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar without a search warrant. She alleged they want to impose President’s rule in whatever states the opposition is in power.“I can assure... I am ready to die but I am not ready to bow down before the Modi government and we won’t allow imposition of Emergency...please save India, save democracy, save the Constitution,” she said.Banerjee asked all opposition parties to unite to bring down the Modi government and called upon personnel of security forces of the Centre and states, besides the Army, to “condemn” the attitude of the Modi government.The developments started unfolding as soon as a team of 40-odd agency officers arrived at Kumar’s residence at Loudon Street in central Kolkata on Sunday afternoon, but they were stopped by sentries and officials.CBI joint director Pankaj Srivastava said the agency’s officials had gone to question Kumar in chit fund scam cases and “we would have rounded him up if he hadn’t cooperated with us”. According to the CBI, Kumar, who led a Special Investigation Team of West Bengal police probing the scams, needs to be questioned regarding missing documents and files but he has not responded to notices to appear before the agency. A day earlier, the CBI claimed that Kumar had been “absconding” and “being looked for” in connection with Saradha and Rose Valley ponzi scam cases.As the CBI team landed at the city police chief’s residence, a team of Kolkata Police officers rushed to the spot to enquire if they had the documents required for questioning Kumar. Later, a small team of CBI officials was taken to Shakespeare Sarani police station.Thereafter, more men arrived at the spot and a commotion ensued. Some CBI officers were then forcibly bundled into police jeeps and taken to the police station. As politics played out on the street, the chief minister, who rushed to the residence of Kumar, said, “Narendra Modi and Amit Shah are trying to organise a coup in the state as we had organised the opposition rally on January 19. We were aware that the CBI will attack us after we organised the rally.”Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime) Pravin Tripathi said the CBI officers have been let go from the police station after questioning. “They just said they had come for a secret operation. We don’t know what kind of operation it is,” Tripathi said.The city police commissioner, who appeared briefly outside his residence after the chief minister’s press conference, said he would talk to the media on Monday. He was later seen at the dharna site of the chief minister.Sources said the CBI is planning to move the Supreme Court. CBI interim chief Nageswara Rao said, “We are contacting our senior law officers about the Kolkata incident. Whatever they suggest will be followed. We are investigating these chit fund cases as per the directions of the Supreme Court.”Congress president Rahul Gandhi called up Mamata Banerjee and extended support to her, saying the entire opposition is together and it will defeat the fascist forces. He alleged the events in West Bengal were part of an unrelenting attack on India'a institutions by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP.He said the Congress stood shoulder to shoulder with Banerjee . “The entire opposition will stand together and defeat these fascist forces,” he tweeted. Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu also condemned the happenings in Kolkata. “This is shocking and we strongly condemn this. We stand by Chief Minister of West Bengal to preserve and protect the Constitution and spirit of federalism in the country,” Naidu tweeted. Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal also tweeted, “Spoke to Mamta didi and expressed solidarity. Modi-Shah duo’s action is completely bizarre and anti-democracy.”The BJP slammed accusing the Mamata Banerjee-led government of making a mockery of governance, democracy and constitutional propriety. “The development in Kolkata and the resistance to the CBI investigation is bizarre, unprecedented and reflect Banerjee’s dictatorial attitude. She has violated the very Constitution she had sworn by,” party spokesperson G V L Narasimha Rao said.Nalin Kohli, another BJP spokesperson, described the situation as unprecedented . Never before a premier investigation agency like the CBI has been stopped from doing its work, which is working under the court’s direction. “It is clear that the state government under Mamata Banerjee has lost sight of all constitutional propriety.”
