[Photo] Darbar poster: Rajinikanth looks fiery and intense in this second look from the AR Murugadoss film

Here's the second look from Rajinikanth's Darbar | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The second look from Rajinikanth's upcoming film, Darbar, is out The film has Nayanthara playing the female lead and is directed by AR Murugadoss Check out the new poster right here

Fans have been excitedly waiting for Rajinikanth’s second look from Darbar and the number of tweets in the last couple of hours is proof enough. The first poster from the film had Thalaiva posing as a police officer and a major portion of the film has been shot in Mumbai. The second poster announcement also sparked a lot of interest around the film and fans cannot stop gushing over him. The second poster has Thalaiva engrossed in an intense action scene and this is literally enough to drive fans crazy. Fans cannot stop tweeting about it and talking about how impressive the second look is.

Check out the new poster right here.

We are also eagerly looking forward to seeing Nayanthara’s look from the film. Her look was leaked on the internet earlier and though it wasn’t completely clear, it got fans excited. The film has been directed by AR Murugadoss and is slated to release during Pongal 2020. Rajinikanth’s last Pongal release was Petta which was a multi-starrer directed by Karthik Subbaraj. We are also looking forward to seeing how Thalaiva and Nayanthara’s chemistry pans out on the big screen this time. We loved their chemistry in Chandramukhi earlier.

Anirudh Ravichander will be composing music for Darbar and we are pretty thrilled for the music, too. We will be seeing Thalaiva play a police officer on the big screen after a very long time and we cannot wait for more massy dialogues from this one. Thalaiva makes sure that apart from his usual swag that made fans fall in love with him, he also has one fiery tag line in the film that fans remember him for. All of his dialogues right from 16 Vayathanile to Petta are popular among fans.

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
