Top Current Affairs Quiz: 11 September 2019

11 September 2019: The Current Affairs Quizzes section of Jagranjosh aims to help every competitive exam aspirant to revise the day at ease. The day’s updated quizzes cover topics such as September 11 attack anniversary, new Principal adviser to PM and Lancet report among others.

1. Who was recently fired by US President Donald Trump from his post of National Security Adviser?

a) John Bolton

b) Mike Pompeo

c) Joseph Maguire

d) Gina Haspel

2. The September 11 terrorist attacks completed how many years in 2019?

a) 17

b) 19

c) 20

d) 18

3. Which country has decided to extend post-study work visas for foreign students to two years?

a) US

b) UK

c) Canada

d) France

4. Which country was the honour country at the 84th Thessaloniki International Fair (TIF)?

a) Canada

b) France

c) India

d) Pakistan

5. Who was appointed as the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister Narendra Modi recently?

a) Pramod Kumar Mishra

b) Arun Kumar Goyal

c) Ramesh Gupta

d) Abhishek Menon

6. Who has been appointed as the Principal Advisor to Prime Minister Narendra Modi?

a) Rajiv Gauba

b) PK Sinha

c) Pulok Chatterji

d) Nripendra Misra

7. PM Modi recently launched the National Animal Disease Control Programme from which city?

a) Varanasi

b) Mathura

c) Kanpur

d) Lucknow

8. Which state recently announced to reduce amount of traffic challans by almost 50 percent?

a) Gujarat

b) Rajasthan

c) Maharashtra

d) Andhra Pradesh

9. Malaria can be eradicated from the world by which year as per the latest ‘Lancet’ report?

a) 2030

b) 2040

c) 2050

d) 2055

10. Which of the following NRI industrialists was nominated to the UK’s House of Lords?

a) Jasjit Singh

b) Rami Ranger

c) Ranjeet Sekhon

d) Vipin Malik

Answers

1. (a) John Bolton

US President Donald Trump abruptly fired his national security adviser John Bolton on September 10, 2019. Trump tweeted, “I informed John Bolton last night that his services are no longer needed at the White House. I disagreed strongly with many of his suggestions, as did others in the Administration.”

2. (d) 18

The 18th anniversary of the September 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Centre was commemorated on September 11, 2019. The attacks were one of the worst terrorist attacks on American soil, as four-passenger airliners were hijacked by militants and two of the planes were crashed into the twin towers of the World Trade Centre in New York, US.

3. (b) UK

UK has re-introduced the two-year post-study work visa for international students. The return of the scheme was announced by UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson. Indian students will now be allowed to stay in UK for two years after graduating.

4. (c) India

India was the honoured country at the 84th Thessaloniki International Fair (TIF) in Greece. The new India pavilion was inaugurated on the occasion by Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic, Kyriakos Mitsotakis and the Minister of State for Commerce and Industry, Hardeep Singh Puri on September 7, 2019.

5. (a) Pramod Kumar Mishra

The Appointments Cabinet Committee (ACC) recently approved the appointment of Pramod Kumar Mishra as Principal Secretary to Prime Minister Narendra Modi with effect from September 11, 2019. Mishra is currently working as an Additional Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.

6. (b) PK Sinha

P.K. Sinha has been appointed as Principal Advisor to Prime Minister Narendra Modi with effect from September 11, 2019. Sinha is currently functioning as the Officer on Special Duty (OSD) in the Prime Minister's Office.

7. (b) Mathura

Prime Minister launched the National Animal Disease Control Programme (NADCP) on September 11, 2019 from Mathura in Uttar Pradesh. The Programme aims to eradicate the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) and Brucellosis in the livestock.

8. (a) Gujarat

The Gujarat government has reduced the amount of fines imposed under the new Motor Vehicles Act (MVA) for breaking traffic rules. BJP-ruled Gujarat is the first state to do so. The new rules will come into effect from September 16 onwards. The Delhi government is also considering reducing certain penalties.

9. (c) 2050

The latest Lancet Report suggested that it may be possible to eradicate malaria from the world by 2050. The report titled, ‘Malaria eradication within a generation: ambitious, achievable, and necessary’ has prepared by 41 leading scientists, economists and health-policy experts.

10. (b) Rami Ranger

NRI entrepreneur Rami Ranger was nominated to Britain's House of Lords for his outstanding service to the business fraternity, the Conservative Party and the public. Former Prime Minister Theresa May had recommended Ranger's name for the peerage in her resignation letter.

Download our Current Affairs & GK app for Competitive exam preparation. Click here for latest Current Affairs: Android|IOS
