Myanmar insurgents pose threat to India's Kaladan multi-modal transit transport project

Myanmar insurgents pose threat to India's Kaladan multi-modal transit transport project

Myanmar insurgent group, the Arakan Army, has set up several camps in areas across Mizoram's Lawngtala district, posing threat to the Kaladan Project. The insurgents are reported to be using 'Bluetooth' and `Wi-Fi; to trigger landmines against Myanmar Army, posing a threat to India as well.

A fresh report by the intelligence agencies has suggested that the Arakan Army has set up several camps in areas across Mizoram's Lawngtala district, posing threat to the Kaladan multi-modal transit transport project, which is considered India's gateway to Southeast Asia.

The insurgent group also active in Mizoram, posing a challenge to Indian security agencies. The Indian Army is currently verifying the use of such technology by insurgent groups to trigger landmines.

“We have requested Assam Rifles to find out about the use of 'Bluetooth' technology to trigger landmines by insurgent groups,” said official working with Indian security establishments.

A report accessed by Zee News also suggests that Myanmar Army has placed jammers to neutralise threat of these landmines. The infantry battalions of Myanmar Army located in Northern Rakhine state is frequently using jammers while moving through these areas. The Arakan Army recruits are trained by another insurgent group, the Kachin Independence Army in Myanmar, to use Improvised Explosive Devices (IED), according to the report.

Earlier, in March this year, the Indian Army carried out a cross-border operation along the Indo-Myanmar border, reportedly destroying almost 12 camps of insurgent groups.

However, the threat to the Kaladan Project remains. The situation on the ground more or less remain the same and the Myanmar Army is expecting more help from India to secure the Kalanan project.

“The Arakan Army had attacked a Burmese vessel carrying 300 steel frames for the Paletwa Bridge and abducted the entire crew but they were later released. The vessel had sailed from Yangon to Paletwa. The Arakan Army is conspiring to launch more such lethal attacks,” said a security officer working in Indian security establishment.

India entered into a framework agreement with Myanmar in April 2008 to facilitate implementation of the Kaladan multi-modal transit transport project. The project, once completed, will help connect Mizoram with the Sittwe Port in Rakhine State of Myanmar. On the Indian side, work is on to extend the Aizawl-Saiha National Highway by 90 km to the international border at Zorinpui.
