Youth martyred, eight detained by Indian troops in occupied Kashmir

Asif Maqbool was travelling in a car when the troops opened fire on the vehicle, resulting in his killing.

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – Amid the illegal and strict lockdown, a Kashmiri youth was martyred today (September 11) by the Indian troops as their fresh act of state terrorism while also arresting at least eight youth in different areas of Sopore town.

According to Kashmir Media Service, the youth identified as Asif Maqbool was travelling in a car when the troops opened fire on the vehicle, resulting in his killing.

Earlier, the troops during house raids arrested at least eight youth in different areas of Sopore town. Those who were arrested include Aijaz Mir, Omar Mir, Tawseef Najar, Imitiyaz Najar, Omar Akbar, Faizan Latief, Danish Habib and Showkat Ahmed Mir.

Meanwhile, military siege along with communication blockade continued on 38th consecutive day, today, in the Kashmir valley and parts of Jammu region. Markets and other business establishments remained closed while public transport continued to be off the roads. Journalists, students, businessmen and patients are bearing the brunt of unprecedented curfew and communication blackout as internet, mobile and landline services remained suspended while TV channels continued to remain closed from 5th of August when India scrapped the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

People continued to face shortage of essential commodities including baby food, milk and life-saving drugs as an acute humanitarian crisis is unfolding in Kashmir due to the clampdown.

Two Muslim leaders from Jammu, Muhammad Hanif Kalas and Irshad Ahmad Malik, in a joint statement issued in Jammu at the end of their recent visit to Chenab valley said that deployment of Indian troops and police personnel in each and every nook had virtually turned the entire valley into a big jail. They said an environment of siege and harassment haunts Kishtwar, Ramban, Doda and other parts of the Chenab valley.

On the other hand, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader and former Indian minister Anant Kumar Hegde in a video message on social networking site Twitter asked Indian Administrative Service officer, Sasi Kanth Senthil, who resigned in protest over Indian brutalities in occupied Kashmir, to go to Pakistan.

He dubbed the Karnataka IAS officer’s resignation as an “act of arrogance”. Senthil had resigned from from his job on September 6, telling the Indian government that fundamental building blocks of democracy were being compromised in an unprecedented manner.
