On a high note

Often relegated as a hobby by an average listener, Indian classical music is scrutinised as a matter of passion and not a lucrative career. This observation has been overturned by a handful of passionate students across city campuses, who are determinedly pursuing this path to secure a glorious livelihood. ‘Following your heart’, has found a new epitome in these young adults, who opened up to Pune Mirror about their vision of an unconventional future and this art’s many personal benefits.Such a musical ambition has been embraced by Chinmay Pathak (and many like him) who can often be found humming his favourite raag during his strolls across the sprawling campus of Fergusson College. “I was introduced to classical compositions by my grandfather and my mother. This eventually led to initiation into formal training at the age of eight,” he explained.Pathak took tabla classes with celebrated musician Mohan Parasnis, who sent then him to Gayatri Sathe, for vocal training. “Later, Pt Sanjeev Abhyankar’s mother, Dr Shobha Abhyankar, sent me to Manisha Shrikhande, who remains my guru till date. The journey was bolstered by Sagar Borwankar, a student of Indian classical vocalist Uday Bhawalkar, as my teacher for Dhrupad (an ancient subbranch of Hindustani Classical music), and then it was back to Shrikhande ma’am,” he said.~~67819629~~This impressive line of mentors serves as a testimony to Pathak’s undying love for his craft. “Classical music aids in breaking down the pretence in music theory and ingraining a characteristic simplicity in the hearts of its students,” he opined, adding, “Every note belonging to a raag comes with its own universe of emotions and atmospheres. What the artist then chooses to do with it reflects their own personality. In this sense, classical music holds up a mirror.”Beyond these merits of a personal nature, Pathak also views classical music as a definite source of income. While he claimed that it is not lucrative at the moment — a factor that is not his top concern — it is the focus on “spiritual satisfaction” that counts as a treasure for him.The 19-year-old psychology student at present stands two exams away from his Visharad Purna — a degree parallel to a bachelor’s in music.These thoughts were also echoed by Juilee Avasare, a master’s in women’s studies student from the university, whose journey began young, too. “I was not into studies at all,” she chuckled.“The only skill I was good at was music. My guruji, Umesh Purohit, introduced me to Hindustani Classical through the harmonium at the age of thirteen. Flash forward a few years later, I was all set to pursue a master’s in women’s studies from the Savitribai Phule Pune University,” she added.Fortunately for Avasare, the day of reckoning wasn’t far ahead.“I soon realised that my college timings would clash with the harmonium classes, making it impossible for me to pursue both. Taking a leap of faith, I decided to choose classical music as my career and became a full-time student at my guru’s,” she said.The harmonium has spent far too long playing second fiddle to other elements of classical music, she opined “as it deserves to be universally recognised as a solo instrument”.“We don’t hear as many standalone harmonium performances as vocal ones. I want to use the television, the radio and the internet to establish myself as an accomplished, independent artiste. After that, I would love to start teaching classical music,” she said.Avasare vehemently disagrees about classical music not being lucrative. “I feel we are too keen to judge it as an illpaying field without looking deeper into the options,” she said.While she believes that this was not a practically motivated domain before, things have changed now. “It admittedly takes a lot of effort to establish yourself in this field, but once you do that, you get paid well. Also, the number of classical music concerts has risen in the past few years, with the audience of classical music growing simultaneously. It may not make you rich immediately, but with time, it can be turned into a decent career choice.”She plans to enrol for an MA in music next, at SNDT University. “I am confident of bagging a place. All it takes is a regular practice and lots of passion,” she concluded.There are those like Avasare and Pathak who delve into pure music and then there are others like Shriya Kulkarni — a student of Fergusson College — who are weaving the benefits of classical music into other professions. This junior college student aims to extend the domain into therapy, a thought she has nurtured for long.Kulkarni initially started learning singing at the age of six, and her mother started learning the harmonium at the same time. She then began training under at the Sargam Sangeet Vidyalaya. She added, “When I was introduced to the core of classical music, it fascinated me, immensely. The way it healed my soul was most astonishing. It was during my Class X that this thought of marrying music and prosocial behaviour occurred to me.”Kulkarni now plans on completing a diploma in music therapy even as she builds a reputation as a harmonium player through regular performances. Furthermore, she too believes that classical music can turn into lucrative a career. “I do not think classical music is a bad choice for everyone hoping for a decent income. If you hone your skills well and build a solid network, there is nothing to stop you from earning an attractive salary,” she said.However, Kulkarni shares Pathak’s views on this matter, as for her money is not the only criterion. “Classical music is a force of change, an agent of physical and emotional well-being. If you invest your time and effort on a consistent scale, it will keep you well-paid and healthy all your life,” she said.An early beginning into the musical monde is a common thread for these youngsters, including Malvika Dikshit of SP College. “My mother ushered me to join music classes at the age of five. I would doodle in my notebook just to avoid her anger. In 2009, I was selected for the Marathi reality show Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Little Champs, and gradually loved the ambiance of a stage,” she said.Malvika began her vocal classical music training under Madhuri Dongre. “Only in Class IX did I slowly realise the importance of regular riyaaz in honing my classical skills,” she admitted.Malvika is now studying for her ‘Alankar Pratham’ — the first out of two levels that will get her a masters equivalent in music. She believes in a simple philosophy when it comes to her passion. “Every raag that you imbibe is a seed, complete and impervious in itself. Your foundation in classical music, however, acts as the soil that allows it to bloom. Only regular, rigorous training can give you that fertility.”She thinks that the fast lifestyle today has sadly made it impossible to pursue classical music as a whole-hearted career. “I would recommend an aspiring musician to keep a backup at hand before plunging into it like I am. It does not make instant money and demands a great deal of emotional and physical investment,” she said.
