Careless investigation led to all 11 walking free

VADODARA: Extreme carelessness in the investigation from day one in the sensational assassination of gangster Mukesh Harjani led to acquittal of all 11 accused. The sessions court that conducted the trial has taken this up seriously.The court of additional sessions judge H I Bhatt has ordered that a copy of judgement be sent to Vadodara police commissioner and state home department to take necessary action against the first investigating officer M D Puar for conducting a shoddy probe.One after the other, the court has highlighted the sloppiness displayed by Puar in his investigation that came to the fore during his examination by defence lawyers. Puar, then inspector of City police station where the case was registered, did not take into consideration the important factor that Harjani was at a party before his murder. The party was attended by the complainant Girdhar Tolani alias Haru, Pappu Sharma, allegedly by Vijay Udwani alias Viju Sindhi and others. Sindhi was one of the key accused. Had Puar ordered forensic experts to check the apartment where the party took place, police could have been able to prove his presence in the vicinity.Another important factor was failure to recover the murder weapons. Police had floated the theory that the accused after killing Harjani had fled towards Godhra, and on the way they had thrown the guns in a canal. The chargesheet mentioned that the two sharpshooters from Ratlam had stayed at an apartment in Manjalpur before the shootout, but Puar neither cared to take statement of the owner of the apartment nor did he check the footages of the CCTV cameras.He also erred badly in gathering the ‘muddamal’. At the time of arrests, cops had taken the clothes which the accused had worn at the time of committing the crime. But Puar made serious mistakes in doing the panchnama of these clothes. The court noted that the panch slip of Anil Gangwani alias Anthony’s clothes were found from the clothes of Mohammed Akbar Ghausi. Similarly, the panch slips of Sanjay Dave alias Sanjay Rx’s clothes were found with clothes of Anthony and Ghausi.Another reason for the acquittal was that the key witnesses including the complainant Haru, Sharma and Anil Meghani alias Titu had turned hostile during trial. Harjani, 46, who ruled the illicit liquor trade in Gujarat, was gunned down in Harni on October 20, 2016.On September 9, the court had acquitted Mohammed Akbar Ghausi, Rajeshkumar Patel, Omprakash Punjabi, Anthony, Sanjay Dave alias Sanjay Rx, Salim Sheikh alias Khatiyo, Kalpesh Patel alias Kalpesh Kachhiyo, Bharatsinh Bariya, Vijaykumar Udwani alias Viju Sindhi, Sunil Ramani alias Sunil Ado and Lalchand Khanani alias Lalu Sindhi.
