Wife, her lover among 4 arrested for man’s murder

Allahabad: A 30-year-old woman and her lover were arrested for allegedly plotting the murder of the former’s husband in Kaushambi district on Wednesday. Police also nabbed the two killers the duo had roped in for the murder.

Police said the accused Rani and Dakhanni Lal had hired two contract killers—Mewa Lal and Gulfur—and paid them Rs 50,000 to murder the deceased Bahore (35). While Rani and Dakhinni are residents of Jamalpur and Harimpur respectively, Mewa Lal and Gulful were native to Ibrahimpur.

SP (Kaushambi) Pradeep Gupta said Karari police found an unidentified man’s body near Tijra Jamalpur village on September 8. On the same day, they uploaded his photograph on social media to find out his identity.

A day later, Rani approached Karari police and said the deceased was her husband Bahore

She told the police that her husband had left home during the day on September 7. “He said that he was stepping out for some work, but never returned,” she told the police.

Police registered a case under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code against unidentified persons started the investigation.

While scanning Rani’s phone records, they noticed that a person identified as Dakhanni had called her multiple times a day before Bahore’s murder. The police later found out that Rani and Dakhanni had been having an extramarital affair since the past four years. Bahore knew about the affair and often used to beat Rani up.

Police said that Dakhanni frequently visited Bahore.

After her arrest, Rani said she was fed up with her husband’s violent behaviour. “She confessed to having asked Dakhanni to find a permanent solution to the problem,” said police.

Dakhanni hired Mewa Lal and Gulful to kill Bahore.

On September 7, Mewa Lal and Gulful managed to strike a friendship with Bahore and invited him for drinks. The two later stoned him to death and disposed his body.

A case under section 302, 201 and 120 B of the Indian Penal Code IPC was lodged against the four.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
