Woman dies, 4 friends hurt as car runs into sand sacks

Ludhiana: A woman was killed and her four friends injured when their speeding car crashed into sacks of sand outside a temple and turned turtle in Sherpur Kalan on Ludhiana-Delhi highway early on Wednesday morning.

Ritu Patel, 30, along with her friends Ashwani Goswami, Yogendra, Sumit Kumar and Sahil, all residents of Delhi and aged between 25 and 30 years, was on way to Manali.

Sahil, who was at the wheel, said, “When we reached near a temple, I failed to notice sacks of sand outside it. The temple is in the middle of road. I lost control of the car after it crashed into the sacks. It then overturned around 4am. After that, we lost consciousness.”

Passersby called up an ambulance and the police. The injured were taken to civil hospital, where Ritu was declared brought dead. The condition of others is stated to be stable.

Division 6 police station SHO inspector Amarjeet Singh said, “Speed and absence of street-lights were the cause of accident. Had the driver been driving carefully, the crash could have been averted. All five work at a private firm in Delhi. They were going on a vacation to Manali.”

The inspector said they have approached the families of Ritu and the injured in Delhi. “They are on way to Ludhiana. If Ritu’s family lodges a complaint against Sahil, who was driving the car, then we will register a case against him on the charges of rash driving and causing death by negligence. We are waiting for their families to reach Ludhiana,” he added.

Later in the day, police registered a case against Sahil under section of 279 (rash Driving), 304-A (causing death by negligence), 337 (causing hurt by Act endangering life or personal safety of others) and 338 (causing grievous hurt by Act endangering life or personal safety of others) of IPC

On crash course

August 22: Darshan Singh, 48, and his mother Satinder Kaur, 69, of Amritsar died while three of their family members were injured when their car crashed into a stationary truck on Ludhiana-Delhi national highway near Sahnewal

August 14: About 22 students of BCM Arya Model Senior Secondary School, Shastri Nagar, had a close shave when their school van crashed into Dugri flyover railing after a tyre burst

August 13: Three students of Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Gill Road, died after their bike skidded near Sareen village of Dehlon and crashed into a pole

August 12: A speeding truck ran over 35-year-old Onkar Singh, a resident of Iqbal Nagar, on Tibba Road while he was going to Chaura Bazaar

August 11: Ram Narayan, 45, of Gobindnagar village died after a speeding car hit his scooter in Kanaganwal on National Highway-44

August 9: Sri Ram, 45, a vendor and resident of Keetri Nagar, was killed and four others injured when a pick-up van rammed into their tempo near Vardhman Chowk on Ludhiana-Chandigarh state highway



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
