Residents grapple with hot weather, light rain likely in two days

Ludhiana: Residents continued to grapple with hot and humid weather as the day temperature and humidity remained high in the city on Wednesday.

In the meanwhile, the Met department has predicted occasional rainfall in Ludhiana in the next two to three days.

As the sun shined brightly in the city for most part of the day on Wednesday, its impact was witnessed on the maximum day temperature.

As per the Met department, the maximum day temperature in the city on Wednesday was recorded at 34.9 degree Celsius which is two degrees more than the normal.

On Tuesday, the day temperature in Ludhiana was recorded at 35.7 degree Celsius, which was three degrees more than the normal.

In the meanwhile, the minimum night temperature in Ludhiana on Wednesday was also recorded on a higher side at 27.6 degree Celsius, which is four degrees more than the normal. On Tuesday, the night temperature in the city was recorded at 26.9 degree Celsius, which was three degrees more than the normal.

Meanwhile, the relative humidity in the city on Wednesday was also recorded slightly higher than the normal at 89%, which is around four to nine per cent more than the routine value and 1% more than on Tuesday.

As the residents had to battle with hot and sultry weather in the city on Wednesday, the Met department doesn’t have any good news for them on the weather front.

“Though there are chances of occasional rainfall in Ludhiana in the next two to three days, but it is expected to be with light intensity. During these days, the temperature and humidity values are expected to remain on a higher side. However, there are chances of light to moderate rain on September 14 and 15 which should bring some fall in the temperatures,” said Surender Paul, director, Met department, Chandigarh.

“It is hot and humid beyond tolerance for the last few days in the city. I haven’t switched off the air conditioners for two days and I don’t think I will stop using it if such weather condition continues. Also, I have been drinking a lot of water to keep myself hydrated,” said Parminder Singh, a trader in Model Town.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
