Jharkhand lynching case: Ansari’s wife approaches court

Ranchi: Sahista Parveen, wife of Tabrez Ansari approached the court against Jharkhand police for not filing case under section 302.

Police issues justification

Earlier, police said that chargesheet against 11 accused persons in Tabrez Ansari lynching case has been filed under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code (culpable homicide not amounting to murder), as the murder case (section 302) could not be made based on the findings of post-mortem report.

S Karthik, SP Seraikela Kharsawan said, “Chargesheet has been filed against 11 accused, murder case could not be made based on the findings of the post-mortem report. We have chargesheeted it as culpable homicide.”

“A total of 13 accused were involved in the case out of which we had arrested 11 people and post the completion of the investigation, charge sheet has been filed.

“Two accused were arrested later. The investigation against them is going on,” he added.

Difference between Section 304 and 302

The Police Officer said the difference between section 304 and section 302 is that the former warrants provision for life imprisonment while the later contains the provision for the death sentence.

However, the family of Tabrez Ansari alleged that attempts were being made to protect the culprits.

Shaista Parveen, wife of Tabrez Ansari had said, “My husband was lynched, the earlier case was registered under section 302 (murder) but it was later changed to section 304 (culpable homicide) under administration’s influence. There is an attempt to save the culprits. CBI should investigate the case.”

According to the report published in Hindustan Times, Parveen filed a petition in Chief Judicial Magistrate Court.

Her lawyer, Mr. Altaf Hussain informed that he had urged the court to consider the case under Section 302.

Meanwhile, Masrul Alam, uncle of Tabrez Ansari seems dissatisfied with the investigation and filed case in Jharkhand High Court appealing CBI probe.

VHP brands Tabrez Ansari lynching as ‘conspiracy’

A day after police in Jharkhand dropped murder charges against the accused in the mob lynching of Tabrez Ansari, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) called it a “conspiracy of secularists”.



“Tabrez’s post-mortem report released after intensive investigation has not only clarified the reasons for his death but also exposed a major conspiracy of the secular gang,” said VHP Joint General Secretary Surendra Jain.



He blamed it on “the Khan Market Mafia, which has repeatedly been maligning Hindu society, India and humanity”. Jain also called them “nourishers” of “jehadi terrorists”.



He claimed that “More than 20 temples were demolished due to the campaign launched after Tabrez’s death and at 32 places jihadists made fierce demonstrations and attacked Hindus. The horrors of the demonstrations in Surat and Ranchi can never be forgotten. But if any Muslim gets hurt in a riot, then the Khan Market Gang gets another chance to discredit the Hindu society, Hindu organisations and the central government.”



The saffron body also accused a section of politicians and “so-called intellectuals” with “vested interests” of strengthening the “hands of the opponents of the country by instilling in people disaffection for the entire judicial system of the country”.
