Fire officer who got President’s medal was dismissed for four years

Bengaluru

Fire Officer

President’s Medal

Devaraj

Devaraj was dismissed from service

By Y Maheswara ReddyNorth RegionalDevaraj is one among the four officers from Fire and Emergency Services selected for thefor Distinguished Service for this year.The Distinguished Service medal, as the name suggests, is awarded to officers who are known for their commendable and praiseworthy service. But Devaraj’s selection for the medal is raising a few eyebrows because he was dismissed from service between 2001 and 2005.He was reinstated on November 21, 2005 but deprived of salary and other emoluments from November 2001 to November 2005. The reinstatement order issued by the Director General of Police and Director General Fire and Emergency Services stated thatwould not be eligible for promotion and annual increment for the next three years. The order had also given a stern warning to Devaraj to desist from being rude with fire and emergency services officers and personnel.The charges against Devaraj according to departmental enquiry were: 1) Stopping water supply from borewell to the Fire and Emergency Services staff quarters while posted at Chickmagaluru Fire Station by engaging two fire personnel (Rajappa and M Arjun) to cut the water pipeline.2) Being rude with Hassan District Fire Officer K Shivakumar who visited Arasikere Fire Station on July 18, 2001.3) Not attending an emergency fire call (No. 7/2001) on August 15, 2001.4) Keeping four rosewood logs (worth Rs 35,000) at a shed behind his residence on the premises of Chickmagaluru Fire Station. Later, the forest department officials seized the rosewood logs.Devaraj filed a petition in the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal (KAT) and claimed that the charges against him were baseless. He questioned the Director General of Police and Director General Fire and Emergency Services for issuing a show-cause notice to him. He told KAT that his wife had helped one of her relatives keep the rosewood logs in the shed. The authorities issued an order on October 29, 2005 reinstating Devaraj. The order also stated that Devaraj would not be given annual increments and promotions for the next three years. The order treated the four years from the date of dismissal to the date of reinstatement as dies-non (not taken into consideration).According to reliable sources, a few senior officers of Fire and Emergency Services have objected to Devaraj’s selection for the President’s medal but higher authorities have okayed his name by taking the last 10-years of Devaraj’s service into consideration. “I am not aware of the charges against Devaraj between 2001 and 2005. I take his present 10-year service into consideration. No one has brought the charges proved against Devaraj to my notice,’’ said Inspector General of Police and Additional Director General, Fire and Emergency Services, Sunil Agarwal.Meanwhile, Devaraj has denied the charges against him. “I have worked hard to open five fire stations in North Karnataka. I also attended many fire calls in Hubballi,’’ he says.
