Kolkata Police-CBI face-off: The dramatic turn of events that have unfolded in last 24 hours

Kolkata: Latest visuals from near Metro Channel where West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is holding her 'Save the Constitution' dharna over the ongoing CBI issue pic.twitter.com/jNA3mTDb6N — ANI (@ANI) February 4, 2019

What Mamata Banerjee says

Kolkata: Latest visuals from West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna at Metro Channel, over the ongoing CBI issue. It has been over 4 hours since the dharna began pic.twitter.com/7dtOyz0HnX — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

Opposition backs Mamata Banerjee

I spoke with Mamata Di tonight and told her we stand shoulder to shoulder with her.



The happenings in Bengal are a part of the unrelenting attack on India’s institutions by Mr Modi & the BJP.



The entire opposition will stand together & defeat these fascist forces. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 3, 2019

Spoke to Mamta didi and expressed solidarity. Modi-Shah duo’s action is completely bizarre and anti-democracy — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 3, 2019

What is Kolkata Police-CBI face-off?

West Bengal: Police force of Bidhannagar police leaves from outside the CBI regional office at CGO Complex, Kolkata. pic.twitter.com/iFYitfmh12 — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

West Bengal: Visuals from Shakespeare Sarani police station in Kolkata where 5 CBI officers have been kept after being detained. pic.twitter.com/JKwTptyyD0 — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

CBI to move Supreme Court

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who began a sit-in protest over the CBI's attempt to question the Kolkata Police chief in connection with chit fund scams, said today she will continue her "Satyagraha" till the country and its Constitution are "saved". As per the report, the Chief Minister skipped meals and remained awake the entire night on a makeshift dais here along with some senior ministers and party members."This is a Satyagraha and I'll continue till the country is saved," Banerjee told reporters who accompanied her at the place of dharna.Banerjee, one of the prime movers behind the effort to cobble together an anti-BJP alliance ahead of the Lok Sabha polls, claimed the CBI knocked on the doors of Kumar without a search warrant. She alleged they want to impose President's rule in whatever states the opposition is in power. She said, "I can assure....I am ready to die but I am not ready to bow down before the Modi government and we won't allow imposition of Emergency...please save India, save democracy, save the Constitution."She asked all opposition parties to unite to bring down the Modi government and, in a rare exhortation by a political leader, called upon personnel of security forces of the Centre and states, besides the Army, to "condemn" the attitude of the Modi government.Stepping in favour of Mamata, the Opposition parties late Sunday night expressed solidarity with the CM. Mamata said she was getting calls from politicians since last night, including former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav, Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamalnath, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and Gujarat MLA and Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani. The Congress has termed CBI's attempt to question the Kolkata Police chief as "mala fide" and an "assault" on the federal polity. Rahul Gandhi called up Banerjee and extended support to her, saying the entire opposition is together and it will defeat the fascist forces.Congress chief alleged the events in West Bengal were part of an unrelenting attack on India's institutions by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP. Besides, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal also came out in support of the TMC chief. He took to Twitter and wrote, "Spoke to Mamta didi and expressed solidarity. Modi-Shah duo's action is completely bizarre and anti-democracy."• In an unprecedented development Sunday evening, Banerjee sat on a dharna, protesting CBI's attempt to quiz Kolkata Police chief Rajeev Kumar in connection with chit fund scams. • A CBI team, which went to Kumar's residence in the city's Loudon Street area, was denied permission, bundled into police jeeps and were whisked to a police station. • The CBI wants to quiz Kumar, who led a Special Investigation Team of West Bengal police probing the scams, regarding missing documents and files.• As the CBI team landed at his residence, a team of Kolkata Police officers rushed to the spot to speak to the CBI officials and tried to enquire if they had the documents required for questioning Kumar. • Later on, a small team of CBI officials was taken to Shakespeare Sarani police station for further discussions. • Thereafter, more men arrived at the spot and a commotion ensued. Some CBI officers were then forcibly bundled into police jeeps and taken to the police station. • The detention of the team by the local police perplexed the agency top brass as the CBI does not have any full time chief to take call in such politically sensitive matters. Recently appointed Director R K Shukla is yet to take reins of the agency.• The CBI has been probing cases allegedly involving opposition leaders like illegal mining case and the Saradha scam in which it was seeking to question the Kolkata police chief. • The probe was handed over to the CBI by the Supreme Court. • In a dramatic showdown with the Modi government, a furious Banerjee, wrapped in a brown woollen shawl, began a sit-in right in front of the Metro Cinema to protest "insults" she faced at the hands of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah.After an all-out war broke out between Centre and the Mamata Banerjee government, CBI sources said the agency will move the Supreme Court on Monday, claiming its probe in ponzi scams was being obstructed by the West Bengal government and the state police. (With inputs from PTI)
