Reeta Lankalingam, joint MD of Lanson Toyota car dealership, found dead at residence

File Photo | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Her body was found by one of the supervisors in her house. Police say they haven't recovered a suicide note as of yet and they are investigating further into the matter According to the police, since Lankalingam did not come out of her bedroom for morning breakfast, the servants knocked on the door which they then broke open to find her hanging A case of unnatural death under Section 174 of the IPC was registered by the police and further investigation in the case has started Alongside her husband, Reeta had been taking care of the company’s dealership and showrooms across the state.

New Delhi: Reeta Lankalingam, who was the joint managing director of the Lanson car dealership, was found dead at her residence in Nungambakkam on Thursday. Lanson is the Tamil Nadu dealer of car manufacturer Toyota.

She was married to M.Lankalingam, who is the GM of the Lanson Group. Her body was found by one of the supervisors in her house. Police say they haven't recovered a suicide note as of yet and they are investigating further into the matter.

The incident came to light when one of the supervisors went to her residence on Thursday morning and could not elicit an immediate response. Lankalingam's husband and the Nungambakkam police was alerted by the supervisor. According to the police, since Lankalingam did not come out of her bedroom for morning breakfast, the servants knocked on the door which they then broke open to find her hanging.

A report quoted Nungambakkam Assistant Commissioner V Muthuvel Pandi saying that they rushed to the business woman’s house as soon as they received the information. “One of her employees had called our station and we immediately rushed to the spot. There are apparently three maidservants and a security guard in her house. The servants had waited for a long time for her to come out of her bedroom. They knocked her bedroom and since there was no response, they broke the door and found her hanging in her room. She had used a screen cloth to commit suicide,” the police informed.

She was found hanging from the ceiling when the police officials reached the spot and broke open the door. The body was taken to Kilpauk Medical College for a post-mortem. “We are carrying out further investigation to know the reason behind the suicide; we haven’t found any suicide note so far,” Muthuvel added.

Police sources have been reported as saying that Lankalingam's husband, Lankalingam Murugesu, who is the MD of the company, was not at the residence when the incident took place. An IANS report cited police saying that her husband had spent last night at a hotel and was not at home on Thursday morning.

A case of unnatural death under Section 174 of the IPC was registered by the police and further investigation in the case has started.

It is worth mentioning that alongside her husband, Reeta had been taking care of the company’s dealership and showrooms across the state. Lanson is car manufacturing giant Toyota’s leading Tamil Nadu dealer.
