Amit Shah’s team lines up rallies by top leaders as Mamata Banerjee goes tough on BJP

Kolkata: Two titans are battling it out in West Bengal ahead of the Lok Sabha polls, with the battle lines clearly being drawn between Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’s BJP and Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee ’s Trinamool’s while the two other mainstream parties –– the Congress and CPM –– have been reduced to ringside fringe players.Banerjee’s government is getting battle-ready in the rink by making it difficult for BJP to hold rallies in Bengal by denying helipads, refusing permission for meeting grounds citing security reasons or by even blocking the grounds. There have been at least five instances over the last seven days in which the state government has either denied permission for a helipad or forced the party to shift its venue.Permission for BJP’s national president Amit Shah ’s helicopter to land was initially denied ahead of his rallies in Malda and East Midnapore, and the same was also done before union minister Smriti Irani ’s rally in Jhargram. Before Modi’s programme at Thakurnagar in North 24 Paraganas, the venue was shifted following a local controversy and a state minister Jyotipriya Mallick said that an FIR was registered against the organisers for felling a couple of trees to build a helipad for the PM’s chopper on Saturday. On Sunday, permissions for helipads were denied for two rallies by Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath in Raiganj and in Balurghat in north Bengal.The BJP is also not backing out. It is lining up an array of senior union ministers, chief ministers and the PM to address multiple rallies in a single day. On Saturday, Modi and union Home minister Rajnath Singh addressed two rallies each in Bengal. On Sunday, Yogi Adityanath and Singh both addressed public rallies. The CPM has also organised a mega rally at Kolkata brigade parade ground on Sunday. Rallies and counter rallies have now become the new normal in West Bengal.Addressing the public rally through an audio conference system from Bagdogra airport in north Bengal, Adityanath said, “I was scheduled to reach the meeting venue at a specific time. But the Trinamool Congress government is so scared and disturbed with BJP’s rise here that the government has been going on denying permission to helipads. These are far places, and we needed to reach there at a particular time. This clearly shows how undemocratic Mamata Banerjee’s government is. This is why I am here to address you through Modi ji’s digital India technology.”
