CLOSED UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE

Ahmed Jahangir has forgotten the alarm code for his restaurant, and is on the phone trying to find somebody who knows it.

Once he knew it by heart, punched it in almost every day, but this is only the second time he's been back to Bawarchi since 15 March.

It's Friday. The 36-year-old would normally be making sure Bawarchi (Hindi for chef), was ready for its busiest night of the week. A halal restaurant, Bawarchi quickly became a focal point for the Christchurch Muslim community in the 13 months it was open. "People used to stand in queues for food … the whole dining area used to be full, all the tables occupied," Ahmed says. “You won't believe it [but] we had a few clients who used to come here every day for a meal." He would look at the customers enjoying the fruits of his work, and feel proud.

Ahmed gets off the phone, enters the alarm code, and goes inside. Standing in the middle of the empty dining room, he remembers how his chef looked in full swing, how the waiters hurried to serve customers.

Remembering hurts. On 15 March, the restaurant’s seven staff were instantly put out of work, and the queues of people waiting for the only authentic Hyderabadi dum biryani in town vanished.





80 people had removed their shoes and gone inside the Linwood mosque to pray when a gunman arrived. 80 people had removed their shoes and gone inside the Linwood mosque to pray when a gunman arrived.

Worshippers at the Linwood mosque knew something was wrong when the Imam stopped the prayer, looked out the window, and announced that somebody was in the carpark shooting people.

Ahmed ran across the soft carpet from the male to the female prayer rooms and told the women to keep down and move to the corners.

The gunman was firing through the windows, but as the mosque's chairperson, Ahmed had always felt he should look after everyone, and on 15 March it was no different. "I thought, I'll just slowly sneak and see where exactly he is and how I can rescue everyone.” Ahmed emerged from behind a petition wall. “He was right in front of me and bang!"

Ahmed found himself on the ground, unable to get up. He had a wound in his shoulder and was losing a lot of blood. His mouth started filling with blood too. “I was spitting out all of the blood because I knew I should not intake that blood otherwise my lungs will get damaged."

Of the 80 people gathered in the modest weatherboard building, dozens were injured and seven were killed. The gunman had already been to the Al Noor mosque, a short drive away, and fatally shot 44 worshippers and injured many more.

As Ahmed lay on the ground, with intense pain in his right hand, the gunman ran out of ammunition, dropped his gun on the doorstep and ran to his car to get a second firearm. Worshipper Abdul Aziz ran after him, threw an eftpos machine towards him, and the gunman fled.

When emergency services arrived, Ahmed was loaded into an ambulance. "I didn't know whether I would be able to reach the hospital or not.” He kept asking, "How far are we from the hospital?" He didn’t want to close his eyes until he knew he had made it safely. His head was filled with horror and thoughts of his wife and kids.

In another ambulance, heading to the same hospital, was Barwachi’s chef, Mohammad Sahadat. He too had been shot.

Barwachi wouldn’t open tonight, or any time soon.





Tazeen Fatima had a fractured shoulder and was covered in cuts from broken glass, but the 33-year-old could only think of her children and her husband. She’d last seen her husband being loaded into an ambulance at the Linwood mosque. "I keep telling myself that nothing will happen, be calm, everything will be okay."

Ahmed and Fatima’s two boys - one at kindergarten, the other at primary school - were in lock down, as police tried to keep the city’s residents safe. Fatima was finally able to see them at 9:30pm. After checking they were okay, she headed straight to Christchurch Hospital for news of her husband. "I don't know whether the operation is done or not, [if] he's alive or not, I don't know anything, just I'm standing and praying."

She waited the whole night for news. Then at 6:30am it came: Ahmed's chest had been opened to clear blood from his lungs. He was in a lot of pain, but he was alive.

"He is not conscious, but he is listening. All the machines cover his face … that was a very horrible thing for me, that I see my husband like this, I never imagined before and I don't want to imagine afterwards."

The boys were desperate to see their father and Fatima reluctantly agreed. But she worried about how they would react to seeing the ventilator and other tubes emerging from him. "The older one was a bit upset and cried a lot. The younger one was very scared."

Fatima felt alone - and in some ways she was. There was no one from her family or her husband's family there - both live in India. "There was no moral support, nothing was there."

When Ahmed came out of his coma, four days after the attacks, he told Fatima she was brave and he was proud of her. And Fatima tried to be brave, reassuring him that, God willing, everything would be alright, everything would be like it was before.

But she knew what he faced. The doctors had told her the bullet had smashed Ahmed’s collar bone and destroyed a collection of nerves. A constellation of about 30 small pieces of shrapnel that remained in his shoulder couldn’t be removed. He needed many more operations and there was only a 50 percent chance he would regain use of his right hand.





Ahmed sits propped up in a chair, wearing a dressing gown and resting his injured arm on a pillow. It’s June and he’s back in hospital. His initial stay lasted eight weeks, his life dragging by in a blur of drugs, operations and flashbacks.

He’s just come out of another round of surgery. The temporary plate that was holding his collar bone together has been replaced with a graft using bone from his hip.

He’s on methadone, pregabalin, tramadol, paracetamol, temazepam and nortriptyline, and to control the side effects of these painkillers (constipation, involuntary jerking), he’s taking many other medicines. In total, he swallows 30 tablets a day.

He’s living in a fog of drowsiness, he says, and worries about the long-term impact on his kidneys, but he knows if he skips even one dose, the pain will become unbearable.

"Anything you live with in your life, you just get used to it [and] that is what's happening with me. Every day I learn how to manage the pain."

The nights are better than the days, because he can take high-dose sleeping pills and drift off. But then come the nightmares.




