Blaze at HPCL bottling plant: 5 workers injured

Safety valve gas leak sparked back-to-back blasts: Probe

UNNAO: Barely a week after the ONGC inferno in Navi Mumbai killed four people, fuelling concern over safety of such units, another blaze triggered by an explosion at a bottling plant of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao district left at least five workers injured. Those who suffered burns included two bottling plant employees and three contractual workers.The fire, which was triggered by a leak in a safety valve of a gas tanker, sparked panic on the arterial Kanpur-Lucknow highway, metres away from the plant site at Dahi Chowk.A massive plume of smoke billowed from the facility, forcing police and fire departments to halt traffic in the vicinity. Fire and foam tenders from Kanpur and Lucknow were rushed to the spot and they battled the blaze for more than two-andhalf hours. Villages and factories within 4-5 km radius of the plant were put on high alert.All approach roads to the plant were shut, except for fire tenders and government vehicles. State Disaster Response Force teams were also requisitioned. Students and teachers of Central School, Dahi Chowk, were swiftly evacuated.A preliminary probe points to a leak in a safety valve of a gas tanker parked for unloading, which triggered back-toback blasts. Police said, five injured were an HPCL officer, Pulasti Kumar, LPG fitter Subhash Chandra, besides contractual workers, Mohd Gufran, Mohd Asif and Shailendra Kumar Yadav. HPCL officer Pulasti Kumar and LPG fitter Mohd Asif are being treated at SIPS, Lucknow, while Subhash, Gufran and Shailendra were rushed to district hospital, Unnao, where their condition was stable. Additional DGP (Lucknow Zone) SN Sabat told TOI that all five injured are safe.Till late evening, billowing smoke could be seen from a distance of 3 km. Unnao district magistrate Devendra Kumar Pandey and superintendent of police, M P Verma, are reviewing the situation.HPCL bottling plant officials said, bulk tank trucks were being decanted for LPG bottling operation. Around 10 am, one of the tankers positioned behind Bay No. 2 developed leak while fixing the spool piece. Immediately fire-fighting system was activated and continued dispersing LPG, but it caught fire. There’s no damage to any LPG facility of the plant," said an HPCL official.
