Gujarat model in Uttarakhand: Traffic penalties slashed

Fear of earning public wrath due to the levy of hefty fines has led several states, including those led by the BJP governments, shy away from implementing the newly-amended Motor Vehicle Act, which came into effect from September 1.

Much to the chagrin of Union Transport Minister, Nitin Gadkari, who waged a spirited battle in Parliament to help pass the amended Act, neither the BJP nor any tall party leader or minister, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has come to his aid to press down on implementation. A ray of hope glimmers in the form of Arvind Kejriwal-led AAP government in Delhi, which seems to have changed its view in favour of the implementation of the Act.

After the Gujarat government scaled down the fines by up to 90 per cent, it was Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat-led Uttarakhand government to announce reductions.

Karnataka, led by BS Yeddyurappa, has followed Gujarat and Uttarakhand by implementing heavy cuts. Among the poll-bound BJP-led states, only Haryana has implemented the amended MV Act; Maharashtra and Jharkhand are still testing waters.

Among states ruled by the Congress, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Punjab have put the new Act on hold while Rajasthan has implemented it only partially. Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal has not only refused to implement it but also called it a draconian measure to loot the people to fill the Centre's coffers.

The penalty for driving without a licence in Uttarakhand has gone down to Rs 2,500 from the Rs 5,000, said state minister Madan Kaushik on Wednesday. The fine for driving with an expired licence has been halved to Rs 5,000 from Rs 10,000.

Driving a vehicle without PUC (Pollution Under Control) certificate attracts a fine of Rs 10,000 but in Uttarakhand, you can get away by paying Rs 2,500. Though the fine for repeat offenders is still at Rs 45,000.

The penalty for not giving way to emergency vehicles is Rs 10,000; Uttarakhand chopped it down to Rs 5,000. Overloaded vehicles will be fined Rs 2,000 (Light Motor Vehicles) and Rs 5,000 (Medium passenger vehicle), with Rs 2,000 fine per extra tonne. The new Act pegs the base penalty at Rs 20,000 for overloading. The fine for driving without valid insurance remains at Rs 2,000.

Zee Media Newsroom
