Balakot air strikes to come alive in central Kolkata pandal

KOLKATA: A cross-border air strike by the Indian Air Force in February that went on to become the centre of a political discourse will be the theme of a Durga Puja pandal in the city.Young Boys Club Sarbojanin Durga Puja Committee, which turns 50 this year, is recreating the entire sequence of the Balakot air strikes, complete with models of a fighter plane and that of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who went deep into the Pakistan territory. Scenes depicting the subsequent jubilation on Varthaman’s return that gripped the entire nation will also be put up. The Puja on Tara Chand Dutta Street in central Kolkata near Royal Indian restaurant is a big draw in the CR Avenue-Rabindra Sarani neighbourhood.“This is a landmark year not only for our Puja, which completes 50 years, but also for the entire country. We felt it was befitting to showcase the Balakot air strikes as our theme to pay homage to our soldiers who sacrifice their lives for the country,” said Rakesh Singh, chief organiser of the Puja. The Balakot air strikes followed an attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama on February 14, when 40 personnel were killed. “We are recreating the models outside and at the entrance of the pandal. There will also be a mock-up of Wing Commander Varthaman who became a national hero,” said Vikrant Singh, youth president of the club.Durga Puja pandals have evolved into platforms to showcase innovative ideas and unique art, displaying creativity. The themes more often than not present the socio-political atmosphere of a particular period and different ideologies. “We are depicting the event from the perspective of our armed force,” said Vikrant. Past themes for the Puja included Bengal’s folk culture, forts in Rajasthan and Buddhist pagodas.The club has hired artist Dev Shankar Mahesh from east Midnapore to create the Durga idol and the models for the theme. The height of the mandap would be 40 feet, one of the members said.
