Tiger strays from RTR, kills third victim in Karauli district

‘NTCA panel will take a decision’

JAIPUR: A 30-year-old man was mauled to death by a tiger, identified as T-104, in Simar-Bagh village of Karauli district on Thursday morning. This is the third such attack by the sub-adult male tiger which resulted in the death of the victim.Sources said the forest department is now trying to capture the tiger and shift it to Jaipur’s Nahargarh Biological Park, where it will be kept in an enclosure. However, senior officials have so far not confirmed any such plan.If this happens, T-104 will become the second tiger from Ranthambore, after Ustad or T-24, which will be put in a cage. The incident occurred around 8am in Kalagudha region under the Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary when the deceased, Pintu Mali, was in his makeshift house in the middle of a small field, near the forest area.The victim’s mother and sister, who were in the field, raised an alarm and shouted when they saw the tiger dragging Mali.T-104 has been constantly straying out of the Ranthambore Tiger Reserve (RTR) and spotted close to human settlements frequently in Sawai Madhopur and Karauli districts. The agitated villagers did not allow the forest and police department to take the body and allegedly also manhandled the team, which is camping in the village to track the tiger.Reportedly, they also held two forest guards hostage till other officials reached the spot.DCF and deputy director of Ranthambore National Park, Hemant Singh said, “An ex gratia of Rs 4 lakh has been given by the forest department to the kin of the deceased. Our teams are constantly tracking the tiger. However, the attack was so sudden that the trackers could not react or prevent it,”After the incident, the forest team has started a search operation to capture and tranquillise the tiger. “The tiger is moving in a terrain where it’s difficult to reach,” he said.“The monsoon washed away the roads and standing the ‘bajara’ (pearl millet) crop is also becoming a major deterrent. We have asked for additional support from Sawai Madhopur and Jaipur,” he said.Chief wildlife warden Arindam Tomar said, “Once the tiger is captured, we will release it in an enclosure in Ranthambore. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) committee will examine the standard operating procedure (SOP) and take a decision accordingly.”In February, a 40-year-old woman was allegedly mauled to death by the same tiger in Sawai Madhopur district . “Why T-104 is killing humans can only be found out after conducting a research on its behaviour. The young tiger killed a human for the first time when it was chased away from RTR by dominant males. Possibly he was hungry then and ate the flesh. After that, he made two attacks on humans and killed them,” sources said.
