Delhi: Assets of 21 major electricity thieves sealed by city court

Properties of 21 power consumers in East Delhi have been sealed, in separate cases, after a Special Court of Electricity found them guilty of stealing electrical power and not paying the penalties.

These properties were sealed by Investigating Officers (police) between August 21 and September 9, 2019 based on the attachment orders by the Special Court of Electricity, Karkardooma, said a spokesperson of BSES power discom on Thursday. The spokesperson said that the "thieves" had collectively stole 550 kW of electricity, and as per the law a fine of `6.2 crore was levied on them, which they failed to pay. In 16 cases, electricity was stolen by "direct theft", and in the remaining five cases through meter-tampering, the spokesperson said.

These properties are situated in Karawal Nagar, Harsh Vihar, New Usmanpur, Gokalpur, Bhajanpura, Welcome Colony, Seelampur, Khajoori Khas, GTB Enclave, to name a few areas of the National Capital. "It appears that he has no intention to make the payment... In such circumstances, let the inspected premises be attached or sealed by the Investigating Officer for the non-payment of the settlement amount," said Devendra Kumar Sharma, ASJ, Special Court of Electricity, in one of the orders.

Under the Electricity Act, 2003, power theft attracts a penalty and imprisonment up to five years. In the last one decade, as many as 10,000 people have been arrested and 1,200 convicted for stealing electricity in Delhi, according to the power discoms. About 9% of electricity in Delhi, worth `400 crore, is lost to theft. The theft was 60% when private discoms came into picture in the early 1990s.

Though aggregate technical and commercial (AT&C) losses due to power-theft have reduced by over 50 % in Delhi, but there are pockets where it continues to be a menace, the discoms said. BRPL and BYPL are main BSES discoms, supplying electricity to the Capital. Meanwhile, BSES spokesperson said, "We urge our consumers to use electricity legally, and not indulge in power theft by any means. Honest consumers suffer due to it."
