Attack on patwari: Predecessor planned attack to get back posting

Ludhiana: Two days after a revenue officer (patwari) was attacked by four assailants in his office at Thareeke village, Ludhiana police arrested four persons, including a revenue officer who had been moved out from Thareeke.

Police said the revenue officer had hired three persons to attack his successor as he wanted to return to his place of posting.

Those arrested were identified as Jaspreet Singh 37, a patwari from Jawaddi Khurd village; Happy Singh, 25, a native of Saharanpur UP and a resident of Shimlapuri; Jaswinder Singh, 30, and Jagjeet Singh, 31, both of Shimlapuri. Others accused in case — Bunty of Shimlapuri, Pavneet Singh of Dugri and Navneet Singh of Shimlapuri — are yet to be arrested.

Ludhiana police commissioner Rakesh Aggarwal said during the investigation, cops found out that Jaspreet Singh was posted as a patwari in Thareeke Patwarkhana for long and Deepak Singla had got himself transferred from Sidhwan Bet circle to Thareeke. Thereafter, Jaspreet was posted at Mullanpur Dakha.

But Jaspreet hatched a conspiracy along with property business owner Pavneet Singh Dugri and his brother Navneet to dissuade Deepak from working in the new place of posting. Pavneet then hired Happy and Jaswinder, who worked at an adjoining shop, for Rs 30,000 and planned the attack. Pavneet and Navneet carried out the recce outside Deepak’s office.

Police said Happy, Jaswinder, Bunty and Jagjeet then attacked Deepak in his office. When he ran out and raised the alarm, the armed assailants fled on their motorcycles. “Jaspreet Singh planned the attack as he had got himself transferred to Thareeke, replacing Jaspreet and the latter wanted to get back his old place of posting.”

Inspector Sukhdev Singh, SHO, Sadar police station, said Jaspreet was arrested from his home whereas other three accused were arrested from Shimlapuri area. He said they have launched a manhunt to arrest other accused in the case.

The SHO said whereas Jaspreet has a corruption case (under investigation) of 2016, Jaswinder was wanted in an attempt to murder case dating 2018. He said two motorcycles and three sharp-edged weapons used in the crime had been recovered from the accused.

Box: The attack

Revenue officer Deepak Singla, 27, of Sardulgarh, Mansa district, was attacked by four assailants in his office at Thareeke village on Tuesday

People took the patwari to a private hospital on Ferozepur Road

On Wednesday, Sadar police registered a case against unidentified accused under Sections 307 (attempt to murder), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 186 (obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 333 (whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant) and 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
