Tabrez Ansari lynching: New medical report suggests cardiac arrest was due to skull fracture, other injuries

24-year-old Tabrez Ansari when he was captured by locals at Dhatkidih village on the night of June 17 over suspicion of trying to steal a motorcycle.

A new medical report on the death of lynching victim Tabrez Ansari has cast a shadow on the claim that he died due to a cardiac arrest.

A document signed by five HoDs of the MGM Medical College in Jamshedpur suggests that while Tabrez Ansari did eventually die of a cardiac arrest, the heart attack was the result of severe injuries.

According to the report, Tabrez's cardiac arrest was induced by a combination of a skull fracture, pale organs and filling up of blood in his heart chambers.

"The combined effect of fracture of the bone, pale organs and heart chambers full of blood resulted into cardiac arrest," is the conclusion of the medical report.

The medical report as signed by the five-member team.

The five-member medical panel was set up to look into the death of 24-year-old Tabrez Ansari who was lynched by a mob in Jharkhand's Saraikela-Kharsawan district on June 17.

The new medical report, dated August 6, indicates that Tabrez Ansari suffered a fracture to the skull caused by a "hard and blunt object".

It also says that Tabrez Ansari suffered a subarachnoid haemorrhage (bleeding in the space between the brain and the tissue covering the brain) and clotting of blood in the lower layer of the skull.

A senior neurologist said that the postmortem report clearly states that there was a grievous injury to the skull i.e. a fracture. He added that the head injury and injuries in other parts of the body turned pale causing a cardiac arrest.

The medical report also ruled out that Tabrez had consumed poison.

The document presented by the five-doctor team suggests that cardiac arrest in and of itself was not the cause of death of Tabrez Ansari as claimed by the Jharkhand Police.

DID SKULL FRACTURE GO UNDETECTED?

When taken by the police to the hospital, Tabrez Ansari was not treated for a skull fracture. The head injury was only detected in the postmortem report.

A doctor on the autopsy team, Dr B Mardi said that when Tabrez was taken for a check-up the day after the attack, he only complained of pain in his leg and did not say anything about a head injury.

"He complained of pain in his leg. On examination, it was found to be a hairline fracture," Dr Mardi said.

The doctor said that the head injury caused stress, leading to cardiac arrest.

"It needs a lot of pressure to fracture a skull. But if somebody hit the skull hard, the injury can also affect the lungs and the heart. If you hit any part of the body, ultimately it leads to stress and has an affect on the lungs and the heart," Dr Mardi said.

POLICE DROPS MURDER CHARGE

The finding becomes crucial as the Jharkhand Police has dropped the murder charge against 11 accused in the mob lynching case of Tabrez Ansari, claiming that the 24-year-old had died of a cardiac arrest and was not murdered.

The Saraikela-Kharsawan district police charge-sheeted 11 of the 13 named accused in the case on July 29, dropping the stringent charge of murder under section 302 of the IPC.

They will now face the law for a lesser offence under section 304 of IPC (culpable homicide not amounting to murder).

READ | Tabrez Ansari lynching: Police drop murder charges against 11 citing autopsy report

Saraikela-Kharsawan Superintendent of Police Karthik S said the murder charge was dropped against 11 accused on the basis of postmortem, medical and forensic reports which said 24-year-old Ansari died of cardiac arrest.

"The postmortem and medical report did not support the charge of murder. They said he died of cardiac arrest.

"We had doubts and we went for a second opinion from higher-level experts from the forensic and pathological side and they also gave the same set of opinion. So, we had to charge them under section 304 instead of 302," the officer said.

In the event of a conviction, section 302 provides for life imprisonment and even the death penalty. Under section 304, a convict can be sentenced to imprisonment for 10 years which may extend to life imprisonment.

THE CASE

24-year-old Ansari worked as a labourer and welder in Pune and had come home to celebrate Eid when he was captured by locals at Dhatkidih village on the night of June 17 over suspicion of trying to steal a motorcycle.

He was tied to a pole and assaulted by a mob with sticks and iron rods. A video of the scene that went viral and was flashed across tv networks showed he was forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' and 'Jai Hanuman' by his tormentors.

Though there was no evidence of the perpetrators' link to any Hindu right organisation, Vishwa Hindu Parishad activists had protested their arrest.

Tabrez Ansari's family had shared the video, which went viral and stirred a nation-wide outrage, with police.

Protest demonstrations were held in many cities and towns.

Police reached Dhaktidih the next morning, arrested Tabrez Ansari and sent him to jail after first-aid.

His family claimed he had a deep gash on his head and multiple injuries all over which, it suspected, caused his death.

As Ansari's condition deteriorated, he was shifted to the district government hospital the same day. With no signs of improvement, he was referred to the Tata Main Hospital, where he was declared brought dead on June 22.

His wife Shahista, who was pregnant at the time of her husband's death, suffered a miscarriage.
