Sacred Games: Here are some of the most shocking deaths from the Netflix India original series

After seeing Majid Khan (Aamir Bashir) and Sartaj at constant logger heads with one another in the first season, it was a breath of fresh air to see them work in tandem in the second season.

In Season 2, we see Majid bearing the bitter fruits of sucking up to DCP Parulkar and we also get a glimpse into his own personal life. And because of this character growth, we all really got over our hatred for him.

In the last episode, the two officers finally find the location of the bomb, and it is Majid who approaches the abandoned truck. But unluckily, he is sniped by Shahid Khan (Ranvir Shorey) before he can really get to it. It seemed like the only man standing from Sartaj’s original police team was Sartaj himself.

1. Guruji

This is the one death we would have never predicted in a million years. While in the beginning itself, when Sartaj discovers the Ashram, the makers establish that Guruji (Pankaj Tripathi) is now gone, and its Batya Abelman (Kalki Koechlin) who has now taken his place. But somewhere down the line, we still believed that Guruji would be hiding away in some bunker waiting for the Satya Yug to arrive. But in the last few episode, we really get a front row view of the dilemma in Gaitonde’s head. He wanted to continue being Guruji’s favourite but he didn’t really want his first love, Mumbai, to be destroyed. And so, when he is staying off Gochi, he realises the huge flaw in this plan for the arrival of Satya Yug and starts going off the cult’s plan. He seeks Guruji out of Samadhi to dissuade him from pursuing this cause further. But instead the former gives Gaitonde another dose of Gochi and tries to ignite the fire within him once again. But that doesn’t go according to plan, because Gaitonde believes that he is the only God and suffocates Guruji with his very own Kaal Granth. Being unable to live with himself for killing the only father he truly loved, he tells the entire plan to Sartaj Singh and then shoots himself before Malcolm can.

With almost all characters besides Sartaj Singh and Batya Abelman dead, we are really wondering whether a third season of Sacred Games will ever arrive. In case that it doesn’t, here’s what one of the show writers Varun Grover said about the open ending.

Sacred Games is a show based on an eponymous novel written by Vikram Chandra. Its second season released on Netflix on August 15, 2019.

NOW READ

Sacred Games 2: Here’s the meaning behind each of the episode titles of the Netflix show

After Sacred Games, 5 other books on organised crime that would make for great shows

These are the Sacred Games characters who were barely there in the book

> More on Entertainment
