Fog: 2 die, 3 hurt as car runs into stationary truck

Ludhiana: Two people were killed and three injured after the car they were travelling in ran into a stationary truck due to low visibility in Machhiwara on Sunday morning. While Avtar Singh, 42, and his friend Rishipal Singh, 32, died on the spot, the former’s wife Harpal Kaur, 40, mother-in-law Gurmeet Kaur, 60, and daughter Sehajleen, 9, received serious injuries.

Avtar and Rishipal, both traders and residents of Anandpur Sahib, were coming to Ludhiana for a business-related work.

“Avtar was driving the car (a Mahindra Logan), his friend was sitting next to him and his family was on the rear seat. When they reached near Garhi bridge in Machhiwara, Avtar failed to see a truck parked on road due to dense fog. By the time he noticed the vehicle, it was too late. The collision was so strong that it tossed parts of the car in air and reduced it to a mass of mangled metal,” said a cop.

As passersby called up the police, Machhiwara cops rushed to the spot. “The car had to be cut to bring the five out. While Avtar and Rishipal could not be saved, the two women and the girl were taken to a hospital in Machhiwara from where they were referred to Ludhiana civil hospital. Due to their serious injuries, the three were later referred to PGI, Chandigarh,” the cop added.

Bodies of Avtar and Rishipal were taken to civil hospital for the post-mortem.

Assistant sub-inspector Devinderpal Singh Garcha said, “The truck has been impounded. Its registration number helped trace the accused.”

Police have arrested the truck driver — Lakhwinder Singh of Machhiwara — under sections 304-A (causing death due to negligence), 283 (obstructing in public way or line of navigation), 337 (causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others), 338 (causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others), 427 (mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees) of the Indian Penal Code.

Can be added as box:

Low visibility

Fog brought the visibility down to 350 metres at 8.30am on Sunday.

Risky misty roads

December 31, 2018: Three vegetable vendors died after a truck ran into their vehicle near Neechi Mangli village on Ludhiana-Chandigarh highway

December 23, 2018: A driver had a narrow escape after his truck veered off the road and fell into Buddha Nullah, near Shakti Nagar

November 30, 2018: Fifty-two people were injured in a truck, a bus and an SUV pile-up due to fog near Mohanpur village on Ludhiana-Khanna highway



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
