Times Union to host NXIVM post-trial panel discussion

COLONIE — The Times Union will host an Oct. 1 panel discussion exploring the inner workings of the cult-like NXIVM organization and its fallen leader, Keith Raniere, who faces up to life in prison after being convicted of federal racketeering and conspiracy charges in June.

The event at the Hearst Media Center in Colonie will take place from 2-4 p.m. and feature panelists Toni Natalie, Raniere’s former girlfriend and business partner turned whistleblower, and Rick Ross, executive director of the Cult Education Institute. The panel discussion will be moderated by Brendan J. Lyons, the Times Union's Capitol Bureau and Investigations editor.

Admission to "NXIVM Exposed: A Post-Trial Discussion" is $15, and registration is being taken at EventBrite or by calling 518-454-5479.

Natalie's book "The Program: Inside the Mind of Keith Raniere and the Rise and Fall of NXIVM," set for release Sept. 24, chronicles her experiences with the group and her escape in 1999 before it flourished into a worldwide "self-help" organization.

Ross, who endured a 14-year legal battle with NXIVM that ended in his favor in 2017, is an internationally known expert regarding destructive cults and similar controversial groups. Ross is author of "Cults Inside Out: How People Get In and Can Get Out." Since 1982, he has been studying, researching and responding to the problems often posed by controversial authoritarian groups and movements.

Ross, whose private dealings had been infiltrated by private spies hired by NXIVM, testified as a government witness at Raniere's recent criminal trial in Brooklyn.

In 2015, the Times Union reported that NXIVM officials conducted financial research on two federal judges in New Jersey: U.S. District Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh and U.S. Magistrate Mark Falk, both of whom have presided over the federal lawsuit that NXIVM filed against Ross in 2006. NXIVM's lawsuit accused Ross of publishing protected materials from its training programs without authorization.

Ross waged a fierce legal battle against NXIVM's efforts to retaliate against him, and in court filings, accused the corporation of hiring a New York investigative and security firm, Interfor, to conduct background checks on him, including obtaining details of his banking records and personal relationships.

A report attributed to Interfor, whose president, Juval Aviv, is a former Israeli intelligence officer, was filed in U.S. District Court in connection with the litigation. The nine-page report includes Ross's Social Security number, date of birth, medical and psychological history and details from his personal checking account and telephone records.

Nominate your favorite people and places now It’s the 25th anniversary of our Best of the Capital Region readers’ survey. Nominate your favorite people, places and businesses between Jan. 21 and Feb. 4.

Records show NXIVM leaders had retained a small Canadian investigative firm, Canaprobe, was hired to conduct a "bank sweep" on Ross.

The Times Union's first panel discussion on NXIVM took place in March and featured Catherine Oxenberg, an actress best known for her starring role in the 1980s Dynasty television series, She is the author of “Captive: A Mother’s Crusade to Save Her Daughter from a Terrifying Cult,” that detailed her battle to get her 27-year-old daughter, India, to leave NXIVM.

Other panelists in March were Michael C. Grygiel, an Albany attorney and media law expert who has represented NXIVM defectors; and Barbara Bouchey, a former girlfriend of Raniere's who grew up in Troy. Bouchey was involved with NXIVM for nine years and had been an investment advisor to Clare and Sara Bronfman, the liquor heiresses who have provided millions of dollars to support the organization.
