Mamata vs CBI in Kolkata showdown

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Kolkata, February 3

An all-out war broke out between the Centre and the Mamata Banerjee government tonight, with the feisty West Bengal leader beginning a sit-in protest at a city landmark over the CBI’s attempt to question the Kolkata police chief in connection with chit fund scams, insisting it stifled the spirit of “Constitution and federalism”.

In a dramatic showdown with the BJP government, a furious Banerjee began a sit-in in front of the Metro Cinema to protest “insults” she faced at the hands of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah, hours after a CBI team that had gone to question Rajeev Kumar was detained in a rare face-off between the police establishments of the Centre and the state.

CBI sources said the agency would move the Supreme Court on Monday, claiming its probe in ponzi scams was being obstructed by the West Bengal government and the state police.

Banerjee claimed the CBI knocked on the doors of Kumar without a search warrant. She alleged they want to impose President's rule in whatever states the opposition is in power.

“I can assure.... I am ready to die but I am not ready to bow down before the Modi government and we won’t allow imposition of Emergency... please save India, save democracy, save the Constitution,” she said.

Banerjee asked all Opposition parties to unite to bring down the Modi government and, in a rare exhortation by a political leader, called upon personnel of security forces of the Centre and states, besides the Army, to “condemn” the attitude of the Modi government.

The fast-paced development started unfolding as soon as a team of 40-odd agency officers arrived at Kumar's residence at Loudon Street in central Kolkata this afternoon, but they were stopped by sentries and officials. CBI joint director Pankaj Srivastava said the agency’s officials had gone to question Kumar in chit fund scam cases and “we would have rounded him up if he hadn't cooperated with us”.

According to the CBI, Kumar, a 1989-batch IPS officer of West Bengal cadre who led a special investigation team of West Bengal Police probing the scams, needs to be questioned regarding missing documents and files but he has not responded to notices to appear before the agency.

A day earlier, the CBI claimed that Kumar had been “absconding” and “being looked for” in connection with Saradha and Rose Valley ponzi scam cases.

As the CBI team landed at the city police chief's residence, a team of Kolkata Police officers rushed to the spot to speak to the CBI officials and tried to enquire if they had the documents required for questioning Kumar.

Later on, a small team of CBI officials was taken to Shakespeare Sarani police station for further discussions. Thereafter, more men arrived at the spot and a commotion ensued. Some CBI officers were then forcibly bundled into police jeeps and taken to the police station.

In a tit-for-tat move, a team of Kolkata Police also cordoned off the CGO Complex, the state headquarters of CBI. Later, central forces arrived at the CBI office in Kolkata. Subsequently, Kolkata Police personnel vacated the compound. — PTI

Opposition backs Didi
