Chhota Rajan And His Aides Slapped With 12 Fresh Cases By CBI

Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) registered new cases against gangster Chhota Rajan, Bharat Nepali, and his close aides. The investigative agency amped its heat against the offenders with 12 fresh cases under charges of murder, extortion, kidnapping, and possession of illegal weapons among others.

These cases are a part of the 71 cases that were transferred from Mumbai Police to the CBI. In August 2019, a Mumbai court had sentenced gangster Rajendra Nikhalje alias Chhota Rajan and five others to eight years imprisonment for attempting to murder hotelier BR Shetty in 2012.

The court had also imposed a fine of Rs 5 lakh each on the six men, who were convicted in the case. They were facing charges under the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act (MCOCA), besides section 307 (attempt to murder), 120 B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code and provisions of the Arms Act.

READ| India exposes Pakistan's denial about Dawood Ibrahim's existence at UN Security Council, says 'D-Company mutated into terror organization'

D-Company poisoning

According to reports that emerged last month, it was known that unprecedented security has been provided to Chhota Rajan inside the Tihar Jail following poisoning threat from Pakistan-based terrorist and Dawood Ibrahim's D-Company.

Lodged in Jail number 2 in Tihar, the gangster reportedly has an attached kitchen and the food is served to the gangster after the clearance of the jail. Along with that, according to reports, he has also been provided with two separate cooks.

Chhota Rajan's deportation

The gangster was extradited to India on November 2015 after being captured him Bali, Indonesia wherein the Indian authorities contacted Interpol to bring Chhota Rajan back.

Reportedly, Rajan was apprehended after a tip-off from Australian Police informing that the underworld don traveled to Bali on an Indian passport with the name Mohan Kumar. The central government had handed over the probe of cases registered against him to CBI. The underworld don faces four dozen criminal cases. Reports have also said that his food is checked by the doctors every day and that the cook is first asked to check the food before serving it to Chhota Rajan. The underworld don is prohibited from going outside the ward premises.

READ| From Dawood Ibrahim to Chota Rajan, Here’s How The Bookie Linked With Arbaaz Khan Ran A Betting Nexus

Dawood Ibrahim's whereabouts

After Mumbai Police arrested Dawood Ibrahim's nephew Rizwan, he has made stunning revelations to the cops. Republic TV's Dinesh Mourya shared the details of what Rizwan told the Mumbai Police to the cops about Dawood Ibrahim.

As per Mumbai Crime Branch sources to Republic, he has confirmed to the cops that Dawood Ibrahim is in Pakistan. He has also told the cops that the underworld don is in touch with his family in Mumbai on a regular basis, as per sources. Sources also said that Dawood's wife speaks on the phone with the Kaskar family in Mumbai. His wife exchanges messages between Dawood and Kaskar family, sources said that Rizwan told this to the cops.

READ| Pakistan should hand over Dawood, Salahudeen to India to show sincerity in tackling terror: Sources

(with ANI inputs)
