Watch | Pakistani Army Raises White Flag At LoC To Retrieve Bodies Of 2 Dead Soldiers

Watch the video here: ANI sources also believe that those killed during July 30 ceasefire violation in Keran sector must have been either Kashmiris or soldiers from Northern Light Infantry (NLI). This is not for the first time that Paksitani Army has disowned their dead soldiers. Even during the Kargil War, Pakistani Army did not take back its martyred soldiers and thus Indian Army performed their last rites even on icy heights during the war. Continuing their nefarious antics, Pakistan on Saturday again resorted to ceasefire violation in Balakot and Mendhar sectors of Poonch district in Jammu and Kashmir. The Indian Army, however, posted along the LoC is giving a befitting reply to Pakistani troops. Even on September 8, Pakistan had violated ceasefire in Nowshera and Sunderbani areas of Rajouri district making it the fifth ceasefire violation attempt by Pakistani troops over the past one week.

Pakistan Army on Saturday raised a white flag at the Line of Control (LoC) at Hajipur Sector to retrieve bodies of two of its soldiers who were killed by Indian Army in a retaliation to an unprovoked ceasefire violation on September 11. The white flag is meant to signify surrender or seeking truce. According to news agency ANI, Indian Army troops killed Sepoy Ghulam Rasool in Hajipur Sector of Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK). Sepoy Rasool hailed from Bahawalnagar in Pakistan’s Punjab province and was killed in retaliatory firing by India on the intervening night of September 10 and 11. Reports also stated that after two failed attempts, Pakistani soldiers on Friday raised the white flag to retrieve bodies of the two soldiers killed in cross-border firing. A video of the incident has been shared by news agency ANI. Initially, Pakistani soldiers tried to recover the bodies while giving cover fire and while doing the same, another soldier was killed by the Indian Army. Sources says that Indian Army respects the dead and thus permitted Pakistani soldiers to recover the bodies after they raised the white flag. However, it is worth noting that the Pakistan Army did not try to take back the bodies of its 5-7 soldiers and terrorists killed on July 30 in the Keran sector. It is believed that those killed were not from Punjab province of the neighbouring country.
