Pakistan using PoK residents as cannon fodder to infiltrate India: Army

Pakistan is instigating the people of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) and using them as cannon fodder in their army’s attempt to cross the Line of Control (LoC), the Indian Army has said.

"There are a large number of leaders across the LoC who are instigating PoK residents. It's trying to use them as cannon fodder for attempts to come close to LoC, Lt Gen Ranbir Singh, chief of Army's Northern Command," said on Saturday.

Lt Gen Ranbir Singh was in Sunderbani, Rajouri on Saturday.

Lt General Ranbir Singh: There are a large no. of leaders across LoC to instigate people of PoK. It's actually trying to use them as cannon fodder for attempts to come close to LoC. Should there be any misadventure, they shall be given a befitting response https://t.co/4dYw9aKAM3 ANI (@ANI) September 14, 2019

The northern command chief warned Pakistan that if there is any misadventure, the Indian Army will give a befitting response. "In that case, there will be casualties and the responsibility will lie with Pakistan and its army. Our position is very clear. They should not use civilians as cannon fodder. They need to put a check on activities of their civilians," Lt Gen Ranbir Singh said.

The northern command chief added that the Army has been successfully able to thwart infiltration attempts from across the border.

Earlier on Saturday, Pakistani troops engaged in heavy firing and mortar shelling on forward posts and villages along the LoC in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday in violation of the ceasefire.

The firing and mortar shelling from across the border started in Balakote and Mankote areas around 10 am, drawing a strong retaliation from the Indian Army, the officials said.

They said heavy exchange of fire between the two sides was going on when last reports were received.

Deputy Commissioner of Poonch Rahul Yadav said there was no report of any casualty in the Pakistani firing and the border residents have been advised to take necessary precautionary measures for their safety.

Also read | White flag in hand, Pakistan Army retrieves body of 2 soldiers killed in ceasefire violation

Also watch | Pakistan Army waves white flags to retrieve bodies of 2 soldiers killed in ceasefire violation
