Shyama Prasad Mukherjee didn't oppose drafting of Article 370: NC MP Hasnain Masoodi

NC MP Hasnain Masoodi said that Shyama Prasad Mukherjee did not oppose the Article 370 at the time it was drafted.

National Conference (NC) MP Hasnain Masoodi has said that Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, who is considered to be the founder of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), was on board when Article 370 was incorporated in the Indian Constituion.

In a recent interview to India Today TV, Hasnain Masoodi said that Shyama Prasad Mukherjee did not oppose the Article 370 at the time it was drafted.

Shyama Prasad Mukherjee founded Bharatiya Jana Sangh that later became the BJP. The political Right has been opposing Article 370 since the Jan Sangh days.

"NC reiterates that Shyama Prasad Mukherjee was on board when Artcle 370 was incorporated in the Constitution. Mukherjee didn't oppose it that time. He was a part of the cabinet also," Hasnain Masoodi said.

Hasnain Masoodi said that removing Article 370 will increase separatism in Kashmir. He said that Article 370 would have helped the local leaders in assuring the people of the Valley about their identity and stir them away from separatism.

"Doing away with Article 370 will increase separatism in Kashmir. With Article 370 and a special status, the political leaders would go to people in J&K and tell them that we have a distinct identity and would stir them away from separatism," Masoodi said.

He also pointed out the fact that there were many grammatical errors in the reorganisation bill which itself shows how it was brought about.

Masoodi said, "There are 52 grammatical errors the J&K reorganisation bill that itself shows how it was brought. And now they can't just go ahead and change these errors just like that. They have to bring it back to Parliament."

Hasnain Masoodi pointed out that the Article 370 was not granted to the people of Jammu and Kashmir, it was given with consensus after negotiation.

"The Article 370 was negotiated, it wasn't granted. It was given with consensus. Everyone agreed to it," Masoodi said.

Calling the abrogation of Article 370 as unconstitutional, Masoodi said that it could not be removed unilaterally.

"The action taken on August 5 is unconstitutional. It coudn't be withdrawn unilaterally. Even the Supreme Court has seen merit in petitions challenging the abrogation," Masoodi said.

The National Conference leader also said that no one was talking about elections at the time as all political parties were focussing on demanding revokation of the abrogation of Article 370.

"There is no talk of elections at this time. Right now, all political parties in the Valley would focus on demanding revocation of this action."

On August 5, the government moved a resolution in the Rajya Sabha to repeal Article 370 of the Constitution which accords special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah also moved a bill proposing bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh.
