Book recommendations for September

Blurbs

10 Minutes 38 Seconds in this Strange World

by Elif Shafak

It is said that the brain can continue to work for 10 minutes and 38 seconds after the death of a body. This Booker shortlisted novel tells the tragic story of Leila; as her consciousness began to ebb, slowly and steadily, like a tide receding from the shore, we are taken from her birth, childhood, and the tragic circumstances of her life that led to her eventual murder.





Ducks, Newburyport

by Lucy Ellmann

Baking a multitude of tartes tatins for local restaurants, an Ohio housewife contemplates her four kids, husband, cats and chickens. Also, America's ignoble past, and her own regrets. A scorching indictment of America’s barbarity, past and present, and a lament for the way we are sleepwalking into environmental disaster, Ducks, Newburyport is a heresy, a wonder—and a revolution in the novel.





Girl, Woman, Other

by Bernardine Evaristo

Girl, Woman, Other follows the lives and struggles of twelve very different characters. Mostly women, black and British, they tell the stories of their families, friends and lovers, across the country and through the years. Joyfully polyphonic and vibrantly contemporary, this is a gloriously new kind of history, a novel of our times: celebratory, ever-dynamic and utterly irresistible.





An Orchestra of Minorities

by Chigozie Obioma

A contemporary twist on the Odyssey, An Orchestra of Minorities is narrated by the chi, or spirit of a young poultry farmer named Chinonso. His life is set off course when he sees a woman who is about to jump off a bridge. Horrified by her recklessness, he hurls two of his prized chickens off the bridge. The woman, Ndali, is stopped in her tracks.





Smoke and Ashes

by Abir Mukherjee

Captain Sam Wyndham and his side-kick Surrender-Not Banerjee return in this dynamic, prize-winning crime series set in 1920s Calcutta, India. There’s a serial murder case on the cards in this atmospheric addition to the series. Sam Wyndham must investigate this most unusual series of deaths, whilst his past life – fighting in the Great War – proves harder to deal with than ever before.





The Nickel Boys

by Colson Whitehead

Colson Whitehead’s brilliantly dramatized novel based on the real story of a reform school in Florida that operated for one hundred and eleven years and warped the lives of thousands of children, The Nickel Boys is a devastating, driven narrative that showcases a great American novelist writing at the height of his powers.





Dust Under Her Feet

by Sharbari Zohra Ahmed

Set In 1940s Calcutta, the story of this debut novel of Sharbari Zohra Ahmed is about the young and lovely Yasmine Khan who is the doyenne of the nightclub scene. When the US sets up a large army base in her city to fight the Japanese in Burma, Yasmine spots an opportunity—her Bombay Duck will be Calcutta’s answer to the wartime bars of London and Paris.





Animalia Indica: The Finest Animal Stories in Indian Literature

by Sumana Roy

For centuries, the animal kingdom has captured the Indian imagination. And the land of the Panchatantra and the Jataka Tales continues to give rise to literary masterpieces. Some of the greatest stories in modern Indian literature have animals as protagonists. In Animalia Indica, Sumana Roy collects the best fiction written about animals from the past hundred years or so.





India-Pakistan-Bangladesh: A Primer on Political History

by Nurul Islam

Published by Prothoma Prokashan, this primer is a very brief introduction to the interlocked political histories of the three countries—India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Looking back on the way the history unfolded or evolved, the book seeks to answer an often-asked question whether the partition of British India could be avoided as well as a follow-up question whether the breakup of Pakistan was inevitable.




