A wheelchair-bound Irrfan Khan hides his face as the paparazzi spots him at the airport : Bollywood News

Actor Irrfan Khan, who was shooting for his next film Angrezi Medium in London, is back to the bay. However, it doesn't look like he is ready to appear in public yet, after a gruelling battle with cancer. On Saturday, we saw a wheelchair-bound Irrfan exiting the airport. Not at all keen to be photographed, he was seen covering his face repeatedly. The security guard accompanying him is also seen asking the photographers not to capture him.

However Irrfan's spokesperson has said, "Irrfan had a successful surgery after wrapping Angrezi Medium in London. He was missing home and has come to Mumbai for a few days. We request the media to not speculate and we thank everyone again for the continued support.’’

Khan, who was diagnosed with neuroendocrine tumour in March 2018, left for London for treatment. Angrezi Medium, which was set to travel to floors by then, was postponed due to the actor's health. He finally returned to work in April and has pulled off his schedules with great energy. It is indeed heart-breaking to not catch him in the best of his health! Watch the video below.



Khan came back to India in March this year, and penned a long, emotional note on social media. “I am deeply touched by your wishes, your prayers and it means a lot for me and my family. I truly respect the way you respected my journey giving me time and space to heal. Thank you for your patience and the warmth and the love all through this overwhelming journey," he wrote.



Here's wishing the actor a super speedy recovery!

Also Read: Angrezi Medium: Radhika Madan says Irrfan Khan was magic on set

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
