'False notion of victory': India calls Pakistan's Feb 27 memorial a 'lie, deceit, deception cast in stone'

India has slammed Pakistan for a memorial dedicated to the events of February 27 when it launched a direct attack on Indian military installations after Indian Air Force's counter-terror strike on Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camps a day before.

New Delhi dismissed the memorial as another propaganda attempt by Islamabad saying it is a "lie, deceit, deception cast in stone".

Calling the structure based on "false notion of victory", an Indian government source said, "Unfortunately Pak Army & ISPR ( Inter-Services Public Relations - the media wing of the Pakistan Armed Forces) is taking the whole nation with 220 million population down."

The memorial was inaugurated on September 7, Pakistan's Air Force Day and is located at Sargodha Air Base near the eastern city of Lahore.

Pak puts up memorial on 27th February events at PAF Base Sargodha. Memorial has two graves below of two Pilots who went down on that day. pic.twitter.com/XKL4STcofD — Sidhant Sibal (@sidhant) September 14, 2019

The memorial has names of Pakistani officials who took part in the February 27 operation and dummy wings of 2 Indian Air Force planes -- a MiG 21 Bison & a Su 30 MKI - Pakistan claims to have struck down.

While India accepts one MiG-21 Bison was shot down and its pilot Wing commander Abhinandan Varthaman was captured but under global pressure, there is no proof of another Indian plane being shot down.

IAF pilot Varthaman was released soon by Pakistan army under international pressure.

On the memorial, it is also written that Pakistan used F-16s which was flown by Sqn Ldr Hassan Mehmood Siddique and Indian military installations were targeted using AMRAAM Missile.

Two graves below the memorial contain two Pakistani Pilots who went down on February 27 which Islamabad has never admitted.

India had launched the Balakt airstrikes on February 26 in response to Pulwama terror attacks of February 14 that killed more than 40 Indian security personnel.
