No power in the world can save Pakistan from disintegration: Rajnath Singh

Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Surat: Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday launched a blistering attack at Pakistan accusing it of playing divisive politics and carrying out atrocities on minorities. The senior Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) also said that if Pakistan continues on this path, then no power in the world can save it from disintegration.

While speaking at an event in Surat, Gujarat, Rajnath Singh said, "The partition of India and Pakistan took place on the grounds of religion, and that divisive politics proved to be counterproductive to Pakistan as it saw further partition of its territory in 1971."

"Minorities are currently suffering in Pakistan and if this situation continues then Pakistan is bound to see another disintegration and no power in the world will be able to help it," added the Union Defence Minister.

#WATCH Defence Minister Rajnath Singh: India was divided into two parts on the basis of religion- India & Pakistan were formed. Pakistan was again partitioned in 1971. If this politics continues, no power can stop Pakistan from being broken into pieces. pic.twitter.com/EsnNnYaq6d — ANI (@ANI) September 14, 2019

He also said that Pakistan, which isn't able to provide security to the minorities in its country, is talking about human rights. "If human rights violations are taking place anywhere, it's in Pakistan. Minority in India was safe, is safe and will remain safe," stressed Rajnath Singh.

Rajnath Singh was in Surat to participate in a function meant to honour the families of the soldiers who laid down their lives in the line of duty.

While paying a tribute to the martyrs, Singh said, "I had an opportunity to honour more than 120 families of martyred soldiers. It forms our national duty to stand as a source of strength with families of martyred soldiers."

The ties between India and Pakistan have deteriorated in the past couple of months in the wake of the Indian government's decision to revoke special status from Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan has downgraded its diplomatic relations with India and demanding that the special status of Kashmir should be restored.

However, India has repeatedly stressed that Kashmir is its internal matter and should be of no concern to Pakistan. Given the deteriorating ties between the two countries, both India and Pakistan are mulling over going to war with each other and are not hesitating from discussing their potential nuclear power.
