Dengue campaign: CM to address RWAs

Govt. signs MoUs with associations

Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal will address a gathering of resident welfare associations (RWAs) here on September 24 seeking to intensify the Aam Aadmi Party government’s ongoing, dengue campaign ‘10 Hafte 10 Baje 10 Minute’.

This, even as the government, on Saturday, announced it had signed MoUs with RWA apex bodies such as URJA and the Citizens’ Alliance as part of its initiative to reach out to such collectives across Delhi in a “big way”.

“Dengue and pollution — both are challenges that Delhi can overcome through people’s participation. I welcome RWAs to join the fight against both dengue and pollution [sic],” Mr. Kejriwal tweeted.

Reach out

These RWA bodies, the government said in a statement, had pledged full support to help in reaching out to RWAs and motivate them to join the campaign for the prevention of vector-borne diseases like dengue and chikungunya.

“The dengue campaign of the Delhi government led by Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal is getting support from people across the spectrum. The participation of RWAs is very important for us as they can ensure that this truly becomes a mass campaign,” Health Minister Satyendar Jain said.

The Delhi government was also planning to partner with over 3,000 RWAs across the Capital as part of the campaign. “The engagement will begin with a mega event on September 24 during which the CM will address the members of the RWAs at the Talkatora Stadium,” the statement said.

The RWAs pledging their support will be urged to participate in the campaign by conducting inspections in their respective areas, especially common areas like parking, terrace, it said.

“The RWAs will also encourage houses under them to maintain a dengue-free atmosphere and provide them with information materials like pamphlets and stickers on combating dengue,” the government said.

Ashutosh Dikshit from URJA said, “We welcome the initiative of the Delhi government to combat dengue. From URJA, we will inform as well as exhort all RWAs to come forward and actively participate in this drive. We will advise RWAs and their members to inspect their respective locality and households regularly so that clear water does not pool in the area,” he said.
