Issues raised over tribals’ rights

Many tribal communities feel that their bondage and problems started after India became independent and how more people have been found ineligible than the number of people found eligible under the Forest Rights Act, were among the issues raised at a lecture on ‘Forests, Conservation and Democratic Rights’ on Saturday.

The lecture at the 34th ‘Annual Dr Ramanadham Memorial Meeting’ was organised by People’s Union for Democratic Rights (PUDR). Forest rights activist Madhuri Krishnaswamy said, “The whole problem of the forest rights begin with the British who decided that forests are resources and it is to be owned by the state. From the time of the British, there has been an attempt to cordon off the forest and say it is state property and everybody just get out. It was completely new situation in Indian society and there was revolts against this.”

The earlier understanding was forests was not owned by anyone, but used by everyone, she said, “Thus entire communities became illegal and unfortunately it continued in Independent India.”

“I have met tribals who said under the British Rule they were beggars, but after the Independence, we lost everything,” she said. “The earlier, [British] government was not able not penetrate as deeply as the government of India was able to do [to implement the rules). So many communities see a situation of bondage beginning with independence,” said Ms. Krishnaswamy, who is also the a member of Jagrit Adivasi Dalit Sangathan.

She also said that the Forest Rights Act, though progressive, has failed on multiple counts. “Even 13 years after passage of act (Forest Rights Act) there is still ‘violence’ [against the forest dwellers by the government]. More people have been found to be ineligible than eligible of forest rights under the Act,” Ms. Krishnaswamy.

Nithin Rai, a political ecologist, said that governments try to create protected areas of forests to conserve it, but that’s not solving the problem. “Since 1970, there is 60% decline in population of all species, globally. Though protected areas have been increasing globally, there is decrease in biodiversity globally. So protected areas is not the magic bullet,” Mr. Rai said, quoting a study.

The speakers also attacked the government of allegedly handing over huge chunks of forest for industries and infrastructure. “About 3.7 lakh acres of land has been handed over to industries and infrastructure in the last five years,” Ms. Krishnaswamy said.

The speakers also said that 74% of mines are in “dense forest” areas, according to Indian Bureau of Mines. “Now you turn around and say the tribals who farm on two acres of forest land is destroying it,” Ms. Krishnaswamy added.
