Ahmedabad: 94, including 6 minors working as bonded labourers rescued from chemical factory

Labourers rescued by the Ahmedabad Police | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Police teams raided the chemical factory in Kathwada on Saturday A case has been registered against the factory owner, said the DCP Six of the 94 labourers rescued, were minors

Ahmedabad: Acting on a tip, police in the state capital of Gujarat on Saturday rescued as many as 94 people who were being forced to work as bonded labourers. A senior officer revealed that at least 12 of those rescued, are minors. Brought from various states in the north, these men were being made to work as slaves at the chemical factory in Ahmedabad's Kathwada area.

Several police teams were dispatched to the spot in order to check on the tip. Upon their arrival, the personnel interacted with the labourers employed at the chemical factory. The labourers, in turn, told the cops that they had not been paid their due wages in months. They went further to allege that they were not being allowed to go back to their respective homes by their employer.

On the basis of a complaint by the labourers, police registered a case in this regard. Deputy Commissioner of Police of Ahmedabad (Zone-5) Akshayraj Makwana told media outlets that the labourers were brought from their native villages in Nagaland and Assam. He added that the owners of the factory are being interrogated for their alleged role in the mis-treatment of the labourers.

Gujarat: Nikol Police today rescued 94 bonded labours (including 12 minors) from Nagaland&Assam, in Ahmedabad. A Makwana, DCP Zone 5, says, “They were not paid any wages for the work they did in a chemical factory. They were also not allowed to visit their homes. Case registered" pic.twitter.com/AU8e5eyi6X — ANI (@ANI) September 14, 2019

Makwana also said that the police department initially assumed that there were close to 30 labourers at the chemical factory but was shocked to find out that there were nearly a hundred men who were being forced to work at the factory without being paid and not allowed to leave. The DCP confirmed that at least 12 of the rescued labourers are minors.

A similar incident had come to light from the state of Tamil Nadu in July of this year when local law enforcement rescued as many as 42 men, women and children who were being employed as child labourers at two wood cutting units in Vellore and Kancheepuram. Out of these, six labourers were below 18 years of age. Upon being rescued by the police, the labourers revealed that they were forced to starve by the owners of the brick kilns.

The owner in question reportedly went missing after the raids and efforts had been initiated to track him down and arrest him. One such incident which was reported by policemen who were part of the raid summed up the desperation faced by the rescued labourers. An elderly man fell at our feet and asked us to rescue his family, a cop told media outlets.
