Punjab: 3 cops, home guard who stood by as mob thrashed SI dismissed

In a video of the assault, which has gone viral on social media, the SI’s colleagues are seen just standing there. (Representational Image)

Three policemen and a home guard jawan were dismissed Saturday for failing to intervene while their team leader, a sub-inspector, was brutally assaulted during a raid at the house of an alleged drug peddler in Amritsar.

Taking suo motu cognisance of the attack on sub-inspector Baldev Singh on Friday, Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Saturday ordered immediate dismissal of the police personnel who accompanied the officer and did nothing to save him.

Baldev Singh, of Kacha Pacca police station in Tarn Taran, had led the team to raid the house of one Amandeep Singh in Amritsar’s Chogawan village on Friday, the police said. During the raid, the officer was badly thrashed by some people, they said.

Punjab CM @capt_amarinder dismisses Punjab Police personnel who remained mute spectators while a Sub Inspector was thrashed by kin of drugs suspect during a raid on his house in Tarn Taran district on Friday.@IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/AjqvfT6ORJ — Man Aman Singh Chhina (@manaman_chhina) September 14, 2019

In a video of the assault, which has gone viral on social media, the SI’s colleagues are seen just standing there.

The chief minister took serious note of the fact that the policemen accompanying the SI simply looked on while their leader was being severely beaten. The video shows Baldev Singh being thrashed by the accused after bolting the gate of the house from inside. His turban is tossed, his uniform is torn and his weapon is snatched by the accused.

“This act of cowardly behaviour is unacceptable in a uniformed force,” Amarinder Singh said.

Acting on the chief minister’s orders, Director General of Punjab Police Dinkar Gupta ordered an inquiry into the role of the police party, which had accompanied Baldev Singh. Based on the inquiry report, Assistant SI Sawinder Singh, Head Constable Gurvinder Singh, Constable Nishan Singh and home guard jawan Darshan Singh were dismissed from service for inaction and dereliction of duty.

Inspector Jhirmal Singh,, SHO Kacha Pakka, was shifted to Police Lines as his explanation into the incident was found to be satisfactory, the DGP said.

DGP Gupta said 30 people have been booked in connection with the assault and five have been arrested. Those arrested have been identified as Shamsher Singh, Gurjinder Singh, Dilbagh Singh and Sarmel Singh — all residents of Chogawan, and Shubh — a native of Tapiala village, he said.

Raids are being conducted to arrest the remaining accused, who were led by drug supplier Amandeep Singh and his brother Gagandeep Singh, Gupta said.

Strong and exemplary action will be taken against the drug suppliers and every single person who dared to attack the police party, he added.

All the 30 accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code, including 307 (attempt to murder), 295 (injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion of any class), and the IT Act, the DGP said.

He said the police party had gone to conduct the raid in connection with a case wherein 152 grams of heroin was seized by Tarn Taran police on September 10.
