Cong leader shot after tiff at Ludhiana eatery

editorial@tribune.com

Nikhil Bhardwaj

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana, September 14

A 43-year-old realtor and local Congress leader was shot dead following a verbal duel during a birthday party at a restaurant located on the fourth floor of Pavilion Mall here last night. A friend of the deceased also suffered a bullet injury and was hospitalised.

The deceased has been identified as Manjit Singh, a resident of GTB colony, Jamalpur. He was into real estate business and had an office on the 33 Feet Road. Gurdev Lapra, former Ludhiana rural Congress president, said Manjit was the senior vice-president of the unit. He is survived by his wife, a son (15) and a daughter (5).

One of the accused has been arrested. He has been identified as Jaswinder Singh alias Bindi (34) of Shahbana, Jamalpur. His aide Jagdeep Singh of Bulara village is absconding.

Addressing a press conference, Simrat Pal Singh, DCP (Detective), said Parminder Singh Pappu of Jamalpur had thrown the party at Castle Barbeque, where Manjit Singh and his wife were guests. Around 12.15 am, Manjit entered into heated arguments with the accused, Jagdeep Singh and Jaswinder Singh, over some issue. “They all were reportedly drunk. After the arguments, Jaswinder went downstairs brought his licenced.32 bore revolver, which was lying in his car, and fired at Manjit from close range,” the DCP said. He said five rounds were fired by the accused, one hit Manjit on the left side of his stomach and another Sumit Saini alias Golu of Delhi on his leg. After the incident, Jaswinder and Jagdeep fled the spot. Manjit was rushed to a private hospital where doctors declared him brought dead, the officer said.

Golu was taken to CMC Hospital, where his condition was said to be stable. Following the incident, SHO Gurmeet Singh and ASI Jaskaran Singh, incharge, Ghumar Mandi, launched a manhunt and managed to nab Jaswinder. They also recovered the weapon from him.

Jaswinder had a notorious past. He is facing cases of kidnapping, firing and scuffle registered at Sahnewal and Police Division 7 here. Pappu, who had thrown the party, had contested the state Assembly elections on RJD ticket in 2007 and 2012.

Questions are being raised that why despite facing FIRs, accused Jaswinder's licenced weapon was not seized? The DCP said he would inquire about the matter.
