Nayanthara's 65th film officially titled after Rajinikanth's Netrikann - see FIRST poster!

Nayanthara Netrikann first poster | Photo Credit: Instagram

And the first officiall poster of Nayanthara 65 is here! Titled Netrikann, the film directed by Milind Rau went on floors in Chennai today. Going by the first look, the intriguing poster is splattered with blood and features items like handcuffs and whip. The font of the title is written in braille, which further makes us wonder if Nayanthara's character will be visually impaired in this upcoming thriller.

What's more special is the fact that Netrikann has been titled after Rajinikanth's 1981 film by the same name. Speaking of which, director Milind was earlier quoted as saying, "It is a strong title that works well for our script. You will understand its meaning when the film’s teaser is out. The film is a thriller and her role will be something she hasn’t done before. She liked the script and immediately said OK. It is Vignesh ShivN’s maiden production venture and we are all very happy. The film will be set in Chennai.We begin shoot from today." Check out the poster below..

Happy,proud & blessed #Nayanthara ‘s 65th film #Netrikann

Produced by RowdyPictures



Thank you @KavithalayaaOff & #Superstar Rajni sir for the title & the blessings@Milind_Rau ‘s unique creation - a thriller hoot starts today wit all ur blessings pic.twitter.com/qmHAAxmQ7S — ROWDY PICTURES (@VigneshShivN) September 15, 2019

Another reason why this film is special is because it's going to be bankrolled by Nayanthar's boyfriend Vignesh Shivan, marking his maiden production venture. For those unaware, Nayanthara and Vignesh have been dating since quite a few years now.

On the professional front, Nayanthara was last seen in Love Action Drama alongside Nivin Pauly. She will be next seen in the historical drama Sye Narasimha Reddy co-starring Chiranjeevi, Amitabh Bachchan, Tamanaah Bhatia and AR Murugadoss' cop drama, Darbar starring Rajinikanth. She is also confirmed to play a pivotal role in the highly-anticipated sports feature, Bigil opposite Thalapathy Vijay.

Stay tuned to this space as we bring you more updates on the film.
