21 civilians killed in over 2,050 ceasefire violations by Pakistan this year: MEA

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: India on Sunday raised concerns regarding more than 2,050 unprovoked ceasefire violations by Pakistan forces this year.

In a statement, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to adhere to the 2003 ceasefire understanding and maintain peace and tranquility along the Line of Control and the International Border.

Also Read | Pakistan could lose in a ‘conventional war’ with India, says Imran Khan

“We have highlighted our concerns at unprovoked ceasefire violations by Pakistan forces, including in support of cross border terrorist infiltration and targeting of Indian civilians and border posts by them,” said Kumar.

“This year they have resorted to more than 2,050 unprovoked ceasefire violations in which 21 Indians have died. We have repeatedly called upon Pakistan to ask its forces to adhere to 2003 ceasefire understanding and maintain peace and tranquillity along the LoC (Line of Control) and IB (International Border),” Kumar further said.

“Indian forces exercise maximum restraint and respond to unprovoked violations and attempts at cross border terrorist infiltration,” he added.

The statement comes as the Pakistan Army retrieved the bodies of two of its Punjabi soldiers killed by the Indian Army at the LoC after raising the white flag.

The bodies were retrieved by Pakistan on September 13 following two days of unsuccessful attempts. An Army official said all attempts by Pakistan to take the bodies by force had been foiled.

However, the bodies of five Border Action Team (BAT) Special Services Group commandos killed during an infiltration attempt in the last week of July in the Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir, still lie unclaimed by Pakistan.

Also Read | Sharad Pawar praises Pakistan, says ‘have always received hospitality there’

Meanwhile, Pakistan has continuously tried to internationalise the Jammu and Kashmir issue after India revoked Article 370 from the state and bifurcated it into two union territories.

However, their campaign has not met with much success. They suffered a setback on August 16 at the United Nations Security Council when, during closed consultations, 14 members of the UNSC — barring China — are believed to have agreed that matters between India and Pakistan should be bilaterally settled as per the Shimla Agreement and Lahore Declaration.

(With ANI inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
