Agartala-bound Air India flight delayed by 2 hours after a swarm of bees attacks plane at Kolkata airport

Kolkata-Agartala Air India flight was delayed due to 'bee attack'

Key Highlights Air India flight AI 743 was delayed by two hours after a swarm of bees was spotted in front of the plane at Kolkata airport 136 passengers and crew members were on the flight at the time of the incident The flight eventually left for Agartala around 12:45 pm

Kolkata: In a bizarre incident, a Kolkata-Agartala Air India flight was delayed after a swarm of bees attacked the aircraft on the runway at the Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport in Kolkata on Sunday.

The Air India flight - AI 743 – was delayed for almost two hours after a swarm of bees was noticed in front of the cockpit window when the aircraft was taxing towards the main runway.

136 passengers and crew members were on board the Airbus A319 which was scheduled to take off from Kolkata for Agartala at 9:40 am today.

Mustafa Jabbar, Bangladesh’s Minister of Post and Telecommunication and Information Technology, was reportedly one of the passengers on board the flight.

However, the pilots noticed the bees in front of the aircraft when it was being taken to the main runway for departure. The pilots immediately informed the Air Traffic Control (ATC) about the situation.

The aircraft was brought to a standstill as further movement could have damaged the plane and even harmed the passengers if the bees would have entered the aircraft through its engines, an Air India spokesperson was quoted as saying by a news agency.

Meanwhile, the fire department had to use water jets to remove the bees from the windowpane of the cockpit.

Upon further investigation, officials found that the bees had not entered the aircraft and that the plane had not been damaged in the incident.

The flight eventually left for Agartala around 12:45 pm.

Incidentally, prior to the incident, the flight had been delayed due to a technical snag.
