Irked over domestic violence, woman kills husband in Navi Mumbai

Reportedly, she immediately rushed to the police station and informed about her son's murder. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident happened on Thursday night and came to light on Friday The couple had been married for the past eight months The police probing if there was any other motive behind the heinous crime.

Mumbai: A 33-year-old woman was arrested on Friday for allegedly strangling her husband to death using a hair ribbon. The incident happened on Thursday night and the accused told police that she killed her husband as he would return home drunk everyday and used to assault her.

The accused was identified as Kalinda Darane and the victim was named as Swaminath. They had been married for the past eight months and were residing in the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) area in Rabale area. According to a report, the victim used to do odd jobs for living. A MIDC police station officier said that man would return home drunk every other night and pick up fights with his wife and assault her.

On Thursday night too, he returned home in an inebriated state and fought with the accused. In a fit of rage, the accused strangled him with a hair ribbon, he added. The incident came to light when on Friday morning when the deceased's mother came to their house and asked about her son, to which her daughter-in-law replied that he was asleep. Finding something amiss, his mother went inside and found her son lying dead.

Reportedly, she immediately rushed to the police station and informed about her son's murder. Upon reaching the spot, the police found dark marks around the deceased's neck, following which they detained her wife and later she confessed the crime. However, the accused has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the police probing if there was any other motive behind the heinous crime.

In another incident reported from the commercial capital, a 20-year-old man was arrested by Mumbai Police for the alleged murder of his live-in partner. The accused was identified as Ramsen Curio who was taken into custody after a preliminary medical examination revealed that the woman's death could not have been caused by an accident as claimed by her partner.

He reportedly told doctors that the deceased fell from the stairs and incurred severe injuries. On her way to the hospital, the woman succumbed to the injuries and a case of accidental death report (ADR) was registered in this regard at the Vakola police station. However, a preliminary medical examination of the victim's body revealed that she died as a result of repeated blows to her body and head.
