Telugu businessman Jayaram’s murder: Nearly 30-50 people questioned, no arrests yet

Telugu businessman Jayaram’s murder: Nearly 30-50 people questioned, no arrests yet

Jayaram’s niece and her friend were also taken into custody for questioning in connection with his death.

news Crime

The police have questioned as many as 30-50 people in the alleged murder of high-profile businessman Jayaram Chigurupati, who was found dead in his car near Nandigama of Andhra's Krishna district, a few days back. This comes after his niece and her friend were taken into custody for questioning.

The Nandigama police reportedly used Jayaram’s mobile call data to retrace his last movements before his death and had found that found that he was confined to a house in Jubilee Hills in Hyderabad for almost 30 hours between January 30 and 31. However, investigation authorities are yet to ascertain what happened during those 30 hours.

Speaking to TNM, DSP Nandigama Subhash Chandra Bose said, "We have questioned as many as 30 to 50 people acquainted with deceased (Chigurupati) as part of the case investigation." He added that they would come to a conclusion in the case by Tuesday.

When asked about arrests pertaining to the case, investigation officer Bose said that no arrests have been made so far in the case.

While a section of local media had raised speculations with regard to the case, police have ruled them out as 'unconfirmed'.

About certain media reports which claimed the alleged role of Shikha Chowdhary (28) who is a niece of Jayaram, and her friend called Rakesh Reddy (30), he said, "We are not concerned about media opinions with regard to the incident, the investigation is underway. Soon, we will uncover the case.”

Police are yet to confirm the motive behind the crime. 55 year-old Jayaram was the owner of Zenotech Laboratories and a few other businesses in Andhra Pradesh. He was also the Managing Director of Express TV, a now-defunct Telugu channel. An NRI, Jayaram was also the Director of Coastal Bank and owned several business firms.
