Bygone Bharta: The deconstruction of Aryavarta: peering into the muddied waters of our ancient origins

Chidanand Rajghatta is The Times of India’s US-based Foreign Editor, long-time Washington DC scribe and sutradhar, and author of The Horse That Flew: How India’s Silicon Gurus Spread Their Wings. LESS ... MORE

Turns out Aryans may not have come down like a wolf on our fold

So what do you say we put away the ghost of Aryavarta?

Apparently we are a mish-mash of indigenous people, very old

How about we embrace a new moniker – like Bygone Bharta.

For too long have we been fed the theory of Aryan invasion

Propounded by colonialists with names like William and Arthur

But dodgy DNA analysis of sketchy Rakhigarhi remains tells the nation

We are the original native people, before Krishna, Sanjaya, or Partha.

* * *

We were born and lived and died here since time immemorial

Our forebears didn’t come from Caucasus, forget Athens or Sparta

We were a localised people whether nomadic or entrepreneurial

We are fully, 100% autochthonous, forget one-half or one-quarta

Even further onward to East Timor, Papua New Guinea and Australia

We traversed all the way from Indus via Kuala Lumpur and Djakarta

We romped through SE Asia practising Saturnalia and Bacchanalia

Long before such events were chronicled in the Mahabharata.

* * *

I’d even suggest we may have spread westward beyond Europe

Crossing over into Alberta and down south to Puerto Vallarta

We shimmied across the Atlantic using a new rope

Hey, it’s just a theory i am floating, hum nahi darta

We were both farmers and grazers, both Aryan and Dravidian

This is the latest news, you can call it sandesh or vartha

Our origins are not Abyssinian or Olympian or Labyrinthian

We predate the priests and prophets, be it Moses or Siddharta.

* * *

So it’s a lie that Aryans came and ousted us from Indus Valley

We already had horses and chariots and wore underwear and garta

We never had to deal with anyone who was hostile or pally

We were everyone, we didn’t have to sign any agreement or charta

Jokes aside, i hope everyone eventually will come around to realise

We are one people, Dalit or Brahmin, Saraswat or Smarta

The world is truly the vasudaiva kutumbakam that we idealise

We may call the whole planet India – India that is Bygone Bharta.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer This article is intended to bring a smile to your face. Any connection to events and characters in real life is coincidental.
