Trigger warning: 10 firing cases this year

Ludhiana: The city has witnessed a spurt in firing cases this year.

On Friday midnight, two Congress workers shot at party leader Manjeet Singh and Delhi resident Sumit Saini inside a restaurant in a mall at Old Sessions Court Chowk. This was the tenth such incident in the city this year.

In six of the 10 incidents, illegal weapons were used and in four licenced ones. Deputy commissioner of police (detective) Simrat Pal Singh Dhindsa said after the Friday firing, the police were checking details of licenced weapon-holders. Licences of all those facing criminal cases would be cancelled, he added.

When asked how many licences were cancelled this year, assistant commissioner of police (licensing) Ranjeet Singh said, “I have recently joined the post, therefore I am yet to check the details. However, from now on, our team will keep a regular check on all weapons-holders. The field staff has already been told to submit a report.”

Earlier cancellations

Acting tough against licenced weapon-holders over discrepancies and involvement in criminal activities, the then commissioner of police, RN Dhoke, had cancelled licences of 24 and also stalled renewal of 57. Notices were issued to 680, telling them that their licences would be cancelled if they did not produce the required documents and records of bullets they had used.

UIN from national database

In 2017, police had asked the weapon owners to get unique identification number (UIN) from the national database of arms licences or face cancellation. When asked about it, ACP (licensing) said he would get it checked if all weapons-holders had got UIN.

Previous cases

July 9: Simranjit Singh, 19, was injured after a group of assailants opened fire at him following a parking row in Mohar Singh Nagar

June 1: Car-borne assailants fired shots at accountant Balwant Khurana near Tibba Road bridge of Sidhwan Canal in Dehlon

March 26: Gangster Amarbir Singh, alias Lalli Cheema, and his aides fired at a team of Organized Crime Control Unit in Dehlon before getting arrested

March 19: Six arrested for creating ruckus and firing in the air in a vegetable market near Jalandhar Bypass

March 7: Balbir Singh, 67, shot dead by his neighbour Jagdev Singh, 33, in Noorwala village

February 2: Brothers Gurbhej Singh and Harbhajan Singh arrested for firing in the air over a domestic dispute

February 19: Baljinder Singh, 30, of Kurukshetra injured in celebratory firing at a marriage function in New Janta Nagar

January 21: Lakhwinder Singh and Baljit Singh booked for opening fire in an inebriated condition during a birthday party in Jassiyan Colony

January 14: A group of assailants fire at former Congress councillor Satwinder Singh Jawaddi, 52, of Jawaddi Kalan



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
