No thanks, we’ve learned Hindi from Raghu thatha

If Indian politics is a theatre, Tamil Nadu is a multiplex. Where cigarette flicks and dark glasses are the perennial symbols of style and substance, sycophancy does a tandava over psephology. And with the players ensconced in the ministerial thrones in Delhi, it is no longer just a southern delight. Arun Ram, Resident Editor, The Times of India, Tamil Nadu, who alternates between the balcony and the front row, says it incites as much as it excites. During the intervals, he chews on a bit of science and such saner things. LESS ... MORE

In Thiruvananthapuram to spend Onam with my folks, I was amazed at my brother, who usually speaks only Malayalam and English, conversing in Hindi with a Bengali who had come to pluck coconuts in my backyard (we no longer get Malayalees for the job). Mera Bharat mahan, I thought.

Today, after Union home minister Amit Shah spoke about making Hindi the national language for unity, my brother and the Bengali coconut tree climber have gone back to speaking to each other in their respective mother tongues, neither understanding a word of the other. They don’t want to be told by someone who speaks neither Malayalam nor Bengali which language they should converse in. So much for the home minister’s shot at unity.

Bhakts say Amitji, the new-age Chanakya, doesn’t speak without intent. That rules out the probability of his playing to the gallery at the ‘Rajbhasha’ award ceremony on Hindi Day this Saturday. So, was he trying to spur a controversy to divert public attention from Nirmalaji’s booster bloomers? Or was he testing the waters for the imposition of Hindi across the country? Either way, it puts the saffron brigade on the defensive in many states, especially in Tamil Nadu and Kerala where the BJP is desperate to make inroads, and in Bengal where it has bigger dreams.

For pastime, let’s take Amitji’s statement seriously and look at it from three angles: linguistic demography, political history and individual liberty. Hindi is not a language spoken by a majority of Indians. Hold that punch, bhakt, what I meant was Hindi, despite being the most spoken language in the country, is spoken by less than 44% of the population, which means a majority of Indians speak languages other than Hindi. Among these 44% Hindi speakers, 40% speak dialects of Hindi such as Bhojpuri, Rajasthani and Haryanvi. This means, a little over a quarter of Indians speak the ‘native Hindi’ dialect. Other languages have a much lesser share, with Bengali at 8%, Marathi at 6.9%, Telugu at 6.7% and Tamil at 5.7%.

If numbers don’t speak matters of the heart, let’s look at the history of attempts to impose Hindi on non-Hindi speaking states, especially Tamil Nadu. The anti-Hindi agitations swept across the state in two waves. The first one started in 1937 after Rajaji’s Congress government made Hindi compulsory in schools in Madras Presidency and ended with the government’s resignation in 1939. The second one, between 1965 and 1967, resulted in an amendment to the Official Languages Act that continues to recognise English, along with Hindi, as an official language. Neither the Constitution nor any legislation has made Hindi the national language despite many Hindi-speaking leaders calling it the ‘rashtrabhasha‘.

The DMK took its anti-Hindi stand to ridiculous proportions in 1986, opposing the opening of Navodaya schools under Rajiv Gandhi’s National Education Policy. Till date, Tamil Nadu doesn’t have these schools, denying students another opportunity to learn not just Hindi, but get quality education. While political parties push their agenda, the average Tamil is not against Hindi (five lakh TN students took Dakshin Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha exams last year), but is against its imposition. And that answers the third point of personal liberty.

I was brought up on the bread – and the occasional butter – my mother earned as a professor of Hindi. Before school hours, I went to Kerala Hindi Prachar Sabha. Today I woke up to Hindi bhajans at home. But the moment I am forced to do any of these, the first word that rushes to my mind would be a harsh one – and definitely not a Hindi one.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
