GQ Exclusive: William Dalrymple on his new book, and what went into writing it

How did a small, unregulated private company with a handful of employees seated in London seize an entire subcontinent in Asia? How did this corporation, with its own private military, grow so big that it could subdue an entire nation of powerful rulers and unimaginable riches in less than half a century?

William Dalrymple’s latest book The Anarchy: The East India Company, Corporate Violence, And The Pillage Of An Empire is about a firm that was among the world’s first multinationals, and its extraordinary story. “[Robert] Clive was answering to an office that was five windows wide,” Dalrymple says over the phone from Algeria. “It was almost invisible on a London street – people could walk past and miss it. Yet, this corporation was so incredibly rich, it had a mercenary army of its own. Imagine Google having an infantry.”

William Dalrymple goes on to speak about why this period is relevant today, how we view historical characters and what went into writing this book.

William Dalrymple's The Anarchy

What was the idea behind writing The Anarchy?

When I was writing this Guardian long-read piece four years ago, I realised we always looked at the British in India through the lens of nationalism – on both sides. For one, it was a tale of imperial conquest and glory. For the other, it was a tale of exploitation and looting. The more I read about the East India Company – this is my fourth book on the EIC, but the first to look at it as an institution – the more I realised that this is not a national story. The EIC was not part of the British government. It was a privately owned corporation. What it did in India is the world’s most well-documented and horrific example of corporate violence.

In our colonial narrative, the East India Company’s role gets overshadowed.

The East India Company was controlled by a bunchof merchants sitting around a table in a small office in London. Shareholders owned it and its only motive was profit. This is also a story about collaboration – many Marwari bankers preferred the rule of the Company to the unpredictable wiles of the Murshidabad Nawabs, while several Maratha generals had invested their life savings in the EIC stock. Collaborators invited Clive to topple Siraj ud-Daulah [the last nawab of Bengal before the EIC took over]. Subsequently, many banking families provided financing to the Company’s mercenary army.

This book took you six years to write. Would you say it’s your most ambitious work yet?

That is the publisher’s blurb rather than mine [laughs]. In terms of the history books I’ve written, it certainly takes the biggest sweep. My books have been micro-histories so far. White Mughals was about four years in Hyderabad (1795-1800), The Last Mughals was three years in Delhi (1855-1858) and Return Of A King was four years of Afghan history (1839-42). This one starts with the founding of the EIC in 1599 and ends with the conquest of Delhi in 1803. It’s taken a long time to write because there was so much material.

Was that one of the main challenges?

Yes, the sheer amount of information. The East India Company was a corporation that was spectacularly efficient and bureaucratic – everything was reported. The National Archives of India [in Delhi] contains miles and miles of documents, including the archives of the Indian HQ of the EIC, Fort William in Kolkata. You can spend half a lifetime there.
