Former Andhra Pradesh Speaker Kodela Sivaprasada Rao commits suicide

Andhra Pradesh

Kodela

Chandrababu Naidu

FormerSpeakerSivaprasada Rao passed away in Hyderabad on Monday.Senior TDP leader and former minister S Chandramohan Reddy said, "Kodela Sivaprasada Rao hanged himself at his house last night. Family members rushed him to hospital but it was in vain". He and TDP politburo member Yanamala Rama Krishnudu alleged that the undue harassment by the YS Jagan government had forced Kodela to take his life.He is survived by his wife Sasikala, sons Siva Rama Krishna and Satyanarayana and daughter Vijayalakshmi.Recently, Rao faced charges of shifting Assembly furniture to his private residence and his son's automobile showroom. The Guntur police are investigating the case, after recovering the furniture. Rao had been under tremendous mental stress, his staff said. He is said to have spoken to his close associates last night and told them that he would fight the political cases against him.Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu, Andhra Pradesh Governor Biswabhusan Harichandan condoled the untimely death of Kodela Sivaprasada Rao. The governor said Kodela's services as Speaker would be remembered forever.Kodela, a doctor by profession, entered politics in 1983, responding to a call by celebrated actor-politician NT Rama Rao. He joined the Telugu Desam Party.He had served as Home Minister in NTR cabinet, during which the most sensational murder of Vangaveeti Mohana Ranga Rao alias Ranga took place. He also held major industries portfolio.Kodela held health and Panchayat Raj portfolios in thecabinet between 1995-2004. He was the first speaker of bifurcated Andhra Pradesh from June 2014 to 2019 April.He got elected to the Assembly from Narasaraopet four times and later shifted to Sattenapalli constituency in Guntur district in 2014. In April 2019 election, he lost the seat to YSR Congress.He was founder chairman of Basavatarakam Indo American Cancer hospital in Hyderabad. The hospital was set up in memory of NTR's wife late Nandamuri Basava Tarakam. She died of cancer.Kodela was more popular as a doctor in Narasaraopet.Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao condoled the death of Kodela.Telugu Desam Party Andhra Pradesh president Kala Venkata Rao said Kodela was subjected to undue political harassment.
