EXCLUSIVE - Christopher Nolan and Robert Pattinson captured shooting at Gateway of India, Mumbai

It was manic movie Monday for Hollywood fans in Mumbai. Hollywood’s ‘ Twilight ’ star and the latest ' Batman ' of the series, Robert Pattinson , along with filmmaker Christopher Nolan , who are here in Mumbai to shoot their film 'Tenet', were spotted with their cast and crew at the iconic Gateway of India, Mumbai. They commenced shooting for their thriller early on Monday morning at the location. While the director and his cast are staying at a plush five-star hotel right opposite Gateway of India, the crew headed to three key locations, a stone’s throw away from the hotel. A restaurant set (named Chaand) has been erected on the sea-facing promenade for some of the shots. Bombay Times exclusively captured them in between the shots on Day One of the shoot.The shoot apparently started around 4 am near the Regal circle where they shot at Mumbai’s landmark eatery, Cafe Mondegar. The shops lined along the street leading up to the café were open at the wee hours of the morning to facilitate the shoot. Says a resident of a nearby building, “The shops in that lane opened very early today. Maybe, they wanted to depict a day time scene. We saw the cast enter the café and leave only after 7.30 am. Later in the morning, the cast was spotted at the nearby Royal Bombay Yacht Club where Pattinson had a suited look – he was seen dressed in a pale suit with a green tie and glares. The rest of the cast wore Nehru jackets, topis and some women were seen in Indian outfits.The next leg of the shoot took place at the Gateway of India, where the cast boarded the launch stationed there. Nolan emerged from the hotel around 2 pm and headed to the boat with his bodyguards. Actress Dimple Kapadia , who is also part of the cast, arrived in her car soon and headed to the boat. The light drizzle didn’t seem to deter the shoot and it went on as planned.Nolan and his team arrived in Mumbai on Friday morning from Denmark . They are said to be here for a 15-day schedule.
