Andhra's ex-Speaker Kodela Siva Prasada Rao dies under mysterious circumstances

Controversial former speaker of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly Dr Kodela Siva Prasada Rao was found dead under mysterious circumstances at his home in Hyderabad on Monday morning.

At around 10:30 am at his Jubilee Hills residence, Sivaprasada Rao's wife Shashikala found no response from the room which was bolted from inside. Rao's gunman was called and the door was forced opened. He was immediately rushed to nearby Basavatarakam Memorial Cancer Hospital where he was declared dead by doctors.

The West Zone police shifted his dead body to Osmania Government General Hospital for post-mortem.

According to DCP ( West Zone ) AR Srinivas, the exact cause of death cannot be ascertained though prima facie report suggests suicide by hanging as per deceased's daughter version.

"According to our initial findings, Dr. Rao's wife, daughter and a maid were present in his home. The gunman was called as the door was bolted from inside. He was brought to the hospital where he was declared dead by the doctors. We can tell the exact cause of death only after post-mortem,'' informed AR Srinivas, DCP, West Zone, Hyderabad.

It may be noted that the former speaker was embroiled in controversy of diverting official furniture to his home when he was speaker from 2014 to 2019. His son and daughter are also facing number of cases.

A towering political figure belonging to Telugu Desam Party from Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh, Kodela had served in various ministries whenever TDP was in power in Andhra Pradesh. Soon after his death, senior Telugu Desam Party leaders are pointing fingers at the ruling YSRCP government.

"He was literally hounded to death by this ruling YSRCP government in Andhra Pradesh. Number of cases were filed against him and his family only to harrass,'' said Somireddy Chandramohan Reddy, senior TDP leader and former minister.

However, the Andhra Pradesh government rubbished TDP claims. "We still do not know the exact cause of death. Why and how he died will be known only after police investigation and post-mortem. Were there any family or personal problems we don't know. How can they blame us. Hence, we are requesting the Telangana government to investigate from all angles,'' urged Botsa Satyanarayana, Municipal Administration minister, Government of Andhra Pradesh.

After post-mortem, the mortal remains of Dr. Kodela Sivaprasada Rao will be taken to his native Guntur district in Andhra Pradesh.
