Another Bovine Invasion: Cow gatecrashes IIT Bombay hostel, seen eating pages from a book

Mid-Day | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights A cow was recently spotted inside hostel number 3 of IIT-B with a half-eaten book A spokesperson of the institute dismissed the photographs and said it cannot be confirmed if it was taken from inside IIT Bombay campus

Back in July, students at India’s premier engineering institution, IIT Bombay, were petrified when a cow interrupted an ongoing class. The stray cattle was seen roaming freely as perplexed students and teachers looked on in sheer amazement.

Students alleged that no action was taken to tackle the menace of the stray cattle on the campus. The incident happened just a few days after a student was attacked by a pair of bovines at the IIT-Bombay campus gate.

But the premier engineering institute has not learned its lessons yet.

In a similar case, a cow was recently spotted inside hostel number 3 of IIT-B with a half-eaten book. After the picture was shared on social media, netizens said authorities must soon find a solution to the cattle menace as it is becoming an embarrassment.

One user wrote, “It isn't rare to see a cow inside the hostel but one entering a room and tearing book like that is certainly to be alarmed about.”

However, a spokesperson of the institute dismissed the photographs and said it cannot be confirmed if it was taken from inside IIT Bombay campus. "It cannot be confirmed if the photo is from inside the IIT Bombay campus. But the cattle committee is working on a war footing to resolve the human-animal conflict," the spokesperson was quoted by Mid-Day.

The security guards inside the campus have been instructed to keep cattle away from the academic buildings. Now, the authority plans to give similar instructions to guards in charge of hostels.

But the spokesperson admitted that a more practical solution would be to restrict the movement of cattle inside the campus, which would require professional help. The institute is currently in talks to several NGOs to find a solution to the menace.
