Prominent spine surgeon, cab driver killed in Mumbai-Pune Expressway accident

Pic courtesy: www.sanchetihospital.org

Key Highlights A noted spine surgeon was killed in a road accident at Mumbai-Pune Expressway on Sunday night The car was stopped on the roadside after one of its tyres had got punctured The three doctors were purportedly returning to Pune after attending a medical conference in Mumbai

Pune: A prominent spine surgeon of a Pune-based private hospital and his cab driver were killed in a road accident at Mumbai-Pune Expressway on Sunday night.

Two other doctors were left injured in the accident.

"The mishap took place near Somatane village around 10.30 pm on Sunday when Dr Ketan Khurjekar (44), a spine expert, and two other orthopaedic surgeons were on way to Pune from Mumbai in a cab," said Talegaon Dabhade police station's inspector Kishor Mhasawade.

The driver had stopped the car near a Talegaon Dabhade village to replace a deflated tyre while returning to Pune.

As all of them alighted from the cab, Dr Ketan Khurjekar went to help the driver.

However, a speeding bus ran over the two men from behind, killing both Dr Khurjekar and the cab driver, Dnyaneshwar Bhosale (27), on the spot.

Mhasawade said that as per the primary information, the car was stopped on the roadside after one of its tyres had got punctured.

While the driver was changing the tyre, "a speeding private bus came from behind and hit them. Dr Khurjekar and the driver were killed and two other doctors have sustained serious injuries. The driver of the bus fled after the accident, we have launched a search for him,” said Mhasawade.

The other two doctors were rushed to Sancheti Hospital for treatment.

The three doctors were purportedly returning to Pune after attending a medical conference in Mumbai.

Dr Khurjekar was reportedly supposed to celebrate his 44th birthday on Monday.

A gold medalist in MS Ortho, Dr Khurjekar was Chief Spine Surgeon at the Sancheti Hospital. As per the record, the doctor had performed approximately 3,500 complicated surgeries.

In 2001, Dr Ketan Khurjekar stood first in MS Orthopaedics from Kolhapur University. He received Gold Medal in Orthopaedics from Kolhapur University in 2002. In the year 2005, Dr Khurjekar stood first in M.Ch Ortho, done from the UK.

Dr Ketan Khurjekar was awarded Global Scholarship in spine surgery by Scoliosis Research Society in 2006.
