NIA files chargesheet against 4 JeM terrorists, says were conspiring terror attack across India

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Monday filed a chargesheet before a Delhi court claiming that Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) Sajjad Ahmad Khan was conspiring terror attacks across the country.

The chargesheet names Sajjad Ahmad Khan, 27, Tanveer Ahmed Ganie, 29, Bilal Ahmad Mir, 23, and Muzaffar Ahmad Bhat, 25 -- all residents of Pulwama.

Sajjad Ahmad Khan was a close aide of Pulwama attack mastermind Mudassir Ahmad Khan, the charges against whom were abated earlier since he was killed in an encounter with security forces in March 2019, the NIA said in its final report.

Sajjad is also suspected to be involved in the conspiracy of Pulwama attack. He was arrested near the Lajpat Rai market by Delhi police and is believed to have been in regular touch with the terror strike mastermind before and after the attack, the NIA said.

Mudassir had sent Sajjad a video of Adil Dar - the fidayeen who carried out the Pulwama attack and later deleted it from his phone, the police had said.

"Investigation has established that the accused persons are members of proscribed terrorist organisation JeM, who were planning to carry out terrorist attacks and also propagating the activities of JeM," the NIA said its chargesheet.

"The slain terrorist Mudassir Ahmad Khan was the mastermind behind this conspiracy. He was one of the main conspirators in Pulwama terror Attack and was killed in an encounter with security forces, in village Pinglish, Tral in the night of March 9-10," it further added.

Pointing at the fidayeen attacks being conspired by the terrorists, the NIA said, "Tanveer Ahmed Ganie and Bilal Ahmad Mir wanted to carry out fidayeen attacks similar to Pulwama Attack. The two elder brothers of Sajjad Ahmad Khan were also active JeM terrorists who were killed in two different encounters with security forces."

The chargesheet was filed against four JeM operatives under sections 120-B (criminal conspiracy) and 121 A (waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the government of India) of IPC, and various sections of stringent Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) and sections of Explosives Substances Act.

The case pertains to a criminal conspiracy hatched by senior commanders of JeM to carry out terror attacks in different parts of India including Delhi-NCR.

These claims by the NIA comes a day after the JeM threatened to blow up Rewari railway junction in Haryana by October 8, along with many temples.

The threating letter, written in Hindi, was sent to the Rohtak railway police by one Masood from Karachi, an official of the Rohtak police had confirmed.

Moreover, three militants were arrested earlier this week in Jammu and Kashmir with arms and ammunition and are currently under seven-day police custody, news agency PTI had reported.

The JeM is a terror group which attacked Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir in February this year, killing more than 40 CISF officers.

(With inputs from PTI)
