Indian Girl poisons 7 Family Members to Elope with Boyfriend

the family was against the relationship.

An Indian girl from Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh, allegedly poisoned her family and later eloped with her boyfriend.

The girl, who is a minor, was unhappy that several members of her family did not approve of her boyfriend. The incident happened on September 10, 2019.

Police officers explained that the girl laced food with poison that was meant for seven members of her family.

After consuming the food, the family members fell unconscious. This included the girl’s mother, her four siblings, sister-in-law and nephew.

When they went unconscious, the girl met with her boyfriend and the two ran away. The man was identified as Arvind Kumar.

Meanwhile, her family was taken to a hospital where they underwent treatment. The girl’s father soon filed a police complaint.

Uday Shankar Singh, superintendent of police explained that an FIR was registered based on the complaint made by the Indian girl’s father.

He also said that two family members have been discharged while a woman and her child are still under observation. The remaining relatives are in hospital recovering.

According to the complaint, the family was against the relationship.

In December 2018, Kumar was jailed following the complaint made but was later released on bail.

But while on bail, Kumar allegedly threatened his girlfriend’s brother of dire consequences if the family continued to oppose the relationship.

Mainather Station House Officer (SHO) Manoj Kumar said:

“Since the girl is a minor, we have registered a case against the accused Arvind Kumar under sections 120B (criminal conspiracy), 328 (causing hurt by means of poison) and 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code and have started investigating the case. We are also conducting searches to locate the girl.”

Mid-Day reported that the minor girl and her boyfriend are still on the run.

In a similar case of a girl taking extreme measures against family members for opposing her relationship, a Bangalore-based businessman was killed by his 15-year-old daughter and her boyfriend.

Jai Kumar Jain had been against his daughter’s relationship with 18-year-old Praveen. When he found out, he allegedly beat her.

The teenage girl conspired with her boyfriend to kill her father. She put sleeping pills in her father’s milk before he went to bed.

She and her boyfriend then stabbed him multiple times before dragging the body to the bathroom and setting it on fire.

The girl initially claimed her father was killed in a house fire but when police officers found bloodstains on the bed, the teenager later confessed to the murder.

Both the girl and her boyfriend were later arrested and a case was registered.
