Watch: Teaser of Karthick Naren's 'Mafia' is intriguing

Watch: Teaser of Karthick Naren's 'Mafia' is intriguing

The video alternates between Arun Vijay and Prasanna, each equating himself to a lion and jackal respectively.

Flix Kollywood

The official teaser of Karthick Naren’s upcoming film with Arun Vijay, Prasanna and Priya Bhavani Shankar titled Mafia was released on Monday evening. Over the weekend, the director had posted that the film’s teaser had been appreciated by actor Rajinikanth.

The teaser alternates between Arun Vijay and Prasanna, both seated on a chair and each equating himself to a lion and a jackal respectively, the majestic and the cunning. While Arun Vijay holds a gun, Prasanna smokes a cigar. The teaser presents them as the hunter and the beast.

The wall behind Arun has the Tamil Nadu government’s emblem on it while behind Prasanna we see the words ‘software solutions’ briefly. The teaser also has plenty of action sequences. While the physical similarities between the two are noticeable in the beginning, the teaser ends with a shot that suggests that the two are perhaps sides of the same coin.

Mafia is bankrolled by Lyca Productions and stars Arun Vijay, Prasanna and Priya Bhavani Shankar in lead roles. Arvind Swami was the initial choice to play the lead role in this film but it eventually went to Arun Vijay. The technical crew of Mafia includes Jakes Bejoy for music, Gokul Benoy for cinematography and Sreejith Sarang for editing. The shooting of this film has been completed and it is currently in the post-production mode.

Watch:

This gangster drama has been shot in Chennai entirely. The director, in an interview, had said, “All three principal actors will be doing roles that they have not done before.”

Karthick Naren, who made his debut with Dhuruvangal Pathinaaru, also has Naragasooran, a long-delayed project that is yet to release. Initially, the director had cast Arvind Swami and Naga Chaitanya to play the lead roles. However, since Naga Chaitanya moved out of the project due to issues with the date, the director roped in Sundeep to replace Naga Chaitanya.
