Drunken man kills mother for not cooking food, tries to implicate father

Nagpur: A 45-year-old man was arrested on Saturday night for allegedly thrashing his mother to death for not cooking his choice of food. He later tried to pass on the crime to his father. The accused, Milind alias Sonu Hinge, had earlier told family member and cops that he was sleeping when his father Sadashiv got in a fight with his mother Mamta and killed her.

However, Sadashiv, who works as security guard at a school, was on duty when the incident happened. Milind has been booked by Sonegaon police for murder under section 302 of Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Cops said Milind, who worked as a mechanic, was an alcoholic and regularly used to get in fights with his mother. On Saturday evening, Milind came home and asked Mamta to cook brinjal for dinner. However, Mamta refused, and the accused thrashed her. Milind, who was drunk, also beat his mother with a roof tile.

The neighbours heard Mamta’s screams and informed her relatives. “The neighbours had heard screams for some time but the shouting stopped, so they informed us. When we reached the spot and opened the door, we saw Mamta lying in a pool of blood. Milind was sleeping in another room,” said one of Mamta’s relative.

“We woke up Milind and questioned him. He claimed that his father and mother had got into a fight and Sadashiv killed his wife. However, when we tried to grab him he started throwing roof tiles at us. So, some of the neighbours caught and thrashed him,” added the kin.

Meanwhile, police were informed about the incident. Sonegaon police arrested Milind while Mamta was taken to Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH), where she died during treatment.

It is learnt that Milind had got married in 2005 however his wife left him a couple of years after marriage due to his drinking habit.

Meanwhile, Mamta’s post mortem was conducted on Sunday at GMCH. Police produced Milind before court on Sunday and procured PCR till January 5.






