Sahista Parveen, wife of Tabrez Ansari the victim of Jharkhand lynching, threatens to commit suicide

Key Highlights Sahista Parveen, wife of lynching victim Tabrez Ansari, threatened to sit on fast unto death if she is not given autopsy report Jharkhand police dropped murder charges against 11 accused in lynching case Caught after stealing a bike, Tabrez Ansari was tied to a pole and beaten to death by a mob in Jharkhand

New Delhi: The wife of Tabrez Ansari who was lynched in Jharkhand in June has threatened to commit suicide if the murderers of her husband are not brought to justice. Sahista Parveen said she will commit suicide if the persons responsible for her husband’s death are not charged with Section 302 (murder) and hanged.

“The whole world knows how my husband died but nobody in the administration is ready to stand with us,” she alleged. She threatened to sit on a fast-unto-death if she was not given the copies of the post-mortem report and reports by the doctors who treated her Ansari after the incident.

In the memorandum submitted to the police, Sahista asserted that her husband died in the mob attack by residents of Dhatkidih village and police negligence. She demanded a copy of autopsy reports and medical records.

She said the police distorted the facts around the death of her husband in the court and sought punishment for the murderers under Section 302 of the IPC.

The Jharkhand police dropped the murder charge against 11 accused in the case pertaining to mob lynching of 24-year-old Ansari.

The video of Tabrez being brutally beaten up by a mob went viral in June. He was reportedly caught with a stolen bike after which he was tied to a pole, thrashed by villagers with rods and forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' in Seraikela-Kharsawan district. The incident took place on the night of June 17.

He was later sent to prison and died a few days later. Eleven people were arrested in the case.

The Jharkhand Police submitted a charge sheet in a court and recommended commencement of trial in the case under Section 304 of IPC (culpable homicide not amounting to murder) and not Section 302 (murder).

The charge sheet was filed by the police on the basis of the final autopsy report, which gave a clean chit to the cops, doctors and people involved in the mob lynching case. The report indicated cardiac arrest as the reason for Tabrez’s death.

According to Seraikela-Kharsawan Superintendent of Police Karthik S, "The post-mortem and medical report did not support the charge of murder. They said he died of cardiac arrest.”

"We had doubts and we went for a second opinion from higher-level experts from the forensic and pathological side and they also gave the same set of opinion. So, we had to charge them under Section 304 instead of 302," he added.
