Total sees opportunity in single-use plastic ban

Compounded poly lactic acid (PLA) bioplastics solutions could be the answer to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s call for eradicating single-use plastics in India.

Bringing this solution to India, Total Corbion PLA, an equal joint venture (JV) between Total and Corbion, has set up a technical collaboration with Konspec to study various plastic applications across industries.

The firms are in discussions with several airports, fast moving consumer goods companies, hospitality chains, footwear companies and food aggregators among others for setting-up industry-specific light-house projects.

Vinod Bondal, chief executive officer, Konspec, said India is on a cusp of revolutionising and reimagining possibilities using biodegradable plastics by evaluating sustainable solutions in the areas of flexible and rigid packaging.

“This provides an opportunity to work with large Indian brand owners and relevant stakeholders to create sustainable solutions that progress towards a circular economy, one that also ensures a robust waste to wealth with zero harm to the environment. We are enthused by the response about its adoption through various sectoral conversations we have been initiating over the last few months,” said Bondal.

An industry leader in polymer masterbatches for several decades now, Konspec’s collaboration with Total Corbion is aimed at offering sustainable and environmentally friendly biodegradable and compostable solutions for the flexible and rigid packaging industries. Targeting India, Bangladesh and Nepal markets, the technical collaboration plans to create ‘light-house projects’ – a closed loop spotlight and industry-exclusive pilot project – with specific sectors that are high on the plastic consumption cycle and yet can be converted into a closed loop of circular economy and a waste to wealth programme where the waste can be reacquired and recycled or converted into energy, or composted and returned to the soil as fertiliser.

Stephane Dion, CEO, Total Corbion PLA, said PLA bioplastics offer concrete solutions to have a real and meaningful impact in terms of sustainability. “As India is focusing the industry’s attention towards finding sustainable solutions, being a world-scale PLA producer, we will work with the industry to create tailor-made solutions. PLA will enable manufacturers to move into the circular economy and produce biobased products,” he said.
