Gurugram: 2 cops sacked for links with NCR crime lord

It was a secret operation that led to the arrest of Gurugram's most wanted man, Kaushal (38), from Dubai last month. Cops had a Kerala resident whose phone Kaushal had used. A copy of Kaushal's fake passport had already been recovered from his man here. Then, multiple police teams flew to Dubai and camped there for two months, sharing leads with local officials.

These and other such details were revelations for many. But a police investigation, launched after Kaushal's interrogation, has thrown up a real shocker. Kaushal fled India in 2017 when he was out on parole. He briefly stayed in Bangkok before reaching Dubai on work visa. He lived in a rented house in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) city and kept changing his looks. He

made extortion calls by using SIM cards of different countries and led his gang members active in Gurugram and its adjoining areas. Money collected by the gang from jewellers, hoteliers and realtors was sent to Kaushal through Hawala transactions. He was planning to fly to an African country on fake Spanish identity but ran out of luck.

THE CONNIVANCE

But all this while, some cops were helping Kaushal run his notorious extortion business. "He knew about every police move planned against him and his gang, involved in about 200 cases of extortion, murder, attempt to murder and kidnapping in Gurugram and neighbouring towns of Rewari, Faridabad and Palwal," said a police source.

"Kaushal had prior information on all transfers and postings of DSPs, inspectors and sub-inspectors, even in the most secretive police departments: the Crime Branch and the Special Task Force (STF)," he said. Two Head Constables, Raj Kumar and Pradeep Dhariwal, have been sacked for their connivance with the crime lord and his men. There might be other moles in the police department, not just in Gurugram but also in Faridabad and Rewari, sources said.

"The two cops were tracking police strategies and sharing them with Kaushal and his men. That helped him be a step ahead and stay off police net. They also helped him continuously change locations in Haryana and Rajasthan even before he fled India," said a police source. Faridabad Crime Branch ACP Anil Yadav said Head Constable Raj Kumar, earlier in STF, was in direct contact with Kaushal, his shooter and the gang's Faridabad in-charge, Sachin Kheri.

He was also in touch with Kaushal's nephew Amit Dagar and shooter Neeraj Faridpur. "Raj Kumar had given names and phone numbers of targets, including Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary. Kaushal made a WhatsApp call to the leader to extort money. Chaudhary refused and also used abusive language which made Kaushal furious. He told Kheri to kill Chaudhary in broad daylight," ACP Yadav said. Chaudhary was shot dead outside a gym in Faridabad in June

this year, to spread a message of terror in the area. Head Constable Pradeep Dhariwal was part of Chaudhary's security team.

"Raj Kumar obtained information about Chaudhary from Dhariwal and passed it on to Kaushal and Kheri. For this information, Raj Kumar took Rs 3 lakh from Kaushal's mother in her native village Naharpur Rupa in Gurugram," said a police source.

ACP Yadav confirmed that Kaushal, during his interrogation, has named the two Head Constables as his aides. "They worked for him and gave all information regarding STF and Crime Branch," he said. Before Kaushal was arrested, Head Constable Raj Kumar took a long leave and stayed in touch with him and Kheri, police source said, quoting call record details.

Faridabad Police Commissioner KK Rao said, "As the matter was very serious, Head Constable Raj Kumar has been sacked." About 20 of Kaushal's men have been nabbed in recent operations. Cops are now chasing the remaining 35.
