Spine surgeon on way to Pune from conference in Mumbai killed by bus

Mumbai-Pune Expressway

medical conference

Sancheti hospital

national and international seminars

Dr Ketan Khurjekar (left) died on Sunday night; (far right) the bus which hit him

Dr Ketan Khurjekar was helping his driver change a flat tyre onwhen a private bus hit them from behind; both died on the spot.A renowned spine surgeon and his driver were killed on the Mumbai-Pune Expressway when a speeding bus rammed into them. The incident happened around 10.30 pm on Sunday. Dr Ketan Khurjekar, 44, was returning from Mumbai after attending awhen the car he was travelling in had to halt on the highway near Somatne village following a tyre burst. Dr Khurjekar was helping the driver replace the tyre when a Volvo bus hit them from behind.He and the driver Dnyaneshwar Bhosale, 27, died on the spot while two other doctors travelling with them sustained minor injuries. Dr Jayesh Balasheheb Pawar and Dr Pramod Bhillare are currently under observation atThe deceased were taken to Talegaon general hospital for autopsy.The police have identified the bus through CCTV footage but are yet to arrest the driver. The killer vehicle was bound for Karnataka.Recipient of several awards, Dr Khurjekar, well-known for carrying out complex spine surgeries, is survived by his wife Dr Devarati, two daughters and his parents. He would have celebrated his 45th birthday on Monday.He was the head of the spine surgery department in Sancheti Hospital. The hospital staff expressed shocked at his sudden demise. A mentor to young orthopaedic surgeons, Dr Khurjekar was loved by his patients, peers and students alike. He was an orator who chaired severalon spine surgery.Dr Parag Sancheti, director of Sancheti Hospital, said, “Dr Khurjekar had successfully carried out more than 10,000 surgeries and was the head of the spine surgery department for over 15 years. His death is a great loss for the medical fraternity and to patients who would have immensely benefited from his expertise.”
