Phoolka: ’84 case against Kamal Nath ‘very strong’

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, September 16

Old ghosts are back to haunt Congress veteran Kamal Nath with legal experts working to secure justice for the victims of 1984 Sikh riots today calling the case against Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister “very strong”.

“The case against Congress leader Kamal Nath is stronger than the one against Sajjan Kumar. The reason is while Kumar all along denied his presence at Delhi Cantonment on November 1 and 2, 1984, when five Sikhs of one family were killed, Nath admitted to his presence at Gurdwara Rakabganj on November 1, 1984, the day two Sikhs were burnt to death and the Sikh shrine torched by communally motivated crowds,” lawyer HS Phoolka working on anti-Sikh riots told The Tribune.

Two key witnesses — Sanjay Suri, a journalist with a daily at the time of killings following the assassination of then PM Indira Gandhi and Mukhtiar Singh — have expressed keenness to record their statements.

Nath was named an accused in the case. The allegation was that Nath instigated the crowds. Nath denied the charge all along and said he was at the gurdwara to pacify rioters on the directions of then PM Rajiv Gandhi.

The Nanavati Commission that directed a re-investigation into three riots cases exonerated Nath in the Gurdwara Rakabganj matter. Lawyer Kaamna Vohra, who was part of the CBI team that challenged the Sajjan Kumar’s acquittal in the case pertaining to five Sikh killings in Delhi Cantonment, also said the matter against Nath remained strong.

Questions for the SIT

What was Nath doing at the gurdwara all along if not instigating riot while two Sikhs slowly burnt to their death. Did Nath arrange help for the Sikh victims of burns if he indeed wanted to help as he claims? Did Nath take the victims to the hospital? — HS Phoolka, lawyer

Probe missing Kanpur files: DSGMC

New Delhi: A day after files pertaining to the killing of Sikhs in Kanpur during the 1984 riots were reported missing, the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) demanded a judicial probe and registration of cases against those responsible for securing the files. tns
