EXCLUSIVE: Tenet in Mumbai: Christopher Nolan took THESE many takes to film David John Washington walk?

The break of dawn at the Colaba Causeway Market in Mumbai saw at least 200 to 300 people gather to film a scene for Tenet. The international espionage is helmed by ace filmmaker Christopher Nolan. Before the sun rose, Nolan and his team were up and about with the intention of filming a scene. It involved actor John David Washington. The sequence was simple, we are told. All David had to do was walk from one portion of the Causeway market to another. However, Pinkvilla exclusively learned that it was not all that simple.

Our sources revealed that the actor had to take a few takes before Nolan called it a shot and moved on towards the Royal Bombay Yacht Club to film with Robert Pattinson. We hear that the filmmaker took about 10 to 12 retakes before he was satisfied with the scene. "All David had to do was walk from one corner of the market to another," our insider spilled the beans.

"He emerged from the inside of the market to make his way to the junction of the street which connects commuters to Gateway of India. It involved the actor take a burner phone, make a call and find his way out of the busy market space. However, the scene took about 10 to 12 retakes before Nolan called for 'cut,'" our source explained.

The cast and crew of Tenet were on the Causeway for three to four hours to film the scene before they made their way to film scenes inside Royal Bombay Yacht Club where Robert Pattinson shot his share of scenes. Bollywood actress Dimple Kapadia was also spotted on the sets with her hair and makeup on. The team made their way to ferries near the Gateway of India to shoot a scene.

While these were the three stars spotted at the filming, Tenet features many more heavyweights. Apart from Pattinson, Washington and Kapadia, the film also stars Elizabeth Debicki, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Clémence Poésy, Michael Caine, Kenneth Branagh and Himesh Patel. Apart from India, Tenet is being shot at Estonia, the United Kingdom, Italy and a few other parts of the world. Tenet is slated to release on July 17, 2020. Stay tuned to Pinkvilla for more updates.

ALSO READ: EXCLUSIVE: Tenet Mumbai Schedule: Christopher Nolan, Robert Pattinson & others to film on Tuesday at THIS time
