Jammu and Kashmir post Article 370 abrogation: Continued high alert an imperative

Pakistan has a deep-rooted vested interest in Kashmir and this explains its desperation in fomenting unrest here | Photo Credit: IANS

The nation took a historic decision on August 5, 2019, when the provisions of Article 35-A and Article 370 were done away with by the approval of both houses of Parliament and the President’s assent thereafter.

In the life of any nation, there comes a time when difficult decisions, having far-reaching ramifications, have to be taken in the national interest and this was one of them.

In one stroke, a historic wrong was set right. The country braced for all eventualities before progressing on this agenda and it is to the credit of the security forces that law and order is very much under control. NSA Ajit Doval has stated, on record, that not a single bullet has been fired in Kashmir in the last one month. He also stated that normalcy can be restored if Pakistan starts behaving. This is highly unlikely, as the existence of the current Pakistan government is closely intertwined with sabre-rattling vis-a-vis India and creating disturbances in Kashmir. Consequently, there are significant and multiple security considerations that would require undivided attention and alertness of the security forces in the foreseeable future.

There are reports that Afghan Mujahideen and the Taliban fighters, and not to mention, ISIS cadres may be provoked by Pakistan and facilitated to infiltrate and create disturbances not only in Kashmir but other parts of India as well. Video footages are available showing Lashkar recruits being trained in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, specifically to negotiate smart fencing along the border and special telescopic ladders are being used to go across. Customised jackets have been issued to the terrorists to prevent injuries while crawling along the concertina barbed wires.

It is noteworthy that both the Afghan Mujahideen and the Taliban had the backing and support of the CIA during their struggle against the Soviet forces in Afghanistan. At that point of time, they were equipped with state-of-art futuristic technologies, not only by the CIA but also by leading intelligence agencies like ISI and of the British. At one time they even had access to the Stinger missiles which had the capabilities of bringing down helicopters and aircrafts. The Frankenstein created then by the CIA is certainly not dead. Around 12,500 were trained by 1992, and another 2,500 passed out later. Harkat ul Mujahideen, a Pakistan-backed organisation, is geared full time currently in training jihadis to create disturbances in Kashmir.

Another ominous factor is the presence of the 40,000 illegal Rohingya migrants that have surreptitiously entered India. Of these, 5,742 are reported to be in Jammu, and 7,064 in Ladakh. There are credible reasons to believe that sections of these Rohingya refugees are being manipulated by Pakistan’s intelligence agency, the ISI, for subversive activities. The presence of Rohingyas in large numbers in Ladakh and Jammu make the ingredients of serious internal security challenges in times to come as they have a history of collaboration with the ISI. The malicious game plan is clear that the Rohingyas were not made to settle in the Muslim majority Valley, but were rehabilitated at strategic locations, paving way for the possible use of refugees as weapons.

There is credible intelligence that the coastal areas of Gujarat are vulnerable to attacks from the seas. Pakistani commandos may attempt to attack the ports in Gujarat and also try to sneak in for the purpose of creating a communal disturbance. Our security forces, however, rose to the occasion and have proved equal to the task.

Meanwhile, Kashmir appears to be comparatively stable with sporadic demonstrations and sloganeering. Unfortunately, a trader who opened his shop in Srinagar was gunned down by anti-social elements on August 29. There are also reports of sporadic incidents of demonstrations, however, the situation is fast returning to normal with the restoration of landline telephone connectivity. But it requires extreme alertness, caution, and care for the next few months.

Ghulam Nabi Azad has been allowed by the Supreme Court to visit Kashmir and Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi has stated that he may visit Srinagar to ascertain the ground reality himself. These are very positive signs and a tribute to our vibrant democracy and judiciary.

But we, as a nation, should not be giving conflicting signals. The clear unambiguous signal that must emanate is that India is one and stands solidly behind the government, rather than give questionable statements. One senior politician from Madhya Pradesh stated that there are more spies from the majority community than from the minority community.

Mamata Bannerjee’s soft corner for the illegal Bangladeshi migrants and Rohingyas is too well known to be reiterated. Sharad Pawar went overboard praising the people of Pakistan. There is no dearth of those who would like to score political brownie points even when it comes to matters of top national interest. A spy is a spy, irrespective of his caste and community and it is best left to investigation and the judiciary to handle this within the framework of the law. Publicly profiling a spy on communal lines is not in the national interest.

Obviously, Pakistan has a deep-rooted vested interest in Kashmir and this explains its desperation in fomenting unrest here and other parts of India. For this reason, our security forces have to be extremely vigilant and alert to cater to any emergency. Pakistan has been snubbed, not only by the Muslim countries but also by almost all the major powers, except China. A frustrated and bankrupt neighbour, known the world over for being the epicentre of terrorism, can be unpredictable and come out with desperate knee-jerk responses. Already Imran Khan is saying that Pakistan is incapable of winning a conventional war against India and in case of imminent defeat, may take recourse to the nuclear option as well. This is yet another irresponsible statement from the maverick, self-styled “ambassador” of the Kashmiri people. But the violation of ceasefire along the Kashmir border continues and there are credible intelligence inputs indicating sly and covert designs of Pakistan to harm India through hybrid warfare.

The situation in Kashmir would require astute handling on all fronts like defence, internal security, diplomacy, information warfare, confidence-building measures, economics and indeed, all aspects of statecraft. Barring aforementioned exceptions, the entire nation, and all the security forces have galvanised as one entity, forgetting all differences to give a befitting reply to Pakistan and mischievous “jihadi” and “azaadi” elements inside the country.

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
