Cigarette butts lifted from crime scene help police catch 'Daytona Serial Killer'

Sheriff Ric Bradshaw briefing the media on the Rachel Bey cold case (Picture Courtesy: PBSO - Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office) | Photo Credit: YouTube

Key Highlights Investigators have linked Hayes to murders committed in 2005, 2006 and even 2007 Hayes enrolled in Bethune-Cookman University from 2000 to 2006 for a degree in criminal justice A judge in Palm Beach County court has ordered Hayes to be held without bond

New Delhi: Officers with the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office claim to have arrested a man suspected to be the 'Daytona Serial Killer'. The suspect, a graduate with a degree in criminal justice from the Bethune-Cookman University, Robert Tyrone Hayes has been arrested and charged with the brutal murders of four women.

The first of these crimes dates back to the 2005 murder of LaQuetta Gunther followed by the killing of Julie Green and Iwana Patton in 2016. The most recent of Hayes' victims was 32-year-old Rachel Elizabeth Bey whose body was found in a battered state off a Jupiter highway in 2016. Police found several cigarette butts from the scene of the crime and obtained DNA evidence from them to further their case.

According to a report, investigators used genetic genealogy to identify Hayes as a suspect and zeroed in on him soon after. He was brought to the Palm Beach County court where a judge ordered that he be held without bond on a first-degree murder charge. A public defender appointed to represent Hayes was briefed about how he had thrashed, sexually assaulted and strangled Bey about three years ago.

Hayes is expected to be charged with three other murders from 2005 and 2006, said 7th Circuit State Attorney RJ Larizza. Larizza further told media outlets that all the three women got into a car with a stranger and were found dead as a result of fatal gunshot wounds later. Officers are now using DNA profiles to confirm whether Hayes was the one who murdered Gunther, Green and Patton.

In fact, DNA obtained from cigarette butts recovered from the Bey crime scene matches DNA evidence collected from at least one of the two Daytona Beach murders. Similarly, ballistic evidence further connects Hayes to two of those murders, including the victim who was not linked to him through DNA evidence. Investigators believe they have reason to suspect that Hayes is also behind the murder of 30-year-old Stacey Gage, who was found dead at her suburban home in Daytona Beach in 2007.

Officers familiar with the case said B-CU has confirmed that Hayes acquired a degree in criminal justice from the university from 2000 to 2006. At the time of the murders, Hayes was interviewed among hundreds of others after he walked into a local gun store with a .40 caliber firearm which resembled the weapon used to commit the crime. However, Hayes got off the hook by claiming that he had lent his gun to his mother, who lived in West Palm Beach at the time. In December of 2006, he had approached police with a complaint regarding his .40 caliber firearm, which he claimed had been stolen from his car in Riviera Beach.
