Pak violates ceasefire on IB in Samba, Kathua: BSF

Pak violates ceasefire on IB in Samba, Kathua: BSF

JAMMU, Sep 17: A day after heavy mortar shelling on the Line of Control (LoC) in Balakote sector of Poonch district, Pakistan Tuesday violated ceasefire and resorted to small arms firing in forward areas along the International Border (IB) in Samba and Kathua districts, BSF officials said.

Using small arms, the Pakistan Rangers began firing at forward border outposts in Samba and Hiranagar sectors at 1 PM. It continued till 3 PM and later intermittently, they said.

The BSF retaliated in equal measure and the cross border fire stopped after some time.

IG BSF N S Jamwal said that that there was no damage or casualty. IG BSF said that Pakistani forces unleashed “unprecedented” cross-border firing along the Indo-Pak border in Samba and Hiranagar sectors of Jammu region.

He said the border guarding force mounted an “adequate retaliation” after Pakistan opened fire in the evening hours. The unprovoked firing from across the border was done by small arms on BSF domination areas in the Samba and Hiranagar sectors, he added.

“No loss or damage to property has been reported on the Indian side,” he said.

This is for the first time in last several months that Pakistan resorted to ceasefire violation along the IB. Over the last two months, Pakistan army has been violating the ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) by targeting villages and posts in Rajouri and Poonch districts.

On Monday, seven army soldiers including a Major were injured in mortar shelling and firing by the Pakistan army in violation of ceasefire in Balakote sector of Poonch district.

Injured army soldiers have been identified as Major Prakash Singh, Subedar Suresh Singh, Havaldar Bhaskar Rao, Sepoy Jeetu Singh, Sepoy Kishan Singh, Naik Nirmal Singh and Sepoy Jasbir Singh.

Five of them were airlifted from the Army Hospital Rajouri and admitted in the Command Hospital Udhampur while two others including Naik Nirmal Singh and Sepoy Jasbir Singh were admitted in the Army Hospital Rajouri.

The border with Pakistan in the plains of Jammu had been peaceful for quite some time.

Pakistan has been violating the ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) by targetting villages and posts in Rajouri, Akhnoor and Poonch district over the last few weeks. This comes amid the escalation of tensions between India and Pakistan after the Centre’s move to abrogation of Article 370 provisions which guaranteed special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

The BSF guards the Indo-Pak International Border from Jammu to Gujarat, including the states of Punjab and Haryana.
