Pakistan Army using dormant routes to infiltrate terrorists into Kashmir Valley

Representational image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights According to officials, higher reaches of Gulmarg are being used by Pakistani army to infiltrate terrorists into the Valley Terror groups have also been entering from Gurez, Machil, Tangdhar sectors

New Delhi: Dormant routes are being used by the Pakistani army to infiltrate terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan has attempted to push nearly 60 terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir since the abrogation of Article 370 in the first week of August. The assessment comes amid reports that there has been a surge in infiltrations from across the border in northern Kashmir and along Poonch and Rajouri in Jammu.

"During a recent meeting to ascertain the number of successful and unsuccessful infiltration bids along the Line of Control, the army representative was presented with host of evidence collected by various agencies about infiltration by terrorists from higher reaches of Gurez, Machil and Gulmarg sectors of Kashmir region and Poonch and Rajouri areas in Jammu region," an official was cited as saying by news agency PTI.

According to the agency report, higher reaches of Gulmarg — partly under Srinagar-based HQ 15 Corps and Nagrota-based 16 Corps was used by terrorists to enter Kashmir in the early 90s. According to officials, terrorists are also using a route leading to 'Ustad Post' to enter the Valley.

RELATED NEWS Pakistanis back Army to counter Indian aggression, says Shah Mehmood Qureshi

"A group of terrorists shifted to Baba Reshi area before moving via Pakherpora to highly-volatile Pulwama district, where they have set up their permanent base. Another group has moved into the central district of Budgam," the officials said. According to the report, militant groups also infiltrated from Gurez, Machil, Tangdhar sectors and were given the cover of heavy artillery fire by Pakistan army.

Lama area in Rajouri is another route the terrorists have been using to gain access to the Kashmir valley.
