'A maniac who could kill anyone and not feel anything': Texas teen sentenced to 20 years for aiding terrorist group

A Texas teenager has been sentenced to 20 years in prison for his attempts to recruit another American to join a Pakistan-based terrorist organization.

Kyle Sewell, 18, was sentenced in federal court after he pleaded guilty to one count of conspiring to provide material support to a foreign terrorist organization. According to court documents, Sewell attempted to recruit an unnamed co-conspirator to join Lashkae-e-Taiba, known as LeT, based out of Pakistan and Kashmir. LeT is the group that was behind the 2008 Mumbai attack that killed 166.

Sewell spoke to two FBI undercover employees during the investigation. He told one that he planned to travel overseas to fight for LeT, but needed three to five years to prepare. He planned to “physically train himself, obtain Lasik surgery to improve his vision, and save money for an airline ticket to Pakistan," according to the criminal complaint.

The teen said he initially supported the Islamic State but didn’t condone their killing of other Muslims.

During this time, court documents say Sewell actively encouraged another American to join LeT and put the unnamed co-conspirator in contact with one of the undercover FBI employees. Sewell told the undercover employee that he didn’t think the co-conspirator was a spy and would kill him if he found out he was.

Sewell also posted a number of inflammatory statements supporting Islamist terrorism on social media. Sewell wrote in October 2018 that “he is a maniac who could kill anyone and not feel anything," according to the complaint.

“Sewell also stated that he had killed dogs, cats, goats, pigs, and camels, but not humans, saying that he would rather wait to do that,” it continued. In addition, that same month Sewell threatened on social media to disembowel someone and spoke about how he “wished death upon all homosexuals.”

In November 2018 he said that he wanted death as much as most people his age want sex and also said he wanted to use a gun to “kill liberal Muslims,” and that it was “Allah’s will to turn him into a killing machine.”

The teen was arrested in Arlington, Texas, in February and pleaded guilty to the charge in May.

“This case demonstrates how an American citizen can be radicalized by a violent ideology based upon hate and how the actions of the FBI and our partners on the Joint Terrorism Task Force worked tirelessly to prevent violence here, and abroad," said U.S. Attorney Nealy Cox in a Monday press release. “The 20 year sentence proves that justice in the Northern District of Texas can be swift and certain."

"We will work aggressively to counter terrorist threats and treat these cases with the highest priority," Cox added.
