Tarigami by his side, Yechury announces sustained legal battle on Article 370

NL Correspondent

New Delhi, Sept 17

CPI(M) chief Sitaram Yechury on Tuesday announced that his party will mount a sustained legal battle in Supreme Court against abrogation of Article 370 which had given special status to Jammu and Kashmir, and bifurcation of the state and related issues.

The four-time sitting CPI(M) MLA from Kulgam, Mohammad Yousuf Tarigami, will lead the battle.

“The case will be registered in the name of Yousuf Tarigami,” said Yechury, adding that the boundary of the state was changed without approval of the Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly.

Charging the Centre being high-handed in its spectrum of actions regarding the state, including scrapping it of special status, and carving out Ladakh as Union Territory, he expressed apprehension on the final end-result of it all.

Just when a chance of government formation after BJP withdrew support from PDP-led government brightened, President’s rule was imposed.

Yechury thanked the apex court for having allowed him to visit the state and also for allowing Tarigami to visit AIIMS-Delhi for medical treatment.

The CPI(M) chief had challenged detention of Tarigami in Jammu and Kashmir following revocation of Article 370. The case will also be pursued, he added.

He said the Centre’s claim of normalcy in the state is misleading. There is complete shutdown in the state and break-down in communication system.

CPI(M) leader from Kashmir Mohd Yousuf Tarigami on Tuesday criticized the Centre for detaining former Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah under PSA and said that “people across the border are clapping” that the Government has done what they could not.

Addressing a press conference with CPI(M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury, the former member of Jammu and Kashmir Assembly said that whatever is happening in Kashmir is not in the interest of the country.

“We, Abdullah and others are not terrorists. It is such a horrible time. I am very disturbed,” he said.

Tarigami said he was informed on the intervening night of August 4 and August 5 that he had been placed under house arrest.

“Although I have seen worse days in the state, I am shocked at the latest turn of events. The BJP government has changed the status of the state in one stroke without taking people into confidence,” he said.

People of the state want to be in sync with the nation. “Give us the chance to march with you,” Tarigami said in an appeal to the Union government.
