Texas teen gets 20 years in prison for terror-recruiting plot

A Texas teen was sentenced to the maximum 20 years in prison on Monday for recruiting a fellow American to join a blood-thirsty Pakistani terror group.

Michael Kyle Sewell, 18, of Arlington, was busted in February following an FBI investigation in which he exchanged a series of online messages with two undercover operatives who were posing as radical Islamic extremists associated with Lashkar-e-Taiba.

The group, also known as LeT, is based in Pakistan and has been accused of training the terrorists who killed nearly 170 people in Mumbai, India, over four days in November 2008.

In one conversation, Sewell said he wanted to join LeT, but needed several years to get in shape, have Lasik surgery to improve his vision and save money for airfare to Pakistan, court papers say.

Around the same time, Sewell also contacted an unidentified US citizen whose social-media account featured an ISIS flag, court papers say.

During online conversations between Nov. 3 and Nov. 8, 2018, the man “told Sewell that he wanted to go to paradise and be a soldier of God,” court papers say.

When the man said he wanted to join ISIS, Sewell argued against it, saying ISIS “had no territory” and suggesting he join LeT or the Taliban instead, court papers say.

Sewell also gave the man contact information for one of the undercover FBI operatives, who he said “was in Pakistan and could help [him] get to LeT,” court papers say.

During a Nov. 9 online discussion with that operative, Sewell vouched for the recruit, saying his “intentions were pure,” court papers say.

After the operative thanked him, Sewell also agreed to help when the operative said LeT needed “many lions,” court papers say.

On Dec. 19, the man who Sewell recruited told the operative that he’d purchased a ticket to fly from JFK Airport to London on Feb. 7.

Court papers don’t say what happened to the recruit and a spokesperson for the US Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Texas didn’t immediately return an inquiry from The Post.

In addition to Sewell’s recruiting efforts, court papers detail outrageous statements he made on social media in support of Islamic extremism, including saying that he hated American and that “it was Allah’s will to turn him into a killing machine.”

see also Pakistani authorities arrest leader behind 2008 Mumbai hotel attack Following his arrest, Sewell admitted that he had researched LeT and knew that the US had declared it a terrorist group before he contacted the recruit, court papers say.

In May, Sewell pleaded guilty to conspiracy to provide material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization.

In addition to his prison term, Sewell was sentenced to 30 years of supervised release, during which he’s required to “participate in mental health treatment services as directed” and have monitoring software installed on his computers.

But Forth Worth federal Judge Reed O’Connor spared him a fine of up to $250,000 because he “does not have the financial resources or future earning capacity to pay,” according to court records.
