Delhi: Prices of onion shoot up in city

Following the floods in major supplying states such as Maharashtra, Karnataka and MP, one kg of onion in the retail market in Delhi is being sold for Rs 60.

Prices of onion have shot up by around 50 per cent due to uneven distribution and supply in the wholesale markets across the country, following floods in major supplying states such as Maharashtra, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh.

Result of this one kg of onions in the retail market in Delhi is being sold for Rs 60. "Onion prices have almost doubled in the last 7 to 10 days. Earlier the wholesale price of onion was Rs 15 per kilogram, now it is being sold at Rs 25 to Rs 35," said Rajendra Sharma, a wholesaler of Delhi's biggest Azadpur wholesale vegetable market.

Sharma attributed the difference in demand and supply due to floods in several states behind the hike. "Supply is less than demand. Due to rains in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, there is a shortage of onions in Delhi," he said. Another trader Dinesh said, "More than 100 trucks loaded with onions used to come here every day, but at present, the number has come down around just 70 trucks."

However, Dinesh hopes that within two weeks the situation will get back to normal. "There is a slight relief from rains in Rajasthan and Maharashtra, so the situation is expected to get under control after two weeks," he added.

Even the buyers are claiming that with the rise in prices they are trying to keep onion out of their shopping list. "As the onion prices are shooting up it is better to avoid it for a few days. After all, it is just for the taste," said a school teacher who came with his wife Snehlata for shopping at Paharganj market.

According to the traders, every year we see a steep rise in prices of perishable commodities like potato, onion and tomato. This year, it is so far limited to onion as Tomatoes are being sold at Rs 15 per kilogram. There was disruption because of floods in states like Maharasthra and Karnataka.
