Surat diamantaires made helmet must a decade ago

SURAT: While the fear of hefty penalties now has now brought Surat residents literally on the line, diamantaires in the city had successfully implemented the helmet rule almost a decade back for their employees.Thus, for an estimated 40,000 workers of the big diamond companies located in Katargam and Varachha, adhering to traffic rules has been a habit cultivated for many years now.In fact, the helmet rule in a majority of these big diamond companies, enforced after the then city police commissioner Rakesh Asthana implemented helmet and PUC rules in 2011, has been much stricter than the present amended Motor Vehicle Act.While some companies would punish their polishers coming to office on two-wheelers without wearing helmets with a day's pay cut and not being allowed to sit on the emery wheels, in some others, such errant workers were not even allowed to park their vehicles inside the premises and as punishment asked to park them a few kilometres away!Chairman of Shri Ram Krishna Export (SRK), Govind Dholakia said, “Helmet rule started a decade ago in our company and it is strictly followed by our 3,000-strong workforce. The rule was implemented following a few cases of accidental deaths of our workers.”Dholakia further said that workers not wearing helmets are not allowed to work on that day and their wages are cut as a penalty. In all these years, hardly a few workers have been caught violating the helmet rule, he added. “We have also tied up with a branded helmet manufacturing company for the purpose. The company will contribute 50% of the cost, while the worker pays the remaining half,” said DholakiaShailesh Patel, a diamond worker in SRK said, “I was not allowed to enter into the factory a few years ago for not wearing my helmet. From then on, I may forget my wallet or tiffin, but not my helmet!”And so it is for tens of thousands of diamond workers who are seen rushing to their factories in the morning wearing helmets.Managing director of Dharmanandan Diamond Private Limited, Hitesh Patel said, "Workers’ safety is paramount in our factory. The mandatory helmet rule was implemented in our factory in 2011. Every year we gift our 8000 workers helmets on Diwali along with Diwali bonus. We have also created two parking slots for two-wheelers. One is inside the factory premises which is for those wearing helmets to work. The other is a punishment parking for workers sans helmets located two kilometres away!
