Saudi oil facility attack: Surging oil prices could worsen India’s growth hurdle

Nearly 5 per cent of the world’s total crude oil supply and half of Saudi’s oil production has been affected by the recent drone attack. (Photo: Reuters/Representational image)

India's plans for economic recovery could hit a barricade after the heart of Saudi Arabia's oil industry was targetted in a deadly drone attack over the weekend.

Multiple drone strikes disrupted operations at two major oil production facilities run by state-owned Saudi Aramco, one of the top oil and gas refineries in the world. The development has triggered panic among global traders, who expect a sharp rise in oil prices if Saudi Arabia fails to restore its full oil production capacity in a few weeks.

Following the drone attacks on Saudi Aramco's Abqaiq and Khurais plants by Yemen's Houthi rebels, Saudi Arabia's total oil production has been cut down by 5.7 million barrels per day (BPD), which is nearly 5 per cent of the world's total crude oil supply and half of Saudi's oil production.

The international benchmark Brent Crude jumped almost 20 per cent on Monday, the highest-ever surge in the past 30 years. While oil prices eased significantly since Monday's shock plunge, a cap on Saudi's oil exports for a few weeks could disrupt India's road to economic revival.

EFFECT ON INDIA

A spike in global crude oil prices seems inevitable as Saudi Arabia will be forced to cap oil supplies in the wake of the attack on one of its largest oil refineries.

Since India is a large importer of oil from Saudi Arabia, a spike in the rates is the last thing New Delhi would want, especially at a time when India is facing an ongoing economic slowdown.

Let's look at some key numbers.

India imports almost 80 per cent of its oil requirements. Saudi Arabia is India's second-largest oil supplier of crude and cooking gas.

Data from the oil ministry's Petroleum Planning and Analysis (PPAC) shows that India's dependence on oil has increased gradually since 2017. In 2018-19, India's oil consumption increased to 211.6 million tonnes.

On the contrary, India's domestic crude output continues to fall. Crude output dropped from 36.9 million tonnes in 2015-16 to 36 million tonnes in 2016-17. By FY19, India's crude output fell to 34.2 million.

IMPORT BILL MAY RISE

The Saudi Aramco drones attacks are likely to hit India's oil import bill, said Singapore's DBS Banking Group.

DBS Chief Economist for G3 and Asia Taimur Baig explained that a 10 per cent rise in global crude prices will widen India's current account deficit by 0.4-0.5 per cent of the GDP. He said "every dollar move" in the Brent Crude prices adds around $2 billion to India's oil import bill. In 2018-19, India spent $111.9 billion on oil imports.

Since India imports almost 80 per cent of its crude oil requirements, India has been left exposed to any rise in global oil prices. The Indian Rupee would be among currencies that will suffer as it would be affected by large import bill, he said.

While the US, Saudi Arabia and China have enough emergency reserves to tackle the crisis, heavy importers like India, which has reserves to sustain the country's energy needs for 12-13 days.

TWIN TROUBLE

A rise in global oil prices due to the recent drone attacks is likely to add on to New Delhi's list of economic woes. India is already in the middle of an economic slowdown, a situation that has triggered panic and job losses across sectors.

Volatility in global crude oil prices during a period of weak demand could further weaken investor sentiments. Sensex on Tuesday was down by 642.22 points at closing while Nifty fell 185 points to 10,817.60.

Meanwhile, the Saudi oil crisis on Tuesday pushed India's petrol and diesel prices to its highest level since budget, reported news agency PTI. Petrol prices increased 14 paisa to Rs 72.17 per litre while diesel price rose to Rs 65.58/litre in the national capital.

However, oil minister Dharmendra Pradhan said India is keeping a close watch over the development and added that India's oil supply will not be disrupted due to the Saudi Aramco drone strikes.

"We have uplifted more than half of the contracted quantity for September. We uplifted oil (from Saudi Arabia) yesterday (September 16) and even today (September 17)," he said.

While India is unlikely to face any problem if the Saudi oil supply is restored shortly, an extended oil crisis could make India's road to recovery slippery.
