A movement becomes a memory

Gauri Lankesh

Ravish Kumar

radical views

Lok Sabha

Karnataka

The huge public reaction to’s murder should have been harnessed properly. Unfortunately, her cold-blooded murder also led to cold calculations.Gauri Lankesh is now a September memory. On September 5 a memorial meeting was held on her death anniversary in Bangalore. Kanhaiya Kumar was present. He spoke, and then released books in a language he did not read. A day before that newspapers announced that the police team investigating her murder was given the Kempegowda Award, which included a purse of a hundred thousand rupees. But the fact is the case has a long distance to cover, and securing a conviction may well be a few years away.On September 22, journalist, who recently won the Magsaysay, will be given the first Gauri trust award. A minor scuffle broke out the other day on an e-mail group between warring liberal factions. They argued about a monumental question: if this was indeed the first Gauri award, or the second.So, Gauri’s memory has been kept alive in familiar ways that we keep memories alive. It is an annual event on the calendar. Between the anniversary date this year, and the one that arrives next year, everything will go on as usual. To capture this irony, her father, P Lankesh, a literary colossus and cultural icon, would have loved to pluck a delicately acerbic line from Auden or Eliot. His own original would perhaps have been as good.Gauri should have been a movement, but has ended up as a memory. Her assassination had the ability to create a constructive agenda for a liberal, democratic resistance. When she was killed people who usually do not cross their tongues’ thresholds to express opinion, came out on the street to hold a placard and shout a slogan. The shock on their visage had a silhouette of uncertainty.Millennials and the non-committal middle classes allowed themselves to be counted not because they agreed with her journalism, her hell-raising activism, or. In fact, not many had heard her or read her or as much as seen her dwindling weekly tabloid. But the manner in which she, a lone defenseless woman, had been extinguished in a crowded city had painted a stark picture of injustice in the minds of people. They had responded from their gut. In death, Gauri had magically collapsed the barriers of an extreme ideology that she had some dalliance with for over 15 years. The impulses of a larger humanity had taken over.This humungous public reaction had to be harnessed for an absent movement that the liberals had, and have still been, longing for, but unfortunately her cold-blooded murder also led to cold calculations. Her comrades wanted to quickly take control of the emerging scene and they only knew exclusion. In their view, perhaps the petit bourgeoisie was not good enough for a revolution. They put up a lot of pretenses of being inclusive but their intent was to strategically exclude. To pull back the direction in which the protest was marching.The Congress regime in power then was making its own dyslexic moves for an impending assembly poll. Nothing shocks the Congress, not even its own demise. They did not even use the death effectively against a remorseless BJP that did not condole Gauri’s death. Some individuals who raised rhetoric around her death quickly drew up a political career plan for thepolls. In all, vested interests tried to control an uninhibited stringing of diverse public support.Gauri had made certain choices when she tried to get into the giant boots of her father in 2000. Her father’s towering intellect had traits of a French modernist. He mixed this outlook with principled anarchism that came from his reading of Gandhi and the 12th Century reformist Basaveshwara among others. But Gauri to create an identity of her own became an activist-journalist who adopted an ideological slant she didn’t fully understand. She, however, overcame this in her death, but her allies and their extensions would not allow the escape.The murder of Prof Kalburgi in Dharwad, which preceded that of Gauri, had similarly been botched up by the official custodians of liberalism in. His death was complex in the sense there were regional and caste identities that got entangled. Those who mourned Gauri later were deeply suspicious of the circumstances of his death in August 2015. In fact, from somewhere inside the Congress government a rumour was let afloat that the professor had been killed in a property dispute. Only with effort did a true alignment with the deaths of Dabolkar and Pansare get created.In Karnataka, Kalburgi’s killing never received the attention that Gauri’s murder received. In fact, Kalburgi’s family had to knock the Supreme Court’s door for a closure. Exclusions and indiscretions surrounding the death of two liberals had eventually stymied a movement.
