Kashmir peaceful, not a single bullet fired: Shah

NEW DELHI: Union Home minister Amit Shah has said that not a single bullet has been fired or anyone killed in Jammu and Kashmir since August 5, when the special status bestowed on it was withdrawn. The decision on Article 370 and 35A was tough and even many in BJP wondered about its implementation, he said.“We will not compromise on national security. Only a strong leadership can take bold decisions. This is amply evident in the decision to remove Article 370 & 35A to realise a truly integrated and unified India,” Shah said at an event in New Delhi on Tuesday.“I have been studying policies of successive governments from the age of 13... If any government runs for 30 years, it could only take five big decisions, but Prime Minister Narendra Modi has taken more than 50 decisions in the last five years. GST, demonetisation, surgical strikes, air strikes, One Rank One Pension, Article 370. These were brave decisions.”Shah alleged “there was widespread corruption in 2013, our borders were not secure and our soldiers were dying every day. There was total policy paralysis, lack of leadership vision, the economy was in doldrums, women did not feel secure and youth was disappointed. There was a government where every minister considered himself the PM, whereas, the PM was not considered one. Only when we compare the country with 2013 will we realise government measures and progress the country has made in the last 5 years.”Though every Indian feels proud when surgical strikes or air strikes are made, the government has to tread a fine line to ensure nothing goes wrong. “People used to say surgical strikes were a fluke. With the Balakot air strikes, a clear message was sent out that India had a well-defined policy to defend borders and aggression towards the country would not be tolerated.”Shah said there may be initial problems during economic reforms but such difficulties would be over soon. He asked the industry to face challenges that would work for overall good. “There were some teething problems in GST. But big decisions have teething problems. We have been able to collect over ?1 lakh crore (in a single month) on many occasions. There may be a need to take a few corrective steps,” Shah said.
