News Nation Morning Wrap: Pak Infiltration Bid Foiled, Massive Jump In Fuel Prices & Other Top Stories

New Delhi:

Indian Army Thwarts Infiltration Bid By Pakistani Commandos Using Grenade Launchers

Amid ongoing tension over Kashmir, Pakistan is making desperate attempts to create tension on the Line of Control. The Indian Army thwarted the infiltration attempt, which was carried out by a team of Pakistani Special Service Group commandos on September 12-13. The army released the video of the brazen attempt on Wednesday. The one minute 44-second grainy clip shows Indian troops launching grenades at SSG commandos using Under Barrel Grenade Launchers. Indian troops eliminated the SSG team in Hajipur Sector of Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. This clip exposes Islamabad’s constant denials. According to a report, Indian Army managed to foil over 15 infiltration attempts by Pakistan on the LoC. Read more...

Protests On Streets Of Karachi After Hindu Girl Murdered In Sindh

Many people took to streets to stage a protest in Karachi on Tuesday after the alleged murder of a Hindu girl, Namrita Chandani. Namrita was found dead with a rope tied to her neck in her hostel room in a medical college in Larkana of Sindh province. According to ANI, people staged protest on the streets of Karachi against the alleged murder. Read more...

India Aspires To Become $10 Trillion Economy By 2030, Says Rajnath Singh

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday said that India aspires to become USD 10 trillion economy till 2030-32 in which the contribution of the Defence sector will be crucial. He said that the government is continuously working towards achieving a target of USD 26 billion defence industry by 2025 with the exports target being USD 5 billion. Rajnath Singh, who was addressing the second annual session of society of Indian Defence Manufactures in New Delhi, said that under the ‘Make In India’ initiative, the defence sector has emerged as one of most prominent sectors in the country. Read more...

Petrol, Diesel Prices Rise On Wednesday, Biggest Increase In Rates Since July

Petrol and diesel prices on Wednesday saw the biggest hike in months. The petrol and diesel prices in India rose after spike in global oil prices following attacks on Saudi Arabian crude oil facilities. The price of Petrol increased by 25 paise per litre to Rs 72.42 and price of diesel rose by 24 paise to Rs 65.82 per litre in Delhi on Wednesday. On Tuesday, petrol price had increased by 14 paisa per litre to Rs 72.17 and diesel by 15 paisa to Rs 65.58 per litre in the national capital. This increase is the biggest single-day hike since the July 5 maiden Budget of Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman that raised rates by almost Rs 2.50 a litre due to an increase in excise duty on fuel. Read more...

Ganga Flows Above Danger Mark In Prayagraj, 1,500 Shifted To Relief Camps

Due to incessant rain, water level of both Ganga and Yamuna in Uttar Pradesh’s Prayagraj has crossed the danger mark. The floodwater entered low-lying parts of the city and residents of the flood-affected areas are being shifted to relief camps. The flood monitoring cell has fixed the danger mark at 84.73 metres for both the rivers. Ganga, which already crossed the danger-mark on Tuesday, flows at 84.75 metres at Phaphamau point while Yamuna flows at 84.56 metres in Naini. The Yamuna currently is flowing 6 centimetres below the warning-mark. Read more...

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
