Bees swarm Air India flight, attacking airport workers and obstructing pilot's view

An Air India flight last weekend was already delayed for technical reasons. Then the bees showed up, and things got much more complicated.

"A swarm of honeybees came and landed on one section of the cockpit glass," Kolkata airport director Kaushik Bhattacharjee told CNN. "Thousands of bees just sat on the left side of the cockpit window blocking the view of the pilot."

According to the Telegraph, workers who tried to remove them were attacked. Windshield wipers were not up to the task. Finally, someone had to call in the big guns: airport fire services. A spokesperson for Air India told the paper that if the bees had flown into the engines, it could have "damaged the plane and harmed the passengers."

Roughly an hour after the bee business began, the water cannon finally got rid of the problem and the plane took off for Agartala, CNN reported. Entomologists told the Times of India that a queen and colony were probably relocating to a new hive across the airport and, without trees or plants to stop at, settled on the plane as a resting spot.

Last year, a swarm wasn't stopped before making it into the engine of a plane in South Africa. Mango Airlines tweeted at the time that three of its flights were delayed so that the bees could be removed. Newsweek reported that the bee removal company had to use a palm frond to prod the insects out of the engine because smoke would have been harmful.

READ MORE:

* Swarm of bees covers nose of plane in Vietnam, passengers trapped inside

* Why do bees buzz?

* The dirtiest part of a plane cabin revealed

A year earlier, an American Airlines flight out of Miami was delayed for four hours after bees attached themselves to a plane near the cargo hold, CBS News reported. Passengers had to leave the plane while they waited for a professional to remove the bees.

SUPPLIED The bees attacked workers who tried to remove them from the cockpit window (file photo).

In a 2006 report with the headline "Bees on a Plane Are a Real-Life Problem Vexing Some Pilots," the Wall Street Journal said Africanized honey bees had been cropping up across airports in the Southwest in greater numbers. Because of their tendency to travel across open spaces, they often end up pausing at planes, terminals or other man-made spots in lieu of more natural areas, the paper said.

The Journal quoted Las Vegas exterminator George Botta as saying that a swarm of bees sucked into an engine could cause damage.

"It's not as bad as hitting a flock of birds, but it'd be like pouring a tank of honey into the engine," Botta told the paper.

Often, the buzz doesn't even reach the media. David Marder, owner of Bee Busters in Southern California, said his company is called to airports "all the time."

"I just get out there with a shop vac and suck them up," he said. That's what he would have recommended for the swarm in India: "Everybody would have been gone in 20 minutes," he said.

Sometimes firefighters also use foam, but Marder said it's always necessary to make sure that kind of solution is OK to use when a plane is involved.

"When you have an aircraft full of people, the most important thing is to get the people safe so they can deplane or depart," he said.
