10 days after woman’s murder, cops arrest husband, 2 others

Ludhiana: Ten days after two assailants had murdered a thirty-year-old woman after barging into a house in Kothe Baggu village of Jagraon, Ludhiana Rural police arrested her husband and his two accomplices for murder. The accused were identified as Gurpreet Singh (35), husband of the deceased who is a driver, Devinder Singh, and Sarabjeet Singh of the same village.

On the intervening night of September 6 and 7, two assailants had barged into the house of the deceased Rajbeer Kaur (30) and attacked a family, in which she had died while her two sons Jaspreet Singh (13) and Lakhbir Singh (10) had suffered minor injuries. A case under sections 302 (murder), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 120-B (criminal conspiracy), 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC had been registered against the unidentified accused into the matter.

DSP Ludhiana Rural police Gurdeep Singh confirmed the arrest of three accused in the case. Police officials said the husband of the deceased had hired the other two accused for the crime by promising to buy them a motorcycle, as he wanted to get rid of his wife whom he suspected of infidelity. They added that Gurpreet had even paid them Rs1,000 in advance for the crime, and they bought two sharp-edged weapons to commit the murder.

Cops said the two contract killers got heavily drunk on the night they carried out the crime. They added that Gurpreet created the drama of receiving injuries to dodge the police, so that they did not suspect him for his involvement in the crime.

Gurpreet stated to police that at around 12 midnight when the family was sleeping, he heard some noise and woke up. When he came out to check, he saw two masked men in the verandah of his house who attacked him with a sharp-edged weapon. On hearing his screams, his wife came to his rescue, but the assailants attacked her too. He added that meanwhile, both his sons also came to his rescue, but the assailants attacked them too. When the sons raised an alarm, the neighbours rushed out, but the assailants had escaped from there. Gurpreet had added that according to neighbours, there were six assailants, as four were standing outside the house.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
