Jassi murder case: 23 lined up as witnesses against mom, uncle

19-year-old

PATIALA: The prosecution has lined up 23 witnesses as the Sangrur court framed charges against her mother Malkit Kaur Sidhu (70) and uncle Surjit Singh Badesha (74), the two key conspirators in the June 2000 murder of Canadian resident Jaswinder Kaur Sidhu , aka Jassi.The charges were framed by the court of additional district and sessions judge Smriti Dhir under Sections 302, 307 and 120-B of IPC against both the accused more than 19 years after the contract killing of Jassi, who was 25 then. The prosecution witnesses include police officers, health officials, local residents of Narike village and some close friends of the ill-fated couple. The two accused are presently lodged at Kapurthala jail after being transferred there from Sangrur jail. Malkit and her brother Surjit have been accused of hiring contract killers to eliminate Canadian-born Jassi and brutally thrashing Jassi's husband, Sukhwinder Singh Mithu in June 2000 at Narike village under Amargarh police station of Malerkotla in Sangrur.According to advocate Ashwini Chaudhary, who is representing Mithu, the framing of charges against the two was delayed as they managed to elude extradition to India by exploiting various loopholes in the Canadian legal system. Both Sidhu and Badesha were extradited to India in January this year and were arrested by the Sangrur police from the Delhi airport. Following this, a supplementary chargesheet was presented in court.Nineteen years after an FIR was filed about Jassi’s murder, charges have been filed against her mother and uncle, who were opposed to her marriage with an autorickshaw driver. Jassi and her husband, who had married secretly in 1999, had been kidnapped from Narike village of Malerkotla in Sangrur on June 8, 2000 and tortured. Jassi’s body was found dumped in a water channel a day later. The Punjab police arrested contract killers who revealed that they had been hired by Jassi’s mother and uncle to eliminate the two. The Indian authorities had sought extradition of the sister-brother duo from Canada in May 2002, but in 2006 the move was stalled by a Canadian court. The Canadian apex court in 2017 ordered their extradition to India to face murder charges. The decision was put on hold after the two accused sought judicial review of the decision. Their plea was rejected in December 2018 and were extradited to India on January 24 this year.
