‘Let Subhasri be last victim of banner culture’: Her father tells MK Stalin

‘Let Subhasri be last victim of banner culture’: Her father tells MK Stalin

Nearly a week after Chennai techie Subhasri was killed, the AIADMK former Councillor Jayagopal, who put up the illegal flex board, is yet to be arrested by the police.

news Subhasri death

DMK President MK Stalin visited the family of 23-year-old Chennai techie Subhasri, who was killed after an illegal flex board fell on her while she was riding her two-wheeler last Thursday. Subhasri was subsequently run over by a water tanker.

Visuals of his brief visit on Wednesday morning showed Subhasri’s mother Geetha and father Ravi breaking down as Stalin offered his condolences to them. Stalin was accompanied by DMK MP TR Baalu and CPI(M) state Secretary K Balakrishnan.

Speaking to the media after meeting Subhasri’s family, Stalin said, "All banners and hoardings should be kept with police permission, action should be taken against those who did it illegally. The ruling party (AIADMK) does not pay heed to even court judgments".

"I met Subhasri's parents and conveyed my condolence. I know that their minds can never be pacified, but we tried to comfort them in whatever way we could," he said, adding, “Subhasri's father told me that his daughter should be last victim of the banner culture. I can't forget his words.”

When asked by reporters about AIADMK former Councillor Jayagopal, who had erected the illegal banners, not being arrested by the police, the DMK leader said, "They are playing a drama, they could've arrested him immediately, I don't want to politicise this."

The DMK also announced a solatium of Rs 5 lakh for the family.

Ravi, Subhasri’s father also said, “This should not happen to anyone in the future, this is what I am asking.”

On September 13, the DMK submitted a writ petition in the Madras High Court saying that the party has followed the HC order on hoardings and has issued instructions to its cadres on the same.

Stalin’s visit comes two day after MNM Chief Kamal Haasan met the grieving family. "Those who committed this crime should be punished and the belief that they can get away with anything should be demolished," said Kamal on Sunday.

However, nearly a week after the tragic accident, Jayagopal is yet to be arrested. While the AIADMK member has checked himself into a hospital after complaining of ‘chest pain’, the police say that he is absconding.

Subhasri’s parents had earlier told the media that following her death, "Nobody from the government or the ruling party has come and visited us or expressed condolences. We have no support and this hurts us." This even as they demand action against those responsible for putting up the illegal banner.

The police have filed cases against the lorry driver Manoj Yadav who ran over the young woman, and AIADMK functionary Jayagopal who was responsible for setting up the banner. But while Manoj was arrested and let off on bail after the magistrate refused to remand him, Jayagopal is absconding.
