UP Police Officer In Hot Soup For Posting TikTok Video In Uniform, Seniors Seek Explanation

TikTok is a fun app. Once you figure out how to work it, it's an addiction that won't stop for a while. From dancing to your favourite songs to flaunting Bollywood dialogues flawlessly, and of course, the challenges and hilarious filters, the app has a lot to offer.

But there have been multiple cases of nurses, doctors and cops who've posted videos on the app while on duty, and gotten into trouble for the same.

YouTube

Among the handful who ran into trouble for flouting the code of conduct, is this UP police officer whose videos in uniform went viral and came to the attention of his seniors.

In the video sub-inspector Mohammad Arif, who is posted at the PGI police station is seen reciting a dialogue, "Yeh police station hai, jab tak baithne ko na kaha jaaye baitho nahi, tumhare baap ka ghar nahi hai. (This is a police station, not your father's house. Don't sit till you are asked to)"

In the second video, he can be heard saying that neither friendship nor enmity of cops is good. In this video, Arif is sitting in a chair and can also be seen pointing towards his service revolver, which is kept behind him on a table.

Senior police officer in Lucknow Kalanidhi Naithani said, "We will seek an explanation from the cop for posting the video on the social media. If a cop is on duty and is wearing the uniform, discipline should be followed. General instructions are also being issued to policemen not to indulge in such indiscipline on social media platforms by posting videos in uniform."

In the past, a policewoman from Gujarat were suspended after a video of her dancing to a song inside a police station went viral on the social media.

Lady police constable in Mahesana district of North Gujarat faces disciplinary action after her TikTok video shot in police station goes viral pic.twitter.com/7NWXpXCh8r — DeshGujarat (@DeshGujarat) July 24, 2019

In the short video clip, Arpita Chaudhary, a Lok Rakshak Dal (LRD) recruit, was seen dancing in front of a lock-up inside the Langhnaj police station in Mehsana district.

Recruited in the LRD in 2016, Chaudhary was transferred to Mehsana in 2018, said the Deputy Superintendent.a

Two Delhi Police woman constables also faced disciplinary action when a video of them singing on duty at a VVIP location went viral.
