Watch | Pakistani terrorists try to sneak into India, army kills them with grenade attack

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Pakistan continues to push terrorists into India and has increased terror activities in the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) even as the FATF's sword hangs on its head.

A video of an attempted infiltration by BAT teams was recorded on the intervening night of September 12-13 in Hajipur. In this video captured on a handheld Thermal Imager, Pakistani BAT teams can be seen trying to infiltrate while Indian forces hit back with grenades.

In the video, Indian troops can be seen launching grenades at Pakistan's SSG (Special Service Group) using Under Barrel Grenade Launchers.

#WATCH Army sources: Infiltration or attempted BAT(Border Action Team) action by Pakistan on 12-13 Sept 2019, was seen&eliminated. In video, Indian troops can be seen launching grenades at Pak's SSG(Special Service Group) commandos/terrorists using Under Barrel Grenade Launchers. pic.twitter.com/KOnYJPWyV8 — ANI (@ANI) September 18, 2019

"Post Article 370 abrogation, numbers of launch pads have been activated by the Pakistani Army close to our own posts along the Line of Control (LoC) and these are only a few hundred meters to 2 km from the LoC," Indian Army sources said.

"These launch pads in the areas facing Gurez, Machchal, Keran, Tangdhar, Uri, Poonch, Naushera, Sunderbani, RS Pura, Ramgarh, Kathua harbor more than 250 terrorists," they said.

Army sources said a communication center has been activated in the Kalighati area since early August to coordinate and facilitate infiltration.

"It is also emerging that the recruitment of terrorists in Pakistan's Punjab has commenced. Daura-e-Aam of LeT and JeM have also begun their training. These training activities are being conducted in Muzaffarabad-Manshera-Kotli clusters," the sources said.

While commenting on growing activities of the LeT and Jaish in the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir region, the sources said that proscribed terrorists Hafeez Sayed and Maulana Masood Azhar are back in-game and fully duly supported by the Pakistan Army.

Sources said that Pakistan has also moved a number of BAT teams of soldiers and terrorists close to number of posts opposite Uri, Keran, Poonch, Mendhar and Naushera Sector. In the same areas, Pakistan SSG has also been deployed.

Pakistan has made several infiltration bids in the recent past; two to three of these specific instances were successfully foiled by the Indian troops.

Meanwhile, in the video captured by the Hand Held Thermal Imagers, on September 10-11 in the Hajipur Sector of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, Indian troops killed a soldier Sepoy Ghulam Rasool of Pakistan's Punjab Regiment from Bahawalnagar of Pakistan.

"In the same area, Pakistan attempted infiltration on the night of September 11-12 and September 12-13. The attempt could have been for BAT action as well. The area reportedly has Pakistani SSG troops. These intruders were well-engaged resulting into death of a Pakistani soldiers on 12-13 September," the sources said.

"Despite global actions, Pakistan will always remain the epicenter of terrorism. Such instances are recently seen in Hajipur Sector prove it," the sources said.

Posted By: Talib Khan
