Fire at Huntsman Polyurethanes Systems House in Turkey

ISTANBUL, Turkey, Sept. 18, 2019 /PRNewswire/ -- This morning at approximately 11.14 a.m. local time, a fire started in a non-manufacturing area at the Huntsman EMA systems house in the Leather Organized Industrial Zone, Istanbul, Turkey. All employees and contractors are safe and accounted for and monitoring for any offsite environmental impacts is underway.

The fire began in an outside area and spread to the main factory and an adjacent commercial property. Both sites have been evacuated and the local fire service is currently working to control the blaze. Local media has reported that two firefighters were injured responding to the fire.

"Our first priority is the wellbeing of the fire crews, and of our neighbors and employees, who have been sent home for their safety," said Steen Weien Hansen, Vice President Europe, Africa, India and Middle East.

The systems house produces polyols and blends polyols that are used in the manufacture of polyurethanes products. Customers will be supplied from other Huntsman facilities, as required. Huntsman carries adequate insurance coverage and does not expect the financial impact of the fire to be material.

About Huntsman:

Huntsman Corporation (NYSE: HUN) is a publicly traded global manufacturer and marketer of differentiated and specialty chemicals with 2018 revenues more than $9 billion. Our chemical products number in the thousands and are sold worldwide to manufacturers serving a broad and diverse range of consumer and industrial end markets. We operate more than 75 manufacturing, R&D and operations facilities in approximately 30 countries and employ approximately 10,000 associates within our four distinct business divisions. For more information about Huntsman, please visit the company's website at www.huntsman.com .

Social Media:

Twitter: www.twitter.com/Huntsman_Corp

Facebook: www.facebook.com/huntsmancorp

LinkedIn: www.linkedin.com/company/huntsman

Forward-Looking Statements:

Certain information in this release constitutes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These statements are based on management's current beliefs and expectations. The forward-looking statements in this release are subject to uncertainty and changes in circumstances and involve risks and uncertainties that may affect the company's operations, markets, products, services, prices and other factors as discussed under the caption "Risk Factors" in the Huntsman companies' filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Significant risks and uncertainties may relate to, but are not limited to, volatile global economic conditions, cyclical and volatile product markets, disruptions in production at manufacturing facilities, reorganization or restructuring of Huntsman's operations, including any delay of, or other negative developments affecting the ability to implement cost reductions and manufacturing optimization improvements in Huntsman businesses and realize anticipated cost savings, and other financial, economic, competitive, environmental, political, legal, regulatory and technological factors. The company assumes no obligation to provide revisions to any forward-looking statements should circumstances change, except as otherwise required by applicable laws.

SOURCE Huntsman Corporation

Related Links

http://www.huntsman.com


