ISB ranked seventh globally on Forbes’ best B-schools list

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, September 18

Indian School of Business (ISB) has secured the seventh position globally in the Forbes’ ‘Best Business Schools 2019’ rankings announced on Wednesday.

ISB is the top-ranked B-School from Asia among those surveyed.

This year Forbes looked at more than 100 schools and surveyed 17,500 alumni regarding their pre- and post-MBA compensation, career choice, and location. They did not consider the schools where alumni had a negative ROI after five years.

Sharing his views on this, Professor Rajendra Srivastava, Dean, ISB, said, “We are delighted to be a part of the Forbes’ Best Business School 2019 rankings, and it is a pleasure to see ISB’s PGP gaining more and more recognition globally.

These rankings speak of the value that ISB’s MBA brings to the table for both our students and the corporate world. It bears testimony to our students’ competencies, teachings of our world-class faculty, the satisfaction of our alumni as well as the confidence of our recruiters. I want to thank each of them for this success. I would also like to mention about our updated curriculum that helps the students to hone their skills as per the fast-changing world today. We look forward to working hard and keep moving up the ladder in the right direction with the ISB family together.”

The School has participated in Forbes’ rankings for the first time this year.

The rankings are announced every two years and the schools are solely ranked on their “5-year MBA gain”. It represents the net cumulative amount the typical alumni would have earned after five years by getting their MBA versus staying in their pre-MBA career.

Forbes compared the alumni earnings in their first five years out of business school to their opportunity cost of doing an MBA. Their survey measured total compensation, including salary, bonuses, and exercised stock options. Based on their analysis, they concluded that a typical student’s salary would have risen half as fast as their post-MBA salary increase.

The Post Graduate Programme in Management (PGP) of the Indian School of Business (ISB) is currently ranked 24 worldwide as per the Financial Times Global MBA Rankings, 2019.
