LoC – the Line of Clashes

The Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir, over the period of time, has actually turned into Line of Clashes between Pakistan and Indian Armies. While it is a common feature on LoC throughout barring a spell of about 3-4 years after the 2003 ceasefire truce, the Pakistani Army has resorted to more than 2,050 unprovoked ceasefire violations this year in which 21 soldiers and civilians on Indian side of LoC have been killed. Among civilians the toll included innocent villagers, women and children. This shocking revelation by the Ministry of External Affairs is not acceptable by anyone for any reason. “We have highlighted our concerns at unprovoked ceasefire violations by Pakistan forces, including in support of cross border terrorist infiltration, and targeting of Indian civilians and border posts by them,” Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said.

India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to ask its forces to adhere to 2003 ceasefire understanding and maintain peace and tranquillity along the Line of Control and International Border. Indian forces exercise maximum restraint and respond to unprovoked violations and attempts at cross border terrorist infiltration, the spokesperson said.

Leadership on both sides, well know that such firings and shelling bring enormous suffering to the people living across the LoC on both sides, yet the simple issue of maintaining peace at the line has never been taken honestly from Pakistani side.

Even on Saturday, the Pakistani troops engaged in heavy firing and mortar shelling on the forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday in violation of the ceasefire. The firing and mortar shelling from across the border started in Balakote and Mankote areas around 10 am, drawing strong retaliation from the Indian Army, officials said.

Pakistani side has a clear motive to keep the LoC hot to attract attention of world community towards Kashmir and simultaneously facilitating and pushing the terrorists to Indian side to carry on subversive and violent activities in Indian territories. It’s high time for Pakistan to refrain from such acts, as the global community is watching its each and every activity. Already, the country has been exposed as the global hub of terror. Also, now is the right time for India to retrieve Pakistan occupied areas of erstwhile Jammu Kashmir state.

Related
