Jaipur: Rs 4.77 crore fake notes from ‘children fun bank’ seized

JAIPUR: The Jaipur police and CID-CB in a joint operation on Wednesday seized fake currency notes of Rs 4.77 crore bearing logo of ‘ children fun bank ,’ and arrested two accused who cheated people on the pretext of supplying high-quality fake Indian currency notes (FICN) in a discounted price.The accused have been identified as Khem Chand (38) and his aide Rajesh (19). Apart from toy notes, the sleuths also seized forged land documents, two fake pistols and stamps.The initial investigation indicated that Khem Chand and Rajesh offered to sell high-quality fake Indian currency notes to dealers who are involved in the illegal trade of FICN smuggling. “The gang would place an original currency note at the top of the money bundle to trick people, while rest of the money underneath contained toy notes. Whenever a buyer got suspicious after seeing the children bank’s logo, the accused would wave a toy pistol to intimidate him,” an official informed TOI, adding that Khem Chand had uploaded several videos of him with fake Indian currency notes to lure people. The special team had been tracking Khem Chand’s movements for past several weeks. On Wednesday, an informer tipped them off that the two accused are planning to hand over the consignment of fake notes in Manak Chowk area.“The police raided the secluded spot and nabbed the two accused. The initial investigation has revealed that the accused had duped several people of Rs 25 lakh,” the official added.Khem Chand was found to be one of the wanted criminals of Jaipur police. In 2010 and 2016, he was booked for supplying FICN with the help of an inter-state gang. He has been evading arrest in multiple cases of murder, loots, and thefts.Interestingly, the police also seized laminated newspaper cuttings from Khem Chand in which the accused was showed with other accomplices arrested for an ATM loot and smuggling of forged currency. “He used these newspaper cuttings to shore up his image that he was part of an inter-state gang involved in selling high-quality FICN printed in Bangladesh,” an official said.The cops involved in the operation are SHO Jitendra Singh, and his team members Hari Om Singh, Ram Singh, Dushyant, Shaid Ali, Ram Niwas, Suraj, Shankar, Mukesh and Hemant.
