Mamata Banerjee vs CBI: Here’s what happened so far in West Bengal after its clash with Centre

With the state assembly elections scheduled to be held in 2021 and the general elections right around the corner, the entire episode of CBI acting years after the scam came to fore smacks of political vendetta, according to the Trinamool Congress. In the last assembly elections of the state, the BJP secured a 10.2% vote share and won 3 seats in the 294-member assembly. TMC holds 211 seats while the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and the Indian National Congress have 26 and 44 seats respectively.

A three-judge bench of the Supreme Court comprising Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices Deepak Gupta and Sanjiv Khanna will hear the pleas by CBI on Tuesday against Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar and West Bengal government for alleged non-cooperation in a case connected with chit fund scams. The agency-led by Rishi Kumar Shukla on Monday filed a contempt plea in the Supreme Court against West Bengal’s Chief Secretary, Director General of Police and Kolkata Police Commissioner for wilful and deliberate violation of Supreme Court’s orders.

Earlier in the day, Mamata Banerjee said she was ready to give her life but won’t compromise. In a veiled warning, the TMC chief said will impose Section 144, if the Centre threatens her government with President rule. RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav and DMK’s Kanimozhi joined Mamata Banerjee at the stage where she has been sitting on Save the Constitution since Monday morning.

Criticising Mamata Banerjee over dharna politics, Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said the West Bengal Chief Minister was following the footsteps of her Delhi counterpart Arvind Kejriwal. He even questioned Rahul Gandhi’s U-turn on the issue and said in 2014, the Congress had tweeted that around 20 lakh people lost their money in chit fund scams in West Bengal.

Hearing the contempt plea filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) against the West Bengal government and its Police, the Supreme Court said that it will hear the case tomorrow, on Tuesday at 10:30 am. The CBI in its plea has sought the apex court’s direction to Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar to cooperate in the ongoing investigations into Saradha Chit Fund scam, where Kumar is a “potential accused.” During the hearing, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta argued that Kumar destroyed crucial evidence in the Saradha scam, on which the CJI Ranjan Gogoi asked the investigating agency to bring proof tomorrow at the hearing.

Though the court asked for proof, it observed that if Kumar has remotely attempted something of this sort, then the court would come down so heavily on him that he will regret.

Meanwhile, the West Bengal Chief Minister’s dharna, that she launched yesterday evening has entered day 2 in central Kolkata. Banerjee has attacked the BJP government claiming that there is “total constitutional breakdown” in the state while adding that the CBI was acting on the behest on the Narendra Modi-led central government.

The unprecedented political crisis was triggered after the CBI sleuths arrived at Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar’s residence for questioning him related to the chit fund scam. However, the Kolkata police not only stopped them but also detained them briefly.

On its part, the Bengal government has contended that CBI officials reached Rajeev’s residence without any warrant and without the prior sanction of the state government. The Bengal government had in November 2018 revoked the general authorisation provided to the CBI and other agencies under DPSE 1946 Act, meaning that now the CBI has to take permission from the Bengal government on a case-to-case basis whenever it wants to do anything in the state.

With the state assembly elections scheduled to be held in 2021 and the general elections right around the corner, the Trinamool Congress has alleged the entire episode of CBI acting years after the scam smacks of political vendetta. In the last assembly elections, the BJP secured 10.2% vote share and won 3 seats in the 294-member assembly. TMC holds 211 seats while the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and the Indian National Congress have 26 and 44 seats respectively.

The use of CBI by the saffron party has been in the question since the past couple of years. There are speculations about CBI investigating former Uttar Pradesh CM Akhilesh Yadav in the sand mining scam, giving rise to accusations that the “caged parrot” will be utilised as an attack dog. Recently, the Enforcement Directorate raided 7 locations in relation to the construction of statues and parks when BSP supremo Mayawati was Chief Minister.

It is worth mentioning that the law agencies have sprung into action after the two parties announced a pre-poll alliance last month. With a combined vote share of more than 50% votes in the politically important state of Uttar Pradesh that sends 80 MPs to the Lok Sabha, the BSP-SP alliance has the potential to harm the BJP in the state, where it currently holds 71 seats.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
