[PHOTOS] Kamal Haasan resumes shooting for Indian 2 in Rajamundry Central jail

Kamal Haasan Indian 2 | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Kamal Haasan starrer Indian 2 is the sequel to 1996-blockbuster film Indian Directed by Shankar, the film also stars Kajal Aggarwal and is aiming for a 2020 release

For the longest time, Indian 2 starring Kamal Haasan was put on hold due to reasons best known to him and the makers of the film. He had signed the Shankar directorial about 2 years ago but with his political career taking off in full swing, there were quite a few issues on whether any of his political ideologies should be included in the film or not. A couple of months back, rumours also suggested that Indian 2 might get shelved considering Kamal Haasan revived his another ambitious project named Thalaivan Irukkiran, in the meantime. However, guess, it's a 'better late than never' scenario for Team Indian 2 as the film has finally resumed shooting.

After wrapping up a schedule in Chennai, Indian 2 is now being shot in Rajamundry, Andhra Pradesh. Kamal Haasan joined the shoot today and the overall schedule is expected to go on for the next 20 days. Check out these first pictures from the Central Jail wherein you can see Kamal Haasan entering the jail amidst much fanfare and high-end security. Kamal Haasan also posed for selfies with the jail authorities and a few bunch of prisoners.

Kamal Haasan resumes shooting for Indian 2 in Rajamundry Central Jail

Kamal Haasan in Rajahmundry Central Jail for #Indian2 Shoot.



Whom ever you are, you will be at peak craze when seeing him @LycaProductions @shankarshanmugh @ikamalhaasan pic.twitter.com/7iki0onfph — KamalHaasanFansClub (@NammavarFC) September 19, 2019

Produced by Lyca Productions, Indian 2 boasts an ensemble cast to the likes of Kajal Aggarwal, Vidyut Jammwal, Rakul Preet Singh, Siddharth, Priya Bhavani Shankar, Nedumudi Venu and Delhi Ganesh. The big-budget flick is aiming for a 2020 release although an official date is yet to be announced.

For those unaware, Indian 2 is the official sequel to the hit film of the 1996-film of the same name. While the first installment addressed the issues of corruption, bribery, unemployment, this second part will focus on several other societal issues that are plaguing the country.

Keep watching this space for more updates on the film.
