Those threatening people in Kashmir will be taken care of: DGP

Those threatening people in Kashmir will be taken care of: DGP

‘Pak financing terrorism through drugs in J&K’

JAMMU, Sep 18: Amid incidents of militants threatening people in Kashmir against venturing out of their homes, Director General of Police (DGP) Dilbag Singh on Wednesday said patrolling had been intensified and various other measures initiated to instill confidence among locals.

“We are with the people and they are with us. We will not allow any harm to come to them. Those who are threatening them will be taken care of and the terrorists will be neutralised,” the DGP told reporters on the sidelines of a function at the drug de-addiction centre in the police lines here.

He also stated that majority of the drugs being pumped into Jammu and Kashmir came from Pakistan to finance terror activities. He stated that the police were working to block the supply chain to rid the region of the menace.

With regard to militants threatening people in Kashmir from venturing out and resuming their routine activities, the DGP said, “Police are conscious of these threats and over the past month, a couple of terrorists were neutralised and over two dozen others, including their sympathisers, arrested in the Valley.”

He said that the people had not responded to the Pakistani propaganda and foiled Islamabad’s designs to create unrest.

DGP said there was a large presence of militants across the Line of Control (LoC) but expressed confidence that the counter-infiltration grid would take care of the threat.

On militants threatening orchardists, shopkeepers and setting a car ablaze in north Kashmir’s Baramulla district on Tuesday, the top cop said, “Two militants, who burnt down a car after beating its driver in Sopore yesterday, have been identified as Sajjad and Muzaffar of the Lashker-e-Toiba (LeT). We will take care of them very soon.”

“We have already neutralised a couple of them, including the one who shot and injured four members of a family of a fruit dealer in Sopore,” he added. The DGP said those threatening the people were being identified and necessary action taken.

“We have taken good care of the people especially in the rural areas by intensifying patrolling even covering the orchards to instill confidence among them. Wherever we are getting information of any kind of militants’ pressure on people, we are moving in and identifying the culprits. The message had gone down very well to the masses. We have arrested eight persons from Sopore who were printing and pasting threatening posters. We have also picked up half a dozen people from Srinagar, while a dozen others were picked up from south Kashmir,” Singh said.

The police and other security forces would take care of the terrorists and would definitely neutralise them, the DGP asserted.

In reply to another question about Pakistan trying to instigate the people for mass uprising after the abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, the DGP said people did not fall for the propaganda from across the border. “We are grateful to them for their cooperation in maintaining peace, and law and order,” he said.

“Pakistan was hoping that people would buy their propaganda and come out in numbers. It did not happen as the people did not respond to their falsehood,” he said.

DGP Singh Pakistan was aiding, abetting and pushing terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir to foment trouble in India. “They have moved a large number of militants along the Line of Control (LoC) and brought them to the launching pads. Even they are coming beyond the launching pads and sitting with Pakistani army in forward pickets,” he said.

The DGP said two Pakistani militants were captured by the army in Gulmarg sector recently and attempts of infiltration were also made in Uri, Keran and Karnah in north Kashmir and Poonch in Jammu region. He said Pakistan and its agencies are using the social media platforms to foment trouble in different parts of the country. “I am sure the people will not pay any heed to the nefarious designs of Pakistan, which stand exposed in the world and will get further exposed with time,” DGP Singh said.

DGP said the drug menace in Jammu and Kashmir had increased manifold compared to the previous years, which was evident from the seizure of a huge quantity of narcotic substances and arrest of drug peddlers.

“It is a big conspiracy of Pakistan as a majority of the drugs is coming from there...investigation into some cases indicates that the money generated from drugs smuggling is being utilised to finance militancy,” the DGP told reporters.

Singh, who released a pamphlet to educate youngsters against the use of drugs, said the police were working tirelessly to wipe out the growing threat. “So far, 340 people (drug peddlers) have been arrested against a total of 350 last year, while the (drug) licences of eight shops were cancelled and 12 more persons were detained under the Public Safety Act,” he said, adding that the police had also seized a huge quantity of narcotics this year.

“The police is working to block the supply chain, whether it comes from Kashmir or the border districts of Rajouri and Poonch and elsewhere.... There are some cases where the drugs were supplied from Kashmir and the investigating team was successful in identifying the route and the supposed destination, whether in Punjab or Delhi, leading to a huge recovery of narcotics,” the officer said.

Seeking people’s cooperation to wipe out the threat from the society, he said the drug menace had increased manifold compared to the previous years. “We have opened this centre in 2013 and over the years, it has expanded, generating the faith and trust of people, especially those addicted to drugs,” the DGP said.

He added that the number of people coming to the centre was increasing with every passing day. “We have identified a piece of land here to construct a bigger centre. We have already established a big centre in downtown Srinagar at a cost of Rs 8 crore. This menace is not only prevalent here, but in Kashmir as well,” Singh said. Once the proposal was approved, Jammu would get a state-of-the-art drug de-addiction centre, which would be like a good hospital, he added.

Hailing the efforts of the staff of the drug de-addiction centre at the police lines, Singh said their counselling and treatment helped many youngsters to give up narcotics. “Some of them have joined hands and are helping other young addicts to overcome drugs. They are playing a very good role,” he said. The state police chief requested the parents to give adequate time to their children to ensure that they did not fall into bad company. “Listen to and understand your children, who need your guidance and time, instead of remaining busy with your mobile phones and chatting. You need to keep a close watch on the activities of your children before it takes the shape of a disease,” he said. Singh also advised youngsters to stay away from drugs and said, “Using drugs is no justification or solution to overcome frustration. It should not be done as success and failure are part of life.”
