Uncertainty looms large over lifting restrictions in Kashmir Dr Abdullah detained

Uncertainty looms large over lifting restrictions in Kashmir Dr Abdullah detained

With India attempting to put onus on Pakistan, the uncertainty over lifting the movement of people, communications and other activities related restrictions seems looming large as New Delhi holds Islamabad responsible for the current state of affairs in Jammu and Kashmir in the aftermath of incident of stripping autonomy from J&K.

Latest move to put former Chief Minister Dr Farooq Abdullah under preventive detention. He was under house arrest so far also confirm this.

"Lifting of restrictions relating to communications, movement of people all depends on the behavior of Pakistan. The restrictions have been put in place as we are determined to protect the lives of Kashmiris from terrorists coming from across the border," said Ajit Doval, the National Security Advisor to the Indian government who was instrumental for implementation of scrapping Article 370 of the Constitution that awarded a special status to state of Jammu and Kashmir.

He said the security and intelligence agencies have intercepted messages that Pakistani communication towers sent to their operatives active in the Indian side of Kashmir. It has been more than a month when Narendra Modi led government through a Presidential order took away exclusive rights of people of Kashmir that were guaranteed to them through a historic document called 'instrument of accession' that was signed between India and the then ruler of Kashmir under which Muslim-majority state of Jammu and Kashmir opted to merge with India other than to become a part of Pakistan, a new nation for Muslims that was carved out of India in the aftermath of 1947 divide.

Kashmir, a beautiful region in the snow-clad Himalayan range has been in the centre of dispute between two nuclear-armed South Asian rivals since their split and sparked two major wars, a military conflict and countless violent clashes that took the lives of thousands of innocent people from both sides.

The Kashmir conflict is a territorial dispute between India and Pakistan over the region. It started after division of India into two entities in 1947 when it was liberated from British rule. The dispute escalated over the years. Currently, India controls 55 percent of the land area of the region and 70 percent of its population. Pakistan controls 30 percent of the land while China holds remaining 15 remaining land in the region

Both India and Pakistan claimed full control over region of Jammu and Kashmir. The Modi government detained few thousand of people including several top local politicians since the curbs were imposed on civilians on August 5 this year.

The central government claimed that a majority of people of Jammu and Kashmir backed government's move to scrap Kashmir's special status because it would bring economic development, prosperity and other benefits to the state that continues to remains underdeveloped as it witnessed skirmishes between the security forces and the local residents. This situation helped terrorists coming from across the border to sneak into Indian side of Kashmir and indulge in terror related activities.

The Indian move of stripping region autonomy received mixed response from the world community with big global players including the US, Russia, France and Germany describing the incident as bilateral matter between the two South Asian nations. However, Pakistan took a strong exception to Indian government's decision to abrogate Article 370 of Indian Constitution comparing Indian government to Nazis. The Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan who has launched a diplomatic offensive since the repeal of the special Constitution clause saying Indian government is bent upon on "ethnic cleansing".

"There are desperate attempts to push in more terrorists. Terrorists who successfully infiltrate have the potential to carry out mass casualty attacks. And this is the real fear. Should a major attack like Pulwama happen, the Indian state is not going to sit quietly," said a senior army official deployed at the bor in Kashmir.

The government officials linked with the latest Kashmir operations believe the unprecedented month-long blackout of mobile phone communications and internet in the region has hindered Pakistan's attempts to revive civil unrest. Another key factor hurting attempts to revive militancy is the critical shortage of weapons in the Valley, senior officials said. Presently, terrorists crossing the line of control bring with them their own weapons. This is insufficient for fomenting an insurrection. Hence, there are frantic attempts to push in more weapons. Terrorist groups are attempting to smuggle in weapon caches through the international border in Jammu and Punjab.

In the backdrop of India's unprecedented move to revoke special status to Jammu and Kashmir and split the state into two centrally administered regions, Pakistan has shifted gears. It has unleashed a shrill multi-pronged campaign, frantic attempts to globalize the issue citing nuclear war and a social media offensive. On the ground, it has been pushing terrorists to carry out attacks in Jammu & Kashmir.

"After August 5, Pakistan has been relying on terrorist networks to create trouble. War-mongering is going on. Anything can happen," Indian army officials said.

With the US now seemingly on its side after the visit of Imran Khan to the US and an understanding emerging on Islamabad helping Washington with its withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan, Islamabad could have calculated that this is the right time to convey to New Delhi that the effect of India's Balakot strike has worn off. Post the strike on the Balakot terror camp on 26 February, there was a thinking that the paradigm of dealing with terrorism emanating from Pakistan has changed.

With an apparent Washington backing Islamabad, the thinking in Islamabad may be that the time is right to test India's resolve on dealing with terrorism yet again. If there is an incident that warrants an Indian reaction, Pakistan could always seek international support to quell tension. The incidents on the border, including the action by the Pakistan border action team, comprising army regulars and terrorists, aiming to ambush Indian troops on patrol along the international border, could be a way of

"conveying to New Delhi that they (Pakistan) are not intimidated by Balakot," now that the US-Pakistan dynamic seems to have changed, said Kanwal Sibal, former foreign secretary.

Tensions in the Himalayan region are high due to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's decision to strip the India-administered Jammu & Kashmir region of a special autonomous status on August 5. The latest border clashes invoke fears of a larger military conflict between the two South Asian neighbours.

-- [IFS]
