Delhi and Mumbai to Gujarat and Bengaluru: Aamir Khan's Lal Singh Chaddha to be shot at 100 real locations

Aamir Khan's Lal Singh Chadha to be shot at 100 real locations | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights In a first for Bollywood, Aamir Khan's Lal Singh Chaddha will be shot at 100 real locations From Delhi and Mumbai to Gujarat and Hyderabad; the actor has asked his team to scout the apt locations The film is an official remake of Hollywood classic, Forrest Gump

Much has been written and speculated about Aamir Khan's next film, Lal Singh Chaddha. The film, which is the official remake of the Hollywood classic Forrest Gump, has got the viewers intrigued even before the release of its first poster or teaser. It's now revealed that the actor will shoot for the film at around 100 real locations spanning across India.

While cities like Delhi, Gujarat, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, and Hyderabad will be a part of the shooting schedule, a source close to the film's development has also revealed that the list will include many other states, which will be a first for Aamir. The decision of scattering the shoot across India comes from the fact that Aamir doesn't believe in studio set-ups and has, therefore, asked his team to scout 100 authentic locations which will be apt for the shooting.

The film's script will require the actor to showcase the journey of the character's life and many of its crucial parts will unveil in different cities.

Apart from location scouting, a part of the film preparation also includes Aamir's physical transformation, for which the actor will undergo massive physical changes to better fit his character. For the same, Aamir will gain over 20 kilos and is likely to sport a turban in some parts of Lal Singh Chaddha.

The film will span a time period, starting from the character's childhood to him being in his fifties. To be helmed by Advait Chandan, the movie has been written by Atul Kulkarni and will be bankrolled by Viacom 18 Studios and Aamir Khan Productions. Apart from Aamir, the film, that is slated for a Christmas release in 2020, reportedly stars his 3 Idiots co-star Kareena Kapoor Khan.

Meanwhile, Aamir has also rejoined Gulshan Kumar's biopic, Mogul, months after he had exited the project.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates on entertainment, lifestyle and fashion.
