11 years on, memories of encounter haunt bylanes of Batla House

No one is ready to rent or buy flat number 108 on the fourth floor of Batla House’s L-18 in Jamia Nagar. (Photo:Aaj Tak)

Flat number 108 on the fourth floor of Batla House's L-18 in Jamia Nagar wears a deserted look -- 11 years after it was the site of one of India's most controversial encounters.

On September 19, 2008, two Indian Mujahideen terrorists were killed and an officer of the special cell of the Delhi Police lost his life.

Over a decade later, the unoccupied flat still resonates with gunshots as a lock hangs on the main door.

There are no takers for the flat due to its infamous history, even the owner has now moved to Ghaziabad -- far away from Jamia Nagar in Delhi.

'HAUNTING MEMORIES'

Suhail Anwar, who lived opposite to the flat at the time of the encounter, says the flat has remained shut for 11 years.

"No one has come to see the flat to rent or buy it. The flat was sealed after the encounter but the year after restrictions were lifted. However, no one has come to live here," Suhail Anwar tells Aajtak.in

As he recalls the fateful day, Suhail Anwar says even thinking about the sequence of events sends chills down the spine. "Everything happened in front of my eyes. Many days have passed but memories of that day still haunt me. I try not to remember it, but what can you do if the flat is right in front," he says.

(Photo:Aaj Tak)

'MOVIE ON BATLA HOUSE ENCOUNTER WAS NONSENSE'

Going down the memory lane, Suhail Anwar says many boys lived in the flat opposite to his. He, however, adds that he wasn't aware of their activities. "I told the Delhi Police whatever I knew," he adds.

On the movie 'Batla House', Anwar claims it doesn't show the truth. "It [Batla House movie] is complete nonsense. I have not seen the film but seen the trailer. Nothing that was shown in the movie happened in real."

Faisal Butt, who lives on the third floor, rented the accommodation just two months back. He, however, says he has not been able to muster the courage to visit the flat that was the site of the infamous encounter.

When we ring the bell of another flat on the third floor, a girl asks us to wait. Her mother shuts the door as soon as flat number 108 is mentioned.

As we exit the building, we meet Badar Taslim.

He, too, gets emotional at the mention of Batla House encounter. "Photos were clicked, videos shot, but nothing happened. There is no point in talking about this now," he says as he goes back inside his home.

DELHI SERIAL BLASTS AND BATLA HOUSE ENCOUNTER

One week before the Batla House encounter, there were serial blasts at five different locations in Delhi -- two in Connaught Place, two in Greater Kailash and one at Ghaffar Market in Karol Bagh. As many as 30 people were killed in the serial blasts.

Serial attacks had earlier rocked Uttar Pradesh, Jaipur, and Rajasthan following which the Delhi Police special cell's Mohan Chand Sharma sent a team for investigation.

During the probe, they found a suspicious mobile number. It was later revealed that the number was used by the prime suspect of the serial blasts -- Atif Amin. As per call record on September 3, 2008, the caller asked for Rs 1.5 lakh near Batla House.

On the same day, two other calls were made for the delivery of money. By then, the special cell had gotten an idea that the person using the suspicious number was in touch with a hawala money dealer.

However, they failed to sense the gravity of the matter that the money was being used to trigger an attack in Delhi. After serial blasts in Delhi, the special cell again started analysing the call. In the intercepted call on September 6, Amin was heard speaking to his associate Mohammad Shakeel about the parking position of an auto-rickshaw at Ghaffar Market, Karol Bagh - targets in Delhi.

Through mobile surveillance, cops tracked him around Batla House. On September 19, the special cell stormed the residential building and killed two terrorists.

Mohan Chandra Sharma of the special cell, who was leading the team, was also shot. On September 19, Sharma succumbed to his injuries.

Also read | 7-minute call that led cops to Batla House: A look at the encounter

Also read | Indian Mujahideen terrorist Ariz Khan, accused of killing 165 people in various blasts, nabbed | All you need to know
