PM Modi In Nashik: 'We Will Hug Each Kashmiri To Build A New Kashmir'

As the state of Maharashtra is gearing up for the assembly elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday addressed a public rally in Nashik. The Prime Minister introduced a new slogan for the citizens to express their unity with Kashmiris and spoke on length over his government's decision to abrogate Article 370. He also spoke about the plans of the Central government on the welfare of Jammu-Kashmir and Ladakh. The Prime Minister also lashed out at the Opposition and their continuous attempts to politicise the decision of abrogation of Article 370 that gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Naming NCP chief Sharad Pawar in his speech, PM Modi slammed his pro-Pakistan remark.

READ: 'Howdy, Modi!': Billboards' surge in Texas to welcome PM Modi

PM Modi introduces a new slogan

"We will make new efforts to end the problems in Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh. We had together dreamt of integrating Jammu and Kashmir, today I can say it with satisfaction that our country is on its way to secure that dream. To facilitate the Constitution of India in Jammu and Kashmir was not only a mere decision taken by the government, but it manifest the dreams and wishes of 130 crore people of this country. This decision has been taken to end violence, terror, and separatism from J&K. This decision is for India's unity and it was our duty that we fulfill the dreams and wishes of people of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh," PM Modi said.

Introducing a new slogan, the Prime Minister said: "You were sloganeering that Kashmir is ours. Now there will be a new slogan- 'Ab hume naara lagana hai, Hindustaniyo ne Kashmir banana hai. Kal tak kehte the Kashmir humara hai, ab har Hindustani kahega hume naya Kashmir banana hai.' ( We used to say Kashmir is ours, now we will say all Indians will build a new Kashmir). The problems suffered by Kashmiris for 40 years due to the wrong policies of the previous governments, it’s time to rid them of those problems. We have to embrace every Kashmiri and we have to convert Kashmir into a paradise again."

READ | 'Howdy, Modi': Texas Mayor welcomes visitors from across United States

PM Modi slams Opposition for politicising the decision of abrogation of Article 370

Prime Minister Narendra Modi slammed the previous governments holding them responsible for the killing of people in Kashmir in the last 40 years. He said that neighbouring country is trying their level best to invoke violence in the state after Article 370 was abrogated. PM Modi also added that it is his duty to ensure welfare in the state and expressed his shock over Opposition's attempts to politicise it. The Prime Minister said: "They are trying to spread violence and misinformation in Jammu and Kashmir, but people of the valley have made their mind to get rid of violence. They want development, job opportunities and we all together will take J&K to a new way of welfare. I am shocked that Opposition is looking for a political benefit in this. Our country has taken such a pathbreaking decision, instead of aiding the process of its proper implementation, the senior leaders of Congress and NCP are politicising it."

The Prime Minister added that to criticise the government as Opposition is fruitful but to speak against national interest. "As Opposition, they criticise my government, they criticise me, they criticise Devendra ji, these are their rights. But to speak against the nation in a way that terrorists are using their quotes to spread misinformation is wrong. Unfortunately, their quotes are being used in foreign countries to attack India," PM Modi said.

READ | Trump confirms appearance at 'Howdy, Modi!' event in Texas on Sept 22

PM Modi launches an all-out attack on Sharad Pawar

Launching an all-out attack at the NCP chief Sharad Pawar, the PM said that it is disheartening to see a politician of his stature stooping to vote-bank politics. "Sharad Pawar ji said he is fond of the neighbouring country, fine that's his wish. He thinks that the rulers and administrators in the neighbouring country are good, that's also his views. But the country, the world, everyone knows where is the factory of terror and from where the pictures of discrimination and violence arrive. In politics, parties and politicians may win or lose, but it is everyone's duty to make the country victorious."

The NCP chief Sharad Pawar on September 16 while addressing a rally, had praised Pakistan for the hospitality he received in the country. "I have visited Pakistan and received their hospitality. Pakistanis have relatives in India and they want to meet them and vice versa. But there are visa issues. People here say that those in Pakistan are facing injustice and are unhappy....these things are being said only for political gains without understanding the actual situation in Pakistan. Those in power here are spreading false things for political benefits," he had said.

READ: CM Devendra Fadnavis hits out at Sharad Pawar absolving Pakistan
