Why govt's intention to ban e-cigarettes is good but its reasons defy logic | Opinion

All cigarettes are equal; some cigarettes are more equal than others.

This modified version of George Orwell's oft-quoted line "all animals are equal; some animals are more equal than others'' from his satirical masterpiece 'Animal Farm' outlines the Narendra Modi government's approach in banning e-cigarettes in India.

George Orwell used this line to portray a situation where the authority in power proclaims to treat everyone equally, but in reality has an approach of according differential and preferential treatment.

While announcing the ban on e-cigarettes on Wednesday, the most popular form of Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems (ENDS), Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Wednesday said the aim is to "protect the youth" from addiction of nicotine.

Once the ban comes into force, consumption, production, manufacturing, import, export, transport, sale, distribution, storage and advertisement of e-cigarettes would become illegal in India. The maximum punishment is a jail term of three years and a fine of Rs 5 lakh.

Justifying the ban, the government said these novel products (e-cigarettes) come with "attractive appearances and multiple flavours" and the reason to ban them is an exponential increase in their popularity in developed countries that has "acquired epidemic proportions", especially among youth and children.

None of this is false.

E-cigarettes are addictive and come with health hazards as they use solutions of nicotine and other harmful chemicals, some of which can be toxic.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) says though the nature of long-term health effects of ENDS is unknown and that many researchers have concluded e-cigarettes are generally less harmful than cigarettes, they still pose a serious public health concern.

Tobacco is the only legal drug that kills many of its users when used exactly as intended by manufacturers. - World Health Organisation

It is also true that the popularity of e-cigarettes has increased manifolds in developed countries. The US government estimates that in 2018, nearly 3.62 million students in middle and high schools were using e-cigarettes. Between 2017 and 2018, use of e-cigarettes increased by 78 per cent among high school students and 48 per cent among middle school students in the US.

In India, import of e-cigarettes rose by 218 per cent between 2016-17 and 2018-19. By 2023, it is estimated that their global market will reach $26.84 billion.

ALSO READ | Explained: What are e-cigarettes? Why did the govt ban them?

In terms of health risks, using product containing nicotine in any form is unsafe, particularly for youth and pregnant women. For users of e-cigarettes, the vapour that they inhale contain toxic substances that may increase the risk of cancer or cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, the WHO says.

These numbers and facts show that the fear of youth getting addicted to nicotine while using e-cigarettes is not unfounded and is based on sound resoning.

WHAT IS THE PROBLEM THEN?

As a measure to prevent health-related risks, banning nicotine products is not problematic. To give a benefit of doubt, let's even assume that the government's intentions behind the move to ban e-cigarettes were also genuine i.e. concern for youth and public health in general.

But what makes the government's decision problematic is the selective nature of the ban, which in extension points to the differential and preferential treatment that George Orwell talked about in his book.

The government has banned e-cigarettes arguing they are addictive in nature, injurious to health and that their popularity is assuming "epidemic" proportions.

But in this exercise, what it conveniently failed to mention with equal (if not more) vigour was that conventional cigarettes are far more injurious to health than e-cigarettes. The nicotine consumption and the addiction that follows after puffing conventional cigarettes and other tobacco products is much higher than the one caused due to e-cigarettes. (This doesn't mean e-cigarettes are non injurious to health.)

If the government was indeed concerned about youth and public health, common sense tells us that the attack should have been directly on regular cigarettes and other tobacco products.

But the government did not do so.

WHAT DEFIES LOGIC?

While announcing the ban, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman referred to "reports" that found e-cigarettes to be addictive and injurious to health. She also referred to the World Health Organisation's opposition to e-cigarettes and its appeals to countries to regulate them.

But what she did not refer to was the voluminous scientific literature (especially of the World Health Organisation) on the lakhs of tobacco-related deaths in India every year, most of which are due to the use of regular cigarettes, cigars etc.

Tobacco kills every second person who consumes it. The estimated number of tobacco-related deaths stands at more than 8 million each year globally. - World Health Organisation

The first paragraph of the health ministry's report titlted 'Tobacco taxes in India: An empirical analysis' reads:

"India faces the challenge of rising burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs)...the NCDs account for more than half of the deaths, which is further exacerbated by the high prevalence of tobacco use in the country. The disease burden due to tobacco poses enormous and inequitable economic loss to society and also presents a formidable challenge to the country's health care systems. As per the health ministry's estimates, total economic cost attributable to tobacco use for all diseases in 2011 amounted to Rs 1,04,500 crore, which is equivalent to 1.04 per cent of the GDP."

On Wednesday, in a press statement, the same health ministry listed a number of reasons to justify the ban on e-cigarettes (without giving any explanation why regular cigarettes have been left out). These included:

Threat to country's tobacco control efforts

Hindrance in achieving targets envisaged under Sustainable Development Goals, National Monitoring Framework for Prevention and Control of non-communicable diseases and National Health Policy, 2017

Overall interest of public health as envisaged under Article 47 of the Constitution of India

Addictive nature of nicotine

Scant scientific evidence for use of e-cigarettes as effective tobacco cessation aids

Safety concern of flavours in combination with nicotine

Reading these well-intended goals, one wonders how India's tobacco control efforts can be free from "threats" if normal cigarettes (which unlike e-cigarettes are the most consumed tobacco products) are kept available in the market.

One fails to understand how the learned health ministry arrived at a conclusion that keeping conventional cigarettes outside the purview of the ban will not pose a "threat to country's tobacco control efforts".

That the government is serious about achieving Sustainable Development Goals and minimising non-communicable disease is heartening to hear. But would it not be more heartening if its action meet its intention?

The total economic cost attributable to tobacco use for all diseases in 2011 amounted to Rs 1,04,500 crore, which is equivalent to 1.04% of the GDP. - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GOI

If the government feels a ban is a possible solution to India's alarming tobacco consumption levels, why not attack the root rather than attacking a secondary cause?

The government also cited Article 47 of the Indian Constitution to justify the ban on e-cigarettes.

Article 47 reads: "Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health. The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health."

In letters, this article does call for imposing a ban on drinks and drugs that are "injurious to health". It asks governments to work towards improving public health and consider this as their "primary duties".

Now, if we go by the spirit of the article, especially the second half, it isn't hard to understand that imposing a ban on a relatively less addictive and harmful product, while leaving the much more harmful variant untouched, does little service to the spirit of Article 47 as envisaged by the Constituent Assembly.

In Orwell's terms, would it be too far-fetched to boil down the government's approach as: 'All cigarettes are injurious to health; the ones more injurious can stay, others must be banned'?

ALSO READ | Cigarette stocks climb as govt approves ordinance to ban e-cigarettes

ALSO READ | Govt bans e-cigarettes, will stop all production, sale: Nirmala Sitharaman

ALSO WATCH | Are e-cigarettes injurious to health?
