Batla House Encounter case: Questions that still haunt us even after 11 years

The Delhi Police officials claimed that the occupants of L-18, Batla House, who were students of various universities and institutes in Delhi | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The armed operation was conducted by the Special Cell of the Delhi Police on September 19, 2008 Police personnel posed as officers of a telecommunication company and were headed to arrest alleged terrorists Police later claimed that the deceased were members of the 'Indian Mujahideen'- an Islamist terrorist group

New Delhi: Eleven years ago, the Delhi Police Special Cell claimed to have unravelled a conspiracy of serial blasts that rocked the national capital on September 13, 2008. A week later, the force conducted an 'encounter' in the Delhi's Muslim ghetto - Jamia Nagar (over 5 lakh Muslims reside here) where two alleged terrorists were killed in the shootout and also resulted in the death of the much-decorated Police Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma.

What happened on September 19, 2008?

In an armed operation conducted by the Special Cell of the Delhi Police on September 19, 2008, the force raided a flat in the building L-18 in Batla House area of Jamia Nagar. Members of the raiding party - police personnel - posed as officers of a telecommunication company and were headed to arrest the alleged terrorists - men who were also believed to be the masterminds of the Delhi serial blasts that had taken place a week earlier.

Inspector Mohan was accompanied by Head Constable Balwant Rana and Sub-Inspector Dharminder Kumar. The alleged terrorists who were later shot dead in the encounter were identified as Atif Amin and Mohammed Sajid. After the elaborate exchange of heavy firing, the third flatmate, Mohammed Saif was arrested from the spot and as claimed by the Delhi Police two other alleged terrorists escaped during the operation.

Meanwhile, Inspector Mohan Chand Sharma, who was apparently not wearing a bullet-proof jacket was injured in the firing and was rushed to Holy Family Hospital which is around 2.1 km from the crime spot. Media reports claimed that the entire area was immediately cordoned off and heavy police security was deployed. However, the local residents were then left perplexed about the situation and the incident stigmatised the area for the coming years.

(Source: BCCL)

Who were these terrorists?

The Delhi Police officials claimed that the occupants of L-18, Batla House, who were students of various universities and institutes in Delhi, hailed from Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh. They were later claimed to be a significant part of the 'Indian Mujahideen'-an Islamic terrorist group operating in India.

The deceased 24-year-old Atif Ameen was enrolled in a Masters course at the Jamia Millia Islamia and had been living in Delhi from the past two years. Mohammed Sajid, the 17-year-old occupant, the second one to be killed in the encounter, was a Class XI in Azamgarh and had reportedly come to seek admission in Jamia School and had been enrolled in an English speaking course in the national capital.

Following the encounter, there were series of arrests from the area which included the flat's caretaker, his son, friends and acquaintances of the deceased, who were questioned in the Special Cell headquarters at Lodhi Road.

Meanwhile, when questions over the genuineness of the encounter were raised by certain quarters, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) took cognisance of the allegations levelled. And in July 2009, NHRC gave a clean chit to the Delhi Police in Batla House Encounter case. The commission stated that there was no human rights violation by the Delhi Police.

In the 30-page report on the encounter case, the commission stated that "we are clearly of the opinion that having regard to the material placed before us, it cannot be said that there has been any violation of human rights by the action of the police."

However, even though the NHRC gave a clean chit to the police, several questions remain unanswered. This includes:
