Street Dancer: Varun Dhawan & Shraddha Kapoor’s film takes inspiration from Govinda’s song for the title

One of the upcoming Bollywood films which stars Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor in the lead and is helmed by Remo D'souza, was making headlines from the past few days. The team was making all the efforts to keep the name of the film under the wraps. Remo's last dance film was called ABCD 2. However, this time, Varun and Shraddha starrer dance flick is titled differently and has taken some inspiration from Govinda's popular song for the title. After a long wait, the movie's title was revealed by Varun on Twitter and it is named, "Street Dancer."

The movie’s team had left for Amritsar last week to shoot the first schedule and also shared the same on social media. The first schedule was shot and Punjabi actress Sonam Bajwa was a part of the same. Till now, the makers and actors of the film were using #3 to promote the film on social media. However today, Varun took to social media to share his look from the film and also mentioned that the title will be revealed soon. And thus, keeping up his word, Varun revealed the title of the film on Twitter.

He also captioned it and wrote, “Why walk on the streets when you can dance on them! Be a rule breaker and come fall in step with #StreetDancer3d this 8th November.” He tagged the entire team in the post. The movie’s hashtag says 3D which means we can expect Varun and Shraddha to groove in 3D.

Check out the tweet:

(Also Read: Varun Dhawan announces the release DATE of Remo D'Souza's dance film but keeps the name under wraps)

Speaking about Street Dancer, the movie will see Varun and Shraddha’s reunion after ABCD 2 and will also star Nora Fatehi. The first schedule has been shot and the next will be shot in London. Earlier, Varun also took to social media to share the first look and the release date of the dance film. Helmed by Remo D'souza, Street Dancer will have a number of international choreographers also as a part of the team. Street Dancer is slated to release on November 8, 2019.
