How departure of Sheikh Mohammed’s sixth wife shone light on Dubai’s state oppression

The six-foot-high metal spiked fence which surrounds the ruler of Dubai’s £75m palatial residence in the Surrey countryside was erected last year to protect the sheikh from the prying eyes of the British public. But it now appears the giant security barrier may serve another purpose – to prevent his wives and daughters from escaping.

Last month Princess Haya bint Hussein, the sixth and youngest wife of Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, ran away from her husband to seek protection in the High Court in London. The Jordanian-born princess, 45, fled with their two children and applied for a forced marriage protection order and a non-molestation order against the sheikh.

Princess Haya’s departure comes 18 months after an escape attempt by one of Sheikh Mohammed’s daughters. Latifa bint Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, 33, reportedly slipped out of Dubai in February 2018 with the help of a French former spy and a Swedish friend. She travelled by car, dinghy and yacht, with the goal of making it to India from where she hoped to fly to the US to claim asylum. But she was apparently hauled back to Dubai after a joint operation involving India coastguards and UAE security forces. She has not been seen in public since.

The freshest exclusives and sharpest analysis, curated for your inbox Email address is invalid Thank you for subscribing! Sorry, there was a problem.

This is not the first occasion Sheikh Mohammed has had trouble keeping his family at home. Nineteen years ago, another of his daughters broke out of the estate in Chobham before also being recaptured and sent back to Dubai.

Runaway princesses — Previous bids for freedom In July 2000, the Sheikh’s 19-year-old daughter Princess Shamsa was holidaying at the family estate in Surrey. She managed to escape the compound and was free for several days before the Sheikh found her and took her forcibly back to Dubai. Princess Shamsa now allegedly lives as a prisoner in Dubai’s gilded cage. In February 2018 Princes Shamsa’s sister Latifa, 33, also tried to flee the family. Her elaborate escape plan by boat to India was apparently foiled when armed commandos raided the vessel and dragged Latifa away at gunpoint, returning her to Dubai. Princess Haya, the Sheikh’s sixth wife, fled Dubai in July with her two young children, aged seven and 11, seeking protection in London. She has instructed top divorce lawyer Fiona Shackleton and is living in the Dubai royal family’s £150m London mansion, with heavy security, across the road from Kensington Palace.

Surrey’s iron ruler

The departure of his sixth wife raises serious questions about the sheikh’s oppressive rule in Dubai and his extensive business interests in this country. There are now calls for the UK Government to freeze the sheikh’s assets to put pressure on the Gulf state ruler to end alleged human rights abuses. One human rights organisation told i that the UK must use its leverage to bring about change.

“The UAE continues to spend a lot of time and money cultivating an image of itself as a progressive, forward-thinking and tolerant state – Sheikh Mohammed, for the longest time, was the face of that,” said Human Rights Watch’s Hiba Zayadin. “And the country’s rulers are very sensitive to that image on the global stage, as seen by their soft power strategy, and particularly because they so aggressively seek foreign investments.”

But she added: “Conversely, UAE investments in Britain are just one way the regime exercises soft power to hide the grim reality on the ground instead of reforming the laws and policies that allow for abuse.”

Read More: UAE tourists could face arrest if they consume alcoholic drinks on their flight to the Middle East

The international human rights barrister and joint head of Guernica 37 International Justice Chambers, Toby Cadman, said it was “deeply disturbing” that UAE rulers retain commercial and real estate interests in the UK. He told i: “It would be fair to say that the system of protection for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the UAE is non-existent. The rule of law and in particular the independence of the judiciary has been circumvented by an autocratic monarchistic rule that has no respect for a free media, political opposition or any notion of a democracy.

“It is deeply disturbing that its rulers continue to have commercial and real estate interests in the UK. More worrying is that our Royal Family maintains cordial relationships with a regime that denigrates the rights of women and opposes and brutally crushed any form of dissent.”

Life of riches

Sheikh Mohammed, 70, was partly educated in England before training with the British Army in Aldershot. He succeeded to the throne of Dubai in 2006 and lays claim to a family fortune estimated to be between £3bn and £15bn. A better indication of this wealth is the £820,000 he and his brothers make each a day from the country’s rich oil resources. However, it is Sheikh Mohammed, a strict Sunni Muslim, who is credited with transforming the fishing village of Dubai into the global city of today.

But Dubai’s rapid growth and Western-friendly enterprises have not been without controversy.

UAE travel brochures promise holidays of “unadulterated luxury”, but it is also an Islamic state run on laws that are often accused of trampling over human rights.

In recent years there have been a number of high-profile cases involving British citizens who have found themselves badly treated at the hands of Sheikh Mohammed’s secret police and security services.

Read More: Woman detained for drinking one glass of wine on flight to Dubai allowed back to UK

If Emirati law can seem harsh to outsiders, it is much worse for its residents. Sodomy carries a 10-year prison sentence and, in theory, can be punishable by death. Rape victims often find they are victimised for going public.

The day-to-day lives of women in Dubai can be oppressive. Only one in five local women are part of the national workforce, and all Emirati women must receive permission from a male guardian to marry.

But the harshest treatment is meted out to 250,000 foreign labourers who human rights groups allege live in conditions which are “less than humane”. Speaking out against Sheikh Mohammed and his family attracts attention from the secret police. Dissidents disappear or have their passports cancelled.

Change needed in UAE

Toby Cadman urges the UK Government to do more to bring about change in the UAE. He said: “The UK Government should recognise the strong position it’s in and exert real pressure on a state that is slipping deeper and deeper into a brutal autocracy.”

In recent years the sheikh has become something of an Anglophile, using his international horse-racing business, Godolphin Stables, to build close ties with the British establishment. He is a frequent guest at Windsor Castle and owns a £150m property portfolio that stretches across Britain. He established himself in the UK in 1981 with the purchase of the Grade II Dalham Hall near Newmarket. Ten years later he bought the Longcross estate, near Chobham, and also owns a remote 63,000-acre estate Scottish estate.

The erection of the metal security fence around his Surrey estate has raised the hackles of many local people who have accused him of riding roughshod over planning permission. Neighbours say he has illegally taken down protected trees to make way for the fences.

Runnymede Borough Council, where the sheikh’s application was made, has since granted permission for the fence on condition openings are made every 90ft to allow wildlife to pass through. The council says that there is no evidence that the Sheikh illegally felled any trees.

In Scotland, his plans to expand his estate by building a 30-room extension have also run into local opposition. Lorna Gillies, a resident, spoke out against “another absentee landlord taking over more land to be used once a year and encroaching into land where people live all year”.

Of much greater legal concern is a looming High Court case brought by his estranged wife, Princess Haya, which threatens to expose his private life to unprecedented public scrutiny. A spokeswoman for the UAE embassy in London told i it would not be commenting on “his Highness’s private life” nor on the allegations of human rights abuse in the UAE.
