Mamata vs CBI: 1 month 5 times when Mamata Banerjee locked horns with BJP

The tussle between West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and the Narendra Modi government has escalated since Sunday evening when Mamata sat on a dharna to defend Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar from the CBI in Kolkata. The fast-changing developments have taken many by surprise. The Opposition has termed it an attack on democracy and federal structure while the BJP says Mamata has unleashed a constitutional crisis in the state.

However, this is not the first time that Mamata Banerjee and the Modi government have locked horns with each other.

5 recent occasions:

Mamata returns to her dharna avatar

Taking everyone by surprise, Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee on Sunday evening ordered the West Bengal Police to prevent the CBI from entering the home of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. She personally intervened in the matter, reached his home and staged a dharna against the CBI and the Modi government. This soon ballooned into the biggest standoff between Mamata and the Modi government.

More than 20 opposition leaders from different parties, including a former prime minister, several chief ministers and party presidents, extended their support to her and joined her in attacking the Modi government.

Mamata announced a 'Save Democracy' protest against the CBI's "highhandedness". She said the Modi government is trying to throttle democracy and the country's federal structure.

Mamata Banerjee bars Yogi's chopper from landing

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath was scheduled to address a rally in Balurghat area of South Dinapur district, West Bengal, on February 3. The rally could not be held as planned because the West Bengal administration did not allow Yogi Adityanath's helicopter to land near the venue.

After this, Yogi Adityanath addressed the people through a telephonic call from Lucknow. The BJP accused the Trinamool Congress government of vendetta politics. It said that Mamata Banerjee was abusing her power by denying permission to an elected CM for his chopper to land.

In his telephonic address, Yogi Adityanath said: "I was supposed to address your rally on the scheduled time but the TMC, out of fear, did not let us in."

Union minister Babul Supriyo said Mamata Banerjee's actions show her "desperation" and "fear". "The state government is trying to block every programme of the BJP, be it a rally, yatra or the landing of Yogi Adityanath ji's chopper," he said.

(READ MORE ON THIS HERE)

BJP, TMC workers clash after Amit Shah rally

Unruly scenes were witnessed in Contai town of East Midnapore district in West Bengal on January 29 as BJP and TMC workers clashed with each other and vandalised property. This happened soon after Amit Shah addressed a rally and left the venue.

The two sides pelted stones at each and many buses carrying BJP supporters were vandalised. Both sides blamed each other for starting the clashes.

As tensions escalated, the administration had to cal in the Rapid Action Force (RAF) to control the situation.

(READ MORE ON THIS HERE)

West Bengal govt bars Amit Shah's chopper from landing

On January 22, BJP president Amit Shah was scheduled to address a rally in Malda, West Bengal. However, the district administration refused to give landing permission for his helicopter, saying the runway is under construction. However, when a team of India Today TV visited the airport, it found that this was far from truth.

The BJP called this a political vendetta and accused Mamata Banerjee of throttling democracy in the state.

(READ MORE ON THIS HERE)

Mamata organises mega Opposition rally in Kolkata

On January 19, Mamata Banerjee organised a mega gathering of the opposition parties in Kolkata. The rally - United India Rally - was attended by leaders from more than 20 opposition parties.

They included leaders like former Union minister Yashwant Sinha, RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav, former Prime Minister HD Deve Gowda, BJP MP Shatrughan Sinha, Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge, Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu, among others.

The rally became a platform for the opposition parties to attack the Narendra Modi government.

CLICK HERE FOR LIVE UPDATES ON MAMATA vs CBI

ALSO READ | Mamata vs CBI: Old picture, new unity, what Didi's United India rally guests say now

ALSO READ | If Kolkata police chief thinks of destroying evidence, he will regret it: Supreme Court

ALSO READ | Mamata versus CBI: When CBI asked for Army help to arrest Lalu Prasad but failed

ALSO WATCH | Modi had sent his police to my bedroom, says Arvind Kejriwal
