'ABCD 3' FIRST Poster: Varun Dhawan announces release date of the film along with revealing his look!

"One “step” closer to the name. The rule breakers of 2k19 are here[lightening bolt emoji] # 3IsComing

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Varun Dhawan FC (@hqvarundhawan) on Jan 28, 2019 at 6:24pm PST It was also reported that Varun had suffered a knee rupture during the shoot in Amritsar for 'ABCD 3' song. He was expected to jump and land on his knee, which he reportedly did as many as 15 times, according to Mumbai Mirror report, which also stated that the 'Kalank' actor was canning a celebratory song with Punjabi actor Sonam Bajwa when this happened. Along with Shraddha and Varun, the film also features Nora Fatehi and punjabi star Sonam Bajwa. The 'ABCD's regular dancer-choreographers Dharmesh Yelande, Punit J Pathak & Raghav Juyal who were recently seen in 'Dance Plus 4', will this time be joined by show's mentor Shakti Mohan too. Also, the 2nd runner up of 'Dance+ 4', Vartika Jha, was offered a role by Remo D'souza himself, in the film, a few weeks ago. It is sure going to be a dance treat for the fans with so much of talent teaming up on one film.

Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor continue to be the lead actors in the 3rd installment sequel of Remo D'souza's dance film 'ABCD' and the actor commenced it's shoot two weeks ago in Punjab. While the fans were intrigued about the look Varun dons in the film and the leaked pictures created a stir on social media, now the actor himself has shared his first look featuring on film's poster, also announcing the release date. The film is set to hit theatres on November 8th this year while the title of the 3rd sequel is yet to be announced. Varun captioned the poster -Although Varun's face is not visible in the poster but his hair with blonde highlights do catch our attention. Also the 6 pack abs can't be missed. Earlier this week, leaked pictures and videos of Varun Dhawan from the 'ABCD 3' sets, sporting the uber cool avatar, had gone viral.
