Akshay Kumar takes the Metro to beat Mumbai traffic like a boss. Shares video with fans

Akshay Kumar took the Metro from Ghatkopar to Versova in Mumbai on Wednesday.

That Akshay Kumar loves adventure is a fact everybody knows by now. But his adventure streak crossed all limits when the actor decided to ride the Metro in rush hour. The Mission Mangal actor took a Metro train from Ghatkopar to Versova in Mumbai with his Good Newwz director to beat the peak hour traffic.

Akshay Kumar took to social media to share the video of him riding the Metro. Sharing the video, he wrote, "My ride for today, the @MumMetro...travelled #LikeABoss from Ghatkopar to Versova beating the peak hours traffic (sic)."

My ride for today, the @MumMetro...travelled #LikeABoss from Ghatkopar to Versova beating the peak hours traffic pic.twitter.com/tOOcGdOXXl Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) September 18, 2019

In the video, the actor shares his experience of travelling in the Metro. He said, "Right now I'm inside the Metro. I have come here quitely. I was shooting in Ghatkopar and I had to reach Versova. My map showed that it will take me two hours and five minutes to reach Versova from Ghatkopar. Then my director Raj, who is directing Good Newwz, suggested me to take the Metro. After getting sceptical initially, I got ready to take the risk. We have a few security guards with us. I'm sitting here in a corner."

Akshay also showed his fans the view of his ride. The Metro was filled with people. Praising the Metro, the Laxxmi Bomb actor said, "It is taking me only 20 minutes to reach Versova. I'm loving it. I think it is the only means of transportation that is on elevation and no amount of rain can affect its function."

Actress Tanishaa Mukerji couldn't help but comment on the video shared by Akshay. She wrote, "Too cute! You look so thrilled about going in the Metro. So much childlike excitement."

To which Akshay replied, "@tanishaamukerji Haha, it was actually quite an adventure and a very pleasant and quick one."

Akshay Kumar has recently returned from London after celebrating his 52nd birthday in the British capital. The actor was in London with his wife and kids, Nitara and Aarav. The actor also indulged in adventurous activities in London. On his birthday, the action star climbed trees and walked on bridges in a jungle with his daughter Nitara.

Twinkle Khanna took to Instagram to share a picture of Akshay with daughter, Nitara. Along with the photo, she wrote, "A birthday filled with many adventures-Next BYOB pottery and then mixing potions in a dark dungeon... (sic)"

The actor is currently shooting for Raghava Lawrence's Laxmmi Bomb, which is the Hindi remake of the Tamil film Kanchana. In the remake, he will be sharing screen space with Kiara Advani.

ALSO READ | Akshay Kumar has best solution for your midweek blues: This green autorickshaw

ALSO READ | Mann Bairagi: Akshay Kumar unveils new Narendra Modi biopic on PM's 69th birthday

ALSO READ | Akshay Kumar wishes son Aarav on birthday: I'll always be beside you to guide you
