Woah! Kartik Aaryan wants to ROMANCE Alia Bhatt and BROMANCE Ranbir Kapoor

The ‘Guest iin London’ actor called Alia a fantastic actor and said that even he couldn’t wait them the pairing on the big screen. We wonder what Sara has to say to this. She is a fantastic actor I love her work Even i cant wait to see us together on screen #AskKartik https://t.co/9vuKblBlPY — Kartik Aaryan (@TheAaryanKartik) February 2, 2019 Another fan asked Kartik which actor he would like to bromance in a film and the ‘Akaash Vani' star replied Ranbir Kapoor. Ranbir #AskKartik https://t.co/HdwHqxRiIp — Kartik Aaryan (@TheAaryanKartik) February 2, 2019 We hope the filmmakers (especially Karan Johar) are listening. The movie buffs would love to see Alia Bhatt, Ranbir Kapoor and Kartik Aaryan together in ‘Dostana 2’, isn’t it? On the professional front, Kartik’s next film ‘Luke Chuppi’ will hit the silver screens on March 1. The actor will soon start shooting for the remake of ‘Pati, Patni Aur Woh’. The upcoming film also stars Ananya Panday and Bhumi Pednekar. VIDEO: 'Coca Cola’ song from Kartik-Kriti's ‘Luka Chuppi’ all set to be this season’s dance anthem! Watch this space for more updates!

Kartik Aaryan has become one of the most sought after actors in Bollywood post the success of ‘Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety’. The dashing actor will be next seen in the rom-com ‘Luka Chuppi’ opposite Kriti Sanon. Saif Ali Khan and Amrita Singh’s daughter Sara Ali Khan, who made a rocking debut with ‘Kedarnath’, had revealed that she has a huge crush on Kartik. The ‘Simmba’ actress even expressed her desire to go on a date with the ‘Pyaar Ka Punchnama’ actor, while talking to Karan Johar on ‘Koffee With Karan 6’. Fans have been eagerly waiting to see them together in a film and speculations are also rife that Kartik and Sara will star in 'Love Aja Kal 2'. However, Kartik wishes to work with another top-notch actress. Kartik, in a recent interaction with his fans on Twitter, answered the questions put forward by them. One of his fans shared a picture of Kartik and Alia and said that he was eager to see the two tinsel town stars on the silver screen.
