Twitter suspends 70 handles claiming to be of Army brass

NEW DELHI: India has joined the Twitter war with Pakistan, amidst the ongoing diplomatic spat over the revocation of the special status of Jammu & Kashmir. The country’s security establishment has got the micro-blogging site to suspend 60-70 “fake” handles that were masquerading as those of senior Indian Army officers to spread “total falsehoods” about Jammu & Kashmir and “spewing venom” on social media platforms.The Twitter accounts were impersonating as the personal handles of officers like Army chief General Bipin Rawat , Northern Command chief Lt-Gen Ranbir Singh, previous vice chief Lt-Gen Devraj Anbu (retd) and former DGMO Lt-Gen Vinod Bhatia (retd), among others, with their profile pictures in uniforms.“We had observed some fake social media handles, especially in the names of some senior officers. We took up the case with the agencies concerned. They have now been brought down. Our agencies monitor such handles. Whenever the Army finds such handles, we report the matter to those agencies who are mandated to take them down,” said Army spokesperson Colonel Aman Anand on Thursday.Added another officer, “Around 200 such fake handles being run by the Pakistani propaganda machinery have been identified by us. They went hyper-active after the Indian government’s decision on August 5 to revoke the special status of J&K and split it into two Union Territories. The ministries of defence, home, external affairs and electronics & information technology are all collaborating on this matter.”A handle purportedly of a serving Colonel in J&K, for instance, said 69 of “my Indian soldiers” had been killed in “unprovoked” ceasefire violations by Pakistan over the last few days. Another fake handle said intelligence reports indicated Kashmiris were being killed in large numbers, with many women being raped.“Similarly, Lt-Gen Anbu’s fake handle said removal of Article 370 was a huge mistake. The Twitter onslaught through such fake handles being run from across the border is now being effectively countered. It must be remembered that there is a ban on serving military officers in India against disclosing their identity or using their pictures in uniform on social media platforms,” said an official.
