Syed Akbaruddin takes swipe at Pakistan over Kashmir, says ‘poisoned pens don’t work for too long’

Syed Akbaruddin, India’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations. | File image

Key Highlights Akbaruddin said that India would want the international community to take action in unison to combat the issue of terrorism

New York: India’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Syed Akbaruddin, on Thursday took a swipe at Pakistan on their continued insistence that the Kashmir topic is raised at the UN, and said: “...Poisoned pens do not work for too long”.

“There may be someone who wants to bring an issue which they have raised before. It is for every country to determine its trajectory, how it wants to approach global platforms. There may be some who stoop low, our response then is we soar high,” Akbaruddin said during a media briefing in New York.

The UN representative was interacting with reporters and was responding to a question on the Kashmir issue being raised by Pakistan at the United Nations.

Syed Akbaruddin: There may be some who stoop low.Our response to them is we soar high.They may stoop low, we soar high. What they want to do is their call. We’ve seen them mainstream terrorism in the past. And what you’re now telling me is they may want to mainstream hate speech. https://t.co/md4XACVznb — ANI (@ANI) September 19, 2019

“We have seen them, their mainstream terrorism in the past...and what you are telling me now, that they may want to mainstream hate speech, it is their call if they want to do that. Poisoned pens don’t work for too long. We are confident that we will soar. We have given you examples of how we will not stoop that low,” he said, news agency ANI reported.

He also said that India would want the international community to take action in unison to combat the issue of terrorism.

“Terrorism will always be a key theme in India’s external orientation because Indians have suffered enough and we would like the international community to act in unison to address these issues,” he said.
