Investigation into deadly shooting at gas station

Investigation into deadly shooting at gas station

SOUTH BEND, Ind. --24-year-old, Baljeet Singh, was shot at the Phillips 66/Arby’s off of Lincolnway West late Wednesday night.

He was identified as 24-year-old Baljeet Singh of South Bend.

South Bend Police responded just before 11 p.m. to the Philips 66/ Arby’s in the 3400 block of Lincoln Way West for a 911 hang-up.

While on their way to the scene, officers learned of a shooting.

Once on scene, officers found the Singh suffering from a gunshot wound in the parking lot.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

The clerk was rushed to the hospital and taken into surgery. Singh later passed away at the hospital.

Now the Saint Joseph County Homicide Unit is looking for one suspect who was on the stations surveillance footage. However, no arrests have been made so far.

One of the Phillips 66 managers, Sam Singh, tells ABC57 that the clerk was closing up the store for the evening when you can see the gun man walk in on the surveillance footage, demanding money and pointing a gun. Singh then obliged giving the suspect everything in the register and put his hands up. Then the gunman made his way around the counter where he proceeded to shoot Singh.

"As far as we know we only we only have one suspect, he wasn’t working with anybody," said South Bend Police Sergeant Douglas Masterson. "But right now we only have one suspect that came into the store and shot the clerk."

While the homicide detectives are still investigating, the community and Singh's family are grieving the tragic loss.

Cousin, Sam Singh, a manager at the Phillips 66 worked with Singh and said that he was a bright young man full of dreams. He moved here from India just over a year ago looking for a better life in the States. Now that dream was shattered in an instant by the aggression of an unknown suspect.

Kenny Jones, a security guard at Dickinson Elementary, knew Singh from the countless days he came in to buy snacks and gas. He said that he cannot believe Singh is gone--violence can be such an unseen issue but when it is right there in your face, Jones says you cannot miss it.

Both cousin Singh and Jones say that the incident was not necessary. Singh gave the robber all the money he had and yet still chose to take his life.

Concerned with the continually growing gun violence in South Bend, both men pray that the suspect is caught soon.

The St. Joseph County Metro Homicide Unit has taken over the investigation. If you have any information please contact CMHU at 574-235-5009 or Crime Stoppers at 288-STOP.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Contributions to this story also made by: Shannon Nolan
