Herd of wild elephants destroys several acres of paddy crops, tramples villager in Jharkhand

The incident took place at the Dhotiduba village in Jharkhand (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jamshedpur: Adding to instances of wild animals clashing with locals in Jharkhand, a herd of four elephants critically endangered a villager while trespassing the Dhotiduba village. The Jumbos also destroyed paddy crop spanning across several acres of farmland under the Ghatshila police station area limits in the early hours of Sunday before trampling the man who is currently being treated for injuries incurred during the clash.

A group of as many as four elephants entered the village and caused damage to paddy crops which prompted locals to chase the herd with sticks. However, one of the locals who has now been identified as Satyaranjan, got too close to one of the jumbos as the herd moved towards the neighbouring Asma village which resulted in him getting critically injured.

#WATCH: Locals try to chase away an elephant, which had entered Milan More village near Siliguri, after getting separated from its herd. (09.02.2018) #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/RkUbF6surj — ANI (@ANI) February 10, 2018

The animals were either scared or angry after being chased out of the Dhotiduba village with sticks which led to them attacking locals. After he was trampled by one of the jumbos, Satyaranjan was rescued by a fellow villager who took him to the Ghatshila sub-divisional hospital from where he was referred to the MGMMCH. The doctor who treated Satyaranjan told Times of India that his condition is critical.

District Forest Officer (DFO), Dalhbhum, Abhishek Kumar told media outlets that a trained team of wildlife officials has been dispatched to the incident site to inspect the corridoor and aid villagers in dealing with such incidents. Dhotiduba falls on the foothills of the Dalma-Bansdih-Kandadubih route which is a popular corridoor for elephants from Jharkhand crossing into West Bengal.

Must Read: Stray leopard attacks, injures five in Pune before being rescued by wildlife officials
