Villagers in Tamil Nadu block roads, foil kidnapping attempt and rescue 19-year-old girl

The villagers forced the kidnappers' vehicle off the road (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The villagers forced the kidnappers' vehicle off the road They asked me for directions and pulled my daughter into their car, said the girl's father Three of the kidnappers were caught and thrashed by villagers while two managed to escape

Chennai: In an incident which resembles a scene right out of a Bollywood movie, residents of a village in Tamil Nadu foiled a brazen attempt to kidnap a 17-year-old girl. Prompt villagers managed to catch three of the kidnappers and thrashed them black and blue before handing them over to the police.

Going by inputs, the incident took place near Manapparai in Trichy on Wednesday night. Ganapathi, a resident of Nadupatti was on his way back home along with his 19-year-old daughter when a four-wheeler pulled up next to their motorcycle. There were five men in the Maruti Van who asked Ganapathi for directions. As he attempted to answer their queries, three men pulled his daughter inside the car and the vehicle sped off.

A group of villagers witnessed the crime unfold and watched as the vehicle carrying the girl moved away from the highway and towards the village roads. In fact, they chased the car for about four-five kilometres.

They even alerted locals in neighbouring villages who managed to put up blockades in the kidnappers' way. It was near Pudukottai village in Dindigul when scores of villagers blocked the four-lane highway and forced the driver of the car to apply sudden brakes which led to the car overturning.

While three of the kidnappers fled the spot, locals captured the other three. The suspects were brutally thrashed before they were handed over to the police. The apprehended suspects identified two of their accomplices as Kuzhandhaivelu and Sellapandian. Amidst protests by locals, police assured villagers that the remaining two kidnappers will be arrested very soon. The three men already in police custody were produced before a court and remanded to judicial custody on Thursday.

Meanwhile, a preliminary investigation has revealed that Ganapathi had recently called off his daughter's wedding to a local man. However, the man insisted on marrying his daughter and decided to stage the kidnapping.

The incident does bring back memories of a similar case from July 2016 when prompt action by police foiled a kidnapping attempt near Tirumayam village in Tamil Nadu. At the time, a 17-year-old girl was kidnapped by three men in a car when she was returning home from her tuition classes. Acting on a tip-off, local police managed to intercept the car at a check-post and rescued the girl. While the trio fled the spot, a case was registered against them under section 366 of the IPC at the Tirumayam police station.
