Will get your son back: What IAF chief BS Dhanoa told Abhinandan's father after February dogfight

BS Dhanoa said he called Abhinandan Varthaman's father and told him that he will bring his son back.

Indian Air Force chief Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa revealed that he called up Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's father after the officer was downed by a Pakistani jet and captured by Pakistani forces earlier this year.

I called him and said we will get Abhinandan back, BS Dhanoa said while speaking at the India Today Conclave 2019. Dhanoa also revealed that he knew Abhinandan from his childhood since he had flown with the officer's father.

When asked what was going through his mind when Abhinandan was shot down and taken prisoner, Dhanoa said, "During Kargil [conflict] I lost my flight commander Ajay Ahuja... he ejected and was then shot... That was going in my mind."

"So I called his father and said Vardha sir we couldn't get Ahuja back we will get Abhinandan back," Dhanoa said.

FOLLOW FULL COVERAGE ON INDIA TODAY CONCLAVE 2019 HERE

Dhanoa was speaking months after the Indian Air Force launched a daring raid in Pakistan, targeting a terrorist hideout located in Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region. The February 26 Balakot airstrike was launched in response to the February 14 Pulwama terror attack.

In response, the Pakistan Air Force tried crossing into India a day later. Indian fighter jets took to the skies to thwart the attack and engaged the Pakistani jets in dogfight. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman shot down a Pakistani F-16 before being downed himself and taken prisoner.

He was released two days later.

Also watch: Flying a Rafale fighter was like driving a Mercedes: IAF Chief BS Dhanoa

Also Read: Chinmayanand arrested only after survivor threatened self-immolation: Priyanka

Also Read: FM Nirmala Sitharaman cuts corporate taxes for domestic, new manufacturing companies

Also Watch | What IAF chief BS Dhanoa told Abhinandan Varthaman's father after February dogfight
