SFI students, Naxals behind attack on Babul Supriyo at Jadavpur University: BJP

MoS Babul Supriyo attacked by students at Jadavpur University premises on Thursday (Source: @ABVPVoice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights BJP state vice president said Supriyo was attacked by SFI students and Naxals BJP took up a rally to protest the assault on Union Minister Babul Supriyo at Jadavpur University in Kolkata Supriyo was attacked when he reached the university premises to attend an ABVP event on Thursday

Kolkata: A day after Union Minister Babul Supriyo was manhandled at the Jadavpur University where he went to attend an event organised by RSS (Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh)-affiliated Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Friday staged a rally in Kolkata protesting the incident.

Jay Prakash Majumdar, BJP state vice president, who led the protest told news agency ANI, that Supriyo was beaten up by the student of Students' Federation of India (SFI) and Naxals. The SFI is a student organisation affiliated to the Communist Party of India (Marxist).

“He (Supriyo) was heckled and beaten up by students of SFI and Naxals. There is no law in the state” Majumdar said.

BJP leader Agnimitra Paul has filed a complaint at Jadavpur Police Station against SFI, after the attack on Supriyo.

BJP leaders Sayantan Basu and Raju Banerjee were also present at the protest march which started from BJP headquarters in central Kolkata. The activist of the saffron party demanded action against those responsible for the assault on the MoS Supriyo. "Leftist mercenaries of JU should be beaten up black and blue. This attack that took place yesterday was a joint effort by CPI(M) and TMC," Basu told the news agency PTI.

Amid high drama on Thursday at the Jadavpur University in Kolkata, students also ‘gheraoed’ Governor Jagdeep Dhankar who went to ‘rescue’ Supriyo who was under attack.

On Thursday evening, a section of students of the university heckled Union Minister Babul Supriyo and prevented him from attending an event organised by the RSS-affiliated student organisation ABVP.

Hours after Supriyo faced the protests by the students, Governor Dhankar rushed to the campus. However, students blocked Dhankar’s car and shouted slogans as he tried to leave with Supriyo.

The students ended their agitation after the police and the university teachers persuaded them to do so. Following this, the Governor was able to leave the spot with the Union Minister.

The Union Minister was stopped from entering the campus for nearly one-and-a-half hours as members of two Left-backed organisations, namely Arts Faculty Students' Union (AFSU) and Students Federation of India (SFI), raised slogans of 'Babul Supriyo, Go Back'.


