When damage came to Jadavpur University

The Acacia nilotica, or babool, is a big tree growing up to 20 metres. It’s also a tough tree, being able to withstand dry environments as well as floods. Most impressively, its wood is hardy and shock-resistant. And famously, its bark is literally ‘worse’ than its bite, containing as it does 12-20% tannin, which can be very useful for tanning leather.

It was Rajiv Gandhi who had explained away the anti-Sikh violence unleased after the assassination of his mother, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, with the observation, ‘When a big tree falls, the earth shakes’. Union minister Babool Supriyo wasn’t an uprooted tree on Thursday, but he was roughed up by protesting students and his hair was pulled, with the consequent result of Jadavpur University being left behind with its campus ground shaken and seriously damaged.

Supriyo was invited by the university’s Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) chapter to address a freshers’ programme. He was well within his right to attend the event, as were the students to protest with slogans, posters and black flags his presence as the representative of what they deemed to be ‘fascist’ forces of the BJP. Now when a politician states to the media — after his by-now much documented assault — “I did not come here to do politics,” it’s essentially like prefixing a comment with ‘I don’t mean to bore you, but…’ And playing to the gallery, too, is not haraam.

But what happened during the course of Supriyo’s entry into the Jadavpur campus and by the time he finally left is Rashomon territory: as in, the minister and his supporters saw the assault on him – students pulling his hair, pulling his shirt, knocking his glasses off – as the true horror; while the anti-BJP, anti-ABVP protestors saw the (wo)manhandling, taunting of the minister’s entourage and, above all, the tandav unleashed on the campus by ‘outsiders’ in retaliation to the earlier attack on Supriyo as the real terror.

A New Indian Express report (bit.do/e9aQt) quoted Debraj Koley, a postgraduate student from the Department of Film Studies, saying, “We [the Arts Faculty Students Union where the Leftist Students Federation of India (SFI) is in power] were going to protest against the fascist government, put up posters, show [Supriyo] black flags, but we never planned violence inside the campus.”

He added, with what seems like astounding naivete, “Once he saw the media, he made our protest into a circus.” adding He pushed us, so did his guards, stamped on us and did not even care if there were women in front of him. He was just rampantly hitting people in front of him whenever the cameras were behind him. And with all this continued the taunting — he asked girls why they were wearing ‘skimpy’ clothes, what they come to the university for, whether we know the full form of NRC along with calling us names….” Another student, quoted in the same report, hit the nail on the head — in hindsight, though, alas: “He wanted us to get agitated. He wanted a scuffle.” You think?

And Babool Supriyo did get what he purportedly had come to get – a reaction resulting from effective instigating (which included shouting at the vice-chancellor for not being at the university entrance to ‘receive’ him as a central minister, and accusing him of being ‘leftist’, to boot for not ordering the police to enter the campus). In such a scheme of things, where the sequence of events, never mind cause and effect, matter less than the desired consequences, by not restricting themselves to ‘non-tactile’ protest and by roughing up Supriyo, the protestors essentially rolled out the red carpet not just for Supriyo and the BJP to cry ‘victim’, but also to put the arc lights on Jadavpur University as a den of ‘goons who even beat up ministers!’

Later in the evening, according to a Times of India report (bit.do/e9aQG), “about 200 supporters of ABVP stormed the premises wearing bike helmets, armed with sticks with sticks and bottles. They ransacked the Arts union room near gate No. 4, the ground-floor corridor of the UG [undergraduate] Arts building, set fire to at least six cycles and blocked the road outside the university for an hour” – not to mention broke furniture, glass and fans inside the faculty building, assaulted students, burning tyres and using acid bulbs. But in the scheme of things, the Union minister of state for environment, forest and climate change being roughed up by JU students will be the overwhelming meme, not that of a university raided and put to siege.

The outrage of an institution being damaged means far less to most people than a central minister being manhandled. And that is the real tragedy of the blunder of reacting to a master instigator. The babool tree begins fruiting within five to seven years. After Thursday’s unleashing of such banal violence — and the utter impunity with which it was conducted by goons retaliating on behalf of a minister of the Government of India — it seems it will take fruit much sooner.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
