'Mother is going places': Twinkle Khanna shares Amul topical on Christopher Nolan and Dimple Kapadia

Amul topical on Christopher Nolan, Dimple Kapadia | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Amul has come out with a new illustration which features Dimple Kapadia, Christopher Nolan and Robert Pattinson from the sets of the upcoming film Tenet Twinkle Khanna shared the Amul topical on her Instagram and wrote, "Mother is going places" Christopher Nolan and the cast are currently in Mumbai to shoot a schedule for Tenet

A few days back, Indian fans of The Dark Knight director Christopher Nolan went into a frenzy when the filmmaker landed in Mumbai to shoot his upcoming movie Tenet. The film which stars Dimple Kapadia, Robert Pattinson, John David Washington, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Elizabeth Debicki and Michael Cain, began shooting in Mumbai on Monday at Colaba Causeway, and later shifted the set to Royal Bombay Yacht Club.

Inspired by several photos that surfaced online from the sets of the film, Amul created an illustration of the same and titled it "For the Dimple Pleasures." Besides this, the Amul topical gave Dimple, "Ten on Tenet". Sharing the topical on her Instagram, Twinkle Khanna, like an excited daughter, wrote, "This is too cute. Mother is going places :) #AmulBaby"

Dressed in a red saree, the illustration showed Dimple standing next to Robert Pattinson who donned a grey suit while Christopher Nolan, with his headse on and a script in hand, was instructing them amidst the shoot.

Check out Twinkle's Insta post below:

Ever since Nolan announced his next directorial, fans have been waiting with bated breath for the film to release. The director, known for his work in other movies like Interstellar and Dunkirk, had created quite a stir on social media after photos of Dimple Kapadia, John David Washington and Nolan floated around the internet as cast and crew were filming in Mumbai.

Twinkle's cousin Karan Kapadia also accompanied his aunt on the set and even posted a photo on Instagram sharing his fanboy moment with Nolan. He wrote, "There’s a reason I have pointy nipples in the picture, and Chris Nolan is only half that reason. #christophernolan #tenet"

Touted as a thriller, Tenet is about time continuum and it is slated to release on July 17, 2020.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates!
