This $3M house has a home theatre and infrared sauna (PHOTOS)

If watching home improvement shows and searching the hashtag “#homeinspiration” on Instagram fills you with the desire to design your own dream home, we got you.

Now imagine moving into one of the most beautiful, custom-built homes imaginable in Vancouver.

Located at 496 East 56th Avenue, this rare home has everything residents could possibly need to live a comfortable life with their family. To make it better, the entire property has been specifically designed for hosting family and friends.

The three-storey home is currently listed by Colin Lo on REW.ca at $2,999,000, and it has everything from spacious rooms to a stunning outdoor space. The 47 x 114 lot even has a even a two-bedroom 740 sq. ft. laneway home and a one-bedroom suite to act as a mortgage helper.

Contemporary design fills the entire 3,805 sq. ft. home, which includes six bedrooms and eight bathrooms, making it perfect for growing families and those who like to host.

Consider yourself a movie buff? Well, this property lets residents say goodbye to watching films on their laptops by providing them with their own uber-fancy home theatre in the basement. To enhance the viewing experience on the massive 155-inch curved screen, the ceiling has even been designed to mimic a starry night — how cool is that?

The home is a corner lot, flooded with natural light from large pane windows and rare, 11-ft. ceilings.

On the main floor, there’s a foyer, a wok kitchen with Calcutta quartz countertops, an open-plan living room with a Napoleon gas fireplace, a cozy den, mud room, and an elegantly-designed dining room.

Enjoy dining al fresco? Future residents of this property can delight in the fact that it has an expansive, south-facing composite deck that’s perfect for summer BBQs and relaxing on the weekend with a glass of wine in hand.

There’s also a TV hookup for those blissful outdoor movie nights.

On the upper level of the house, you’ve got airy bedrooms, laundry, and a walk-in closet to make getting ready each day even more enjoyable.

But what would a house like this be without a few extra features? We’re talking about air conditioning, an infrared sauna and steam shower, as well as a shower system with body jets for the full spa-inspired experience.

The future owners of this stunning home will also have a one-car garage and the ability to control the lighting, sound, and security system, through one single app.

If you appreciate the level of quality and detail of this property, simply submit a viewing request now. After all, homes like this don’t go on the market every day.

Here’s a look at the details once more:

Address: 496 East 56th Avenue

Neighbourhood: East Vancouver

Listing price: $2,999,000

Built in: 2017

Specs:
