Waiting for husband to return from temple, 59-year-old woman shot dead in Delhi's Madhu Vihar

Visuals from the scene of the crime | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Police have identified the victim as 59-year-old Usha Rani She died on the spot after a bike-borne assailant opened fire at her Rani was reportedly driving her husband to Max Hospital in Madhu Vihar for his dialysis

New Delhi: Police in the national capital are investigating the brutal murder of a 59-year-old woman who was shot dead near Max Hospital in Delhi's Patparganj area on Saturday. The victim has been identified as one Usha Rani. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and the matter is under active investigation.

Preliminary inputs suggest that Rani was driving her red-coloured I-20 car when an armed bike-borne assailant pulled up next to her vehicle near Max Hospital in Madhu Vihar and opened fire at her. The bullets hit 59-year-old Rani who died on the spot. For a few minutes, the sound of gunshots filled the air and prompted bystanders and passerby to duck for cover.

The bike-borne man fled the scene of the crime within seconds. When locals approached Rani'car, her body lay on the driving seat in a pool of blood. She was rushed to a nearby hospital where doctors declared her dead on arrival. City police personnel arrived at the spot and launched an investigation into the matter.

A team of experts with the forensic unit and the crime branch was also rushed to the scene of the crime and collected evidence which may lead police to the identity of the assailant. Meanwhile, a preliminary probe has led police to believe that Rani drove her husband to the Max Hospital in Madhu Vihar for dialysis thrice every week. On Saturday morning, her husband asked her to wait for him outside a temple. As soon as he stepped inside the temple, the armed man shot Sahni dead.

In an official statement, the Delhi Police said that the statements of Rani's family members have been recorded. Investigators also suspect that the assailant knew the victim's routine. While family members confirmed that she had no personal enmity with anyone, officers have ruled out the possibility of robbery since no valuables were stolen from the car. Rani was due to retire from her government job. She is survived by her husband, a recently-married daughter and a younger son who is still studying.

This horrific incident comes barely days after a gang war erupted on the streets of the national capital. Earlier this month, a 40-year-old gangster was shot dead in North Delhi's Narela in broad daylight. Police officers said that the victim, Virender Mann was shot as many as 25 times near Lampur Road in Narela industrial area as he was travelling in his car. The victim's car was surrounded by armed men who showered bullets at him, giving him no room to run or save his life.
