5-year-old and his aunt killed in Hyderabad after SUV rams into two-wheeler

5-year-old and his aunt killed in Hyderabad after SUV rams into two-wheeler

Five-year-old Ayaan was reportedly being taken to the hospital by his aunt and father because he is unwell. The boy's father is in critical condition.

news Accident

An SUV driven by a 19-year-old rammed into a two-wheeler in Hyderabad on Friday killing a five-year-old child and his 24-year-old aunt. The boys' father is reported in critical condition, according to reports.

Five-year-old Ayaan was reportedly ill and was being taken to the hospital by his father Varun Sunil, a resident of BHEL enclave and his sister Priyadarshini, a nurse by profession when a Tata Hexa hit the two-wheeler. The car then overshot a divider and crash into a Tata Indica on the opposite side of traffic, police said. Though the Tata Indica car suffered damage, no one was hurt in the car.

The five-year-old and his aunt reportedly died on the spot.

The 19-year-old identified as Raghavendra Chary had rented the vehicle from Zoomcar on Thursday. A degree student of Nizam College, Raghavendra and five of his friends were on their way to Sanga Reddy district to attend a party with a cake. Police found no trace of alcohol in the blood of the driver. The police have termed the accident a case of rash and negligent driving, according to reports.

Alwal traffic policemen told Times of India that the stretch where the accident took place was difficult to drive at night as it was poorly lit and the divider did not have reflectors and was not painted.

Speaking to ToI, Alwal inspector P Yadagiri said, "The residents of BHEL Enclave were going to a hospital when the youth, identified as Raghavendra Chary, 19, of Parigi, hit the car at breakneck speed. The accident occurred due to rash driving. It appears like the teenager was driving at a high speed and after hitting the two-wheeler, turned towards right and crashed into the divider,” the inspector said.

The boy's grandmother Deepika speaking to reporters said, “Ayaan was suffering from fever and started vomiting. My daughter thought he might be suffering from dengue or viral fever and decided to take him to the hospital. No one should suffer what our family has suffered. I lost my daughter and grandson, my son is in hospital. Those who are responsible should be punished,” she added.
