Minor girl harassment case against actor Bhanupriya transferred to Chennai

Minor girl harassment case against actor Bhanupriya transferred to Chennai

The girl’s mother had filed a complaint in Andhra Pradesh alleging that Bhanupriya and her brother had tortured her daughter while she was employed with them.

news Crime

The Pondy Bazaar police station has registered a fresh case against veteran actor Bhanupriya in relation to the illegal confinement of her 14-year-old domestic help.

According to reports, the case booked under the Juvenile Justice Act and for criminal intimidation was initially registered in Samalkot, Andhra Pradesh and has now been transferred to Chennai. The actor was booked under Sections 323 (Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (Punishment for criminal intimidation), 341 (Punishment for wrongful restraint) and 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC and Juvenile Justice Act Sections 75 (Punishment for cruelty to the child) and 79 (Keeping a child under bondage for employment).

In January, the girl’s mother had alleged that Bhanupriya and her brother Gopalakrishnan were torturing her daughter. Gopalakrishnan had told her that her daughter had stolen valuables worth Rs 10 lakh from the house. He allegedly told the girl’s mother to pay Rs 10 lakh if she wanted to meet her daughter. She also alleged that Gopalakrishnan had sexually harassed her daughter while she was working in their house. She hence filed a police complaint with the help of a few child welfare groups in Andhra Pradesh. In her complaint, she had also stated that her daughter was not being paid regularly.

In February, Gopalakrishnan had also filed a police complaint that the girl had stolen 10 sovereigns of gold, watches and other electronic gadgets. The police had arrested the girl’s mother and the girl was sent to an observational home after the complaint. In July, the Juvenile Justice Board acquitted the girl of all charges and she was allowed to go home.

Actor Bhanupriya, however, had stated that she was not aware of the girl’s age and was being falsely implicated in the case. She also refuted the allegations leveled by the girl’s mother saying that there were no restrictions on the girl when she was working in Bhanupriya’s house.
