[VIDEO] Deported from Spain, drug addict hacks mother to death in Punjab's Moga

The woman's debt-ridden husband Bhola Singh committed suicide around 20 years back.

Key Highlights Man kills mother in Punjab's Moga district Accused Satwinder Singh is said to be a drug addict Accused was recently deported from Spain

Moga: In a shameful incident, a 22-year-old man said to be a drug addict hacked his mother to death in Punjab's Moga district. The incident occurred on Friday at Himmatpura village in Nihalsinghwala.

The deceased has been identified as 45-year-old Karamjit Kaur. The woman was preparing meal when she was hit by the accused Satwinder Singh on head and face.

Later, the police officials took the body to the district hospital for autopsy. According to police, the woman was lying in a pool of blood when they transported her to the hospital. The body was handed over to the family after the post-mortem.

"Today we received information that Karamjit Kaur wife of Bhola Singh was murdered by a man identified as Satwinder Singh. She was killed while she was preparing meal. The accused earlier went to Sweeden. He was having mental issues. The accused used a shovel to hit the woman on head and face. We will soon arrest the accused," said a DSP level officer.

According to a report, the woman's debt-ridden husband Bhola Singh committed suicide around 20 years back. The report further suggests that the deceased woman sold a part of her land to send her son to Spain for work, but the accused was reportedly deported to India last month.

Police officials said that the deceased was not happy with the Satwinder's drug habits. She objected to him consuming drugs and this could be one of the reasons for Satwider killing his mother, said a police officer.

The police have booked the accused under Section 302 (murder) of Indian Penal Code. The accused is still on the run. Police have recovered the weapon used to commit the crime.



Man murders 21-day-old daughter after fight with wife in Delhi

In a similar incident, a man was arrested for allegedly killing his 21-day-old daughter following a fight with his wife in Dwarka's Bindapur area. The 26-year-old Mukesh allegedly strangulated his daughter and then drowned her in a water tank on September 10, 2019.

The girl's mother lodged a police complaint against her husband who is a businessman. "I was planning to visit my mother's place after the delivery on August 16. Mukesh was not happy about it. He took the girl upstairs and locked the door," the woman said in her complaint.

"After a while, Mukesh opened the door and I saw my daughter lying on the cot unconscious. Mukesh told me that he had strangulated her and then drowned her in a water tank," she further told police.
