Dungeons of Doom! India’s prisons a cauldron of crime, but should we hope for reforms?

There were 6,013 inmates who were suffering from mental illness. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Prison reform a need of the hour to rid our jails of crimes There is a need to free undertrials on bail as recommended by Law Commission With crimes, mental illness is also growing rapidly among prisoners

New Delhi: Has our prison system become a hub of crime and corruption? The answer may not be in negative if we observe many media reports exposing how hardcore criminals have it easy in jails. And this situation is prevalent across prisons in various Indian states.

Recently, a gangster and double murder convict inside Bihar's Sitamarhi jail celebrated his birthday by cutting a cake. A video of the criminal cutting the cake and making merry went viral on social media.

Not only cake and decorations, but the criminal named Pintu Tiwari also arranged a mutton party for the inmates, all under the nose of the jail authorities.

In July 2018, Uttar Pradesh gangster Munna Bajrangi was shot dead by another gangster Sunil Rathi inside Baghpat district jail. Nobody knows how the accused Rathi acquired the pistol with which he shot dead Bajrangi. But there was no denying the collusion between the criminals and prison officials.

These two incidents clearly exposed how a criminal can manipulate the system to his advantage. You just have to throw some money around to get what you want.

A jail term is meant to deny a convict a normal life and face harsh realities of prison. But the collusion between the criminal and corrupt prison officials has upended these objectives.

Today, a criminal can avail any product of his choice - be it a smartphone, SIM card, drugs or weapons - just by greasing the palm of the jail officials.

After every raid at prisons by officials, there is a warning to jail administrators not to allow illegal activities, but reportedly after some time everything goes back to normal.

According to Prison Statistics India (PSI) 2016 report, the Indian jails hosted some 4,33,033 people in prison, of which 1,35,683 were convicts and 2,93,058 were undertrials. The report was published by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) in April this year.



Factors turning prisons into crime hubs

Overcrowding and the longer stay in prisons due to delay in delivery of justice are some of the factors that are causing inmates to turn towards crimes. Apart from convicted hardcore criminals, the Indian jails are flooded with undertrials. The PSI report says that our prisons house 68% undertrials who were yet to be convicted for crimes they were accused of. Some studies suggest that India’s undertrial population is highest in the world.



The way forward

In an attempt to free up jails of the high population of undertrials, the Law Commission in 2017 had recommended release of prisoners, who have completed a third of their sentence for charges that invite up to seven years of imprisonment. Not only the increasing crimes in jails are a concern, but the prisons are also causing mental illness among undertrials prisoners. The 2016 PSI report said that there were 6,013 inmates who were suffering from mental illness.
