Shiv Sena ready to play a second fiddle in Maharashtra

Shiv Sena has finally admitted that it is no more a big brother in Maharashtra politics but has to play a second fiddle to BJP which has grown substantially after last assembly election held on October 2014. Shiv Sena left its ''go solo'' stand ahead of Lok Sabha election and quietly entered into a seat-sharing agreement with BJP which is in total command. Even though both the saffron parties have been repeatedly announcing that alliance for assembly election slated for October 21 will happen, they are currently engaged in exchanging few seats here and there.

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has already revealed party's stand on an alliance in the presence of Prime Minister Narendra Modi here in Mumbai on September 7 where he said the party wants power for the overall development of Maharashtra and not due to greed. Thackeray clearly dropped hint at no rift with BJP and fighting assembly election jointly. Interestingly, he has also indicated that the party has never pressed for 144:144 or 135:135 seat-sharing formula with BJP but the allotment of seats for Shiv Sena has been left to Fadnavis.

His explanation was that the seat-sharing arrangement has already been sealed during his meeting with Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and BJP president Amit Shah at the time of Lok Sabha election. BJP and Shiv Sena fought Lok Sabha poll with 25:23 formula wherein BJP won 23 and 18 by Shiv Sena. Even though the Shiv Sena has launched poll preparations in all 288 assembly seats, Thackeray on Friday clarified that the alliance will be announced in two days.

Thackeray has not hidden the party's ambition to grab CM's post in the state. His son and the party's youth leader Aaditya Thackeray, who may take the plunge into electoral politics, is being projected as Sena's CM face. Fadnavis was quick to reply to media reports in this regard indicated that he may offer deputy chief minister's post to Aaditya. There will be clarity on this issue only after the elections are over.

However, Shiv Sena faces huge challenge to win more seats in Mumbai, its traditional bastion and simultaneously increase its presence in Marathwada, North Maharashtra and the Konkan region where BJP has already made sufficient inroads. Fadnavis has been credited with providing reservation in education and jobs to the politically influential Maratha community and also for the implementation of crop loan waiver. Shiv Sena until Lok Sabha election played a dual role of BJP's ruling ally and opposition criticising slew of decisions taken by the government at the Centre and in the state. However, Fadnavis made all attempts to keep Thackeray in good humour and ahead of Lok Sabha poll put on hold the Rs 3 lakh crore refinery project at Nanar in Ratnagiri district opposed by Sena.

Aaditya has launched Jana Ashirwad Yatra which coincided with Maha Janadesh Yatra completed by Fadnavis. He strongly justified that there is nothing wrong in hiding ambitions but said if he starts running after post he will never enjoy the process. Aaditya is expected to enter into electoral fray and he has already launched extensive outreach in Worli assembly seat in south Mumbai. However, the party has yet to take a call in this regard.

Aaditya has been hogging the limelight for his opposition to the proposed Metro crashed depot in Aarey Milk Colony in north Mumbai. He has clarified that the issue is not about BJP vs Sena as much as it is about "Mumbai vs environmental damage". However, Fadnavis has made it categorically clear that the Metro crashed depot will come in Aarey Milk Colony as Metro will mitigate carbon footprint and the state government has done all environment assessments.
