[PHOTO] Salman Khan shares a pic with Saiee Manjrekar for the first time from the sets of Dabangg 3

Salman and Saiee Manjrekar's latest photo is mesmerising | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Salman Khan recently shared a beautiful photo of Saiee Manjrekar and himself from the sets of Dabangg 3 Saiee Manjrekar, daughter of actor Mahesh Manjrekar, will make her Bollywood debut with Salman Khan-starrer Dabangg 3

It won't be wrong to say that Salman Khan is one of the most loved actors in the film industry. In the past two years, the actor has been associated with Race 3 and Bharat. While Race 3 failed to make a mark for itself at the box-office, the Ali Abbas Zafar directorial garnered appreciation from the actor's fans. Salman is currently gearing up for the third installment of the hit franchise Dabangg, and a recent photo shared by the actor on his social media account has managed to grab his fans' attention.

Salman took to this Instagram account earlier today and shared a beautiful photo featuring himself and Saiee Manjrekar, who is all set to make her big Bollywood debut with the film. The actor shared a BTS picture from their shoot location of the forthcoming film. While Saiee is seen wearing a peach coloured Punjabi suit, Salman looks handsome in a grey shirt as they pose at the bank of a river. Captioned, "On location #dabangg3 . . . @saieemmanjrekar", check out the photo below:

Meanwhile, the makers of the film recently dropped a teaser of the cop drama and they decided to unveil the same, exactly 100 days before the film's release. The 17-second clip showcases Salman in his true Dabangg avatar and the video is enough the make fans eager to watch the flick. Salman Khan shared the clip on his Instagram account with a caption that read, "Chulbul Pandey ke saath lijiye maza Dabangg 3 ka ab Tamil mein. Swagat Toh Karo Humara!" Check out the video below:

Along with Salman and Saiee, Dabangg 3 also stars Sonakshi Sinha as the female lead. The actress will be seen reprising her original role of Rajjo. The flick will also star South actor Kiccha Sudeep, who will be seen playing the role of the antagonist in the film.

Directed by Prabhudeva, the film is slated to hit the screens on December 20 this year.
