Odisha police resolve Niharika murder case, boyfriend Raja arrested killing deceased nurse

Report by Kahnu Nanda, Jagatsinghpur: The much hyped murder of Nurse Niharika Patra was finally resolved by police on Saturday speaking to media persons at police headquarters here district superintendent of police Prakash R informed that the deceased nurse boyfriend Kishor Kumar .Aanchal alias Raja had murdered Niharika on Sep 8 following altercation occurred between them when Niharika disagreed marrying him due to his unemployment.

Revealing investigation conducted by cops SP said basing on complaint lodged by deceased nurse mother Pratima Patra in Biridi police station on 17, September, after she had confirmed that the dead body had recovered on the bank of river Biluakhai near Nuapari village under Biridi block was her daughter Niharika police swung in to action finishing legal formalities.

As the complaint had alleged that deceased Niharika boyfriend Raja was main suspect in the murder case police had launched a search drive nabbing Raja later on 20 September Raja was captured by police near Hajipur on the outskirts of Biridi police station and sent for interrogation subsequently.

A police team probing the case was interrogated Raja in district headquarters and finally unearthed truth reason and motive of the crime murdering nurse Niharika by his boyfriend.

The accused Raja confessed that on 8 Sep he had taken up Niharika from her work place from M M Medicare a private nursing home in Cuttack and moved to one of his friend Sunil Kumar Sahoo’s rented house in Aparna Nagar under Chauliganja police limits in Cuttack where both were quarreled effecting their marriage. Niharika although had been maintaining relationship with Raja but disagreed marrying soon due to Raja’s unemployment. Nikarika’s disagreement for marriage enraged Raja who out of control strangulated Niharika who succumbed at the rented house.

After murdering Niharika in friends rented house Raja planned disposing the body, he preferred packing the body in a plastic gunny bag and shifted it to a bike and moved towards river Biluakhi bank adjoining to his native village and finally performed it’s as per planning fled to Chennai.

But he did not stay long in Chennai returned village and later captured by police on 20 September, basing on Raja’s confession police seized the bike used for the dead body disposal, mobile phone, helmet other wearing apparels and registered a case against him under section 302, 201 IPC at Biridi police station on Saturday and forwarded to court subsequently. Meanwhile the accused Raja would be taken five day police remand for further investigation, SP said. [Ends]

Related
