Haryana battle is set to be Hooda's moment of truth...

NEW DELHI/CHANDIGARH: From promising four deputy CMs if voted to power to loan waivers to job quotas, Bhupinder Singh Hooda is virtually the face of the Congress campaign in Haryana despite being given a lesser appointment as head of legislature party than as state unit chief.But in his heart of heart, the Jat leader and the two-term former CM knows that the challenge for him is existential and not exactly a political opportunity as he pretends.It is not so much about winning Haryana but about saving his bastion of old Rohtak district from where he derives his strength. The seats in Rohtak, Sonipat and Jhajjar - the Jat stronghold - would determine if the old warhorse manages to emerge with dignity intact in the challenge that by a wide consensus is uphill, and even impossible, for Congress.Close on the heels of its whitewash of Haryana in LS polls, BJP is pushing further and harder. While it managed to polarise the state along "Jat vs the rest" lines, it has cleverly roped in Jat leaders from Chautala's INLD to widen its net. This has put Congress and others into a tight corner.It is focussed even strongly on Rohtak, Jhajjar and Sonipat - all to decimate the safety buffer in Hooda stronghold that has helped Congress in recent years. After all, Congress managed to win 15 assembly seats in 2014 despite the Modi wave and anti-incumbency against Congress.For two years, the state Congress was in a stasis over demands for ouster of Ashok Tanwar as party chief. The Hooda lobby only now managed to have its way, with Tanwar being replaced by Kumari Selja and the former CM being appointed the leader of opposition in assembly. The prolonged leadership paralysis helped BJP steal a march over the rest. The Hooda camp laments the change has been effected too late .And yet, the Jat leader cannot duck the fact that Congress is looking to him to emerge from the battle with some honour. A decent defeat would be a good result, many feel.Compounding the pressure on Hooda is the realisation that his own stature as a satrap is on line. Only four months back, he lost the Sonipat LS polls while his son Deepender Hooda too bit the dust in the family fief of Rohtak.The investigations into alleged irregularities in land allotments during his tenure as CM only increases the burden on him. After four decades in politics, Haryana election is Hooda's moment of truth.
