Army Chief: Israel may not dare to show up in Persian Gulf

Army Chief: Israel may not dare to show up in Persian Gulf

FNA – Commander of Iranian Army Major General Seyed Abdolrahim Mousavi reiterated that Israel is too fearful of Tehran to have a military presence in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea, warning that any wrong move by Tel Aviv will even shorten its life.

In an interview with Iran’s state TV, Major General Mousavi said that Israeli membership in the US-led anti-Iran coalition in the Persian Gulf is nothing but a symbolic move, stressing that Tel Aviv is afraid of having a military presence in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea.

“The Persian Gulf is our home and we will not allow a regime like the Israeli regime to enter our home,” the commander highlighted.

He then warned Tel Aviv that any wrong move will even make their expected 25-year life shorter, referring to remarks of Supreme Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei.

Ayatollah Khamenei said in September 2015 that there won’t be any Israel in 25 years from now, describing Israel as a “fake” regime.

Early in August, Israeli Foreign Minister Yisrael Katz said that his country will join the US-led coalition, “to protect trade routes in the Persian Gulf”.

Two days later, Commander of the Islamic Revolution Guards Corps (IRGC) Major General Hossein Salami warned that any new war in the region will be a major threat to Israel, describing the issue as a main source of concern for the US.

“We are now in a full-scale war with the big powers,” General Salami asserted.

He underlined that Washington has no appetite for confrontation against Iran as it knows that “a new war will put the Zionist regime under a full-scale threat”.

On August 9, Iranian Foreign Ministry Spokesman Seyed Abbas Mousavi said that his country will see Israel’s membership in the US-led military coalition in the Persian Gulf region as a material threat to its national security, warning that Tehran will counter Tel Aviv’s presence in the region in self-defense.
