Policeman opens fire at dhaba owner for refusing food, on the run

Constable suspended by Ghaziabad Senior Superintendent of Police. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused constable fired at eatery owner after being told that food was over Constable has been identified as Sandeep Baliyan, a resident of Muzaffarnagar Constable suspended by Ghaziabad Senior Superintendent of Police

Ghaziabad: In a fit case of being drunk on power, a policeman posted in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh allegedly opened fire at a dhaba after the eatery owner informed him that the food was over. The incident occurred on Friday evening near Harson police lines.

After the matter came to light, the senior officials have ordered an FIR against the errant constable. The constable has now been suspended by the Ghaziabad Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP). The accused constable has been identified as Sandeep Baliyan.

According to a report, the constable, who was posted at CGO complex, reached the dhaba at around 10 pm and demanded food from the eatery owner Azad Kumar. When Kumar told him that the food was over for the day, the policeman got angry and fire two shots in the air.

According to Circle Officer Atish Kumar Singh, Baliyan insisted that the food be served to him, but there was an argument as the eatery owner told him that the food was finished.

Fortunately, the two shots missed Azad Kumar and hit the electricity panel. Later, the constable fled the spot and is still at large. Baliyan, a resident of Muzaffarnagar district, was a regular visitor at the dhaba.

Police said the department did not issue any weapon to the accused policeman. The cops have recovered two empty cartridges of 0.32 bore.

"It is only after the policeman is traced we will be able to know what weapon was used in the crime. The rounds recovered by us indicate that the weapon used could be a pistol. The accused constable has been suspended by SSP," the report quoted Atish Kumar Singh as saying.

The police have filed an FIR against the constable under section 307 (attempt to murder) of Indian Penal Code (IPC). The FIR was filed based on the complaint by the eatery owner.

Delhi policeman arrested for killing couple at a temple

In a similar incident in March this year, a Delhi policeman allegedly shot dead a couple at a temple apparently because the woman had ended her relationship with him. Dinesh, assistant sub-inspector with the Delhi Traffic Police, and his accomplice Pintoo were arrested, days after the bodies of Preeti, 32, and her fianc Surendra, 26, were found in a temple in 'Sai Upwan' near the Hindan river. An FIR was lodged by the girl's father Pramod Kumar.
