‘Rahul Gandhi sees politics, we see patriotism’: Amit Shah on govt’s move in Kashmir

Mumbai | Jagran News Desk: Union Minister Amit Shah on Sunday addressed a public event in Mumbai where he spoke about the government’s decision to revoke Article 370, which gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcated the state into two union territories.

“I congratulate Prime Minister Modi's bravery and grit. He removed Article 370 and 35A in the very first session of the Parliament as soon as we formed the government for the second time with 305 seats,” said Amit Shah at the event.

The Home Minister also attacked the Congress and Rahul Gandhi and said that the grand old party was doing politics over Article 370. He said that more than three generations of BJP have given their life for Kashmir and for the abrogation of Article 370.

Also Read | ‘Want freedom from Pak’: Baloch, Sindhi, Pashto activists gather in Houston to seek help from PM Modi

“Rahul Gandhi says Article 370 is a political issue. Rahul Baba you have come into politics now, but three generations of BJP have given their life for Kashmir, for abrogation of Article 370. It's not a political matter for us, it's part of our goal to keep Bharat maa undivided,” said Shah in his attack on Congress.

“The issue of Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) wouldn't have been there had the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru not announced an untimely ceasefire in 1947, when the Army was strongly fighting against Pakistani infiltrators in Jammu and Kashmir,” he added.

He further said that Article 370 helped Pakistan foster terrorism in Kashmir and because of it more than 40,000 lost their lives.

“Article 370 helped Pakistan foster terrorism in Kashmir and because of terrorism, more than 40,000 people lost their lives in Kashmir,” said Shah.

Also Read | 'Impossible to come to Houston & not talk energy!': PM Modi on 'fruitful' talks with energy sector CEOs

Speaking about the abrogation of Article 370, Shah said, “We abrogated Article 370 because until it was active, Jammu and Kashmir wasn't an integral part of India.”

“Article 370 was the reason why every Indian had to say and prove that Kashmir was an integral part of the nation,” he added.

Shah also spoke about Syama Prasad Mukherjee and said that he was the first person to shed blood for Jammu and Kashmir.

Shah was speaking at an election rally in Mumbai. Assembly polls in Maharashtra and Haryana are scheduled to take place on October 21, the Election Commission said on Saturday. Nearly 11 crore people across the two states will cast their votes with results to be declared on October 24. This will be the first election since Article 370 was abrogated.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
