Assailants fire at Delhi Police team near Akshardham Temple, no injuries reported

Sources further mentioned that the Mandawali Police Station team had laid a trap to catch a gang | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The incident happened at around 10:45 am on Sunday Suspects fired targeting the police personnel but no one was injured A police team chased the suspects but they managed to flee the spot

New Delhi: A Delhi Police team patrolling near the Akshardham Temple in East Delhi was attacked on Sunday morning after four unidentified assailants in a four-wheeler, fired at the team. The incident happened at around 10:45 am. Even after the police chased the suspects, they managed to flee the spot.

Sources stated that the police team had asked the suspects to stop the vehicle but they resorted to firing. No injuries were reported at the spot and the suspects managed to escape. The suspects were in a white colour car and acting on a tip-off the Delhi Police team asked them to stop. Meanwhile, the suspects fired targeting the police personnel but no one was injured.

#Visuals from Delhi: 4 unidentified assailants, in a four-wheeler, fired at police team near Akshardham temple this morning. The police team had asked them to stop their vehicle when they resorted to firing and later managed to escape. No injuries reported. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/RC7EIIfP2P — ANI (@ANI) September 22, 2019

Sources further mentioned that the Mandawali Police Station team had laid a trap to catch a gang who would dupe people of belongings near Akshardham Metro station Foot-over bridge. On Sunday, when the suspected white colour car came, the police team was alerted and they signalled them to stop the vehicle.

Immediately, one of the suspects fired one round at the police team and sped towards Geeta Colony flyover. The police retaliated and fired one round, meanwhile, another team chased the suspects who were heading towards Gandhi Nagar. But, the suspects managed to flee the spot. However, further probe in the matter is underway.
