Man takes sister to hospital in Karachi; shot dead by unidentified assailants

The incident has been caught on the CCTV camera installed in the area (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man was shot dead by masked assailants in Pakistan's Karachi The deceased Salman was taking his sister to a hospital and two other women were accompanying them

Karachi: Bike-borne assailants in Karachi's Gulistan-e-Jauhar allegedly shot dead a man on Saturday. The incident took place when the youth was taking his sister to the hospital. The police found 30-bore pistol casings from the spot of the incident. Apart from his sister, two other women were also accompanying the victim.

The deceased has been identified as Salman. Salman was taking his sister to the hospital in his car when five to six bullets were fired at their vehicle. The assailants had covered their faces. The incident has been caught on the CCTV camera installed in the area.

In the CCTV footage of the area, it could be seen that Salman was making a turn when the accused came from the side. Other vehilcles were seen passing from the busy road. According to a report, the accused shot at Salman when his four-wheeler had slowed down. While Salman died on the spot, his sister sustained serious injuries. The two women who were accompanying them were not injured. No arrest has been made yet.

Bike-borne assailants shoot woman to death outside temple in Delhi

This is not the first time that a person has been targeted by lawless assailants. A similar incident came to light from the Madhu Vihar area of the national capital in September this year. Two unidentified men allegedly shot dead a woman who had gone to offer her prayers at a temple with her husband. The deceased was identified as Usha Rani. A resident of Jagatpuri, the woman was accompanied by her husband Kailash Kumar.

Rani was employed as an assistant manager with an insurance company. On the day of the incident, Rani and her husband were on their way to a hospital in the national capital when they stopped at a temple near Hassanpur Depot. Rani's husband went inside the temple while she was waiting in her car on the driver's seat.

Two unidentified men allegedly came near the vehicle and shot at Rani. Kailash Kumar found his wife lying in a pool of blood when he came out of the temple after offering his prayers. Kailash Kumar took Rani to a hospital where the doctors declared her brought dead. The doctors found an injury mark near Rani's ear that seemed to be a bullet injury. After the incident, Kailash Kumar approached the police and registered a case under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
