Mamata vs CBI escalates into opposition against Centre

NEW DELHI: Both Houses of Parliament were washed out on Monday as Centre and opposition huddled over the stand off between CBI and West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee on the move to arrest Kolkata police commissioner. Accusing the Centre of “murdering democracy”, opposition parties chalked out strategy to counter the Centre’s move.After the January 19 rally of all opposition parties in Kolkata, TMC leaders see Sunday’s development and the moves after that as another show of solidarity by the anti-BJP parties.TMC members in the House were overwhelmed by the support that came from opposition BJD. Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik-led BJD is not a part of the 22-odd opposition parties.Attacking PM Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah , Kejriwal said, they needed to be defeated in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls “to save democracy” in the country. He alleged that the “Modi-Shah duo was the biggest danger” the country was facing as they were trying to “murder” democracy.NCP leader Sharad Pawar, at whose residence opposition leaders met after a joint meeting with the CEC over EVMs, said, “What happened to Mamata has happened in Delhi. Kejriwal has faced similar issues.”Strongly condemning the incident in Bengal, Chandrababu Naidu said it is “a glaring example of how Modi-Shah duo are destroying the institutions. Attacking political opponents in different states, few days before the Parliament elections will have disastrous consequences in the country.”TMC leader Derek O'Brien said 22 parties have extended their support to the protest against the Centre as he sought to project her as a leader who has succeeded in uniting the entire opposition against the alleged misuse of the CBI. “Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal , TDP chief and Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu, RJD's Tejashwi Yadav , DMK's Kanimozhi have expressed their desire to join the protest with Banerjee in Kolkata. Others like SP leader Kiranmay Nanda have already visited the protest site,” said O'Brien.Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and BSP chief Mayawati, DMK leader M K Stalin were also among those who spoke to Banerjee over phone.TMC MP Kalyan Banerjee pointed out that the Union home minister was suppressing facts while speaking in the House and said the Kolkata high court had stayed the summons against Kumar till February 13. “The CBI has violated orders of the court by moving against Kumar. This is against the Constitution as well as the federal structure. As head of state, Mamata Banerjee has protested against this,” he said.Sena chief Raj Thackeray said, “We applaud and support the stand taken by Banerjee against the autocracy and tyranny of the Central government. We firmly stand behind her and the fight against this tyranny.”
