Shah hopes to ride on Article 370 in state

Article 370

BJP president Amit Shah

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Aaditya Thackeray

BJP president Amit Shah and Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis at the party’s meeting at Goregaon

BJP chief launches party’s campaign; skips Shiv Sena in speech, talk of alliance too.Abrogation ofwill be one of the main planks of the NDA in the forthcoming Assembly polls, Union home minister andsaid, claiming that the ruling coalition will return to power in the state with a three-fourths majority.Shah said the people’s mandate will show whether the Centre’s decision to set aside the special status to Jammu and Kashmir was right or not.Shah was on a day’s visit to Mumbai and addressed party workers at Goregaon, while launching the party’s election campaign.Though the BJP has been repeatedly saying that elections will be fought with Shiv Sena, Shah did not mention Sena in his speech. Neither did he visitat his residence even as the two parties are engaged in alliance talks, Shah said, “Elections for Maharashtra and Haryana have been announced. I am sure the BJP will win in both states with huge margins. In Maharashtra, the NDA (BJP, Sena and smaller allies) will have a threefourths majority.’’On Article 370, Shah said that no one ever imagined that it would be removed.Shah echoed’s assertion that Devendra Fadnavis would continue to hold the chief minister post after the polls. This is being viewed as a taunt to Shiv Sena, which is promotingfor the CM’s post.He also said that the state was working in tandem with the Centre for the welfare of the people.Shah, who as Union home minister, played a big role in Parliament to get the special status for J&K abrogated, said the state had been finally fully integrated with India. “No one dreamt that Article 370, and Article 35A would so removed so easily. Prime Minister Narendra Modi did it in the very first session of Parliament after winning the second term, with a thumping majority,” he said.BJP says that elections in Maharashtra and Haryana, coming soon after the removal of Article 370 and Article 35A, will benefit the party. “The people of Maharashtra will decide whether they want to support a nationalist party or parties that promote parivars,” he said.Shah said that claimed peace has prevailed in Kashmir ever since the removal of Article 370 and 35 A. “Not asingle bullet has been fired and not a single life has been lost. There is curfew in only ten districts, and this too is now being lifted. There is no problem in Kashmir Sharad Rao (referring to NCP chief Pawar),” he said.The BJP chief said three generations of party leaders had laid down their lives for Kashmir.Speaking about the sacrifice of Dr Shyama Prasad Mookerjee’s, he said, “Mookerjee went to Kashmir. In those days one needed a permit. He was put in jail by Sheikh Abdullah’s government where he died. And thus, he became the first martyr for the cause of Kashmir.”Shah said that Congress leader Rahul Gandhi says Article 370 is a political issue, but for the BJP this is about integrating Kashmir with India and about patriotism.The BJP chief said that it is Jawaharlal Nehru’s fault that Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir became a huge problem because he called for a ceasefire. But it was his fault that POK has become an issue.The BJP chief said only three families in Kashmir benefitted from the special status.
