‘Mumbai Mirrored’ – An ode to the captivating journey of the city of dreams, Mumbai

Mumbai Mirrored: An ode to the captivating journey of Mumbai

It’s the city that never sleeps and where people dare to dream big. It’s also called the maximum city which is often applauded for its high spirit’. Yes, we are talking about none other than Mumbai – the city of dreams, glitz and glamour, which has its own set of challenges and struggles. Holding a mirror to the city’s fast life, its culture and zeal, the city’s favourite compact newspaper, Mumbai Mirror presents a special video series called ‘Mumbai Mirrored’.

The series is a walk down memory lane from Bombay to Mumbai – a journey that is full of nostalgia and wonderment. Join celebrated adman Gerson da Cunha, scholar and activist Pushpa Bhave, urban planner Shirish Patel, founder of Dalit movement in the city JV Pawar and Mumbai’s own super cop Julio Ribeiro as they unravel the elements that make the city what it is – its truths, culture, crime, activism and politics. Here' a gimpse of the contributions of each of our five legendary Mumbaikars in shaping the city.

The intriguing 5-episode video series captures the transformation of Mumbai from being a group of 7 islands to Bombay and then to the commercial capital of India. It portrays the rich culture and glorious history that makes every Mumbaikar’s heart swell with pride. Weaved together with enlightening interviews and interesting anecdotes as narrated by the 5 legends, Mumbai Mirrored depicts the very essence of the city. Being the first citizens of Mumbai, these legends have beautifully summarised Mumbai’s 100 glorious years in fascinating tales – tales of inspiration, of gut and gumption.

The innovative series was launched on September 18, 2019 when Mumbaikars woke up to 7 unique jackets in the newspaper, symbolizing the 7 islands that the city built from. The jacket features reflections of 7 iconic structures of the city, that come to life only when looked through a mirror. True to the name of the series ‘Mumbai Mirrored’, the brand has used mirrors and reflections as a creative device to launch the video-series.

Watch the 5-episode video series on www.mumbaimirrored.com
