China-Iran deal: Strategic implications

By NDT Special Bureau

The Petroleum Economist reported on September 3 that China will invest around $290 billion in Iran’s oil, gas and petroleum sectors, and another $120 billion in transport and manufacturing infrastructure through “technology, systems, process ingredients and personnel required to complete such projects” with “up to 5,000 Chinese security personnel on the ground to protect Chinese projects”. China acquired the first right of refusal on all Iranian projects and a 12 per cent guaranteed discount on all energy imports from Tehran.

China’s massive financing of Iran’s development is an extension of the ‘Belt and Road Initiative’ and a rebuff to America’s thought-so aggressive trade, technology and military moves.

American strategy of ‘maximum pressure’ to bring Iran to knees economically and rein in nuclear and missile programs and politico-military ambitions in the Middle East is thought to fall flat. Adamant China is nonchalant to “secondary sanctions” of the US on companies and countries which continue economic relations with Iran.

China will import virtually all of Iran’s oil and gas production and expand manifold the present 200,000 barrels per day (bpd) to full capacity over 4-5 million bpd through China’s energy giants-CNPC, CNOC, Sinopec-from existing and new fields. Iran won’t need any other markets for oil exports.

Iran can export gas via the existing Turkmenistan-China gas pipeline or construct new oil pipelines along the same route. That significantly reduces the threat of the US/Western maritime energy blockade against China or Iran. China need not depend on the US-friendly energy suppliers in the Gulf (Saudi Arabia, the UAE) and East Asia (Indonesia, Brunei) and achieve energy security through Iran and Russia.

China’s transport infrastructure in Iran including high-speed rail on several routes provides additional avenues for trade-overland trade-through Iran and Turkey to and from Europe and maritime trade through Iranian ports (including Indian-sponsored Chabahar) to the Middle East, Africa and beyond.

Economic partnership with China will supplement Iran’s close security ties with Russia to alter the Middle East power equations. Tehran’s nuclear and security policies against the US gets China’s encouragement. Reinforced ‘strategic’ partnership will promote Iran’s objectives in Yemen, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Afghanistan and help retaliate Israel’s frequent strikes on Iranian military assets and militia affiliates. Iran is promoting the Houthi rebels in Yemen and Assad in Syria against the Western Gulf coalition and could extend influence to Iraq, Lebanon and even Afghanistan.

The aborted US-Taliban deal would have reduced ‘counterterrorism’ US forces in Afghanistan to mere 8,600. Was Iran-China deal the reason why the US backed out, as reduced American presence was inadequate versus heavy Chinese presence in Iran?

The Sino-Iran economic partnership supplements and reinforces China’s long-standing strategic participation with Pakistan. It offers another strategic ‘window’ besides the CPEC and insurance against the possible US or Indian disruption of the China-Pakistan corridor. China acquires security and military foothold when Chinese navy shifts from Gwadar to Chabahar.

Pakistan columnist, Munir Akram, writing in Dawn, talked of an ‘Asian Order’ comprising of China, Russia, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey and Central Asia under the SCO and the BRI; and the US Indo-Pacific strategy of the US, Israel, the UK, Saudi, the UAE, Australia, India and Japan on the other; drawing clear battle lines between the two.

India had so far balanced both the worlds, appealing to the US ‘strategic altruism’ to preserve traditional arms import from Russia and trade and investment cooperation with China. Intensifying the Sino-US global confrontation narrows down India’s strategic space to manoeuvre. The evolving power equations could force a strategic choice on India. It is being speculated that to protect Aksai Chin, China is openly supporting Pakistan on Kashmir, indicating emerging alignments.

India’s relations with Iran is over a millennium old and that with Saudi, the UAE, Oman and the GCC is picking up. India has strategic relations with Russia, the US and China who have invested in India’s big time, for anchorage during tumultuous times. India must work with anyone to promote national interests. Asian order is a Chinese construct, like the BRI, to promote Chinese interests alone. China can tackle the US alone but not the alliance of Japan-Australia-US-India and/or ASEAN.

China-Iran cooperation took off only after the USA imposed tariff on Chinese imports. China is using Iran deal to avenge the US tariffs. Flirting with Iran is mere sabre rattling. China is just exploiting Iran’s vulnerable situation with western powers and Saudis’ alliance.

Asian countries coming together to make “Asia Great Again” suits China. The deal is China’s calculated kick aimed at America’s strategic objectives. Unmasking China’s strategic move and its consequences will be interesting.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Like this: Like Loading...
