Defense news on: 2019 September 23 (acquisition and contracts)

Americas

Boeing won a $51.6 million contract to procure 136 Advanced Capability Mission Computers in support of the F/A-18 aircraft. The Advanced Capability Mission Computer is an integrated information processing system, providing complete hardware and software solutions. It is built on a well-defined open systems architecture allowing for rapid insertion of emerging technologies. The ACMC is a set of digital computer hardware and software that performs general purpose, I/O, video, voice, and graphics processing. The F/A-18 Hornet is a single- and two-seat, twin engine, multi-mission fighter/attack aircraft that can operate from either aircraft carriers or land bases. The F/A-18 fills a variety of roles: air superiority, fighter escort, suppression of enemy air defenses, reconnaissance, forward air control, close and deep air support, and day and night strike missions. The F/A-18 Hornet replaced the F-4 Phantom II fighter and A-7 Corsair II light attack jet, and also replaced the A-6 Intruder as these aircraft were retired during the 1990s. Work will take place in St. Louis, Missouri. Estimated completion will be in February 2022.

The US Navy awarded Lockheed Martin a $24.7 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to develop the first production unit fabrication and qualification of the TB-37X Multi-Function Towed Array (MFTA) System. The legacy TB-37/U MFTA is an integral part of the AN/SQQ-89A(V)15 Undersea Warfare Combat System Improvement Program for the Arleigh Burke Class guided missile destroyers (DDG-51), Ticonderoga Class missile cruisers (CG-47) and Zumwalt Class destroyers. The TB-37X MFTA shall incorporate next-generation telemetry to mitigate reliability and obsolescence issues experienced with the legacy TB-37/U MFTA. The TB-37X will be deployed on additional platforms, including Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) and Next Generation Guided Missile Frigates (FFG(X)). Lockheed will perform work in Liverpool, New York; Millersville, Maryland; Marion, Massachusetts; Cleveland, Ohio; and Albuquerque, New Mexico, and is expected to be completed by October 2026.

Middle East & Africa

General Dynamics won a $36 million contract for 21 forging sets and 660 warhead housings to support the production of guided missile warhead sections for the weapon system for the government of Saudi Arabia. The AGM-84H/K SLAM-ER is an advanced stand off precision-guided, air-launched cruise missile produced by Boeing Defense, Space and Security for the US Armed Forces and their allies. The SLAM-ER can be remotely controlled while in flight, and it can be redirected to another target after launch if the original target has already been destroyed, or is no longer considered to be dangerous (command guidance). The SLAM-ER is a very accurate weapon; as of 2009 it had the best circular error probable of any missile used by the US Navy. Work will take place in Anniston, Alabama, and is expected to be completed in March 2028.

Europe

Lockheed Martin announced that it delivered the first of two KC-130J Super Hercules aerial refuelers to representatives from France’s Armée de l’Air’s 62st Transport Wing at Orléans-Bricy Air Base. France will receive a total of four Super Hercules aircraft — two C-130J-30 combat delivery airlifters and two KC-130J aerial refuelers — through a Foreign Military Sale with the US government. The two C-130J-30 airlifters were delivered in 2017 and 2018, and a second KC-130J will deliver in 2020. All of these Super Hercules are operated in conjunction with France’s existing C-130H fleet. “The KC-130J provides Armée de l’Air crews with a proven solution that delivers much-needed fuel in any environment, at any time,” said Rod McLean, vice president and general manager, Air Mobility & Maritime Missions at Lockheed Martin. France is the 17th country to choose the C-130J for its airlift needs. The C-130J Super Hercules is the most advanced tactical airlifter in operation today, offering superior performance and enhanced capabilities with the range and versatility for every theater of operations and evolving requirements.

The Finnish government has approved long-delayed contract awards to Rauma Marine Constructions Oy and Saab for the delivery of the Finnish Navy’s $1.5 billion Squadron 2020 corvette program. Squadron 2020 covers the procurement of four new Pohjanmaa Class corvettes, capable of operating in ice conditions, to replace the seven existing surface combatants in Finnish Navy service. RMC will build the new ships at its shipyard in Rauma, while Saab will take responsibility for the supply and integration of the combat system, plus the integration of government-furnished weapons and equipment. The decision was made at the outset of the Squadron 2020 program to build the new corvettes in Finland to assure security of supply and sustain national shipbuilding capability. A letter of intent and design contract was awarded to RMC in 2016.

Asia-Pacific

India’s Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL) has delivered another license-built Kalvari or Scorpène Class diesel-electric submarine to the Indian Navy. The vessel, which will be in service as INS Khanderi once commissioned, was handed over on September 19 at a delivery ceremony in Mumbai. Khanderi is the second of six boats ordered under an $3.2 billion contract signed with Naval Group (then known as DCNS) in October 2005 under India’s Project 75 submarine program. The program’s first-of-class, INS Kalvari , was commissioned in December 2017.

Today’s Video

Watch: 100 ORDER JLTV OSHKOSH LATEST LIGHTWEIGHT TACTICAL ARRIVE AT 3RD MARINE DIVISION IN OKINAWA JAPAN
