Balakot reactivated by Pakistan, 500 terrorists waiting to enter India: Army Chief

Gen Rawat said Balakot has been reactivated by Pakistan very recently.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat has said the Balakot terror launchpad of Jaish-e-Mohammed that the Indian Air Force (IAF) wiped out in an airstrike on February 26, has been reactivated.

Speaking to the media in Chennai, General Rawat said, "Balakot has been reactivated. Balakot was affected, damaged and destroyed. The action had been taken by the Indian Air Force and now they are reactivated."

General Bipin Rawat also said that about 500 infiltrators are waiting to infiltrate into India.

"We have a minimum number of 500 people (terrorists). Depending on the weather pattern they keep moving. As the temperature keeps falling, they move. Figures keep fluctuating depending on where terrorists are. We have taken measures and put in more troops along LoC," he said.

Interacting with the media at Officers Training Academy (OTA) in Chennai, General Rawat said, "Pakistan violates ceasefire to push terrorists into our territory. We know how to deal with ceasefire violations. Our troops know how to position themselves and take action. We are alert and will ensure that maximum infiltration bids are foiled."

Asked if the Army is planning another strike to counter the resurgence, General Rawat said, "Why should we repeat the same action? Why not go beyond that? Let them keep guessing."

General Rawat said Balakot was reactivated by Pakistan very recently.

Following the devastating terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama on February 14, the Indian Air Force conducted airstrikes on one of the crucial terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot and destroyed the establishment.

However, according to the Indian Army chief, the terror base has been reactivated by Pakistan.

Speaking on the Kashmir situation, General Rawat clearly mentioned that the communication setback in the region is to prevent terrorists from contacting their handlers in the Valley.

He added that the ground situation in Kashmir clam and added that there is no clampdown in the region.

"I don't agree there is a clampdown. The brick kilns are active, smoke is coming out of the chimneys, sand is being collected from Jhelum river. Heaps of apples plucked from the orchards and being transported. If all this is happening in clampdown, how are people moving," he questioned.

"This is made up of terrorists. If you are saying that clampdown is happening for the last two months, how are people surviving without food and water? Shops are working from behind because front-shutters are closed by terrorists. Airports are working. The clampdown is a fear psychosis," General Rawat added.
