Odisha Congress to meet on Tuesday to pick Bijepur bypoll nominee

BHUBANESWAR: The Congress is scheduled to draw a roadmap for the October 21 Bijepur assembly byelection in a meeting at Congress Bhawan on Tuesday. The party's state president Niranjan Patnaik and legislature party leader Narasingha Mishra, among other leaders, are also likely to finalize a nominee in the meeting."We will hold a meeting on September 24 to discuss probable candidates and poll strategies. The name of the selected candidate will be sent to the All India Congress Committee (AICC) for approval," said Mishra, who is heading the selection committee. Bijepur would go to polls again after chief minister Naveen Patnaik vacated the seat and retained his usual Hinjili constituency. In a first, Naveen had contested from two constituencies - Hinjili and Bijepur - this time and won both the seats. Bijepur, which was once a Congress stronghold, slipped into the BJD fold in the 2018 bypoll. Congress's Subal Sahu had been representing the seat since 2004 before his demise in August 2017. The party received a jolt when late Sahu's wife, Rita Sahu, contested from the constituency on a BJD ticket against Congress's Pranay Sahu and won the bypoll in February 2018.The Congress has since been struggling to recapture Bijepur. In April's assembly election, the party performed miserably in Bijepur, which was the cynosure of all eyes as BJD president and chief minister Naveen Patnaik contested from the seat. Congress candidate Ripunath Seth faced a crushing defeat and lost his security deposit.In this bypoll, Seth is said to be lobbying for his son, Abhisekh, for a party ticket. "We will abide by the party's decision after they zero in on a candidate. My son will definitely perform well if given a chance. He has been associated with the party for quite a long time now. I lost the April election as I had little time to make preparations. My opponent was the mighty CM Naveen Patnaik," Seth told TOI. The Congress faced the worst-ever setback after losing the Patkura assembly segment in July this year. The party finished third. Polling in Patkura, which was initially scheduled on April 29, was deferred twice - first due to the death of BJD's nominee and second due to Fani. Party candidate Jayant Mohanty lost and failed to retain his security deposit.
