Balakot terror camps re-activated, 500 terrorists waiting to infiltrate: Bipin Rawat

Chennai | Jagran News Desk: Army chief General Bipin Rawat on Monday revealed that the terror camps in Balakot, which were bombed by the Indian Air Force earlier this year, have been 're-activated'.

“Balakot has been re-activated by Pakistan, very recently. This shows Balakot was affected, it was damaged; it highlights some action was taken by the Indian Air Force at Balakot and now they have got the people back there,” said the Army chief while speaking to media on Monday.

Also Read | 'Howdy, Modi' | 'Where were 9/11, 26/11 perpetrators found?': PM tears into Pakistan in Trump's presence

The terror camps in Balakot were bombed by the Indian Air Force on February 27 after the deadly Pulwama attack which led to the death of 40 CRPF soldiers.

The army chief also spoke about the ceasefire violations by Pakistan and said the army knows ‘how to deal with it’. He further said that about 500 infiltrators are waiting to infiltrate into India.

“Pakistan violates ceasefire to push terrorists into our territory. We know how to deal with ceasefire violations. Our troops know how to position themselves and take action. We are alert and will ensure that maximum infiltration bids are foiled,” said Rawat.

Speaking about the restrictions imposed in Jammu and Kashmir after the revocation of Article 370, Rawat said, “there is a communication breakdown between terrorists in the Kashmir Valley and their handlers in Pakistan but there is no communication breakdown between people to people.”

Also Read | After PM Modi blasts Pakistan at Houston event, Trump set to meet Imran Khan today

“I feel the interpretation of Islam by some elements who possibly want to create disruption is being fed to large number of people. I think it is important we have preachers who convey the correct meaning of Islam,” he added.

The revelations about Balakot from the army chief come days before PM Modi’s address at the 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly where his counterpart Imran Khan will also speak.

Tensions between the two countries increased after India revoked Article 370 which gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcated the state into two union territories.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
