Behror firing case: Rajasthan cops parade 13 accused in underclothes

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Alwar, September 23

Police paraded 13 semi-clad suspects accused of opening fire to help a Haryana resident who faces murder cases escape from a police station in Behror here earlier this month through a crowded marketplace on Sunday—a controversial act that has drawn criticism for several quarters.

The 13 handcuffed suspects walked through a crowded market only in their underclothes, escorted by several policemen.

Police justified their decision saying it was to recreate the crime scene and not to send a message to the public.

"It was to recreate the scene from where they came, where they parked their vehicles, how they entered the police station and opened fire helping Papla to flee," Sharma said.

Papla alias Vikram Gurjar had escaped after more than a dozen men barged in the police station and opened indiscriminate firing. The SOG is investigating the case and 20 accused have been arrested in this case so far. Of them, 13 were involved in attacking, firing and helping Papla flee along with them while the rest seven accused had helped Papla at different places after he had escaped from the police station.

Papla is still at large.

Then Behror SHO and deputy SP were suspended, two head constables were terminated and 69 policemen of Behror police station were shunted to police lines after the incident.

Papla was detained for questioning at Behror police station on September 6 after cops intercepted his SUV during patrolling. An amount of Rs 31.90 lakh was seized and he was taken into custody for further interrogation. He was taken to the police station and was being questioned, when about 10-15 men barged into the premises and opened indiscriminate firing. They then managed to flee with Papla.

Papla, who is from Mahendragarh in neighbouring Haryana, is wanted in five murder cases.

Some people such as Delhi MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa appreciated police's action.— PTI
