One Killed, 2 Injured in Jharkhand Mob Attack After Suspicions of Cow Slaughter

New Delhi: A mob killed one man and injured two others in Khunti, Jharkhand on Sunday, after accusing them of “slaughtering” a cow. The occurred around 10 am in Jaltanda Suari village, Indian Express reported, after people apparently saw the three men taking meat out of the carcass.

“The three villagers, identified as Kalantus Barla, Philip Horo and Faagu Kacchap, are alleged to have been carving an animal prohibited for slaughtering. Other villagers spotted them and started beating them. However, police reached the spot as we got information and rushed them to hospital. Barla sustained grievous injuries and he died before reaching hospital. The other two are said to be stable,” DIG (Chhotanagpur Range) Homkar Amol Venukant told the newspaper.

No arrests have been made so far, and there is uncertainty over the “sequence of events”, Venukant added. He told The Telegraph that some men have been detained for questioning. “Preliminary investigation suggests the three men were selling prohibited meat. They were caught by the mob and thrashed. Additional police forces have been deployed.”

Watch | #BeyondTheHeadlines: Modi’s Indifference Has Turned Lynching Into An Epidemic

A doctor at RIMS hospital told The Telegraph that Barla was declared dead when he arrived at the hospital, and the postmortem would determine the cause. The others had multiple injuries, he added.

Jharkhand has witnessed a string of lynchings and mob violence incidents, with at least three such attacks being reported in September alone. All three of these attacks – in Sahibganj, Ramgarh and Dhanbad districts – were reportedly triggered by rumours of child-lifting and led to the victims’ deaths. According to the Indian Express, at least 21 people have been killed by mobs in the state in the last three years.

In April, Prakash Lakda, an Adivasi, was killed by a mob because he and others with him were reportedly carving a dead ox. The police then decided to go after the other victims, charging the three Adivasi men who survived under the Jharkhand Bovine Animal Prohibition of Slaughter Act. A fact-finding by activists had found that the FIR and several discrepancies in the police’s report seem to overwhelmingly suggest bias against the victims.
