Close to 500 terrorists waiting to infiltrate into India, Army ready to tackle any situation

New Delhi: Army and intelligence sources said Monday that more than 500 terrorists are waiting at terror launch pads run by Pakistan to infiltrate into India. However, the sources also stated that the military is ready to response ‘at any level, any range, anywhere’.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat confirmed Monday that Pakistan had very recently ‘reactivated’ the terror camp in Balakot, which was bombed by India in February in response to a suicide attack at Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama in which 40 soldiers were killed. According to sources more than 250 terrorists had been killed in the strikes. Pakistan, however, strongly refuted India’s claims. During his interaction with the section of the media, Bipin Rawat also put the number of terrorists wanting to infiltrate into India ‘close to 500’. He also said that the terror camps were close to the Line of Control (LoC)

The information on the ‘revival’ of Balakot came four days back. Sources confirmed Monday that the threat potential from the Balakot pad is ‘presently far more serious’ than ahead of the festival season during other years.

But the same sources stated that India is ready to tackle any situation. “Our response will be at any level, any range, anywhere. Adequate plans are prepared,” Army sources said. “The 15 Corps, based in Srinagar, isn’t only for defensive operations… it can also launch counter-offensive,” the sources asserted.

It is estimated that 60 terrorists have crossed over in the last two months, at the Line of Control as well as International Border. Four or five terror launch pads are believed to be ready to push in terrorists. The increased activity, sources said, is linked to Pakistan’s anger over India’s decision August 5 to scrap special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

“The window for terrorist infiltration starts closing in by November depending on the sector … Gurez-Kargil-Machhil-Keran-Tangdhar-Uri close down, in that order, usually depending on snowfall, and open up for infiltration in the opposite way,” informed Indian Army sources.

Speaking in Chennai Monday morning, the Army Chief had been asked whether the response to the ‘reactivation’ of Balakot would be similar to the February 26 strike by the Indian Air Force (IAF). However, Bipin Rawat had ruled out a similar type of operation and said that it is always better to keep the opposition guessing. Why not keep the other side guessing as to what we will do,” General Rawat said.

Agencies
