Corporate Rivalry To Sexual Harassment At Work, Here Are 5 Important Issues That 'Thinkistan Season 2' Discusses

MX Player – India's leading online platform has hit yet another milestone with the second season of its MX Original Series Thinkistan. Set in the 90s, this show received so much appreciation from the audiences that the creators decided to give the fans what they wanted and even sped up the timeline to bring back MTMC to us.

MX Player's Kiska Hoga Thinkistan Season 2 is much more dramatic than the first season. The previous season saw the struggle between two copywriters Hema and Amit who battled for their places in an ad agency and navigated their creative lives. The second season is back with a bang as both these characters shuffle between new, demanding bosses and failing love lives.

But that's not all the show tackles. Other than the characters' love lives and career trajectories, this season saw a multitude of issues being discussed. Here are some of the issues that made the script more relevant:

1. Cut-Throat Field Of Advertising:

When you watch ads on TV, some seem well-made and some fail to convince you, but the one thing we don't see is the work that goes into every idea. Thinkistan 2 was able to bring into light the struggle that copywriters and people who work in agencies like MTMC go through. This cut-throat side of advertising and the rivalry that goes on within agencies and with other agencies needed to come into the limelight.

2. Homophobia:

The show is set in the 90s and at that time homophobia was worse than today, even in liberal-minded fields like advertising. And that is exactly what was brought to light with Ashiq Jabeer's storyline. We see the negative characters crack homophobic jokes and even use his sexuality to their advantage which leads to a devastating end to Ashiq's story. This was and is the reality that many people still live through and it's high time issues like these hit mainstream media.

3. Sexual Harassment:

We are currently living in the era of #MeToo where women are finding the strength to fight against sexual harassment in their workplaces and raising their voices, but it still isn't something that every woman would do. Thinkistan 2 handled this issue the right way - they showed Sonam's struggle openly and saw her fight to break free, we even see Amit come to her rescue but nothing ever gets reported because the culture to stay silent is yet to change.

4. Toxic Work Environment:

There are many shows where we see characters complain about their office environment and how their bosses drive them crazy, but no one ever does anything about it. Thinkistan writers finally changed that by having characters quit the agency. We see Sharmishta leave when she realises that the new creative Director William will create problems and once he starts his toxic tactics, we see almost all of them quit the agency which is what anyone should do in a toxic environment.

5. Extra-Marital Affairs:

Many shows and movies have dealt with extra-marital affairs in the past but it seemed too fantasised, but Thinkistan changed that. They did not try to portray Hema as a stud when he cheats on Priya and neither do they question Sneha's character. We see relationships fall apart and Hema and Priya go their separate ways, which is what would happen in real life. This is one issue that needed to be rationalised in mainstream media and Thinkistan has done an excellent job at that, to say the least.

Thinkistan season 2 is a gripping show that forces you to question your own environment as you sit and relate to the characters and their lives
