500 militants waiting to sneak into J&K to create unrest; security forces on high alert: Report

A large group of terrorists is reportedly waiting at the terror launch pads in Lipa Valley on the Pakistani side for an opportune time | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Nearly 450-500 terrorists are reportedly waiting at terror launch pads to sneak into the Kashmir Valley The Indian security forces have been given full freedom to deal with any infiltration bid along the LoC in J&K Earlier today, Army chief General Bipin Rawat said Pakistan has reactivated the Balakot terror camp very recently

New Delhi: Hours after Army chief General Bipin Rawat revealed that the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot has been reactivated, a report on Monday said nearly 450-500 terrorists are waiting at terror launch pads to sneak into the Kashmir Valley.

With an aim to foment unrest as part of Pakistan's nefarious plot, a large group of terrorists is reportedly waiting at the terror launch pads in Lipa Valley on the Pakistani side for an opportune time.

Meanwhile, in order to deal with any infiltration bid along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir, the Indian security forces have been given full freedom.

The report added that some of the terrorists awaiting their chance to infiltrate into India have received their training at the JeM camp in Balakot, which was bombed by the Indian Air Force in February this year.

The report mentioned intelligence inputs as alleging that the target of the Pakistan-based terror groups is vital installations located in several major cities.

"Around 450-500 terrorists are waiting at the terror launch pads along the LoC in PoK," said the report.

It added that Pakistan wants to trigger unrest in Kashmir, so that it can project before the international community that the situation in the Valley is worsening after India decided to abrogate Article 370, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

The report further said that the Army, which is on high alert, has been given full freedom to tackle any security challenge "effectively".

Earlier today, Army chief General Bipin Rawat said Pakistan has reactivated the Balakot terror camp very recently.

"Balakot has been reactivated by Pakistan recently...Pakistan has got people back there," the Army chief told the media at the Officers Training Academy (OTA) in Chennai.

He was talking about the JeM terror camp which was destroyed by the Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26.

The operation was carried out by the IAF in retaliation to the attack on the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy at Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14. The Pulwama attack, in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, was claimed by Pakistan-based JeM.

The Army chief said that nearly 500 terrorists are waiting to infiltrate into India, adding that Pakistan resorts to ceasefire violation to push terrorists into India. He, however, added that the Indian Army very well knows how to deal with that.

More troops have been positioned along the LoC to check infiltration, added Bipin Rawat.
