Next-gen 2020 Hyundai Creta spied in India once again

If you remember, IAB broke the story of the 2020 Hyundai Creta's local testing having commenced in India with its exclusive spy shots last month. Now, the upcoming SUV has been spied on test again, courtesy Team-BHP. The latest sighting took place in Chennai.

The next-gen Hyundai Creta will be identical to the next-gen Hyundai ix25. Though a previous report published in Arpil 2019 suggested otherwise, but it is now apparent that both the model will atleast be similar, if not exactly identical. On the other hand, maybe only the LATAM-spec second-gen Hyundai Creta will have design differences while the Indian-spec 2020 Creta will retain the same design as the second-gen ix25.

The second-gen Hyundai Creta derives inspiration from the Hyundai Palisade which is the company's new flagship SUV. The new model carries a mix of straight lines and curves as opposed to the simple, sorted and balanced design of the first-gen model, which is the key reason for its huge success in the country. The exteriors may be too bit too odd, but on the contrary, the interiors of the all-new Creta will be nothing but elegant, posh and upmarket. Speaking of which, it will have new and compact steering wheel, horizontal central air vents and an exceptionally large floating central display which seamlessly gels with the floor console. Apart from that, it will also get a new fully-digital instrument cluster which has a twin-segment screen with an MID placed in the centre. Current speed and fuel-level indicator are displayed on the left side, while the right-side space displays a tachometer and engine temperature bar.

The all-new Hyundai Creta will be equipped with features like a panoramic sunroof, shark fin antenna, split LED headlights, 17-inch alloy wheels, split LED front and rear lights, electric parking brake with auto-hold function and a 360-degree camera system.

Also Read: Hyundai micro-SUV (Maruti S-Presso rival) receives green signal, codenamed 'Hyundai AX'

The 2020 Hyundai Creta will likely be offered with 115 PS 1.5L naturally aspirated petrol, 115 PS 1.5L turbocharged diesel and 120 PS 1.0L turbocharged petrol engine options. Expect its launch to take place in mid-2020.

[Image Source: Team-BHP]
