MUSLIMS MUST HAVE COMMITTED THE FOLLOWING CRIMINAL ACTS

Whenever I write in defence of democratic-secular India, against persecution of minorities, Dalits, women and working-class, the Hindutva zealots instead of responding to issues raised by me, single me out for all kinds of degraded attacks. For them my name and religion become main target of venomous attacks. My family, my mother, her womb, my bringing up, my social beliefs, my religion (about which I had no choice) as a whole and all its beliefs are showered with the choicest of abuses in the most vulgar language.

The Hindutva gang tries to communalize the issue and as a response, I have drawn a list of incidents from Indian and world history. I seek their response to this list. I am sharing it with friends so that whenever Hindutva fascists attack secular activists with Muslim names the latter must confront this gang with this list. In fact, this list can work as a resource material for all those who want to expose Hindutva gang’s polarizing agenda.

Those who disrobed Draupadi were sadist Muslims! Pandavas who gambled on their wife and lost her to Kauravas were beastly Muslims! Mahabharata in which millions were killed was caused by Muslims! Guru Dronacharya who forced Ekalavya, an Untouchable, to cut off his thumb through deceitful methods so that Guru’s high Caste students win was a Casteist Muslim! Lord Ram was forced for vanvaas by Muslims! Sita Mata was kidnapped by a criminal Muslim! Lanka was burnt by Muslims! These were Muslims who did the Gandhi ‘vadh’ (a term used in the Hindutva fraternity for the murder of Gandhi ji)! The RSS English mouthpiece ORGANIZER (14 August 1947) demeaning the choice of the National Flag, just on the eve of Independence, wrote: “The people who have come to power by the kick of fate may give in our hands the Tricolour but it never be respected and owned by Hindus. The word three is in itself an evil, and a flag having three colours will certainly produce a very bad psychological effect and is injurious to a country.” RSS MUST BE AN ORGANIZATION OF MUSLIMS! Hindu Mahasabha led by ‘Veer’ Savarkar ran coalition governments with Muslim League in 1941 in Bengal, Sind and NWFP. SAVARKAR MUST HAVE BEEN A MUSLIM! When Neta Subhash Chander Bose was trying to liberate India militarily, Hindu Mahasabha organized recruitment camps for the British army, recruiting more than 1 lakh Hindus in the British army which killed hundreds of Netaji’s soldiers. HINDU MAHASABHA MUST HAVE BEEN AN ORGANIZATION OF MUSLIMS! RSS on the eve of Independence demanded that democratic-secular Indian Constitution should be replaced by Manusmriti. How Manusmriti denigrates Sudras and women can be known by the perusal of following content of this de-humanized work:

Laws of Manu concerning Dalits/Untouchables

For the sake of the prosperity of the worlds (the divine one) caused the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra to proceed from his mouth, his arm, his thighs and his feet. (I/31) One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Sudras, to serve meekly even these (other) three castes. (I/91) Once-born man (a Sudra), who insults a twice-born man with gross invective, shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin. (VIII/270) If he mentions the names and castes (jati) of the (twice-born) with contumely, an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth. (VIII/271) If he arrogantly teaches Brahmanas their duty, the king shall cause hot oil to be poured into his mouth and into his ears. (VIII/272) With whatever limb a man of a low caste does hurt to (a man of the three) highest (castes), even that limb shall be cut off; that is the teaching of Manu. (VIII/279) He who raises his hand or a stick, shall have his hand cut off; he who in anger kicks with his foot, shall have his foot cut off. (VIII/280) A low-caste man who tries to place himself on the same seat with a man of a high caste, shall be branded on his hip and be banished, or (the king) shall cause his buttock to be gashed. (VIII/281) As per the Manu Code if Sudras are to be given most stringent punishments for even petty violations/actions, the same Code of Manu is very lenient towards Brahmins. Shloka 380 in Chapter VIII bestowing profound love on Brahmins decrees: “Let him never slay a Brahmana, though he have committed all (possible) crimes; let him banish such an (offender), leaving all his property (to him) and (his body) unhurt.”

Laws of Manu concerning women

Day and night woman must be kept in dependence by the males (of) their (families), and, if they attach themselves to sensual enjoyments, they must be kept under one’s control. (IX/2) Her father protects (her) in childhood, her husband protects (her) in youth, and her sons protect (her) in old age; a woman is never fit for independence. (IX/3) Women must particularly be guarded against evil inclinations, however trifling (they may appear); for, if they are not guarded, they will bring sorrow on two families. (IX/5) Considering that the highest duty of all castes, even weak husbands (must) strive to guard their wives. (IX/6) No man can completely guard women by force; but they can be guarded by the employment of the (following) expedients: Let the (husband) employ his (wife) in the collection and expenditure of his wealth, in keeping (everything) clean, in (the fulfilment of) religious duties, in the preparation of his food, and in looking after the household utensils. Women, confined in the house under trustworthy and obedient servants, are not (well) guarded; but those who of their own accord keep guard over themselves, are well guarded. (IX/12) Women do not care for beauty, nor is their attention fixed on age; (thinking), ‘(It is enough that) he is a man,’ they give themselves to the handsome and to the ugly. (IX/14) Through their passion for men, through their mutable temper, through their natural heartlessness, they become disloyal towards their husbands, however carefully they may be guarded in this (world). (IX/15) (When creating them) Manu allotted to women (a love of their) bed, (of their) seat and (of) ornament, impure desires, wrath, dishonesty, malice, and bad conduct. (IX/17) For women no (sacramental) rite (is performed) with sacred texts, thus the law is settled; women (who are) destitute of strength and destitute of (the knowledge of) Vedic texts, (are as impure as) falsehood (itself), that is a fixed rule. (IX/18)

[This selection of Manu’s Codes is from F. Max Muller, Laws of Manu (Delhi: LP Publications, 1996; first published in 1886). The bracket after each code incorporates number of chapter/number of code according to the above edition.]

MANUSMRITI MUST HAVE BEEN PENNED BY MUSLIMS!

Maharaja Gulab Singh & Ranbir Singh of Kashmir who sent the largest contingent to help the British in 1857 for capturing Delhi were Muslims! 1983 Nellie massacre was the handiwork of Muslims! 1984 Sikh massacre was the criminal deed of Muslims! Every 30-40 minutes an Indian farmer has been committing suicide since 1995 due to exploitation by Muslims! December 16, 2012 brutalization of Awindra Pratap Pandey & Nirbhaya and rape of the later were the criminal acts of Muslims! The following major incidents of persecution & massacre of Dalits, 1968 Kilvenmani massacre, Tamil Nadu, 1985 Karamchedu massacre, 1991 Tsundur massacre, Andhra Pradesh, 1996 Bathani Tola Massacre, Bihar, 1997 Laxmanpur Bathe massacre, Bihar, 1997 Melavalavu massacre, Tamil Nadu, 1997 Ramabai killings, Mumbai, 1999 Bant Singh killing, Punjab, 2000 Caste persecution in Karnataka, 2006 Khairlanji massacre, Maharashtra, 2011 killings of Dalits in Mirchpur, Haryana, 2012 Dharmapuri anti-Dalit violence, 2013 Marakkanam anti-Dalit violence, Tamil Nadu, 2014 Javkheda Hatyakand, Maharashtra, 2015 anti-Dalit violence in Dangawas, Rajasthan, 2016 Rohith Vemula Suicide in Central University of Hyderabad (these are some of the thousands of incidents of Dalit persecution) were the criminal acts undertaken by Muslims! Vyapam scandal (fake admissions in medical colleges in which RSS leaders were found involved) of MP in which dozens of witnesses have committed suicide was run by Muslims! 19. Haryana burnt for more than 10 days in February 2016 in which more than 20 Indians were killed, scores of women were allegedly raped on the national highway and property worth 20-25 thousand of crores was destroyed. This must have been the work of Muslims! 20. Those who are destroying Indian education (after destroying the school education system) are all Muslims! The RSS English mouthpiece ORGANIZER (14 August 1947) demeaning the choice of the National Flag just on the eve of Independence wrote: “The people who have come to power by the kick of fate may give in our hands the Tricolour but it never be respected and owned by Hindus. The word three is in itself an evil, and a flag having three colours will certainly produce a very bad psychological effect and is injurious to a country.” RSS MUST BE AN ORGANIZATION OF MUSLIMS! Atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima & Nagasaki was the diabolical work of Muslim hegemony! Great Rationalist, Narendra Dhabolkar, renowned historian, Govind Pansare, authority on ancient India, MM Kalburgi and a renowned journalist-cum-human rights activist, Gauri Lankesh were murdered by Muslim fascists! Swami Vivekananda who wrote that “if ever any religion approached to this equality in an appreciable manner, it is Islam and Islam alone”. He concluded that “for our own motherland a junction of the two great systems, Hinduism & Islam ‘Vedanta brain and Islam body’ is the only hope…I see in my mind’s eye the future perfect India arising out of this chaos and strife, glorious and invincible, with Vedanta brain and Islam body”. Swami Vivekananda must have been a Muslim! Dalits killed and bashed up mercilessly in different part of India specially Gujarat by the so called ‘go rakshak’ criminals were all Muslims! According to NCRB data everyday 3 Dalit women are raped in India, the rapists must be all Muslims! The rapist ‘HOLY MEN’ like Gurmeet Singh, Asa Ram Bapu and Swami Chinmayanand (convicted or in the process) must all have been Muslims!

[This list can be endless]

HINDUTVA BIGOTS JAWAAB DO!

(“The opinions expressed in this article are the personal opinions of the author”, http://shamsforpeace.blogspot.com/).

Author: Shamsul Islam, Twitter: @shamsforjustice, mobile: +91-99680 07740
