50 years ago, Delhi bank robbery led to ‘senseless’ slaughter of 4

Helen Huebner asked her husband, Joe, to drive her downtown to McAlpin’s to grab her paycheck for $42.50. He circled the block before she could cash it at the bank next door, so on their way back home in Delhi Township they stopped at Cabinet Supreme Savings & Loan Association on Delhi Pike.

Another car pulled up behind them. Luella Stitzel and Henrietta Stitzel, two sisters-in-law on their weekly shopping trip, stopped to do some banking.

The three customers entered the brick savings and loan building, located at what is now the parking lot for an O’Reilly Auto Parts store. It was just after 11 a.m. on a cool Wednesday morning, Sept. 24, 1969.

Fifty years ago, the quiet West Side community lost its innocence.

Joe had been waiting awhile. Glancing in his rear-view mirror, he spotted three young men leaving the savings and loan. They got into a light blue 1964 Chevrolet Chevelle Malibu. The man with a beard was carrying two purses, one a red plastic handbag Joe recognized as his wife’s.

Joe entered the building to find the lobby empty. He called out, “Helen, are you hurt?” He heard a moan, then silence.

Straight back and to the left in the small office was a 6-by-10-foot concrete bank vault. Inside he found the bodies of four women, one was his wife.

{Support local journalism: Subscribe here.}

The Enquirer called the slaying “brutal and senseless.” Col. Paul Fricker of the Hamilton County Sheriff’s Department said, “This is the most vicious crime we have seen.”

Huebner, 47, was mother to three boys, one in the U.S. Navy, one in high school, the youngest in grade school. She worked part-time as a saleswoman at McAlpin’s.

Sisters-in-law Luella Stitzel, 61, and Henrietta Stitzel, 64, lived in the same house in Price Hill. Their husbands were brothers. Henrietta was a widow with five daughters, a son, and six grandchildren.

“Luella and Henrietta usually went out together once a week, always to Price Hill and more often than not to the building and loan,” said Luella’s husband, Nicholas J. Stitzel. “…Luella drove my car as usual Wednesday.”

Each of the women had been shot in the head.

Bank teller Lillian Dewald, 41, was shot in the back four times.

The robbers made away with $275.

One of the first police officers on the scene was Cincinnati Patrolman Walter P. Dewald, who had been on traffic detail nearby. He was told his wife was one of the victims.

“Dammit, this could have been avoided,” he said. “They knew something was going to happen.”

A few weeks earlier, his wife had told him about two suspicious men who had opened an account at Cabinet Supreme, then had withdrawn the money. She told police:

“I have worked at the savings and loan for 13 years. I have never been afraid in here. But these two guys just scared the living daylights out of me. I was afraid they were going to rob me right, then and there.”

Delhi Twp. police had posted lookouts at the savings and loan, expecting a night-time burglary, but after a few days the watch was taken off. No one had expected a robbery during the day.

Raymond Kassow, John Levi Leigh and Watterson “Big Red” Johnson had waited that September morning until the manager left, then entered the savings and loan. Kassow had orchestrated the robbery, handed out the guns and given the order: “No witnesses.”

Police said that Leigh admitted to shooting the women with a .25 caliber automatic.

“He said his gun went off and then he just kept shooting,” Homicide Sgt. Russell Jackson testified in Leigh's trial. His gun jammed so he grabbed Johnson’s gun.

Asked why he shot Dewald four times in the back, Leigh reportedly said, “She just kept screaming.”

Weeks before, Lillian Dewald had identified a photograph of Kassow as the man who had opened an account at the savings and loan. Police picked up him a few hours after the killings at his house in Price Hill, a block from the home shared by the Stitzels.

With a massive manhunt underway, Leigh and Johnson were apprehended four days later near Gallup, New Mexico.

All three men were convicted of murder and sentenced to death in the electric chair, although their sentences were commuted to life imprisonment after the U.S. Supreme Court struck down capital punishment in 1972. All three men died in prison.

{Get news alerts for weather, traffic, breaking news and more. Download the Cincinnati.com app here.}

Sources: Enquirer archives
