Rajkot: Crime show addict slits throat of four-year-old boy

RAJKOT: Addiction to a popular Hindi crime show on TV led to brutal murder of a four-year-old boy who was killed by his 25-year-old cousin uncle in a village of Surendranagar district The accused Asif Abdul Sayyed slit his nephew Sohil’s throat on Sunday after a bitter quarrel with his parents when they refused to let him watch the television show at their house in Kharaghoda village.Police said that Asif, a labourer, was addicted to crime show and daily went to his cousin brother Imran’s house to watch TV at night. This was his routine for the past three years and Imran lived in the house next to his.However, on Saturday, Imran’s wife Yasmin told Asif that his daily habit of watching the crime show till late night was highly disturbing and her children too couldn’t sleep soundly. She and Imran then asked him not to come to their house. This led to a bitter altercation and Asif walked way in a huff.On Sunday morning, Asif, who was seething with anger over the night’s quarrel, saw Imran’s son Sohil playing in the courtyard and called him to his house. When the boy went inside, Asif slit his throat, killing him on the spot. In the meantime, Asif’s mother Mehram came home and he told her that he had killed Sohil.“Asif stuffed Sohil’s body in a container used for storing flour and told his mother that he would bury him in the house itself. He asked his mother to lock the house from outside and leave as he started digging inside,” said KJ Chauhan, investigating officer, Patdi police station.Around 12:30pm, when Sohil’s parents returned from the field, and couldn’t find their son at the house, went searching for him. They went to Asif’s house and saw it was locked.However, they suddenly heard sound of digging from inside. Imran and Yasmin entered the house from a rear door and noticed blood stains. They got suspicious and saw the container lying near Asif who was digging. On opening the container, they saw Sohil’s body stuffed inside and immediately called the police.Asif was arrested and his 60-year-old mother too was taken into custody for helping him in the crime and trying to destroy evidence.“Asif has confessed that he was addicted to watching the crime show through entire nights. He was enraged when Imran’s wife refused to allow him to watch TV,” Chauhan told TOI.
