Take control of your data, says Google

These recommendations are part of internet giant Google’s campaign ‘#Securi-tyCheckKiya’ that urges users to take control of their data.

New Delhi: Securing the phone screen with a unique password and keeping a tab on the permissions given to apps are some steps smartphone users can take to keep themselves safe online, tech giant Google said on Monday.

These recommendations are part of internet giant Google’s campaign ‘#Securi-tyCheckKiya’ that urges users to take control of their data. The campaign is being initiated ahead of Safer Internet Day on February 5.

“As technology continues to change the way we live, work, and play, users want to know how best to ensure their safety on the web. Helping people manage their privacy and security is integral to everything we do,” Google India Director, Trust and Safety Sunita Mohanty said.

She said Google builds products with strong security protections at their core to continuously and automatically detect and protect users’ data. “We notify you when you’ve granted access to third-party sites or apps, but it’s really important for you to understand the information that you share with these apps or sites.”

“A quick check on your phone tells you exactly what access — including Calendar, Camera, Conta-cts, Location, Microphone, etc. — you have shared with third party apps. So while you sip your morning coffee tomorrow, spend a minute to skim through app permissions on your phone, and choose the right settings for you,” Ms Mohanty said.

She explained that it is important that users also conduct a health checkup of their Google Account to ensure safety of their data. “Overall there is growing interest among users to understand how they can make their online experience safer... while this is good, we believe there is still a need to improve user awareness, on how to stay safe online and protect their data,” she said.

She said providing simple actionable steps work best with users — especially young and those coming online for the first time. “This year, we will continue to educate users on the safety they can do, so they can take more control of their online security and privacy,” Ms Mohanty added.

Click on Deccan Chronicle Technology and Science for the latest news and reviews. Follow us on Facebook, Twitter.
