Trump makes a surprise appearance to hear leaders offer climate change mitigation solutions

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Climate change is perhaps the most serious collective danger facing the world today. Moreover, its nature is such that a solution cannot be limited to individual countries. It needs global coordination with varying responsibilities because mitigation measures have a short-term economic cost. The United States has been the catalyst for most global coordination measures following World War II. In the climate change effort too, the US for a while took the lead. However, US President Donald Trump, a notable climate change skeptic, has opted out of efforts to combat climate change. The US was an absentee among the speaker line-up of more than 60 countries, India included, which called for action yesterday at the UN Climate Summit in New York.

There were many suggestions put forward during the summit, including one from French President Emmanuel Macron to link trade negotiations to commitments to reduce emissions. However, the highlight of the summit was a symbolic act. President Trump turned up unexpectedly at the summit to hear some of the solutions proffered. The US hasn’t still changed its recent position on climate change. But the unexpected presence of Trump gives rise to hope.

Read more: Trump makes unscheduled appearance at UN climate summit, listens to PM Modi, Angela Merkel

The other positive development during the summit was that even as the world struggles for a collective solution, individual countries have made their commitments public. India, according to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, will increase its renewable energy targets in an effort to reduce dependence on thermal power. Even if individual actions appear haphazard, they still serve the cause of mitigation. And set a moral example to others.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
