‘Completely baseless’: Pakistan denies Balakot terror camp has been reactivated

Balakot terror camp that was destroyed in February | File image | Photo Credit: ANI

Islamabad: Pakistan on Tuesday denied that the terror camp at Balakot had been reactivated. Pakistan’s Foreign Office dubbed as “completely baseless” a statement by the Indian Army chief that the terror camp at Balakot, which was destroyed in air strikes by the Indian Air Force on February 26 this year, had come back to life.

Speaking in Chennai, Army chief General Bipin Rawat had yesterday said that Pakistan had reactivated the Balakot Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp not long ago and that some 500 terrorists were waiting to infiltrate into India.

General Rawat said at the Officers Training Academy in the Tamil Nadu capital that India’s response this time to the Balakot terror camp, if it has been reactivated, may go beyond the previous action India had taken.

Rebutting the claim and issuing a statement, the Pakistan Foreign Office said the Indian Army chief's statement "completely baseless".

It further said by alleging "infiltration" from the Pakistan side, the Indian Army chief was making "a desperate attempt" to divert the global community’s attention from the "humanitarian crisis" in Jammu and Kashmir.

India will not "succeed in misleading the world community through these diversionary tactics", the Pakistan FO stated further.

The Indian Air Force had struck at the Balakot terror camp in Pakistan in a pre-emptive action against JeM terrorists, who were plotting to carry out attacks in India. The air strikes came just days after the JeM carried out a deadly terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14, killing 40 jawans.

While tensions between India and Pakistan were at an all-time high in February and March, the bilateral relationship sunk further after India on August 5 revoked the special status granted to Jammu and Kashmir under the Indian Constitution. The Indian government also bifurcated the state into two Union Territories.

Following the move, Pakistan downgraded diplomatic ties with India and asked India’s High Commissioner to leave the country.

Ever since the August 5 move, Pakistan has been making all possible attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue but to no avail. India has stated that abrogation of Article 370 with regard to Kashmir was an "internal matter".
