Periya Youth Cong workers’ murder: SIT says CPI(M) leaders did not supply weapons

Periya Youth Cong workers’ murder: SIT says CPI(M) leaders did not supply weapons

The parents of slain Sharath Lal and Kripesh, had alleged that the weapons were supplied by top leaders of the CPI(M), which is the main constituent of the ruling Left front in Kerala.

news Crime

The Special Investigation Team (SIT) which is probing the murder case of the two Youth Congress workers, who were hacked to death in Periya of Kerala’s Kasaragod district in February this year, has given a clean chit to the top brass of the CPI(M), by denying that the weapons used to kill the Youth Congress workers were supplied by the CPI(M) leaders.

The parents of 24-year-old Sharath Lal and 22-year-old Kripesh, who are the slain Youth Congress workers, had accused the police of failing to probe the source of the weapons that were used to murder their sons. They had alleged that the weapons were supplied by the top leaders of the CPI(M), which is the main constituent of the ruling Left front in Kerala.

However, according to reports, the SIT stated that the murder weapons which were used to attack the duo included swords and pipes, which could have been easily sourced. As per a report by the Times of India (TOI), the iron pipes belonged to Reji, who is an electrician in the Kalliote area in Kasaragod.

The SIT, as per the ToI report, was quoted as saying, “Search was conducted in the house of the accused persons for further evidence. During the thorough interrogation, no other source regarding the manufacturer of weapons was available.”

As per a report by The New Indian Express (TNIE), SIT in their report to the HC stated that no external forces had intervened in their investigation and that they do not have leniency towards any political party. The statement by the SIT also said that since all the accused in the case have been arrested and that the investigation has been going smoothly, there was no need to hand over the case to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
