City corpn to seek more time to upload resolutions on website

Coimbatore: Days after the Tamil Nadu local bodies ombudsman directed the city corporation to upload the council resolutions in its website within 15 days, the civic body has decided to buy more time by explaining about the website upgradation work.

“At present, works to enhance digital payment system are being carried out in the corporation website. We do not want to do any major changes in the website until the upgradation work is over as it might compromise the security,” a senior corporation official said.

Based on a petition filed by activist SP Thiyagarajan, the ombudsman, in August 2018, had directed the civic body to upload the resolutions passed since July 2017. Upon failing, action would be taken against it under the Tamil Nadu Local Bodies Ombudsman Act, 2014, the order stated.

“During the hearing, the corporation had given same reason for not uploading the answer and the ombudsman had refused to accept it. If the corporation did not upload the resolutions within 15 days, we will start the legal battle by filing a petition in the Madras high court,” said Thiyagarajan. “The resolutions were not uploaded for more than one-and-a-half years. How much more time will it take for the corporation to finish the upgradation work?”

After the council was dissolved, the corporation commissioner, a special officer, had implemented multiple projects, Thiyagarajan said. “The actual agreement between the contractor and corporation could be understood only through resolutions. By hiding resolutions from the public, they pave way for suspicion. I had even requested the corporation to view the resolutions under section 2 (J) of RTI Act, but was denied. If the civic body did not violate any of the norms, then why are they not making the resolutions public? As per the Coimbatore Corporation Act, 1981, the civic body would be able to implement a project only after a resolution is passed in the council. As per the Right to Information Act, 2005, the corporation should upload all the resolutions in its website as they are public documents.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
