Forget disqualified MLAs; field their kin in Karnataka bypolls: RSS suggests BJP

Bengaluru, Sept 24: The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) has reportedly suggested the BJP to forget the disqualified MLAs whose rebellion led to the collapse of the Congress-JD(S) coalition government, and field their kin in the upcoming bypolls to 15 assembly constituencies in Karnataka.

However Chief Minister B S Yediyurappa is trying his best to help the rebels in their legal battle in the Supreme Court.

The RSS has its reasons to be wary of making the disqualified rebels candidates-for one it is not too sure of the loyalties of these former Congress and JD(S) MLAs, who deserted their parties to bring down the coalition government. And if they win the coming assembly by-elections as BJP candidates, they will have to be accommodated in the state cabinet, as promised by Mr Yediyurappa.

But, if the family members of the disqualified MLAs are given tickets and they win, the BJP will not be under any obligation to make them ministers and the vacant ministerial berths in the Yediyurappa cabinet can be allotted to BJP loyalists, said sources explaining the Sangh's preferences.

Sources said the party top leadership was always against Operation Lotus to lure Congress and JD(S) legislators as it wanted the coalition government to fall due to the infighting between then CM Mr H.D. Kumaraswamy and Congress Legislature party (CLP) leader Mr Siddaramaiah.

There are also BJP leaders who are worried about the contents of the audio tape which has been mentioned in the disqualification report of former Speaker Mr K.R. Ramesh Kumar.

In February, while trying to allegedly lure Gurumitkal JD(S) MLA Mr Naganagouda Kandakur to the BJP, Mr Yediyurappa and Devadurga MLA Shivanagouda Naik had reportedly made some self-incriminating statements in the tape, said sources. This has left many BJP leaders uncomfortable and they are not too keen on extending legal assistance to the disqualified MLAs now fighting their case in the top court, the sources added.
