Wanted in several cases of celebratory firing, Delhi businessman surrenders

Picture grab of Sharma engaging in celebratory firing | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Several videos of Sharma opening fire are in circulation on social media Wanted in multiple cases of celebratory firing, he has been absconding since last year Sharma's wife has claimed that he threatened her at gunpoint

New Delhi: A city-based businessman today surrendered before the Delhi Police in connection with multiple cases of celebratory firing. Identified as one Rohit Sharma, the businessman has been on the run since last year after videos of him opening fire during a number of parties went into wide circulation on social media platforms.

Wanted in multiple cases of celebratory firing, Sharma surrendered at the Tees Hazari court in the national capital on Tuesday morning. It is still unclear whether the police will charge Sharma under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which has been invoked in several cases of celebratory firing in the past. This section corresponds to the punishment for murder. However, there are other provisions which are taken into account in cases of celebratory firing.

The Arms Act, 1959 usually deals with instances of celebratory firing. Section 25 of this Act prescribes the punishment for a number of offences while section 27 deals with the use of arms. Apart from Section 302 which is the charge for murder, police have also invoked section 336 and 304-A of the IPC in past cases. These correspond to the punishment for endangering human life and act of negligence respectively.

One of the landmark cases in this context is Kunwar Pal vs State of Uttarakhand where the order was written by Justice SA Bobde. While such instances of celebratory firing are regularly reported from across the country, the cases that emerge from northern India outnumber those coming to light from other parts of the country. Each year, celebratory firing claims the lives of several people. In most cases, these people were merely spectators.

Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Bihar are states which witness these instances most often. In this case, Sharma is expected to be charged and tried for engaging in celebratory firing in the coming days. However, reports also suggest that Sharma's wife has accused him of threatening her at gunpoint. A police investigation into the allegations levelled by her is underway.

Earlier this year, a case of celebratory firing led to the death of one Archana Gupta who was attending a New Year's Eve party at the farmhouse of former JDU MLA Raju Singh. Police arrested Singh in connection with the celebratory firing which led to Gupta's death. Officers with Delhi Police also seized two rifles and as many as 800 bullets from the former MLA's Vasant Kunj farmhouse where he was hosting a party which had Gupta in attendance. gunpoint
