Kashmir on brink as India claims Pakistan's militant camps have been reactivated

Pakistan: Protesters rally after India revokes Article 370

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Indian Army Chief Bipin Rawat claimed action "had been taken", referring to a airstrike that India claim struck a militant camp within Pakistani territory. He added that the group hit by the strike was responsible for an act of terror in Kashmir, where 40 Indian soldiers were killed by a car bomb. Rawat claims it was in response to an Indian fighter jet was shot down by Pakistani air force in February, who then took the pilot as prisoner before releasing him.

However, Rawat claimed Indian aggression may not stop there. He said: "Why repeat? Why not beyond that? Let them keep guessing." Rawat did not provide any evidence to back his claims. Pakistani officials – speaking on condition of anonymity – denied India's airstrike boasts, stating no sights were hit or were even in operation in the area They said India's government and military were "using false propaganda to implicate Pakistan for the domestic backlash to Indian repression in Indian-administered Kashmir".

Modi Khan

India and Pakistan both have control of various areas in Kashmir

India has placed a curfew and other restrictions on people in its part of Kashmir since downgrading the special status of the disputed Himalayan region on August 5. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has called on India to life curfews in the region which has been engulfed by violence for decades. Khan and Indian Prime Minister Nerendra Modi are set to meet at the UN General Assembly today in New York. Conflict over Kashmir has persisted since the late Forties when India and Pakistan won independence from Britain. READ MORE:Pakistan-India CRISIS: Tensions erupt after eight left dead

India controlled areas are under strict curfew

Modi has recently agreed to cooperate with Putin's military

The countries have fought two of their three wars over Kashmir, and each controls their own respective part of the region. In 1989, the region saw the start of a full-blown armed rebellion against Indian control for a united Kashmir, either under Pakistan rule or independent. Since then, around 70,000 people have been killed in the conflict. The region is one of the most heavily militarised in the world, patrolled by soldiers and paramilitary police. Most Kashmiris resent the Indian troop presence and support the rebels. DON'T MISS:

Pakistan-India CRISIS: Imran Khan rules out talks with Modi [COMMENT]

Kate and Prince William’s trip to Pakistan may be CANCELLED [NEWS]

Imran Khan warns of mass violence [INSIGHT]

Imran Khan with Donald Trump

Trending
