Trump whipsaws GOP on drug pricing

Trump whipsaws GOP on drug pricing Presented by the Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs (CAPD)

With help from Allie Bice and Arthur Allen

On Tap

— Trump whipsaws GOP on drug pricing, as allies try to keep up.

— FDA takes another look at drug with a complicated history.

— A study on marijuana use for chronic conditions shows gaps in research knowledge.

A message from the Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs (CAPD): New polling shows that Americans aren’t fooled by Big Pharma. Voters believe big drug companies are responsible for high drug prices. More than that, they want Congress and the Administration to take immediate action to protect patients by addressing the problem at its root: the high and rising prices set by Big Pharma. Learn more.

Happy Tuesday and welcome back to Prescription PULSE. Who's ready for a week of drug pricing hearings? Send tips to Sarah Karlin-Smith ([email protected] or @sarahkarlin) and Sarah Owermohle ([email protected]) or @owermohle

Drug Pricing

TRUMP WHIPSAWS GOP ON DRUG PRICING — The Republican response to House Democrats' push on drug pricing is hampered by a familiar problem: lawmakers have little idea what the president wants, Adam Cancryn and Sarah Karlin-Smith report.

Voters on both sides of the aisle are urging action on the cost of medicines and Republicans are eager to gain the upper hand on the issue heading into the 2020 election.

But GOP lawmakers are struggling to keep up with the evolving — and often contradictory — positions staked out by the Trump administration and GOP leaders on prescription drugs. Last week Trump tweeted support for bipartisan legislation from Sens. Chuck Grassley and Ron Wyden, while also offering positive remarks about Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s signature drug pricing legislation, calling it “great to see.”

Trump "is keeping his cards close to the vest right now," and that makes Republican lawmakers nervous, said Christopher Holt, director of health care policy at the conservative American Action Forum. "It's not necessarily clear where he will go."

The Pelosi bill is a non-starter for most Republicans and behind the scenes HHS has been pushing lawmakers to back Grassley and Wyden’s plans.

But Trump officials have also sought to open fresh channels with Democrats, meeting privately earlier this month with a group of moderate Democrats and on Thursday hosting another session focused on finding common ground. At that meeting, HHS Secretary Alex Azar focused mostly on the Grassley-Wyden proposal, lawmakers said, and did not comment on House Democrats’ just-released legislation.

But without firm leadership from Trump, health policy watchers say, they are skeptical Republicans will get on board with Grassley’s plan. While it stops well short of pushing for government drug price negotiations, conservatives believe key measures of the Grassley measure tinker too much with the free market. And given Trump’s frequency for changing his tune on bipartisan cooperation at the drop of a dime, Republicans are hesitant to go out on a limb and support policies typically anathema to conservative.

Pelosi bill gets it first hearing — As the GOP response falters, Pelosi plan will get its first hearing in the Energy and Commerce health subcommittee Wednesday. A handful of other drug pricing bills are on the committee's agenda, but the focus is expected to be almost entirely on the Pelosi plan, the only one of the bills expected to get a committee markup. The Education and Labor Committee will hold a subcommittee hearing on the bill Thursday. Markups are expected in October.

Eye on FDA

DRUG WITH COMPLICATED FDA, PRICING HISTORY TO GET ANOTHER AGENCY LOOK — In a very rare move, the FDA announced Monday that it will have its Bone, Reproductive and Urologic Drugs Advisory Committee review AMAG Pharmaceuticals’ marketing application for Makena, a sign that it may be considering pulling the product from the market. The drug was granted accelerated approval in 2011 for reducing the risk of preterm birth based on a clinical trial that demonstrated the drug reduced the proportion of women who delivered at less than 37 weeks gestation. Making it past the 37-week mark was a surrogate endpoint that FDA thought was likely to be indicative of a clinical benefit of reducing neonatal mortality and morbidity. But a follow-up study examining the clinical benefit of the drug, required for all accelerated approval applicants, did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference between Makena and placebo on reducing the risk of recurrent preterm birth or improving neonatal mortality and morbidity.

Makena has been the subject of controversy for much of its existence. Prior to its approval the treatment was available for less than $20 from compounding pharmacists, but a formal FDA approval typically makes such compounding illegal. But when KV Pharmaceuticals began selling Makena at $1,500 per injection, outrage led FDA to decide to use its discretion to allow continued compounding of versions of the drug.

Medical Marijuana

ADULTS WITH MEDICAL CONDITIONS USE MORE MARIJUANA — Adults with a chronic medical condition are more likely to use marijuana that those without one according to a new JAMA Network Open study based on a survey of 170,000 adults. Of those that reported using marijuana (just over 8 percent) 45 percent said they use marijuana for medical purposes—the rest said it was recreational, while 18 percent of the total said their uses overlapped. Regardless of medical use or not, most marijuana users reported smoking it.

Marijuana use was particularly high among respondents with asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arthritis, cancer, and depression, according to the study. But use also decreased with age, ranging from a quarter of young adults to just under 3 percent of seniors.

Why it matters: Marijuana is legal in some form in 33 states, but there is sparse research on its medical use. Researchers in this study said that to their knowledge, this might be the first to report national estimates of current and daily marijuana use among people with medical conditions. They urged doctors to ask patients about use and work with them on benefits and risks.

A message from the Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs (CAPD):

Coming Up in Pharma

TODAY-WEDNESDAY: AdvaMed hosts its MedTech conference in Boston, Mass.

TODAY-THURSDAY: America’s Health Insurance Plans hosts its National Conference on Medicare.

TODAY: The American Enterprise Institute hosts a discussion on health reform.

The Partnership for Safe Medicines holds a congressional briefing on drug importation proposals and counterfeit drug developments.

WEDNESDAY: The House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee holds a hearing on the affordability of prescription drugs.

House Appropriations Labor-HHS-Education Subcommittee holds a hearing on funding for medical research.

THURSDAY: FDA’s Pediatric and Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committees holds a meeting to discuss pediatric-focused safety review for OxyContin.

The House Education and Labor HELP Subcommittee holds a hearing, “Lowering drug prices and increasing transparency.”

FRIDAY: FDA’s Pediatric and Drug Safety and Risk Management Committees meet to discuss a safety review of the use of Singulair.

Pharma in the States

NEW JERSEY FUNDS OPIOID TREATMENT IN COUNTY JAILS — New Jersey will deploy $8 million to make medication assisted treatment available to opioid use disorder patients being held at county correctional facilities, the governor announced Friday. The state Department of Health has estimated that 70 percent to 80 percent of New Jersey’s incarcerated population suffers from some form of substance abuse disorder, Pro New Jersey’s Sam Sutton reports. Compared to the general population, recently released inmates are 129 times more likely to die from an overdose.

Expanding access to medication assisted treatment, or MAT, has been a central component of Gov. Phil Murphy’s strategy for addressing the state’s opioid addiction epidemic. More than 3,100 people died of drug overdoses in New Jersey last year, Sam writes.

…while Pennsylvania adds commercial plans to MAT agreement. The state’s insurance commissioner announced Monday that two commercial insurers, Pennsylvania Health and Wellness, and Oscar Health, join seven others on a list of payers that have agreed to align their prior-authorization processes for opioids and medication assisted treatments. The idea behind Pennsylvania’s MAT agreement, established last fall, is that patients will have unrestricted access to MAT if they are battling an addiction.

Pharma Worldwide

FEARS OVER DRUG, DEVICE ACCESS IN U.S-INDIA TRADE DEAL — Advocacy groups are worried that the U.S. is pushing drug and medical device industry interests in negotiations over a trade package with India. The president discussed the deal with Indian officials this weekend. Before the meeting, Doctors Without Borders pressed the countries not to change India’s intellectual property system in ways that could impact patients’ access to generic drugs in that country and around the world. India is one of the biggest global producers of generic drugs. Doctors Without Borders is worried by media reports that the U.S. is pressuring the Indian government to end price controls on essential medical devices like X-ray machines and implants.

It is not uncommon for the U.S. government, while focused on lower drug costs at home, to push for tougher policies on intellectual property overseas that can lead to high drug prices. This has occurred with both Democrat and Republican administrations.

DOCTORS ACCUSE WHO OF EBOLA VACCINE RATIONING — Doctors Without Borders is also pointing fingers over the Ebola epidemic. It accused the World Health Organization of rationing Ebola vaccines in a way that frustrates efforts to stamp out the epidemic, and called for the creation of an independent committee to manage the vaccination program in the Congo, where more than 2,100 people have died of the disease since last year.

… The WHO’s “ring vaccination” strategy calls for all known contacts of previously confirmed cases to be vaccinated. But lack of trust in the war-torn communities where the disease has spread is making it hard for health workers to confirm contacts. This situation is aggravated when Doctors Without Borders goes into epidemic areas with insufficient vaccine supplies because of WHO’s restricted eligibility criteria, the group said in a news release.

WHO denied the accusation. “We are not limiting access to vaccine” but rather implementing a strategy recommended by WHO experts and agreed to by the government of Congo, said Mike Ryan, executive director of WHO’s Health Emergencies Program.

… Congo’s government Monday announced it will introduce a second Ebola vaccine, made by Johnson & Johnson, in mid-October. This newer vaccine, thus far untested in epidemic settings, will be primarily used in at-risk populations in epidemic-free areas, to build immunity against Ebola there, WHO officials said.

… Meanwhile, the agency is raising alarms about the disease’s possible spread to Tanzania. A Tanzanian doctor died Sept. 8 after returning to her country from Uganda, and several of her contacts became ill. Tanzanian authorities say they tested negative for Ebola, but WHO accuses Tanzania of refusing to share the tests.

Quick Hits

HOW CONGRESS MISSED THE FENTANYL CRISIS — A Senate bill that would have mandated harsh sentences for distributing fentanyl was sidelined in 2015 as leaders worked on criminal justice reform that some thought clashed with former New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte’s fentanyl legislation. And so an early warning on the super-potent opioid went unheeded, write Washington Post’s Katie Zezima and Colby Itkowitz. Congress didn’t pass a bill specifically targeting fentanyl until nearly four years later. In that time, more than 67,000 people had died from the drug and other synthetic opioids—and deaths are still rising, Zezima and Itkowitz report.

MULTI-DRUG ALS TRIAL NEARS LAUNCH — Massachusetts General Hospital will soon launch a trial that will simultaneously test multiple potential treatments for the fatal degenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The goal is to find a cure for ALS at the lowest cost, reports Boston Globe. The first so-called platform trial will begin in 2020 and start off with five medicines administered at 54 sites across the country. “There are about 20 or 30 drugs ready to go into people, and we didn’t want to do them one at a time,” said Merit Cudkowicz, a neurologist overseeing the hospital’s new ALS center who has worked on two dozen ALS trials over the years.

A message from the Coalition for Affordable Prescription Drugs (CAPD): Americans aren’t fooled by Big Pharma. According to new polling, 80% of Americans want Congress to rein in big drug companies’ skyrocketing prices. Americans believe that big drug companies bear responsibility for high drug prices and are looking to Congress and the Administration to take immediate action to protect patients. Learn more.

Document Drawer

The Association for Accessible Medicines published a research paper on generic drug pricing and affordability.

The Biosimilars Forum applauded the introduction of the BIOSIM Act, by Reps. Kurt Schrader(D-Ore.) and Greg Gianforte (R-MT) aimed at boosting add-on payments for biosimilars.

FTC approved a final order settling a complaint against Boston Scientific’s acquisition of BTG, a medical equipment supplier.

FDA approved new labeling for the anti-diarrheal drug loperamide.

FDA issued draft guidance for industry on patient involvement in investigations into medical devices.

FDA issued final guidance for industry detailing the requirements for wholesale distributor verification.

FDA published a notice seeking public comment on pediatric-focused safety reviews of products released this year.

FDA issued final guidance for the development of treatments for ALS.

FDA issued guidance for industry on citizens petitions for certain products.

FDA issued draft guidance on public engagement in the design and conduct of trials for medical devices.

Follow us on Twitter David Lim @davidalim



Lauren Gardner @Gardner_LM
