The Times Columnist Roger Cohen on the Future of India

The Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, was at a Houston stadium on Sunday for a rally, appearing with President Trump before a crowd of fifty thousand people. Many of the attendees were Indian-American supporters of Modi, the leader of a Hindu-nationalist movement. “This is extraordinary. This is unprecedented,” Modi told the crowd, before walking around the floor hand in hand with Trump. Modi said that he admired Trump for “his sense of leadership, a passion for America, a concern for every American, a belief in American future, and a strong resolve to make America great again.”

Modi has been trying to make India great again, with his long-held conviction that India, which was founded on pluralist values, should become a Hindu state. Before Modi became Prime Minister, he was the chief minister of the state of Gujarat, where there is strong evidence that he presided over a pogrom of Indian Muslims. Since he took national office, in 2014, hate crimes against Muslims, who make up about fifteen per cent of the population, have risen sharply, and the country’s democratic foundations have been gravely weakened. The state of Assam is conducting a mass citizenship check, which could lead to many Muslims being deprived of all civil rights. The government is building detention camps in Assam to house those declared illegal, and Modi’s close adviser, Amit Shah, has discussed doing something similar nationwide. On August 5th, Modi’s government revoked Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, which had granted special status to India’s only Muslim-majority state, Kashmir, and imposed a near-total blockade on it. A journalist who was recently there wrote to me, “Soldiers, brought in from outside the state, stand on every street corner. Public gatherings are banned. The state’s leadership and civil society are either in jail or under house arrest. Young men are picked up regularly in raids; many disappear, those released complain of beatings and torture.”

In a Times column on Monday, titled “Don’t Mess with Modi in Texas,” the longtime foreign correspondent Roger Cohen applauded Modi’s leadership abilities. After noting some of the human-rights abuses in Kashmir, Cohen wrote, “The question, however, is whether Modi had any choice in Kashmir and whether, over time, the revocation of an article conceived as temporary breaks the Kashmiri logjam, pries open the stranglehold of corrupt local elites and offers a better future. I think it might.” He added, “Modi, a self-made man from a poor family, is measured, ascetic, not driven by impulse. Trump was born on third base. He’s erratic, guided by the devouring needs of his ego. I’d bet on Modi to transform India, all of it, including the newly integrated Kashmir region.”

I spoke by phone with Cohen on Monday about his column and his views of Modi. Born in London, he has reported from numerous countries throughout Europe, South America, and the Middle East, for the Times and the Wall Street Journal. The interview, edited for length and clarity, is below.

I read an interview with you where you stated, “In many ways, journalism is a young person’s game. When the phone goes in the middle of the night and you’re twenty-five and you’re asked to go to Beirut, it’s the greatest thing. But, when that happens at fifty, less so. I also like writing longer-form magazine journalism and I get less opportunity to do that than I used to. Doing a column, though, I choose where I want to go. I can’t complain about midnight calls from the desk.” Can you talk more about how different column-writing is from reporting?

I think it is very different. First of all, the form is very tight. There is a great premium on pithiness, and, of course, you have to have an idea—probably one and a half ideas, something to give it a little bit of a tweak near the bottom. There is very little room for narrative or descriptive writing, and that’s also something I enjoy doing. As a foreign correspondent, I like to report for my columns. I like to get out there. I am very wary of writing about places I have not seen, because I think seeing and feeling things is the basis of what we do, and the view from the ground. I believe in that very strongly. And, as a correspondent, of course, you are trying to immerse yourself in place and describe what you see as evocatively and fairly and powerfully as you can. As a columnist, you are taking a view.

What did you learn most from reporting that you try to use in column-writing?

Well, I think, above all, that you need to get out there. You need to probe deeply and try to understand something, and the world is complex. That’s almost a platitude. The basis of what we do as journalists, I think, is that. Everything has changed since I was filing by telex from the Commodore Hotel in Beirut in 1983. But the basis of what we do I don’t think has changed—the fundamental effort that has to be made to speak to people, to understand people, to probe deeply into the situation.

How big a story do you think the rise of right-wing authoritarianism is now? Does it feel like the most important story you are writing about, and do you feel that you bring something with your reporting past that allows you to connect various strands in these different countries that are distinct but have commonalities?

I think it is a huge story. I think it is an unexpected story. If you had told me, at the beginning of this century, a decade or so after the fall of the Berlin Wall, that we would be dealing with nationalist, nativist, xenophobic reaction, from Brazil to the United States to parts of Europe, parts of Asia, too, I would not have believed it. I do think it is a very big story—the biggest one around, probably. Having taken a deep interest in European history, having served as the Times’ bureau chief in Berlin, when the capital was returning from Bonn to Berlin—and I spent a lot of time in Poland and Central Europe, and also covered the Bosnian war, a war in which there were concentration camps—for better or worse, I do bring that sensibility to it.

You refer, in your latest column, to Modi as “measured, ascetic, not driven by impulse.” Is that the best way to describe someone who is a right-wing ideologue and has gleefully waved away reports of mass murder that he presided over?

Well, I think, you know, I’m not—I have been in India several times. I can’t claim to be an India hand. As came through in that column, I’m skeptical of this knee-jerk reaction to Modi, who seems, to me, to be a very important and transformative figure. Troubling, but the fact is that, after seventy years [of Indian statehood], I don’t know how many hundreds of millions of toilets, of roads, of gas connections, he’s made. It is also a human right, in my view, not to have to defecate outside. And he is moving India forward, I think, in a very powerful and interesting way. And he just got elected in a landslide, by more than six hundred million people. You will tell me that Orbán was elected, too, and so was Hitler, for that matter, but six hundred million votes—that’s the world’s largest democracy in action.
