Accountant stabbed to death at Bengaluru pub for objecting to loud noise

The accused has been arrested and charged with murder (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police have identified the suspect as one Tabrez Pasha The victim, Kishore Kumar was a resident of Byrasandra Pasha incurred injuries after police officers shot at him during a chase

Bengaluru: Police in the state capital of Karnataka arrested a man for stabbing a 32-year-old accountant to death following a heated argument between them on Sunday afternoon. Identified as Tabrez Pasha, the accused was apprehended by Bangalore police personnel after a violent chase which resulted in him incurring injuries.

Shockingly, Kishore Kumar of Byrasandra was killed only after he objected to the accused making a commotion at a pub in Mico Layout area. Eyewitness reports suggest than Kumar and his friend Yusuf Khan were sitting in a bar in Jayanagar Block IX when the victim got into an argument with Pasha and his accomplices. The accused was sitting on the table next to Kumar's and got irritated when the victim objected to him laughing out loud.

Kumar and Pasha launched into an argument. However, the accused lost his cool when the victim got into a verbal fight with a transgender who was accompanying Pasha. According to a report, this is when Tabrez lost his cool and stabbed Kishore in the chest. Aghast bystanders rushed Kumar to a nearby hospital but he succumbed en route even as the accused and his accomplices fled the scene of the crime. City police were alerted and a team of officers dispatched to the spot.

Police officers caught up to Pasha and his accomplices but had to fire at him in order to apprehend him. Three others have been arrested in connection with the murder. Pasha has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for murder. His accomplices have also been charged with abetting the crime.

The incident brings back memories of a similar crime which was reported from Bengaluru a little over a year ago. In August of 2018, four men stabbed a cab driver to death after he accidentally grazed his cigarette against one of the accused. The crime took place at a pub in the city's Kadirenahalli Cross. Identified as 24-year-old Onte Kathina Chandra, the victim was a resident of Sarabandepalya.

An officer with the Kumaraswamy Layout police station had told media outlets at the time that a case of murder was registered against the accused who were identified as residents of Sarabandepalya. In fact, the officer had also revealed that the victim was an accused in a murder case dating back to 2007. However, instances of petty arguments leading to violent crimes at public places continue to surface from across the country.
