Chennai: Wanted history-sheeter killed in police encounter

when Manikandan was with his men, Villupuram police team surrounded him and asked the criminals to surrender.

Key Highlights Gangster Manikandan had 10 murder cases against him Manikandan was killed when he attacked a police officer with a machete Slain criminal was hiding in Chennai for the past 20 days

Chennai: In a major success for the city police, a wanted history-sheeter with at least 10 murder cases on him was killed in an encounter in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, on Tuesday. The slain criminal has been identified as Manikandan.

The gangster was hiding in Chennai along with his family members for the past 20 days. Manikandan had 10 murder cases on him in Villupuram district.

Acting on a specific tip-off that Manikandan is in Chennai, a special police team from Villupuram camped in Chennai and observed his movements.

On Tuesday, when Manikandan was with his men, Villupuram police team surrounded him and asked the criminals to surrender.

Manikandan allegedly resisted the arrest and attacked a sub-inspector with a machete. Another sub-inspector opened fire in self-defence killing him on the spot. This is the third encounter in the city in the last 9 months.

In a similar incident in June this year, a 21-year-old man with an alleged criminal record was shot dead by the police after he allegedly attacked the police team with a machete. One of the policemen was grievously injured in the attack. The accused was identified as Vallarasu, who was wanted by police in connection with a case.

History sheeter gunned down in a encounter by Villupuram Police in Chennai today.



Manikandan, who is wanted in at least 10 murder cases in Villupuram was encountered in self-defense when he resisted the arrest and attacked a sub inspector with the machete he had. pic.twitter.com/g6NSOjMSk8 — Mugilan Chandrakumar (@Mugilan__C) September 24, 2019

When cops tried to arrest Vallarasu, he attacked them with the machete.

Constable Pounraj was rushed to a hospital and sustained 20 stitches. While the other constable sustained minor injuries during the attack.

Special Task Force guns down wanted history-sheeter

In a similar incident in June this year, the Special Task Force (STF) of Uttar Pradesh police gunned down a wanted criminal who had several cases against him. The fierce gunbattle which resulted in the death of history-sheeter Taukir of Pratapgarh took place at Kotwali City area of Pratapgarh district. Police also recovered arms and ammunition from Taukir, who had a bounty of Rs 1 lakh on his head.

The history-sheeter reportedly had several cases against him, including those of dacoity, extortion, attempt to murder and murder. Two .32 calibre pistols and a .30 calibre carbine was recovered from him. According to a PTI report, Taukir was believed to have carried out the murder of marble trader Rajesh Singh. He was shot dead inside his shop in Pratapgarh's Sadar area in January of this year.
