Minor dies due to dog bite, Jaipur civic body slapped with Rs 10 lakh fine

The district consumer forum has ordered JMC to give compensation to complainant in two months. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The child was attacked by a pack of dogs almost eight years ago in 2011 He was playing outside his house, while he was attacked by three dogs The forum has ordered JMC to give compensation to the complainant within a span of two months

Jaipur: A consumer court has directed the Jaipur civic body to a pay hefty fine of Rs 10 lakh as compensation to a complainant after his six-year-old son succumbed to dog bite injuries. The child was attacked by a pack of dogs almost eight years ago in 2011, while he was playing outside his house.

The deceased was resident of Taron Ki Koont area, Jaipur. While hearing the case, the district consumer forum has ordered that if the Jaipur Municipal Corporation (JMC) is collecting house tax and other taxes from citizens, it is the concerned body's responsibility to safeguard their residents from such attacks by street dogs. The district consumer forum has ordered JMC to give compensation to the complainant within a span of two months.

According to a report, the lawyer Devendra Mohan Mathur had argued the case for the complainant- Manager Roy. His son was playing outside their house in May 2011 when he was attacked. The kid was immediately rushed to Sawai Man Singh Hospital, where he underwent treatment but later succumbed to injuries.

The deceased's father then appealed in the court accusing JMC of negligence and holding them responsible for his son's death. In defence, JMC claimed that their officials never collected any sort of payment or taxes to catch the dogs.

In a similar case reported from Jaipur's Mansarovar area earlier this month, a boy was attacked by a stray dog for the second time in eight months. The eight-year-old was identified as Jayesh Sharma, a resident of Radha Nikunj Colony on ISCKON Road.

The minor had gone out of his house to play with his friends when he was attacked by a stray dog. The dog attacked the eight-year-old boy on his neck, severing his nerves. The minor was immediately rushed to the emergency ward and was stable after a while.

The minor's father told media that the dogs have attacked his son for the second time and this time around, the attack was more lethal. Before the surgery, the doctors told them that the injuries are serious and my son could die.

However, the operation was successful and the doctors claimed that Jayesh had lost a lot of blood in the attack and to compensate for the same, they had transfused four bottles of blood during treatment.
