Husband held for killing Tajpur Road woman, 39

Khanna: The police on Tuesday claimed to have solved the July 29 murder of a Tajpur Road woman with the arrest of her husband.

Rakesh Kumar Gaba, a cellphone distributor, was arrested from Khanna bus stand. His 39-year-old homemaker wife, Radhika, was shot near Bija on Khanna-Ludhiana national highway on the night of July 29. Rakesh had then told the police that they had gone to Chandigarh for shopping and were on way home when he stopped his vehicle to relieve himself. Four masked men on two motorcycles came and one of them fired at Radhika when she resisted their attempt to rob her. Rakesh took Radhika to a hospital in Ludhiana where she succumbed a day later.

Khanna SSP Gursharandeep Singh Grewal said, “A special team was constituted to investigate the case. During probe, it was found that as Radhika had come to know about her husband’s affairs, he hatched a conspiracy to eliminate her. As per his plan, he took her to Ropar and then to Chandigarh for shopping. When they were coming back to Ludhiana, he killed her near an eatery on GT Road in Khanna with a .32-bore revolver, which belonged to his father and he had stolen from his almirah.”

After killing his wife, police said, Rakesh hid the weapon under clothes in his almirah. “To mislead the investigation, he concocted the robbery and murder story,” the police said.

Police got a major lead when they learned that a woman friend of Rakesh had visited his house and accused him of lying about his divorce. “After this incident, Radhika and other members of Rakesh’s family came to know about his illicit affairs. During questioning, Rakesh told that after his woman friend got engaged to a Muzaffarnagar man, he went to UP to kill him but couldn’t find him,” the cop added.

A case has been registered against Rakesh under sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder), 379 (punishment for theft), 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender), 506 (criminal intimidation), 182 (false information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person) of the Indian Penal Code and under the Arms Act.

Booked earlier too

Sadar Khanna SHO Baljinder Singh said, “Earlier, too, Jamalpur police had booked Rakesh and his brother after they fired at a man to whom they owed money. At that time, they ran a finance business.” The SSP said the weapon of Rakesh’s brother was seized and it was still in police custody.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
