TV, Biwi aur Main: Karan Veer Mehra: I shouldn’t have got married then. It would’ve saved two lives from getting ruined

The last few years have not been easy for actor Karan Veer Mehra; he met with a serious accident two years ago, battled alcoholism and went through separation from wife Devika, who was his childhood sweetheart. What doesn’t kill you only makes you stronger, he says, as he settles down to talk to Bombay Times exclusively about his divorce, which came through a few days ago, and how he managed to bounce back in life after many debacles…I hail from a middle-class family, and frugal spending and making ends meet come naturally to me. We were always taught to minimise our needs, so the struggle I faced in Mumbai was nothing new. But once I got to do a lot of shows and my career soared, I began to follow a very lavish lifestyle. The flipside of this early success was that I became reckless — reckless enough to take a serious step like marriage without any thought. I decided on marriage within a day and she also agreed, though we had fought just the previous evening! So, I believe that she was also equally reckless. Also, we had been dating for almost 10 years.The quintessential prerequisites for a happy marriage are that one’s emotional(love, respect, loyalty and honesty), physical and financial needs should be taken care of. When two people tie the knot, all these matter. After a couple of years, even if one aspect remains intact, they still stick around, but if all three are gone, it’s best to part ways. One can keep fighting about the hole being on your side, but eventually, the ship will sink... and it did. Honestly, in hindsight, maybe, I am more to blame.Perhaps, I could’ve done things differently. To begin with, I should never have gotten married back then. It would have saved two lives from getting ruined. On the work front, too, I lost out on a film only because I didn’t understand the concept too well when the maker narrated it to me. And later, when the film released, I really regretted it. But then, I guess mistakes are what make us and not the other way round. So yes, my personal life and my professional life are full of mistakes and a few right choices.I believe in the sanctity of marriage and belong to a very loving family that holds this institution in high regard. Maybe, we were not made for each other. A childhood friendship of 10 years and another eight of marriage could not withstand the blitz of the glamour world. As my career grew, she also chose to become a part of this charismatic world, and soon, we began to drift apart. I felt like I had begun to slip from her list of priorities. Consequently, our equations changed and I got linked to actresses, actors and creative producers, and it was the beginning of the end. So, I don’t blame or disrespect the institution of marriage and I’m not disillusioned either. In fact, I could take the plunge again, but if that doesn’t happen, I am still keen to have children. Industry bigwigs like Karan Johar , Tusshar and EktaKapoorhave taught us about the pleasures of single parenthood. So, despite my failed marriage, I still have a lot of love left in me. Today, I have learnt to accept and share, but I still need someone who can give me love and care.Not really. Most of them have chosen sides. Some, who were actually my friends, have blocked my number and some, who claimed to be her friends, bad-mouth her.I met with a bike accident in December, 2016, and was bed-ridden for over five months. I would drink to put myself to sleep in those days and that’s how I got into alcohol. I wasn’t earning anything. This is the volatile nature of an actor’s life, but I never stopped fighting, thanks to my family and upbringing.I was always taught to get back on my feet and start running again. Narcissism also helped me out. One day, looking into the mirror at my out-of-shape body, I said to myself, ‘Is this the guy who came to become something in this city of dreams?’ That was the moment when I decided to take charge of my life and soon got a grip over myself. I stopped drinking, my physiotherapy began and I hit the gym. So, my ‘rehab’ happened internally. Never live in denial, the trick is to accept, fight and overcome. I fought my depression full throttle and luckily work, be it films, TV, theatre or web, started coming my way.Can I choose to say it’s complicated? (laughs!) As they say, once bitten, twice shy. On a serious note, that’s not the case with me. I am close to someone, but not close enough to call her mine. At the same time, I can’t call myself single and available either.
