Is Donald Trump already mediating, not on Kashmir but between Modi and Imran?

US President Donald Trump has offered at least four times since July 22 to mediate between India and Pakistan. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has declined to accept the offer while his Pakistani counterpart has welcomed it.

There have been at least four mediation offers from US President Donald Trump in the last two months. On all four occasions, Donald Trump offered to act as a mediator, intervener or interlocutor on the Kashmir issue between India and Pakistan. He has claimed that he has never failed as a mediator.

However, his credentials as a mediator have not impressed India much. Delhi has rejected all such proposals with Prime Minister Narendra himself saying that he would "not like to bother any country" over the Kashmir issue. On the other hand, Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan has been explicitly vocal about US mediation, preferably by Donald Trump over Kashmir.

An "if" inserted by Donald Trump in his statements has proved to be powerful enough to allow all three countries to maintain their respective positions yet keep the Kashmir issue and India-Pakistan tension at the centre of public discourse in India and Pakistan.

But a closer look at statements by Donald Trump suggests that he might already have been mediating, if not on the Kashmir issue, then between PM Modi and his counterpart Imran Khan. The latest remark from Donald Trump suggests that he expects a meeting between Narendra Modi and Imran Khan in the near future.

This is what he said on September 24: "I really believe that Prime Minister Modi and Prime Minister Khan will get along when they get to know each other. I think a lot of good things will come from that meeting." (Emphasis added)

The "that" in his statement reflects him seeing a possibility of a meeting between Narendra Modi and Khan - a thing that Donald Trump has been batting for some time now. This possibility gives him a foothold in India-Pakistan talks on all issues including Kashmir.

India stopped engaging with Pakistan after the terror attack on the Pathankot air force base in 2016 and toughened its stance after the Pulwama suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in February this year.

Incidentally, it was the post-Pulwama attack aerial dogfight that might have brought Donald Trump in picutre between India and Pakistan. In the aerial dogfight between Indian Air Force and Pakistan Air Force, India shot down an F-16 fighter jet of Pakistan but also lost a MiG-21 Bison while IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman ejected safely but landed in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

While Abhinandan was in Pakistan's custody, Donald Trump was busy with summit talks with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. He surprised many with a key announcement at the press conference that Donald Trump addressed in Hanoi, Vietnam after meeting Kim Jong-un.

Donald Trump said, "We (the US) have been involved in trying to help them (India and Pakistan) stop (hostility) and we have some reasonably decent news...I think reasonably attractive news from Pakistan and India."

Within hours, Imran Khan announced the decision to release Abhinandan unconditionally as "goodwill gesture". In India, PM Modi announced that a mission had been completed and that the word "Abhinandan" would now acquire a different meaning than from what dictionary says.

The fresh mediation story began on July 22, when Donald Trump met Imran Khan at the White House. "I will love to be mediator," Donald Trump had said then before claiming that PM Modi asked him during the G20 Summit in Osaka, Japan to mediate on Kashmir.

Imran Khan welcomed it. In fact, Imran Khan said he asked President Trump if he could play his role and "mediate between Pakistan and India". Imran Khan presented the mediation offer from Donald Trump as some sort of a diplomatic coup against India.

In India, this set off a storm as the government rejected the claim made by Donald Trump that PM Modi asked him to mediate on Kashmir. The external affairs ministry raised the matter strongly with the US foreign department, forcing the Trump administration to issue a rebuttal of its President's claim.

A week later, on August 2, Donald Trump made a big about-turn on the claim that PM Modi asked him to mediate on Kashmir; however the US president expressed willingness to "intervene" if both India and Pakistan wanted.

But more importantly, Donald Trump said he spoke to both India and Pakistan about "that". Answering a question about his mediation offer at a White House press meet, Trump said, "If they wanted somebody to intervene and I spoke to Pakistan about that I spoke frankly with India about it if they wanted me to I would certainly intervene."

He climbed down from his July 22 stand but made clear that he was talking to both India and Pakistan about them talking to each other.

Donald Trump reiterated this position on September 9 saying he was willing to "help" India and Pakistan talk and resolve the Kashmir issue. "I am willing to help them if they want. They know that. That (offer) is out there," he said.

Now, two week later, Donald Trump has expressed confidence that PM Modi and Imran Khan will get along and a lot of good things will come from a meeting between them. Isn't this a clear signal that Donald Trump is already mediating between PM Modi and Imran Khan even if Kashmir is not on the table yet?
