CBI Joint Director Pankaj Srivastava gets notice for letting sleuths 'torture' innocents

A day after the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) team visited Kolkata Police commissioner Rajeev Kumar's residence in Saradha scam, the Kolkata Police has served a notice to CBI Joint Director Pankaj Srivastava on Monday to appear for examination in a cheating case. Srivastava reached New Delhi from Kolkata in evening to meet newly appointed CBI Director Rishi Kumar Shukla and apprised him about the situation.

The summon was issued to Srivastava to join the probe into a case registered under Sections 341 (wrongful restraint) and 342 (wrongful confinement) and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC filed against CBI Sub-Inspector Sunil Meena and others at Bhawanipur Police Station on January 21. The case was registered on the direction of a city court.

The complainant Vaibhav Khattar had alleged that the CBI had illegally detained and tortured him in a case which had nothing to do with him. Khattar is an employee of Central Roller Flour Mills Pvt Ltd which was raided on August 17, 2018. It was alleged that the raids were carried out due to infighting within CBI between then Director Alok Kumar Verma and then Special Director Rakesh Asthana.

Sources said the owner of the mill Dipesh Chandak, who had turned approver in the Bihar fodder scam probe, was picked up by CBI on August 18, 2018 following raids at his mills and residence in a cheating case and was allegedly coerced into framing Asthana. But Chandak fled from CBI custody only to be later arrested by Kolkata police in a cheating case. Chandak is still behind bars.

Sources said that when Chandak fled, CBI sleuths furiously picked up the company employees, including Khattar, and then illegally detained and tortured them. Thereafter, Khattar had approached court which ordered registration of FIR against CBI sleuths for the same.

The summons were served to Srivastava as the activities took place under his leadership as the Joint Director.
