12 planes lost, at least 20 air force personnel killed in crashes this year so far

Wreckage of the India Air Force's Mi-17V-5 transport helicopter that crashed in Budgam, Jammu and Kahsmir, on February 27. (Photo: Reuters)

The MiG-21 trainer aircraft that crashed today in Bhind district of Madhya Pradesh was the 12th aircraft of the Indian Air Force to have crashed this year. Since January, at least 20 military personnel have been killed in these crashes.

Today's crash involving a MiG-21 trainer aircraft took place during a routine mission around 10 am. Both pilots managed to eject safely. Local police said the crash took place in Choudhary-ka-Pura in Madhya Pradesh's Bhind district.

Earlier in June, the Defence Ministry informed Parliament that 27 Indian Air Force aircraft have crashed since 2016. In the 2016-17, six IAF fighter jets, two helicopters, one transport aircraft and one trainer crashed. In 2017-18, the IAF lost two fighter jets and one trainer aircraft in crashes.

This number rose in 2018-19 when the IAF lost seven fighter jets, two helicopters and two trainers.

Here are other instances when Indian Air Force planes crashed/met accidents this year:

January 28: IAF Jaguar crashes in UP

A Jaguar fighter plane of the Indian Air Force crashed in Khushinagar area of Uttar Pradesh on January 28. The fighter plane had taken off from the IAF airbase in Gorakhpur. The pilot managed to eject safely.

February 1: 2 pilots killed in Mirage 2000 crash

Two Indian Air Force pilots were killed in a crash involving a Mirage 2000 trainer aircraft in Bengaluru. Squadron Leaders Samir Abrol and Siddartha Negi died in the crash.

Both pilots ejected before the plane crashed but one of them died immediately after landing on the wreckage of the aircraft; the other pilot succumbed to injuries later at a hospital.

February 12: MiG-27 crashes near Pokhran

A MiG-27 fighter aircraft of the IAF crashed in Eta village in Pokaran tehsil of Jaisalmer district in Rajasthan on February 12.

The MiG-27 aircraft had become airborne from Jaisalmer and crashed during a routine mission. The pilot ejected safely.

February 19: 2 Surya Kiran planes collide mid-air

Two Surya Kiran jets of the IAF collided mid-air during practice at the Yelahanka Airbase in Bengaluru. The Surya Kiran is an aerobatic team of the Indian Air Force that is renowned for performing breathtaking mid-air stunts. The jets were practising for the Aero India 2019 show.

#WATCH Two aircraft of Surya Kiran Aerobatics Team crashed today at Yelahanka airbase in Bengaluru, during rehearsal for #AeroIndia2019. One civilian hurt. Both pilots ejected, the debris has fallen near ISRO layout, Yelahanka new town area. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/gJHWx6OtSm ANI (@ANI) February 19, 2019

The two aeroplanes collided mid-air and crashed, killing Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi and injuring Wing Commander VT Shelke and Squadron Leader TJ Singh.

February 27: Abhinandan's MiG-21 crashes in PoK

A MiG-21 Bison of the IAF, piloted by Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, was downed during a dogfight between Indian and Pakistani fighter jets on February 27 after the Balakot airstrike.

February 27: IAF chopper crashes in Kashmir

A day after the Balakot airstrike, a helicopter of the Indian Air Force crashed in Budgam district of Kashmir. The ill-fated helicopter was a Mi-17V-5 military transport helicopter.

Three people, including two pilots, were killed in the crash at Budgam. The IAF helicopter had taken off from Awantipora airbase and crashed, as an inquiry later determined, because of friendly fire.

March 8: MiG-21 crashes near Bikaner

A MiG-21 fighter aircraft of the Indian Air Force crashed in Bikaner district of Rajasthan on March 8. The pilot managed to eject safely.

The MiG-21 aircraft was on a routine mission and crashed after getting airborne from the Nal airbase near Bikaner.

March 31: MiG-27 crashes in Jodhpur

A MiG-27 UPG aircraft of the IAF crashed near Sirohi after taking off from Jodhpur on March 31. The plane was on a routine mission. The accident took place around 11.45 am.

The MiG-27 UPG aircraft crashed after experiencing problems in its engine. However, the pilot managed to eject safely.

Visuals from Rajasthan's Jodhpur where a MiG 27 UPG aircraft on a routine mission from Jodhpur, crashed this morning. pic.twitter.com/dGPL9yYk7P ANI (@ANI) March 31, 2019

June 20: 13 IAF personnel onboard An-32 killed in Arunachal

After days of frantic search in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, the Army was able to locate the crash site of an An-32 jet of the Indian Air Force on June 20. 13 IAF personnel were killed in the tragedy.

The transporter aircraft was headed from Jorhat in Assam to the Menchuka advanced landing ground near the China border in Arunachal Pradesh on June 3 when it lost contact around half-an-hour after taking off. For days, the Indian Air Force tried to trace the aircraft and also deployed helicopters but owing to bad weather, the aircraft's crash site could not be reached.

June 27: IAF pilot drops fuel tank after bird hit in Ambala

A young IAF pilot was lauded by the Indian Air Force for his "quick thinking" after a flock of birds hit his fighter aircraft Jaguar on June 27. The pilot made an emergency landing at Ambala airbase after the Jaguar aircraft suffered a suspected bird hit.

Before making an emergency landing, the pilot unloaded the additional fuel drop tanks and Carrier Bomb Light Stores (CBLS) pods to avoid any casualties. For his presence of mind, the IAF praised the pilot and said he had averted a "major disaster".

The aircraft, however, suffered engine failure due to a suspected bird hit immediately after the takeoff.

July 2: Fuel tank of Tejas falls off in Tamil Nadu

Agricultural labourers in Chennai's outskirts were surprised when they saw fuel tank of an IAF aircraft falling off on their field. Later, it was discovered that the fuel tank was of a Tejas aircraft that was on a sortie.

Tamil Nadu: Indian Air Force to order investigation into the incident where fuel tank of the LCA Tejas aircraft of IAF fell down in farm land near Sulur air base during flight today. pic.twitter.com/KqtCJickeU ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

Defence sources in Chennai had then confirmed that the fuel tank was of a Tejas aircraft and had said the fighter jet landed safely at the Sulur Air Force station.

August 8: Su-30 crashes in Assam

A Su-30 MKI fighter jet of the Indian Air Force met with an accident and crashed in a paddy field in Milanpur area of Assam on the night of August 8. The fighter jet was on a routine training mission. Speaking about the crash, defence spokesperson had said both the pilots managed to eject successfully but one of them injured his leg.

Assam: Locals rescue one of the two Indian Air Force (IAF) pilots, whose Su-30 aircraft crashed in Tezpur during a routine training mission, today. The other pilot was also rescued after ejecting safely from the aircraft. pic.twitter.com/xr1lVSUqiA ANI (@ANI) August 8, 2019

On seeing the crash, locals in the area rushed the pilots to the Army's Base Hospital in Tezpur, Assam.

ALSO READ | Indian Air Force lost 27 aircraft, including 15 jets and choppers, in crashes since 2016

ALSO READ | The IAF's airplane crisis

ALSO WATCH | IAF Jaguar fighter plane crashes in Uttar Pradesh
