Gurugram: Upset over feeling neglected, man stabs parents; father dies, mother critical

Mayank rushed his parents to the hospital, where his father was declared brought dead. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Gurugram man stabs his parents for allegedly neglecting him Accused has been identified as Rishabh Mehta Father of the accused died on way to hospital

Gurugram: In a shocking incident, a 32-year-old man in Gurugram stabbed his parents for allegedly neglecting him. The accused has been identified as Rishabh Mehta.

While the father of the accused died on way to the hospital, his mother suffered severe wounds and is battling for life at the All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) in New Delhi.

According to a report, the mother of the accused has received multiple stab wounds in the stomach, chest and neck. The incident occurred on Tuesday when Rishabh had a quarrel with his father Sushil Mehta and mother Chandar Mehta.

Mayank Mehta, the younger brother of Rishabh, has filed a complaint against him. Mayank is said to be the eyewitness of the incident.

According to Mayank, the accused had frequent fights with his parents. On that fateful day, Mayank went to a nearby market to buy some groceries when he received a call from his uncle that Rishabh has stabbed his parents.

Mayank immediately rushed home and found the accused still stabbing his father. When Mayank tried to intervene, Rishabh stabbed him too. Mayank has suffered stab wounds on his hands.

Later, Mayank rushed his parents to the hospital, where his father was declared brought dead. The doctors referred his mother Chander Mehta to AIIMS trauma centre in Delhi.

Accountant stabbed to death at Bengaluru pub for objecting to loud noise

In another incident, the Karnataka Police arrested a man in Bengaluru for stabbing a 32-year-old accountant to death following a heated argument over loud noise in a pub on Tuesday (September 24). The victim was identified as Kishore Kumar from Byrasandra.

Identified as Tabrez Pasha, the accused was apprehended by Bangalore Police after a violent chase which resulted in injuries to the accused.

Eyewitness reports suggest Kumar and his friend Yusuf Khan were sitting in a bar in Jayanagar Block IX when the victim got into an argument with Pasha and his accomplices. The accused was sitting on the table next to Kumar's and got irritated when the victim objected to him laughing out loud.

Police officers chased Pasha and his accomplices but had to fire at them in order to apprehend them. Three others have been arrested in connection with the murder. Pasha has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for murder. His accomplices have also been charged for abetting the crime.
