From the Archives (September 26, 1969): 17 killed as mobs attack train

Seventeen passengers were killed when violent mobs attacked two trains – the Ahmedabad-bound Janata Express from Delhi and the Ahmedabad-Karanja local – this evening [September 25]. The Express was attacked near Amblihayan station and the local at a point between Kalol and Dhangarwa stations on the meter-gauge section of the Western Railway. According to the Railway authorities here [Ahmedabad] in the attack on the express train thirteen persons including three women were killed and several others injured. Four others were killed when the Ahmedabad-Karanja local was attacked, the authorities said. The mob of about 200 was said to have stopped the express before attacking it. On board were a few armed guards who were helpless before the overwhelming numbers of the mob. The train left for Ahmedabad after being detained for over 40 minutes, the reports said. According to reports received by the Western Railway area Superintendent, Mr. R.D. Mishra, the mobs pulled out several passengers from both the trains and beat them. Some bogies of the Janata express were also set on fire near Amblihayan, he added. A strong police contingent rushed to the spot. Mob violence has also been reported from Anand, where Army personnel opened fire twice to disperse violent crowds. Two persons were injured. This brings the total of injured to four in the disturbances when spread to Anand yesterday [September 24]. About 200 persons have been rounded up for violation of curfew imposed on the town last evening [September 24]. Army personnel are patrolling the town. Several hundred riot police personnel, armed with rifles, are enforcing the curfew in Ahmedabad. There are groups of mobile policemen, who along with the military, patrol the city. Curfew was relaxed for 10 hours in Baroda to-day [September 25], but following reports of some cases attempted arson and isolated group clashes people hurried back home and shops downed their shutters. It was officially stated that five persons were taken into custody to-day [September 25] charged with spreading rumours. In all about 600 arrests have been made in the city in the past four days. The list of injured went upto 138. Fresh curfew is to be imposed at 5 p.m. on Saturday [September 27].
