Menace in the sky: Pak-based terror groups are laying their hands on drones. India must be prepared

Reports of a Khalistani terror group using Chinese commercial drones to smuggle weapons and other contraband into Punjab for attacks in Jammu & Kashmir or other parts of the country open up a whole new frontier in Pakistan’s three-decade-long asymmetric warfare against India. Only recently, Saudi Arabia was shocked by attacks on its two largest oil facilities in which drones, attributed to Houthi rebels in Yemen, were used. The attacks caused enough damage to potentially reduce global oil supply by over 5%. Struggling to infiltrate terrorists into India, drones offer Pakistan’s ISI several distinct advantages.

They are cheap to fabricate and difficult to detect with conventional air defence mechanisms like radars and long-range missiles geared towards detecting ballistic missiles and fighter jets rather than the slow, low-flying drones. Drones also avert the need to physically send terrorists to bomb a target. US-made long-range Patriot missiles reportedly guarded the Saudi oil fields but their ineffectiveness against the low-cost drones and the laxity of the Saudis in protecting their most precious strategic assets stood exposed. With many sensitive installations close to border areas, India is also distinctly vulnerable.

Many terror groups across the world are known to be in possession of a significant stockpile of drones. The ISI hand in the Punjab air-drop of weapons indicates the roles drones can play in a new proxy war strategy if terror recruitment becomes difficult to sustain in Kashmir. The defence establishment needs to reorient itself towards this threat which may require a combination of radar systems, radio frequency detectors, long-range drone detector cameras and jammers to be deployed around sensitive installations. From more boots on the ground, focus must shift to more eyes in the sky.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
