Daily Times

DEAF, DUMB, DULL!

The world’s principal democracy has gone 3-D. The pertinent UN institutions and international organisations have necessitated India to lift the curfew imposed on Jammu and Kashmir and venerate the sovereign rights of Kashmiris by reinstating the communication shutdown. But, PM Modi-led Indian government is crippled of its power of hearing the world’s stance for peace. It stays unresponsive.

The UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) has instructed India to stop violating international laws in the valley. India has opted for dumbness; intriguing a deadly war in the region. The thick clouds of psychological insecurity have occupied the minds of Indian democratic leaders. It has made the outlook of the Hindu majority country quite dull and abrasive.

India’s tarnished quality of being deaf of the screams of the innocent Kashmiris is hard to master for any other country of today’s civilised world. Sowing the seeds of war and turning the fertility to barrenness is the work of insane social agents, who are corrupt, conspiratorial and capricious. Inflicting injuries on fellow humans is the dismalness of mind. It witnesses the paucity of civic norms in the strategic circles. People from around the world are protesting against the callousness of India in Kashmir. But, inappropriate calculations of its military strength have brought India to the brink of war against Pakistan, which is the advocate of peace and prosperity in the region.

A report published by the Inter Nations fixed India at 5th place in the list of most dangerous countries for foreigners. Based on a survey, the Thomson Reuters Foundation placed India at the top of the list of most perilous countries for women with an uncontrollable increase in the number of rapes and domestic violence cases. Full of social tensions, vast India is narrow at mind. The aggregate impact of social dissection in India always disappoints the world when it comes to contributing to global peace.

PM Narendra Modi is the saviour of BJP’s political legacy. He seems to have no atom of reverence and sympathy for humanity

PM Narendra Modi is the saviour of BJP’s political legacy. He seems to have no atom of reverence and sympathy for humanity. Deaf of the modern world’s loud slogans for peace, present India appears to be an experimental country. This is why it fails in its experiments of positioning its spies to Pakistan: air-attacking the neighbouring country and launching its craft to the moon. The world will never forget Kulbhushan Jadhav and Abhinandan Varthaman. The failure of Chandrayaan spacecraft shows India’s dullness in the field of space technology. Soon after partition, India waged an experimental war against Pakistan in the same year and Pakistan’s valiant army kicked them out, conquering Azad Kashmir. That was also a failed experiment on the part of India.

Fully armoured Indian army in IOK has indulged in killing the innocents; inflicting physical injuries; shooting pellet guns; humiliating women and mortifying humankind. The level of indifference demonstrated by the top Indian command to resolve the Kashmir dispute acceptably and humanely has been symbolic of its ridiculous behaviour with Pakistan.

India is trying to plunder the identity and autonomy of IOK through the nullification of Article 370 and 35-A of the Indian Constitution, which sanctions special powers to the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Around 900 thousand military men in the small valley have been constantly sabotaging the basic rights of peaceful natives for one and half month.

India’s heinous efforts to debilitate the fabric of freedom movement in Kashmir are being denounced throughout Europe, the US, and the United Kingdom. The state-level players, China and Turkey, have openly warned Modi’s government of the consequences of plausible war.

India’s diabolical behaviour has raised many questions: why India does not want a good relationship with Pakistan? Why the meaning of global peace is unintelligible for India? Who is responsible for designing India’s imprudent foreign policy.

The international media is repeatedly reporting the increasing number of kidnaps and merciless killings in Kashmir. The arrest of freedom movement leaders has raised the degree of resolution of Kashmiris. On the other hand, India’s burning desire for fighting a war against Pakistan is evident from their hostile military activities along the LOC.

The government of India should think about arranging jobs for the 90 million unemployed Indians and installing toilets for the masses. It is ruining its budget by constructing the foundations of terrorism in Kashmir and igniting flames of war against Pakistan. India has been standing dumb while considering the miseries of its natives, spread over half of the sub-continent. According to the World Health Organisation’s suicide rates for 2019, India stays at 21st rank, whereas Pakistan comes at 169th; proving a much healthier mental condition of the people of Pakistan. The government of India should pay heed to instigating patience, tolerance and moderation throughout the country. It would eradicate the element of extremism–the biggest factor behind terrorism–from the Indian society. Present India is not only ignorant of the supremacy of human rights. It is blind of its internal subdivision and socio-economic commotion.

The writer is a researcher and journalist
