Surat: Teacher thrashes a class XII student, his parents attack teachers in school

On cam: Parents, relatives thrash teacher who assaulted Class 12 student

SURAT: In two incidents in the same school , a class XII student was thrashed by a school teacher at Ashadeep School in Simada area of city on Tuesday, while the parents of the child along with their sympathizers, thrashed the teacher on the school campus on Wednesday.The student allegedly suffered minor injuries, but the teacher had to be admitted in a hospital after the attack. Both the incidents have been captured in the school’s CCTV cameras. Both the parties lodged cross complaints against each other in Sarthana police station.According to the police, the class XII student was slapped and punched by teacher Vipul Gajera in the school on Tuesday. The school officials claimed that the student was shouting in the toilet and when the teacher questioned him about his unruly behaviour, he started abusing the teacher. Later, Gajera thrashed the student in the school’s lobby.“My son went to the toilet during recess and he was thrashed mercilessly by the teacher for some mischief done by other students. The school, however, did not inform us about the incident,” said Paresh Lakhani, father of the student.Police booked three teachers of the school including Gajera for thrashing, while the other two teachers, Chetan and Jagdish Ramani, for not taking any action to stop Gajera.After reaching home, the student informed his parents, who went the next day on Wednesday to the school to complain about the incident. However, the parents who were accompanied by a group of sympathizers pulled Gajera out of a classroom where he was teaching and attacked him with sticks, punched and kicked him.Mahesh Ramani, chairman of Ashadeep School said that the process to relieve Gajera from the school had already started when the parents came and attacked him. “The parents used abusive language in the presence of students. Gajera is currently admitted in a hospital owing to the attack,” he said.Acting on Gajera’s complaint, the police have booked five persons including the parents of the student. While cops have registered Gajera’s statement in the hospital, the other teachers who too were abused by the parents have also approached police to register their statement. Ramani claims that the school teachers are refusing to come to work after the incident.“Education department will carry out an inquiry in the incident and take necessary actions based on the findings,” said H H Rajyaguru, district education officer.
