Bizman shot dead in New Delhi, gang rivalry suspected

CCTV grab shows one of the two assailants firing indiscriminately at Narendra Gehlot.

A property dealer-turned-politician was shot dead outside his office on Tuesday in a suspected gang rivalry between two groups at Delhi's Dwarka Mor, police said.

A couple of men on a bike wearing helmet blocked his way and fired at least a dozen rounds at Narendra Gehlot alias Nintey.

The incident took place at around 4:30 pm when Gehlot, 45, was about to leave for home.

The incident took place near Metro pillar number 809 near MCD office, located on old Palam road.

The CCTV footage showed assailants firing indiscriminately at Gehlot.

The gunmen chased Gehlot and fired at him when he tried to leave the car.

Gehlot managed to come out of his car and started running towards his shop when the criminals chased him and fired at him again.

Gehlot had contested the municipal corporation elections in 2014 as an independent candidate, but had lost. He was later booked in a case of attempt to murder in Inderpuri. There were two other cases of cheating and assault against Gehlot.

Initial probe suggested that Gehlot might have fallen out with some criminals of a rival group.

"We received a message about the shootout on Tuesday evening around 4.30 pm and officials of concern Dwarka north police station reached the spot immediately. The victim was taken to the nearby Venkateshwara hospital where he was declared brought dead by doctors. He sustained two bullets on chest and stomach," said Anto Alphose, DCP Dwarka district.

"We have registered an FIR under IPC section of 302 and matter is under investigation," the DCP said.

Meanwhile, an official of Dwarka north police station told Mail Today that he and his office bearers had beaten a person over property dispute three months ago who happened to be a close aide to west Delhi's notorious Nandu gang. The incident on Tuesday could be a retaliation of that," the official said.

Dwarka police have identified four persons including the man who was beaten by Gehlot and his men. "We have some leads about the accused and separate raids are currently underway about their possible hideouts in Delhi rural belt and Haryana," police said.
