Police say Pak drones drop Ak-47 rifles, grenades in Punjab; CM seeks MHA intervention

Police say Pak drones drop Ak-47 rifles, grenades in Punjab; CM seeks MHA intervention

CHANDIGARH, Sep 25 (Agencies): Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh has asked Home Minister Amit Shah to ensure necessary action in the 'incidents' of Pakistan-origin drones being used for dropping consignments of arms and ammunition in the state.

He asked the Home Minister to handle the 'drone problem' at the earliest.

"Recent incidents of Pakistan-origin drones dropping consignments of arms and ammunition is a new and serious dimension on Pakistan's sinister designs in the aftermath of the abrogation of Article 370. Request Amit Shah Ji to ensure that this drone problem is handled at the earliest," Singh tweeted on Tuesday.

On Wednesday, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, while responding to Punjab CM's letter to Home Ministry, said that India is ready for any national security challenge.

"Whatever be the national security challenges, our jawans, be it Army, Air Force or Navy, are capable of combating and defeating them. Don't worry, our force is fully prepared," Rajnath Singh said. The concerns were raised by Captain Amarinder Singh days after a Pakistan-backed terror module was busted in the state. During the investigation, it was revealed that weapons were smuggled to the terrorist module from Pakistan using drones.

The police said it seized a huge cache of arms, including five AK-47 rifles, pistols, satellite phones and hand grenades, following a raid in Tarn Taran district, bordering Pakistan.

"While we are investigating the matter on our end, we have handed over the case to the NIA. It poses a danger for the entire country," Director General of Police (DGP) Dinkar Gupta said. Gupta said the large-scale infiltration appeared to have been aimed at scaling up terrorism and militancy in Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and the Indian hinterland, in the wake of the recent developments in the Kashmir Valley.

The terrorists arrested by the Punjab Police belonged to the revived Khalistan Zindabad Force (KZF), which was backed by a Pakistan and Germany based terror group that was conspiring to unleash a series of terror strikes in Punjab and its adjoining states.

A large number of arms, ammunition, and explosives were recovered from their possession, which the police suspects were delivered across the Indo-Pak border by drones launched from Pakistan.

Those arrested have been identified as Balwant Singh, Akashdeep Singh, Harbhajan Singh and Balbir Singh.

Both Akashdeep and Baba Balwant Singh have a criminal past with multiple criminal cases against them.
