Talaq over 3 months leads to demand for change in law

In recent case, husband of woman in city pronounced talaq over time; she is unsure of justice under existing law after filing police case. Activists want amendments



The ruling party might be planning to put forth triple talaq as a campaign issue in the upcoming Assembly polls here, but for Muslim women, not much seems to have changed on ground. While many of these women could earlier be divorced instantaneously (talaq e biddat), they are now being served notices by their husbands over a period of time in a similar way (talaq e hasan), towards the same result.



A woman in Pune, recently divorced in this manner, has challenged the talaq in court. With this, activists have demanded that the law be amended so that all these matters pass through a court of law.



Salma Shaikh (name changed), a resident of Baramati taluka, married an IT engineer from Pune in May 2017. Little did she know that this marriage would lead to a long legal battle, with her husband divorcing her within two years. Since triple talaq was banned by 2018, earlier this year, her husband chose to send her talaq notices for three consecutive months (May, June and July of 2019) and pronounced that their marriage was dissolved by August 2019. In the same month, claiming that she wasn’t given a chance to put forth her side, Salma filed a police complaint under the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act of 2019 that became law on July 31 this year.



Yet, since this isn’t exactly a triple talaq, the case might not result in a decision in her favour.



Salma narrated, “My father-in-law used to claim he has superpowers, and pronounced that if I deliver a child, it might result in his death. When I came to know I was pregnant earlier in 2019, the family started pressuring me for an abortion. When I refused, they sent me to my maternal home and then, after three consecutive notices in as many months, my husband claimed that we were divorced.”



Though Salma has filed a police complaint, since it’s not technically a case of triple talaq under the law’s existing ambit, she is uncertain about the result. Speaking to Mirror, advocate Sharada Wadekar, who works on cases for women’s rights, said, “Triple talaq law only speaks about instantaneous talaq. Also in the said case, the process started (in May) before the law was enacted (in July) — two reasons why the woman may not benefit. Also, in divorce cases in court, the very first step is counselling. If this does not work, divorce proceedings are taken ahead. That is what needs to be done in such cases as well.”



Well-known women’s rights activist Razia Patel stated that the fear of arbitrary talaq still looms over Muslim women’s heads. “Salma’s case is the perfect example how the new law is of no use. It was publicised heavily, but has barely helped Muslim women on ground. Triple talaq was already deemed illegal by the Supreme Court in 2017. The government criminalised it. But Muslim personal law still exists, leaving other ways for talaq to take place. Now, while it cannot be pronounced at once, the man can pronounce talaq over a month’s gap thrice to divorce his wife,” she said.



Highlighting this plight, activist Shamshuddin Tamboli, president of the Muslim Satyashodhak Mandal, demanded that the triple talaq law needs to be amended. He stated in multiple letters to the government that the required amendments must be made to ensure equality. Tamboli told Mirror, “The problem is that the right to divorce here lies with the man. Since it is done outside court, women might not necessarily get justice. There is no arbitration. We are not against talaq. What we want is equal rights for men and women. Cases should be resolved and divorce granted through courts. Right now, women have to go to court, but men can divorce them even outside court, despite the recent law.”



Weighing in, advocate Asim Sarode stated that people always tend to find loopholes in any law. “The process to divorce exists in every religion. We cannot state if anything is good or bad just because of religion. What should be done is that legal options need to be explored. For instance, a woman could challenge a case in court after the first notice. This is allowed by law,” he shared.


