Ready to even give life for Rajeev, says Mamata as war of words continues on day 2 of Bengal CM's dharna

Ready to even give life for Rajeev, says Mamata as war of words continues on day 2 of Bengal CM's dharna

Mamata Banerjee on Monday upped the ante during her dharna in Kolkata saying she is even willing to give her life for Kolkata top cop Rajeev Kumar, whom the police wants to question in connection with chitfunf scam.

Didi virtually threw a gauntlet at the centre saying if they have section 355, 356, she also has article 144, reported Zee 24 Ghanta. Mamata said that after not being able to defeat her politically, the centre is harassing honest police officers. She said that people who are saying there is no law and order in the state should put leucoplast in their face.

Also Read: Big boost to BJP in Bengal: Ex-cop Bharati Ghosh, once dubbed 'Mamata's daughter' joins party

Also Read: Suffering from Multiple Personality Disorder: BJP reminds Rahul he slammed Mamata Banerjee for Chit Fund Scam

Also Read: Mamata vs CBI - If you have Article 356, we have section 144, says Bengal CM

A political firestorm raged Monday as Mamata Banerjee's sit-in protest against CBI's bid to question Kolkata police chief in chit fund scam cases entered the second day, with the West Bengal Chief Minister declaring her agitation to save the "Constitution and country" will go on and she was ready to face the consequences.

Virtually all opposition parties rallied behind Banerjee's direct confrontation with the Modi government, even as the BJP called it an "alliance of corrupt" and Home Minister Rajnath Singh told Parliament that developments in West Bengal were indicative of a "breakdown of the Constitution".

Trinamool workers took to streets burning effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah and blocked trains, while the BJP lined up its top leaders to step up the counter-offensive against Banerjee and other opposition leaders.

"I do not have any grudge against any individual. But I am angry over the way institutions are being destroyed and misused," Banerjee told the gathering at the protest venue.

She said it was her government that arrested Saradha chairman Sudipta Sen and claimed Rs 250-300 crore was returned to the duped depositors.

The alleged ponzi scams at Saradha and Rose Valley groups are at the centre of what has become a major political controversy now, as the BJP leaders have alleged that the ruling party leaders in West Bengal have been among major beneficiaries of fraudulent collection of money.

Allegedly, these schemes were being run without necessary regulatory approvals and collected nearly Rs 20,000 crore from lakhs of investors in West Bengal and neighbouring states, through what is commonly known as 'chit funds'.

Several TMC leaders including parliamentarians like Kunal Ghosh, Srinjay Bose, Sudip Bandyopadhyay and Tapas Pal, and state minister Madan Mitra were arrested for their alleged links with the two groups.

"Today you are labelling those who helped arrest the culprits as thieves. You are calling Rajeev Kumar (Kolkata Police Commissioner) a thief! Whose money has he taken? You are calling me a thief! Whose money have I taken? "If you are labelling people who are honest as thieves without any evidence, then I will definitely stand by their side. And for that if I need to give up my life, then I am ready to do that but I will not compromise," she asserted.

Claiming that the CBI team had knocked on Kumar's door without a warrant, Banerjee said, "I have fought all through my life but never given up. I am ready to face any consequences." The failed attempt by the CBI to question Kumar in connection with the Saradha and Rose Valley chit fund scams on Sunday became the latest flashpoint between the BJP-led Centre and Banerjee, one of its bitter critics. The CBI has accused Kumar of destroying evidence related to the two fraud cases.

A CBI team was bodily prevented from entering Kumar's residence by police personnel, bundled into vehicles, and detained. Police contingents also descended on CBI premises in Kolkata, as a furious Banerjee rushed to Kumar's residence before beginning a dharna opposite landmark Metro Cinema.

As political temperature soared, Banerjee told her supporters to keep the demonstration peaceful and not to burn any effigies.

"Save the Constitution, save the federal structure, save the police force, save the Indian Administrative Service and all ranks of civil service from disaster," read the banner that fluttered on the dais Banerjee has made her home since Sunday night.

Support for her poured in from far off leaders -- DMK chief M K Stalin in Chennai, Andhra chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu in Amaravati and former prime minister H D Deve Gowda in Bengaluru.

Odisha's ruling party BJD, which had hitherto kept silent over the development, also threw its weight behind Banerjee.

"We are not a banana republic...," BJD leader B Mahtab said, adding the CBI was becoming a "political stooge and political weapon" in the Centre's hand.

Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge charged that the government was using the CBI as a weapon to finish the Opposition and put in place an autocratic regime.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal alleged the "Modi-Shah duo" were trying to "murder" democracy.

NCP leader Sharad Pawar, at whose residence leaders of opposition parties met, said what has happened to Mamata has happened in Delhi to Kejriwal also.
