Punjab: Kin tries to rescue woman from domestic abuse, shot

PATIALA: A resident of a village in Nabha block of the district was shot on Tuesday night in front of two cops who had accompanied him to rescue a woman in a case of domestic violence.The two cops from Dandrala Dhindsa sub-police station were sent to the woman's house in Mungo village after a formal complaint of domestic violence was lodged at women cell via a phone call. The cops accompanied 60-year-old man, identified as Harjit Singh of Alohran Kalan village, to rescue the woman identified as Manpreet Kaur.Harjit was Manpreet's uncle and had helped sort out disputes between the latter and her husband Kulip Singh on various ocassions. However, on Tuesday, Kuldip using his pistol opened fire on Harjit Singh in the presence of two cops and three other relatives of Manpreet Kaur.According to police, Harjit had lodged a complaint with police on Tuesday after he was informed by Manpreet that she was being physically tortured by her Kuldip Singh again. Harjit, in his telephonic complaint, had claimed that Manpreet was locked by Kuldip Singh with her children. The police team, along with the relatives of the woman including Harjit Singh, reached Manpreet's house where arguments ensued between the accused Kuldip Singh and relatives of Manpreet Kaur.The police claimed that Kuldip brought his weapon and shot Harjit on the spot, after which he managed to escape.Sub-inspector Rauni Singh, in-charge at Dandrala Dhindsa sub-police station, said, "Our cops did not have any weapon with them. It was a complaint regarding a matrimonial dispute. The couple had two children, including a six-years-old daughter and a three-year-old son, from their seven years of marriage. In the past, the complaints of domestic violence had reached the police station, but before any action could be taken, the couple used to reach a compromise. We have now registered a case under sections of murder and other sections of Indian Penal Code against the accused Kuldip Singh, his father Avtar Singh and Kuldip's mother Harbans Kaur. Further investigation in the case is underway. The accused are on the run, but will be nabbed soon as the police teams are conducting raids."Ravinder Singh, former sarpanch of Mungo village where the incident took has taken place, said, "By the time we reached, Harjit Singh was dead. He had multiple wounds of gunshots. Manpreet had several injuries on her face."
