Delhi spy, Mangaluru stepson and a farmhouse worth crores

FARMHOUSE TUSSLE

Battle won’t be easy; property must go to rightful owner: Son

MANGALURU: Edwin D’Souza, 76, once a petty thief and carjacker from Mangaluru , is all set to fight a legal battle for a Delhi farmhouse worth crores. The 8,550-sqft property belonged to his step-father Coomar Narain – who was involved in an espionage scandal in the 1980s that went right up to the Rajiv Gandhi PMO – and is now at the centre of a tussle involving a woman who claims to be Narain’s daughter.It was in the course of a search for potential inheritors that police turned to Narain’s wife — Geeta Narain aka Gerty Walder. The trail from Delhi led to Mangaluru, Geeta’s home, and to Edwin, her son from her first husband. On September 19, police filed a chargesheet against Radhika, the woman who says she is Narain’s daughter and inheritor of the farmhouse, under sections of trespass and cheating, among others.News of the potential windfall reached Edwin on December 14, 2017. In the runup to Christmas, sleuths from the Economic Offences Wing from New Delhi reached his home in Jayashreegate, near Kulashekar, to announce that his biological mother and her husband had left him a huge farmhouse in south Delhi, recalls Edwin’s elder son, 50-year-old Prakash.Coomar Narain, who was involved in an espionage scam, died in 2000Edwin suffers from multiple diseases and cannot speak clearly, says Prakash, who has been working in Dubai for almost three decades and is home on vacation. “I have never seen the property, even though we are aware of it. Some of my friends who are in Delhi have visited it and sent pictures. I am going to Delhi to carry out the paperwork. I know it won’t be a cakewalk. It will require a lot of money to fight legally and we are hopeful. The property must go to the rightful owner.”Edwin was born to Gerty Walder on February 7, 1943. When he was about two-and-a-half months old, Gerty left him in the care of her mother Juliana and went to Mumbai. Later, she married Coomar Narain and moved to Delhi.“We are not aware about my grandmother’s first husband. It is her past,” says Prakash.The grandson recalls Gerty was born in Morgansgate. “My dad used to talk about this but we were too small to understand it. According to my father, Geeta last visited Mangaluru in 1955 when she sold her ancestral property in Morgansgate. We have collected her baptism certificate from the Bejai Parish and other documents as well. This should give us a start in Delhi,” says Prakash.Geeta and Coomar purchased the farmhouse in 1995. Coomar died in 2000. He was 75. Geeta was allegedly strangled in the farmhouse by an unidentified person in 2002. “My father was aware about his mother’s death but didn’t know she was killed,” recalls Prakash. Edwin eventually married Mary and had three children, Prakash and two daughters.The last time Edwin saw his mother was in 1964 when she called him to Delhi. A young Edwin was falling into bad company and she did not want him to stay on in Mangaluru. “My father told us he did not like Delhi. He loved Mangaluru and Juliana, whom he considered his mother. He stole Geeta’s Fiat car and drove all the way back to Mangaluru,” says Prakash. “A car theft complaint was filed in New Delhi. When Geeta called Juliana, she learned that her son had stolen the car. I don’t know what became of the complaint but it helped police trace my father decades later.”The investigation took more than a year as police struggled to find Edwin. He had lived in Morgansgate, shifted to Valencia, Urwa-Kodikal and Highland. For the past 10 years, he has been staying with Prakash’s family in Bikkarnakatte. His father’s criminal records, says Prakash in lighter vein, actually helped. They showed that Edwin is the son of “Geeta Narain, wife of CV Narain, resident of Delhi”.
