IAF bases in J&K, Punjab, UP on high alert

IAF bases in J&K, Punjab, UP on high alert

Any military drone from Pak to be shot down: Lt Gen Kler

NEW DELHI/HISAR, Sep 25(Agencies): India is on high alert after intel inputs warning of a terror plan to target Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah and National Security Adviser Ajit Doval, home ministry sources said today.

The ministry has put out an alert to all states following a threat naming 30 major cities. Indian Air Force (IAF) sources have also confirmed a serious security threat to frontline bases following multi-agency inputs.

An “orange alert”, which is a notch lower than the highest state of emergency, is in place at important installations and security has been tightened on IAF bases in Srinagar, Awantipora, Jammu, Pathankot and Hindon, sources say.

In the meanwhile, amid reports of drones being used to drop weapons from across the border, South Western Command chief Lt Gen Alok Singh Kler said Indian armed forces are capable of identifying such devices and any military drone venturing towards Indian side from Pakistan will be “shot down.”

According to inputs received by the defence ministry and intelligence agencies, the Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad has been plotting a fidayeen or suicide attack on air bases. The inputs include a threat letter dated 10 September, received by the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security. The letter in Hindi is reportedly from one Shamsher Wani of Jaish and claims revenge for the government's Article 370 decision.

Sources say terror groups based in Pakistan have been planning a strike since the government declared the end of special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 on August 5 and said the state would be split into two union territories.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has repeatedly targetted the government on the Kashmir move and tried to rally support on the world stage. Sources say according to inputs, the Jaish is angling for high-value targets in retaliation.

On a week the annual world gathering United Nations General Assembly is in session in New York, there is a worry that at least one important installation may be hit and it could likely be an air base, if only to slow down air activity.

In the meanwhile, amid reports of drones being used to drop weapons from across the border, South Western Command chief Lt Gen Alok Singh Kler said Indian armed forces are capable of identifying such devices and any military drone venturing towards Indian side from Pakistan will be “shot down.”

Interacting with reporters on the sidelines of a first-of-a-kind seminar on artificial intelligence, at Hisar Military Station, Lt Gen Kler also said there was “nothing to worry” at the moment.

"At present, the drones that you see being demonstrated at the event here, their capacity for carriage is very low. And, what we are hearing, the reports coming about drone being used across the border, their capacity is (also) very small.

So, there is no need to worry,” he said when asked about the reports of drones being used across the border.

Lt Gen Kler said the systems and radars of the Indian armed forces are in place.

“And any military use of any drone, which comes to our side will be shot down by the capabilities of the Indian Air Force and the Army,” he said.

Hisar Military Station is home to the 33rd Armoured Division of the Army.

On use of AI in Army, Kler said, “From information to intelligence, direct destruction, for all such military capabilities, AI is going to be used.” “Initially, it will be for constructive use, helping the commander take his decision. Taking information and converting into intelligence, that is possibly the first usage of AI for Army in a constructive manner," he said.

"But, soon we will have to take into account the disruptive use of artificial intelligence," he said.

The Indian Air Force (IAF) bases in Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, and Uttar Pradesh were put on high alert after intelligence agencies issued a warning against a suicide attack by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) militants in those IAF bases.

According to top government sources, a module consisting 8-10 JeM militants will attempt to carry out the attack in Srinagar, Awantipora, Jammu, Pathankot, and Hindon air bases. Following this, the IAF bases have been put on high alert at orange level.

Senior officers are reviewing the security arrangements round the clock to tackle the threat. The alert has emanated after agencies monitored movements of the JeM militants.

This comes at the backdrop of reports that Pakistan is transporting weapons through Punjab route into Jammu and Kashmir. According to the investigative agencies, arms were delivered from Pakistan using drones via the Punjab border eight times over a period of five days--September 6, September 7, September 9, September 10 and September 15.

A large consignment of arms was delivered to the Taran Taran district of Punjab by the Khalistani group, Khalistan Zindabad Force (KZF), with the help of Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI). These weapons were to be used in Kashmir.

The IAF base alert comes within less than 48 hours of Indian Army Chief General Bipin Rawat informing that the JeM camp in Pakistan’s Balakot, which was attacked by the IAF in February to avenge the terror attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir, has been reactivated. General Rawat had further said, “As many as 500 terrorists were waiting across the border to infiltrate into the Indian territory.” He had said that soon after the temperature starts falling, the militants would be pushed into the Indian territory through areas which have less snow.

Earlier on September 23, what could have been a major terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir was averted, when the security forces recovered at least 40 kg of explosives along with other items from Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua region. The seizure was made during a search operation in Dewal village of Dilawal area of Kathua.

As per reports, one person was arrested in the connection. Acting on a tip-off, the troops of army's Intelligence Corps and Jammu and Kashmir Police undertook a joint operation and conducted a search at a suspected location and recovered a cache of locally-made explosives.

Earlier in September, Border Security Force (BSF) sources had said that Pakistan is reportedly training a group of 50 JeM terrorists to carry out a seaborne attack against India.
