Morning digest: U.K. orders Mallya’s extradition to India,Trump to name David Bernhardt as head of Interior department, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

British Home Secretary Sajid Javid has signed the order for the extradition of liquor baron Vijay Mallya to India. The businessman — whose legal team had previously indicated their intention to appeal the extradition — will now have two weeks to lodge an appeal.

President Donald Trump said on Monday that he is nominating David Bernhardt, a former lobbyist for oil and gas companies and other industries, to head the Interior Department despite objections from environmental groups that Mr. Bernhardt already was making regulatory decisions on the country’s natural resources to benefit industries.

There is no data available on unemployment subsequent to the period of demonetisation, Labour Minister Santosh Gangwar told Parliament on Monday, in a written response to a question in the Lok Sabha.

Tensions between the Centre and the West Bengal government continued to simmer on Monday as Trinamool chairperson and Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee continued her protest here against the attempted raids by the CBI on the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

From their forward base in Ishigaki, a part of the Okinawa chain of 150 islands, large ships of the Japanese coast guard, all gleaming white, keep a tight round- the-clock vigil on a group of islands, 170 km away.

A team of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) officials reached Delhi on Monday with the documents the agency is required to submit before the Supreme Court in support of the petition against the Kolkata Commissioner of Police Rajeev Kumar in connection with the chit-fund cases.

Attorney General K.K. Venugopal has filed a contempt of court petition against advocate Prashant Bhushan for his tweets alleging that the government, through the top law officer, had misled the court about the appointment of M. Nageshwar Rao as interim CBI Director.

Leaders of Opposition parties approached the Election Commission on Monday to express concerns about the possibility of the electronic voting machines (EVMs) being tampered with.

Eminent journalist and political commentator Arun Shourie in conversation with former Editor-in-Chief, The Hindu, N. Ravi. In this freewheeling discussion, Shourie urges people to study court judgments academically in order to ensure accountability within the judiciary.
