The Mughal empire reenergized and reached to Bengal

Fatema Miah:

Passion for empire running and Mughal eventually reached to Bengal. The Mughal emperor what at the time of Jalal Uddin Akbar under Beyram Khans direction reached up to the highest pick point and marked The Hindustan, from Kabul to Agra and Conquered Delhi.

The knowledge, education and more importantly the respect of diversity what keeps the wheel of the vehicle running. Both Beyram and Humaun were well educated and intelligent too, as i wrote before diplomacy was their natural nature per they maintained mutual exchanges, and didn’t interfere with Hindu customs and drew regional peoples respect. After all, in running the vehicle, the vehicle type couldn’t be forgotten or ignored. And the type, it was Muslim Kind so the principles were necessary in the system. There were home and away matters as always do.

Positive and negative always do bubble up and it did strongly and largely there in Mughal Empire too. The international attraction towards India was the biggest touble for Mughal rulling. The Europeans already coasted to India. The Taj Mahal was made and richness of wealth was summed up. Internally, home issues with other regional rulers, between other rulers, and local regional people having to cope with Afghani gang attacks and lootings, all these tensions made people unhappy under Mughal rulling.

There was the biggest sound of Muslim Scholarly group against Mughals reluctance of Islamic principles. Shah Jahan was openly known to ‘dancing women’, alcohol and drug made as accustom. Respecting cultures of a country is one thing and abusing the same extravagantly for fun is different. The Mughal rule was must for Muslims pride otherwise Muslims are nothing, not to forget. The Kings are although small are kings. The Indians portray greatness of peace and cooperation, obedient and respective of Muslim and Mughal philosophy.

Now question is did Mughal empire die after or at the time of Shah Jahan? Yes and no. Aurangajeb, Mohiuddin Alamgir, Shah Jahans 3rd son took power and turned the vehicle on. Europeans already were at the coastal of India and British East India Company members made walking in and out to the red Ford palaces inner chambers. Dara, Shah Jahans eldest son was into philosophy and interfaith claiming of following great grand father Akbar’s setting, whereas Aurangajeb completely opposite. They ended up having battles, family and brothers called battles and Aurangajeb successfully got his three brothers killed for the throne.

The Mughal rule stood back up from it’s death bed and began to ran across from Afghan to Bengal. Yes, Bengal to both East and West Bengal. There Marked Murshidabad in West Bengal and Dhaka was named Murshidabad too, from West across to East to the footstep of Sylhet reached as far as Hobi Gong, (Shiesta Gong) later on and named after Subedar Shiesta Khan. There Sylhet, the Shree Hotto secured it’s borders tightly and Muslim empires couldn’t cross in, Sylhet was Assams richest capital and a different climate. Mughal Empire had no understanding of tea wealth. On the other side, Beyram Khans son Abdul Rahim Khan dedicated his skills and quality from the end of Akbar the great time onwards to Aurangajeb, he settled in Punjab and managed the western region and stablished Punjab to Lahore.

The Muslim Shrines in India welcomed everybody regardless of faith to come and seek comfort and for wish-making, people of Sylhet were allowed to cross the border in and out for business and pleasure and so outsiders were allowed to come in for work and charity seeking in Sylhet. Some Sylheti working people and low level land owners took Islam faith so there were very few Muslim in Sylhet, they were allowed to live with their faith during Gouro Govinds era though there was Cow slaughtering forbidden in Sylhet. There, Aurangajeb aggravated Hindus and there were battles between Hindu kings and Mughals. Mughal and Marata battles continued for generations.

Mughals encouraged Muslims to challenge restrictions on cow slaughtering. On the other hand the Europeans were allowed at the coastal regions on trade Business. There were other Muslim rullings were taken into Mughal rulling to work in collaboration with Mughal for example of Nawabs. After Aurangajeb his son Akbar ii and then carried on by grandson. There in the South West coast Portuguese attempted to invade in and with the help of British Portuguese were pushed out. The French had to turn back and only British was left and assigned a business trade contact.

On the other side, during the Alladins rule in 13th century there in Sylhet the king Gauro Govind chopped Burhan Uddins hand off for offering cow slaughtering (an Akika), on his male Childs birth and killed the child as a punishment. Sha Jalal (ra) a spiritual Muslim (non Mughal) with 360 of his spiritual followers came to Sylhet to talk to king for his cruelty. By miraculous they crossed the river and entered into the kingdom and witnessing the miracles the Kings men dropped down the arms and fell to his spiritual comfort to repent, since then it’s became comforting spiritual place and Sha Jalals shrine is there in Sylhet. People, Hindu and Muslims in the region lived comfortably until centuries later Pakistan made. British during Mughal Empire era reached for the tea in Sylhet and Assam. British took Assam including Sylhet under their governance during British rule.

There the Marata and Muslims war continued for generations. The Mughal Women allowed East India Company British to their inner chamber of Red Ford and Treasures were opened up to them; as gifts and in exchanges of fancy items enticed to. There were Multiple marriages of the Mughal rulers and many children been born, and the female/ the daughters weren’t married off for 5/6 generations, so the female members were in increase and the conflict of will has been on the rise and continues in the inner chamber.

When East India Company had battle against Siraj ud Dawla of Bengal Mughal Sha or his people didn’t have time to look at this direction. Bengal gone into British hand. There Tipu Sultan fought British and the Mughal were tight down with Marata and internal conflicts. Mughal family aggravated Indian Hindu people already though they weren’t respected as Mughals anymore. Question is were they Mughal Empire anymore at that stage? There was no Mughal court, or any Muslim courtship in place. Islam was peoples religion and Hindu was continental. British set up courtship there.

India was sort for it’s wealth and the nature. Dhaka silk and Sylhet tea were the best seeked renowned products. Mutiny was peoples battle again, against British. Bahadur Sha Zafar comes in, or came out you can say, voice as the Mughal from no where, and shouting for a throne for rullingship, and with a team of family women he was exiled to Rangoon in Burma. There Nawab dynasty in Dhaka been left sleeping quietly. Dhaka Nawab Dynasty is interrelated to Kashmiri Khan. The Khans are the serving employees, except for few top like Beyram Begg/Khan who was one of the key founders.

British gave kingly states to kings, and allowed some Nawabs assertion of rule. Hyderabad Nawab rule was an exception. British then took the Accumulated Wealth and the jewels, shifted to UK. British succeeding to set rule in India because of Muslims deception to Muslims, not only Mirzafar and Mirkashim, there were many hypocrites greedy at every points and stages seeked power. Also the later Mughal rulers shamed Islam and were cursed in ruling and took power for granted.

Moreover, Mughal Empire was founded by Babur who came to India to invade and rule when his uncle deprived him off his share. Instead of fighting back there he ran towards India a foreign land not only to take shelter to make a living, rather to rule with power. It’s power seeking, turned into Empire. So were all the other Empires and rulers. Truth is initially 1st Muslims came to India only with spiritual blessings back in 7th and 8th century. They didn’t seek power neither took advantage of Indias wealth. They came in with their gold coins and jewels and conducted fair trade. Their philosophy and spirituality was appreciated and praised in India because Indians are fond of values, and appreciative of good nature, mannerism and legislative system.
