BSF man dies, 12 hurt in mishap

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, February 4

A Border Security Force (BSF) jawan, Giriwar Singh, was killed, while 12 others were injured when a private bus hit the Canter carrying the jawans. There were 16 jawans and officers in the vehicle.

The condition of six of the injured jawans was serious and they were admitted to a private hospital. The police have arrested the driver of the bus.

According to the police, the bus, belonging to Baba Budha Sahib Transport, was being driven by Jaspal Singh. The bus was going from Dera Baba Nanak to Amritsar via Ajnala. Jaspal Singh was driving the bus rashly and hit the BSF vehicle from behind. The 13 jawans, belonging to 73 Battalion of the BSF, were returning to the Ajnala headquarters after their night patrolling duty.

The injured have been identified as SR Reddy, Mithun Kumar, Balbodh Kumar Jha, Mahipal Singh, RS Rao, Srikant Ghosh, Sohan lal, Tazimal Hussain, Kashinath Nago, Ashrath Khan, Gunain Saikia and Ashok Kumar. The condition of Mithun Kumar and SR Reddy is stated to be serious. All the injured were later referred to a private hospital in Amritsar. Driver of BSF vehicle and two others escaped unhurt in the mishap.

Parampal Singh, SSP, said the police had registered a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 304 of the IPC against driver Jaspal Singh. He has been arrested for negligent and rash driving leading to the death of a BSF jawan and injuring others.

Moga: Two persons were killed and one was seriously injured when the car in which they were travelling crashed into an unknown vehicle due to dense fog near Rajeana village in Baghapurana late last night.

The deceased were identified as Gurav Kumar (28) and Anoop Kumar (30). Sahib Kumar, who sustained severe injuries, was rushed to a local hospital from where he was referred to DMC Hospital, Ludhiana. His condition was said to be critical.

Sources said the victims were coming from Kotkapura to Moga on a Maruti Zen car (PB-10BS-0400). When they reached Rajeana village, the car crashed into an unknown vehicle due to fog. Gaurav and Anoop died on the spot, local police officials said.

The roof of the car was ripped away. The unknown vehicle was not found on the spot. The police believe that it could be a truck that might have hit the car from the rear.

The police have registered a case at Baghapurana police station and began investigating the incident. Efforts were also on to trace the unknown vehicle, the police said.
