4 Film Series to Catch in N.Y.C. This Weekend

[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]

FRITZ LANG’S INDIAN EPIC ‘THE TIGER OF ESCHNAPUR’ AND ‘THE INDIAN TOMB’ at Film Forum (Sept. 27-Oct. 3). A sweeping adventure filled with tigers, snakes, romance and the camp-connoisseur favorite Debra Paget, these two movies marked Lang’s return to German film production after more than two decades in Hollywood, although both were shot and set in India. Released in the United States in 1960 as a condensed 92-minute version, the films are showing here as separate features, which means that more than three hours of expressionistic color and wild plot developments await.

212-727-8110, filmforum.org

NEW YORK FILM FESTIVAL at Film at Lincoln Center (Sept. 27-Oct. 13). The world premiere of Martin Scorsese’s “The Irishman” and other main-slate screenings may nab the headlines, but you can spend the entirety of this festival at the sidebar programs and come away sated — not least because this year’s revivals include a 25th-anniversary restoration of Bela Tarr’s “Satantango” (on Sunday), a film that runs seven and a half hours. For the festival’s 57th edition, the big retrospective celebrates the 100th anniversary of the American Society of Cinematographers. In the first week, the members represented include the innovative Chinese-American cinematographer James Wong Howe, with “The Hard Way” (on Saturday), a melodrama in which Ida Lupino refuses to let anyone impede her sister’s rising stage career, and the film noir master John Alton, with the Los Angeles police procedural “He Walked by Night” (on Tuesday). In the annual Spotlight on Documentary lineup, Sergei Loznitsa offers a sardonic found-footage look at the pageantry surrounding Statlin’s death in “State Funeral” (on Saturday and Sunday), while in “Free Time” (also on Saturday and Sunday), the city symphonist Manny Kirchheimer makes a cine-collage out of scenes of downtime in New York shot from 1958 to 1960, adding a gently off-kilter sound design of classical music, jazz and imperfectly synced noise.

212-875-5601, filmlinc.org
