Emergency-like Situation in India; Says Chhattisgarh CM

Patna: Chhattisgarh Chief Minister and Congress leader Bhupesh Baghel who was in Patna on Thursday to attend the party's 'Social Justice Convention' organized by the youth wing of the party, slammed the NDA government at the Center saying the voters across the nation were having a second thought about giving a second term to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

"Despite Modi's historic win in the last Lok Sabha elections, the country is void of any enthusiasm. The economy is on a downward spiral and the youths have nothing to look forward. Could it be that the voters of India are having a second thought and are feeling cheated by the NDA?" Baghela asked.

Speaking at the Sri Krishna Memorial Hall, the Chhattisgarh Chief Minister said that it was astonishing that the people of Bihar were sitting quietly when the nation was undergoing an 'emergency-like' situation.

Vaghela also questioned the rational behind the Pulwama attack and the withdrawal of Article 370 from Kashmir.

"Bihar had been at the forefront of any movement that required fighting for social justice. Even Mahatma Gandhi chose Bihar to launch his battle against the British Raj. Once again, it's time for Biharis to rise and speak against this corrupt regime that first took money out of people's pocket by implementing demonetization and later taking out the Rs. 1.75 lakh crore surplus money from the Reserve Bank of India to hand it over to the Prime Minister's business friends," he said.

Touting his own state's economy, Vaghela said that Chhattisgarh was the only state in the country that was not affected by the current economic crisis caused by Modi's ill-advised policies and Chhattisgarh was also the only state to see a 36% increase in auto sales.

Congress Bihar in-charge Shakti Sinh Gohil, speaking on the occasion, said that the BJP believed in the policy of speaking from both sides of its mouth by saying one thing and doing another (munh mein Ram, bagal mein chhoori) while Congress had always believed in a justice based on 'Ishwar Allah Tero Naam, Sabko Sanmati De Bhagwan).

Others to speak on the occasion included Youth Congress national president Srinivas B V, Congress national secretary Chandan Yadav, Congress state president Madan Mohan Jha, senior party leaders Sadanand Singh, Shakeel Ahmed Khan and may others.
