Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank Withdrawal limit eased, boardroom battle begins

Even as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) gave minor relief to the Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative Bank (PMCB) depositors by increasing their withdrawal limit to Rs 10,000, a boardroom battle seems to be emerging over the loans given to troubled real estate firm Housing Development and Infrastructure Ltd (HDIL).

A small faction felt that the advances to the beleaguered HDIL landed the urban co-op bank in a soup, sources said. The larger group, however, justified the decision and reiterated that the HDIL group had supported the bank when it was going through a crisis in 2004.

The bank's link to the HDIL group has been widely circulated and the exposure to the realty firm has been pegged at around Rs 2,500 crore.

"PMCB was helping HDIL procure loans through various credit lines and accounts. A month back, when the bank took another exposure of Rs 100 crore, one of the directors alerted RBI and action was taken," a source said.

RBI, which had on Tuesday imposed business restrictions on PMCB for six months, clarified on Thursday that its action was "necessitated on account of major financial irregularities, failure of internal control and systems of the bank and wrong and under-reporting of its exposures."

Meanwhile, in an action-packed Thursday, the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) refused to accept HDIL's cheque of Rs 100 crore, which was taken as a loan from PMCB, to pay Bank of India in a one-time settlement offer. PMCB had sanctioned the loan to HDIL just a month back.

The NCLT's decision on Thursday meant that HDIL would not be able to use the recent Rs 100-crore loan that PMCB had cleared. Bank of India had moved the NCLT against HDIL for liquidation, for an unpaid loan of Rs 500 crore.

The day started early for Sarang Wadhawan, vice-chairman and managing director of HDIL, who was woken up to a peaceful protest by a group of PMCB staff members outside his gate at Union Park in Bandra in a bid to pressure him to repay the loans. Many protesters were branch managers.

"Wadhawan, a Sindhi from Punjab, had stood by PMCB when there were rumours about it shutting down in 2004 and there was a run on the bank's deposits," a source said. The bank's support to HDIL in terms of loans has, however, not won favour in some quarters.

"The over-exposure to the HDIL group has pulled us down," another source said.

The flow of developments is showing no signs of ending. The important question on everybody's mind is whether the depositors will be able to get back their savings.
