Rajnath: Kolkata events a constitutional breach : The Tribune India

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 4

The last night’s confrontation between the CBI and the West Bengal police echoed in the Lok Sabha today. Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh said the development posed a serious threat to the federal structure of the country and hinted at a constitutional “breach”– which many saw as a hint at possible imposition of the President’s rule in the state.

The Trinamool Congress (TMC) accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of “damaging the constitutional structure”. Rajnath Singh said: “Yesterday’s events, in a way, hinted at a breach of constitutional procedure.” Any conflict between the country’s law enforcement agencies was unfortunate and the events were unprecedented, he said.

The Lok Sabha saw repeated adjournments. Speaker Sumitra Mahajan adjourned Question Hour and then allowed MPs to raise their points during Zero Hour. The House was again adjourned amid sloganeering.

The Rajya Sabha witnessed similar scenes and sloganeering by TMC members over alleged misuse of the CBI by the Centre.

In the Lok Sabha, the Opposition condemned the CBI move to raid the house of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar, a 1989-batch IPS officer.

TMC MPs termed the CBI “chor” (thief) and raised slogans against PM Narendra Modi. Senior TMC leader Saugata Roy said there was no specific instruction from the Supreme Court to raid Rajeev Kumar’s premises. West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee is observing a sit-in against the CBI.

Rajanth said the CBI had to go to the house of Rajeev Kumar as he did not respond to the CBI summons and was not cooperating in the probe in the Saradha chit fund scam. The CBI, he said, was probing the case as per Supreme Court’s direction.

The CBI, Roy said, was being used to pressure the Opposition. Matters reached such a pass that Saumitra Khan, a TMC MP who joined the BJP on January 9, was not allowed to speak by TMC MPs from the Opposition benches. The MP “walked across” to the ruling benches and then launched a tirade against West Bengal CM.

The TMC received support from the Congress, Biju Janata Dal (which often backs BJP on many issues), NCP, Samajwadi Party and TDP. Mallikaarjun Kharge of the Congress said, “Whoever raises voice is suppressed.”
