DNA Edit: Pak warmongering - Hardliners are baying for war and India needs to be alert

India’s intelligence and security agencies are in the orange alert mode. With a neighbour like Pakistan, they cannot take chances.

An orange alert, a notch below red alert, has been sounded in all parts of the country. Clearly, agencies know something that the others don’t. The Centre has put various sensitive installations, including five front-line army and air force bases, along with 30 cities across India on high alert following intelligence inputs that Pakistan-based terrorists, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), may strike inside the country at multiple levels.

The intelligence inputs also include heightened threat perception to three top targets on JeM’s hitlist — Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah and National Security Adviser Ajit Doval.

Accordingly, security has been tightened at all frontline IAF airbases. The heightened alert comes after Army Chief General Bipin Rawat confirmed reactivation of JeM’s advance training camp at Balakot in Pakistan’s Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa region, which was bombed by IAF fighter planes in February to avenge the Pulwama bomb blast.

IAF sources have independently confirmed a serious level of security threat to frontline bases following inputs from multi-agency and human sources. Included in the threats is a letter received by the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security written in Hindi, reportedly by a Jaish operative, which has threatened revenge attacks against India’s decision to abrogate Article 370.

Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh - himself a former soldier - has alerted the Centre to the possibilities of drone attacks. With the recent deadly drone hit on a Saudi airfield, which went viral on social media, the prospects of launching a similar attack at a prominent Indian target could be tempting. It would leave India with no option but to retaliate and get sucked into a larger, if limited, conflict.

In addition, the security agencies have factored in airdropping of large arms and ammunition in Amritsar by drones flying from Pakistan. The dropped consignment includes a cache of AK-47s, grenades and satellite phones. It would be enticing for the baffled, frustrated and under-pressure Pakistani Army to provoke India since a conventional battle is out of their reach.

They know that India’s political stakes as a responsible power and its economic prospects as one of the fastest growing large economies could be put under strain in a conflict situation. So to draw attention to Kashmir - something that Pakistan has been trying to do unsuccessfully for seven decades, but would not mind trying again - anything is possible.

The biggest sign of the times are evident in the Pakistan media, where barring a few sensible and sane voices, there is non-stop clamour for ‘jang’ or war. One such TV programme this week was devoted to an imaginary Indian plan to carry out attacks on Bahawalpur city - the plan, needless to say, was thwarted by the unseen brave soldiers of the ISI! With Kargil architect Pervez Musharraf as the expert commentator on this show, obviously the sky was the limit. Coupled with Prime Minister Imran Khan’s daily rantings of a nuclear holocaust, India needs to keep up its guard.
