Man shoots inside police station while depositing his firearm

pistol

police station

Bengaluru

While depositing a fire-arm

Says he was checking ifwas loaded, but excuse won’t keep him out of jailAround 30 policemen of the Nandagudinear Hosakote inRural had a miraculous escape after a person, who had come to deposit his pistol in view of the by-election, accidentally opened fire while checking if the pistol was empty.Farm owner N Srinivas, 46, a resident of Naduvinapura village in Nandagudi, created this trigger-happy faux pas around 12.45 pm inside the premises of the police station. He has since been arrested and remanded to judicial custody.A police constable had gone to the residence of Srinivas on Monday and asked him to deposit his .9mm pistol in the police station. Accordingly, Srinivas turned up at the police station to do his duty.At the time Srinivas had gone to the station there were 30 policemen there as an inspection duty was going on in view of a station visit by the Superintendent of Police (SP) and the Additional SP. “Balappa Valikar, a police constable assigned the duty of the station writer was asked to complete the formalities. When the station writer was about to enter Srinivas’ details in the gun licence book, he heard a gunshot. The bullet had hit the floor of the station, damaging the tiles. And the bullet was fired by Srinivas from his pistol, which created tension insidethe police station,” said an officer.A police officer immediately warned Srinivas against opening fire again and snatched the pistol from him. When Srinivas was questioned, he claimed that he was checking if the pistol was still loaded or empty.“When the officer checked the pistol, he saw there were still five more rounds. Srinivas was pointing the pistol towards the ground when he fired. If he had lifted the pistol just a bit higher, the consequences would have been unimaginable. Luckily none of the policemen were injured in the incident. He should have emptied the pistol before depositing it at the station. We are contemplating to cancel his gun licence as he is not trained enough to use a pistol. He had taken the licence claiming that he is facing a threat to his life,” the officer added.Srinivas was immediately arrested and a case against him has been booked under section 27 of the Arms Act of 1959 and act endangering life or personal safety of other (IPC 336).Meanwhile, the Hosakote assembly constituency by-election that was scheduled for October 21, will not be happening for now as the Supreme Court on Thursday stayed bypolls in all 15 Assembly constituencies of Karnataka.* A person has to separate the rounds from the weapon and must deposit a weapon which has no ammunition.* The officer incharge of the pistol deposits will check to reconfirm that the pistol is empty.
