Tit-for-Tat! CFI demands Arrest of Man who Instigated Students with his ‘Hindu Rashtra’ Remark

Tit-for-Tat! CFI demands Arrest of Man who Instigated Students with his ‘Hindu Rashtra’ Remark

Mangaluru : Tit-for-tat, in response to the comments and tweets by BJP State President Nalin Kumar Kateel and Mangaluru South constituency MLA Vedavyas Kamath, condemning the act of the students manhandling the person, a insurance agent who had made ‘Hindu Rashtra’ remark, both both BJP leaders had said that no one who disrupts peace in the region will be spared, the Campus Front of India (CFI) has now come forward demanding that the man who allegedly instigated a group of students with communal remarks, also be arrested, while the police have arrested only the students who confronted the man.



In a press statement by CFI’s Dakshina Kannada district president Mohammed Sadiq accuses the police of acting in a biased manner with regard to the case by only arresting the students and not the man who provoked them with communal remarks. He states that there has been a rise in ‘anti-constitutional’ statement of calling India a ‘Hindu Rashtra’ by Sangh Parivar members. The man from Bantwal, who is a insurance agent has instigated the students who were discussing about nationalism at the mall. The police should also arrest the man for his remarks which instigated the students and also for making ‘anti-national’ remark of “Hindu Rashtra”.

“Earlier, when students belonging to minority community were attacked, the same police had charged them under weaker sections of the IPC to weaken the case. But in this particular case, the police seem to be biased and have sided with one party involved in the case. Hence, the police must act accordingly considering the students’ future” adds Sadiq.

It should be noted that as of how police have arrested five young students, including a minor boy soon after the incident that took place at Forum Fiza mall on Wednesday. When asked whether action will be taken against the man (Manjunath from Bantwal) who made the communal remark in a video that had gone viral, police commissioner Harsha had said he will look into it if any complaint is lodged against Manjunath.

Also read related article :
