Citizens help one another as rain swamps houses

Untitled Carousel 71318928

Untitled Carousel 71318812

71303904

Untitled Carousel 71318860

It has not even been a month that torrential rains waned from Pune that another thunderous spell lashed the citizens, who were left in a lurch. And, like last time, help poured in, too, in generous amounts as people — who were in a better place — did not let others stranded. Several anecdotes were recorded from the city, ones that speak of exemplary humanity.~~71318800~~For instance, the Kurambhatti family put all their might to help the residents of Tangewale Colony, whom they always considered a family. When these residents’ belongings were washed away due to the flood, they were the first ones to reach for their help. While they could not do much in the night — as the water gushed with force — in the morning, Ruta Kurambhatti sprang into action. She catered to the needs of her house help who is down with dengue and even opened her residence to those affected by the spell of the rain. This brought relief to Tangewala Colony residents like Rekha Thakure, who lost everything to the deluge. “We were sitting on the streets since Wednesday night. Finally, these people from bungalow helped us, by asking us to sit inside. I did not know what I was going to do. Finally, I have some respite,” she said.Kurambhatti said that it was her duty to extend the helping hand. “We have known them for years,” she said, adding, “We have seen them grow up. When I saw them huddled near a collapsed compound wall, I was worried. That is when I asked them to come. I have asked them to demand anything that they need — be it space to stay, clothes or food. They are a part of our family. We cannot leave them stranded like this.”Apart from help to the stranded, some daring rescue efforts were also witnessed during these torrential hours. Fire brigade official Maruti Deokule seemingly risked his own life to save a family of four, including a10-month-old baby, residing at Mitamandal Chowk.The Ambil Odha that flows through this area swelled over the last two nights, much to the bewilderment of Mayuresh Natu, an IT professional. He and his family had never seen such an occurrence over the many years of his residence in the area. When the water levels spiked on Wednesday night, he was clueless. Mayuresh and his wife, Sarita along with their baby, climbed atop a water tank in the veranda as the water gushed in. Mayuresh’s father, Pramod and mother Sanhita stood on a chair and table in the hall. Their cries for help were heard by the people in the neighbouring media house office, who halted a fire brigade that was passing by. At the location, officer Deokule jumped into the water and rescued the entire family.“My wife sat on a table and I was standing on a chair inside the home. The water level was increasing at a terrible speed. When I was losing hope, the fire brigade officials came to our rescue,” said Pramod.Deokule claimed that while rescuing others was easy, the baby proved to be a challenge. He said, “The baby was constantly moving. We luckily found a bathtub, in which we kept the ten-month-old and then placed it on the tube meant for rescue. I swam with the baby and handed him over to his grandparents. This was my duty,” he said.^^71307014^^
