Going Undercover

Of late, it seems, more than ever, it’s the spies who are being watched. Netflix has witnessed a wave of series in the spy genre, featuring clandestine activities and whiteknuckle tension, attracting viewers away from traditionally popular genres.

Set against the backdrop of the Indian sub-continent, spy thriller Bard of Blood, starring Emraan Hashmi, Kirti Kulhari, Sobhita Dhulipala and Vineet Kumar Singh, takes centre stage. "It has been a long time coming. Bollywood hasn’t done justice to the spy genre. Only [maybe] Agent Vinod and Raazi," Hashmi tells Mail Today. "But it’s going to be tricky in Bollywood, as we have to figure out how to insert songs in to market the film," he adds with a hint of sarcasm in his voice. "I hope Bard of Blood is the beginning of many original spy dramas".

To Hashmi, the genre is proving attractive because espionage is a topic of reality, projecting viewers into a world that feels mysterious and thrilling. "It starts with intrigue. Spies have always fascinated us. We don’t know much about how they function, and [so] secretively. Four months ago, I went to a spy museum in Vienna and got to know about many interesting espionage activities that we can easily make umpteen films and series related to the subject."

Director Ribhu Gupta said shooting the web series was exhausting’ but is one of the finest experiences’ of his life.

An adaptation of Bilal Siddiqi’s eponymous novel, this is a sevenepisode series of power and deceit, directed by Ribhu Dasgupta, who garnered praises for his 2016 gritty thriller Te3n. "Early last year, I read the book, and loved it. So when I was asked to direct the adaptation, I jumped at the offer," says Dasgupta. "The task was exhausting, but it is one of the finest experiences I have had as a filmmaker."

Shot in Leh, Ladakh, Rajasthan, Delhi and Mumbai over 70 days, and despite the burden of finding a contemporary relevance or putting fun into functional it didn’t veer away from the book, adds Dasgupta. Although things have been altered, the idea was to stick to the plot. The story is the key and the rest followed.

Since there’s nothing quite so morally straightforward about a spy, with power, manipulation and deceit, Hashmi says playing the lead, agent Kabir Anand, was not easy. "Understanding the fear syndrome of spies, how they function in enemy territory and infiltrate to extract information is like walking in a minefield Getting into that psyche was difficult. But playing any character comes with its own challenges. One has to find that voice. I read books and articles, and watched related documentaries and along the way I [came up with] my own interpretation of the character."

Despite its richness, spy fiction often seems so rigidly masculine. Emphasising no one should be too surprised that female agents are every bit as ambitious as their male colleagues, Dhulipala, who plays undercover agent Isha Khanna, says Bard of Blood addresses the need to break the stigma that spy world is ill-suited to women. "I think a spy is a spy is a spy that it happens to be a woman is incidental. Playing this role was more enriching than empowering," says the former beauty queen. It’s true my character had to prove she’s worthy of a chance to be a spy, deal with gender dynamics, which I can relate to, but she is as good. I got to do action scenes for the first time, and have a newfound respect for the people who do this job.

KIRTI GETS GRITY

Pink actress Kirti Kulhari, who has cornered the market in playing a host of interesting roles, says her character is not in the book, and was developed only for the series. "I play Jannat Mari, a Balochi girl, who has immense emotional and mental strength. It is a complex, conflicted character, with so much going on in her life. I fell in love with the character in first impression." To get into the zone of the character, Kulhari says she watched a documentary on Balochistan to have an idea about the milieu it’s set in and learned to speak Urdu.

Spy thriller is a rich and inventive genre, and there are no signs of it dying out any time soon. And unsurprisingly, Kulhari, who loves the thrill of espionage thrillers, says she’d love to play a spy someday. "It’s on my bucket list!"

WE TRAINED TO USE GUNS AND KNIVES’

Beside Emraan Hashmi and Sobhita Dhulipala, Vineet Kumar Singh is one of the three-person mission called upon to rescue Indian spies from Balochistan in Bard of Blood. Playing a commando and an undercover agent, tackling bombs, bullets and, of course, enemies, was a learning experience nailing guns and other weapons Kumar says. "We did training to use small guns, AK- 47 and knives."

Like many, Singh is a fan of James Bond, but while growing up, he loved watching the TV series Byomkesh Bakshi, a Bengali fictional detective. "Byomkesh Bakshi left a great impression on me. Of course, Bard of Blood is very different from that. It’s so action-oriented," says the actor who won hearts with Anurag Kashyap’s Mukkabaaz.
