Bigg Boss 13 grand premiere: Devoleena's sexy dance, Salman's shirtless avatar

Bigg Boss 13 grand premiere: Devoleena Bhattacharjee to dance on Aashiq Banaya Aapne, Salman Khan to be seen in shirtless avatar on the show.

Bigg Boss 13 grand premiere is all set to air on Colors TV at 9 pm. The channel recently aired a promo where an actress is seen dancing to the title track of Aashiq Banaya Aapne. The actress's face is not clear but she seems to be Devoleena Bhattacharjee aka Gopi Bahu.

In the promo, the Saath Nibhaana Saathiya actress enters in a saree and soon sheds her 'sanskaari' avatar and is seen in a maroon thigh-high slit dress.

New promo : Glimpse from the premiere night performance.

Who is she? Devoleena or Rashmi? #BiggBoss13 pic.twitter.com/oVdRx3hHJf Biggbrother720 (@Biggbrother720) September 27, 2019

Salman Khan's stylist Ashley Rebello shared a picture of the actor from the sets of Bigg Boss 13, where he is shooting for the grand premiere. A shirtless Salman Khan is seen in the picture. Ashley captioned the image, "SK in the house."

Salman Khan will shoot for his performance today. The housemates started shooting for the show from September 26. All the contestants will enter the house today and the episode will be aired on Sunday.

Before making a smashing entry in Bigg Boss 13, Salman Khan will be seen in Dance Deewane grand finale on Saturday, September 28.

This year, Bigg Boss is will be aired at 10.30 pm and the contestants will be up on their feet from Day 1 as the show will reach its finale in a month's time. In an exclusive chat with India Today, Salman Khan said, "They are going to start the show from Day 1. In four weeks, they will have a finale. After that, some important twists and turns will be introduced in the show. And, two months after that, we will have the main winner. Earlier, what used to happen was if the contestants didn’t gel up in the first two weeks, it used to hamper the pace of the show. Here, they have 'bhidaaoed' them right from Day 1. 'Bhidaao' in the sense that the tasks will come in and they will start competing for the four weeks finale. So, they will be on their toes.

In a picture shared by a Bigg Boss fan page on Twitter, Salman Khan is seen in white attire. Check out the picture below.
