Priyanka Gandhi Vadra returns to India, meets brother Rahul Gandhi to discuss 'Mission UP'

New Delhi:

Amid intense speculations over her impending public programme, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra returned to India on Monday night and met her brother and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi. Sources say that both leaders discussed crucial ‘Mission UP’ during the key meeting at the Congress president’s Tughlaq Road residence. This was the first time that Priyanka Gandhi Vadra met Congress chief after she was inducted in the Grand Old Party on January 23 and appointed as General Secretary Uttar Pradesh (East). Apart from her, Jyotiraditya Scindia was also present in the meeting. Scindia was appointed as Congress General Secretary Uttar Pradesh (West).

According to Press Trust of India, the Monday meeting was just a prelude to Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s packed schedule in coming days. On Thursday, she is set to take part in the Congress meeting in which all AICC general secretaries and in-charges of various states will plan the strategy for the Lok Sabha election due by May.

Rahul Gandhi has also called a meeting of state chiefs and Congress Legislature Party leaders on Saturday in the national capital, to review preparedness for the general election.

Sister’s entry into active politics is seen as much-needed help for brother Rahul Gandhi. After Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s appointment as General Secretary, the Congress chief had expressed his happiness. Talking to media in Amethi, Gandhi had said that he was very happy with the news. “I am personally very happy that she will work with me now. She is extremely capable person,” a visibly happy Congress president said. On the impact of Mrs Vadra’s entry into politics, Gandhi said that “we can totally trust her. The Congress won’t work on backfoot now in Uttar Pradesh. Priyanka has mission UP with her.” On his political opponents, Gandhi said that “BJP wale ghabraaye hue hain (BJP is very scared).”

Gandhi had also congratulated Jyotiraditya Scindia for the new role as Congress in-charge in UP (West). Scindia is a very dynamic leader. The Congress chief also didn’t shy away from talking about the crucial SP-BSP alliance in Uttar Pradesh. “We have no enmity with Mayawati ji and Akhilesh ji, in fact I respect them a lot. We are ready to cooperate with them wherever possible. Ultimately the aim of all three of us is to defeat BJP, but yes our fight is to save Congress ideology,” Gandhi said.

Numerous Congress leaders were seen congratulating Priyanka Gandhi Vadra after her appointment. “As Priyanka Vadra Gandhi takes charge of Uttar Pradesh as AICC gen secy the politics of the Hindi heartland is about to change. With a new general in command each UP Congressman is battle ready,” former minister Jitin Prasada said on Twitter.

Reacting to the story, BJP UP in-charge JP Nadda said, “Priyanka Gandhi officially becomes General Secretary of Congress, but everyone knows how this household company works. It is also first official declaration from Congress that Rahul ji has failed, he should tell what is his view of Parivarwadi soch?”
