Rahul has gone from calling Saradha a scam to defending scamster: Jaitley calls out flipflop on Mamata vs CBI

Rahul has gone from calling Saradha a scam to defending scamster: Jaitley calls out flipflop on Mamata vs CBI

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, who’s currently in the US for treatment, wrote a strongly-worded rejoinder on Mamata Banerjee’s anarchist battle against the CBI and Centre.

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, who’s currently in the US for treatment, wrote a strongly-worded rejoinder on Mamata Banerjee’s anarchist battle against the CBI and Centre.

He wrote: “Mamata Banerjee’s disproportionate over-reaction to the CBI wanting to interrogate the Kolkata Police Chief has flagged several issues for a public discourse. The most important being that a Kleptocrat’s Club now aspires to capture the reigns of India. It would be a gross error to assume that she did this because of a routine investigation involving a Police Officer. She did it to defocus from other opposition aspirants for the highest office and to project herself as the nucleus of India’s opposition. Today the CBI is being brutally prevented by physical force and detention of its officer from investigating a crime legally within its jurisdiction, in the State of West Bengal. It is a textbook illustration of a State Government assaulting Federalism. When Mamata Banerjee decided to sit on a Dharna she received support of many opposition parties who aspire to be in power. Most of them, or their affiliates are today being investigated, prosecuted and in some cases have also been convicted for crimes of corruption.”

He added: “Curiously, the AICC President somersaulted his position from Saradha being a scam to “shoulder-to-shoulder” support to scamster. Interestingly, the first family of Congress where most members are on bail. A non-ideological short-lived coalition of opposition is disaster for India. 2019 Election will be either Modi Vs. Chaos or Modi Vs. Anarchy. Mamata Banerjee’s latest acrobatics are the best evidence of the kind of governance India’s opposition can provide.”

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Sunday called up West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and extended support to her, saying the entire opposition is together and it will defeat the fascist forces.

He alleged the events in West Bengal were part of an unrelenting attack on India'a institutions by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP.

He said the Congress stood shoulder to shoulder with Banerjee who is on an overnight protest dharna against CBI's attempt to question Kolkata Police chief Rajeev Kumar in connection with chit fund scams.

"The entire opposition will stand together and defeat these fascist forces," he tweeted.

Read: Latest update from Didi's Dharna

This led to BJP sharing old snippets of Rahul Gandhi slamming Mamata Banerjee over the Chit Fund Scam, Syndicate Raj and Saradha Scam. They also wrote: “Diagnosed: Multiple Personality Disorder is characterized by a tleast two distinct and enduring personality states - there is trouble remembering certain events, beyond ordinary forgetfulness. These states alternately show in person's behavior. Get well soon, Rahul ji.”

Read his full text below:
