Bihar: Man reaches police station with daughter's half-burnt hand; accuses in-laws of murdering her

According to Sangeeta Devi's father, she was harassed by her in-laws and husband for dowry (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A woman was allegedly set ablaze by her husband and in-laws in Bihar The accused allegedly killed the woman as their demands for dowry had not been fulfilled The deceased's father recovered her half-burnt hand from the pyre and went to the police station

Patna: A man in Bihar's Champaran took his daughter's half-burnt hand to the police station on Tuesday. The man alleged that his daughter's in-laws murdered her and were performing her last rites without his knowledge. The deceased has been identified as Sangeeta Devi.

Sangeet Devi had been married to Bhutkun Ram for the last ten years. Randheer Kumar Bhatt, inspector Lauriya police station said on Wednesday that an investigation is underway into the case. According to Sangeeta Devi's father, she was harassed by her in-laws and husband over dowry. The deceased's father Ramnath Ram said that five of the deceased's in-laws were involved in harassing her.

According to a report, the accused have been absconding. In his complaint, Ramnath claimed that he married his daughter to Bhutkun Ram around ten years ago in a lavish ceremony. The couple has an eight-year-old daughter and two seven-year-old sons.

Ramnath said that on Tuesday night, his daughter's brother-in-law Saheb, Sanjeet, Deepu, her father-in-law and her husband murdered her. Ramnath said that when he received information about his daughter's death, he rushed to the crematorium.

When he raised an objection to the burning of his daughter's body, the accused beat him up. The deceased's father said that he did not want the last rites to be performed. He managed to pull out his daughter's hand from the pyre and went to the police station.

Uttar Pradesh woman burnt alive by husband, in-laws over dowry

A similar incident came to light from Pilibhit district of Uttar Pradesh in September this year. The husband and her in-laws of a woman allegedly set her ablaze after their dowry demands went unfulfilled. The woman had suffered 90 per cent third-degree burns.

The woman was identified as Rajkumari. Rajkumari's father said that she was married for four months. He said that they had tried their best to meet the demands made by Rajkumari's in-laws. He said that even though their demands had been fulfilled, the accused subjected Rajkumari to mental and physical torture. A few days before the alleged incident, Rajkumari's husband had asked her for Rs 2 lakh. When his demand went unfulfilled, he allegedly poured kerosene on his wife and set herself on fire.

The six of the accused were identified as Rajkumari's husband Dharm Prakash, father Daya Ram, mother Kamla Devi, brother Sanjeev Kumar, sister Sunita and husband Manoj. The accused were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Dowry Prohibition Act.
