Imran Khan brings up Kashmir, repeats war rhetoric in hour-long UNGA rant

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Friday addressed the 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly and yet again brought up the Kashmir issue. In an hour-long rant at the UNGA session, Imran Khan also repeated his war rhetoric, saying that Pakistan will fight if a conventional war starts with India.

Speaking of Kashmir issue, Imran Khan alleged that India violated the Constitution when the Indian government scrapped the provisions under Article 370 that granted a special status to Jammu and Kashmir (J&K).

Attacking India on the situation in Kashmir, Imran Khan said that the state has been under lockdown since August 5 and claimed that "more than 7,000 children have been put under detention by the Indian Army". He also said that "there would be a bloodbath when the curfew in Kashmir is lifted".

"Has PM Modi thought what would happen when the curfew in Kashmir is lifted? Do you think people in Kashmir would accept that you have withdrawn the special status? Thousands of children in Kashmir have been put under detention. They, too, will come out on the streets after the curfew in the state is lifted. There will be a bloodbath when the curfew is lifted from the state," Imran Khan said.

Imran Khan also said that after the curfew is lifted in J&K, there will be another terror attack like Pulwama and Pakistan will be blamed.

The Pakistan prime minister said, "If people come out on the streets, Army will shoot them. We do hear about pellet guns being used on the people of Kashmir. But after the curfew is lifted in Kashmir, there will be another attack like Pulwama and Pakistan will be blamed."

"If there's a bloodbath, Muslims will become radicals. You are forcing Muslims into radicalisation," Imran Khan said.

If conventional war starts, Pak will fight: Imran Khan

Imran Khan also said that if a conventional war starts with India, "Pakistan will fight".

"If the conventional war starts with a country which is four times the size of Pakistan, what will we do? This is what I ask myself a lot of times. But I say this, we will fight but think what happens when two nuclear countries fight," PM Imran Khan said.

No militant groups in Pak: Imran Khan

Attacking India for accusing Pakistan of harbouring terrorist groups, Imran Khan said that while there are none in the country since his government dismantled what was left of these groups when he was elected a year ago.

"When I came to power, my priority was Pakistan would be a country which would try to bring peace. The Mujahideen groups were trained by Pakistan and funded by the US to do jihad against Soviet when they occupied Afghanistan. Come 9/11, Pakistan joined the war against terrorism. Now that we joined the US which had occupied Afghanistan, these groups turned against us. At least 70,000 Pakistanis died in this war. When we came to power, we would dismantle what was left of these groups," he said.

Imran Khan said, "I know India keeps accusing us that there are military groups in Pakistan but there are not. The United Nations officials can come and check themselves."

PM Modi's RSS inspired by Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini: Imran Khan

Attacking the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and PM Narendra Modi, Imran Khan said that the Indian prime minister's "whole life is RSS" and the Sangh is "inspired by German dictator Adolf Hitler, Italian dictator Benito Mussolini".

"RSS believes in the ethnic cleansing of Muslims. RSS goons butchered hundreds of Muslims. This is arrogance. This makes people do cruel things. Something PM Modi has done. Arrogance has blinded PM Modi," he said.

Imran Khan also quoted Congress to peddle his anti-India rhetoric during his UNGA address. "The previous Congress Home Minister gave a statement that in RSS camps, terrorists are being trained," Imran Khan said.

Imran Khan's war rhetoric was in sharp contrast to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's peace message from the same podium a few minutes earlier in which he said India is a country, that has "given the world, not war, but Buddha's message of peace."

Meanwhile, India will use the right to reply option to Imran Khan's speech at the UN general assembly.
