‘Not everyone feels there’s life beyond jingoism of nuclear war, jihad’: India’s dig at Imran’s UNGA speech

Imran Khan speaks at the UNGA | Photo Credit: PTI

New York: Shortly after Imran Khan took aim at India in his speech at the annual United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), Raveesh Kumar, spokesperson of the Ministry of External Affairs, slammed the Pakistani Prime Minister of misusing the global platform.

Referring to Khan’s speech in which he referred to India, PM Narendra Modi, Kashmir, RSS etc, Kumar suggested that the address was full of jingoism.

“But then, not everyone feels that there is life beyond the jingoism of nuclear war, jihad, encouraging terrorism, war mongering, falsehood, deceit and misuse of the highest global platform,” the MEA spokesperson tweeted, along with an image of a map of Pakistan superimposed with the words that were part of the Pakistan PM’s speech.

For example, the picture says, Khan mentioned Islam 70 times in his speech, Terrorism 23 times, Kashmir 21 times, India 16 times, PM Modi 12 times etc.

But then, not everyone feels that there is life beyond the jingoism of nuclear war, jihad, encouraging terrorism, war mongering, falsehood, deceit and misuse of the highest global platform. pic.twitter.com/p67KjjKFrS — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) September 27, 2019

Khan’s more then 50-minute-long speech was nothing but a repetition of what the Pakistan PM has been saying all along since India abrogate Article 370 and revoked Kashmir’s special status.

Appealing openly to the Muslims across the world against "ethnic cleansing of Muslims" by an "RSS Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi", Khan warned of "a bloodbath" in Jammu and Kashmir when the curfew (restrictions) is lifted.

"What happens then? Has anyone thought about that?" he asked.

He went on to warn that "there will be another Pulwama and then India will blame Pakistan". The Pakistan PM was referring to the February 14 terror attack in J&K’s Pulwama in which 40 CRPF jawans were killed by a terrorist of the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed group.

Forgetting that his country was a sanctuary for terrorism, Khan said India was working to push Pakistan to the Financial Action Task Force blacklist.

"The RSS believes in ethnic cleansing of Muslims and PM Modi is a leader of the RSS," he said.

Referring repeatedly to Islam and Prophet Mohammed, he said: "The Prophet lives in our hearts and the pain of the heart is much more than pain of the body."
