India vs Pakistan: Trump urged to stop nuclear disaster - ‘We’re eyeball to eyeball’

President Trump welcomes Imran Khan to the White House

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

And, responding to Mr Trump’s remark that he hoped the two countries could “come together” to work out a solution, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan likewise urged the President himself to get involved directly instead. Questioned about the possibility of India and Pakistan finding a way of settling their differences among themselves, Mr Quereshi told Newsweek: “I think we’ve come to the conclusion after one year of continuously trying that it is pointless. “After these actions I do not see any bilateral movement, the only way this issue can be resolved is through third-party facilitation.

“President Trump can play a role, he has a lot of influence over them and the Security Council, which is responsible for peace and security, can play a role.” “What India has done by this unilateral, illegal action of their’s is they have threatened the peace and security of the region. “After these actions I do not see any bilateral movement, the only way this issue can be resolved is through third-party facilitation. “President Trump can play a role, he has a lot of influence over them and the Security Council, which is responsible for peace and security, can play a role.”

Kashmiris hold torches as they attend a protest today

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan has asked Mr Trump to intercede

Two nuclear-armed states face-to-face, eyeball-to-eyeball that’s a very dangerous situation Shah Mahmood Quereshi

“What India has done by this unilateral, illegal action of their’s is they have threatened the peace and security of the region. “Two nuclear-armed states face-to-face, eyeball-to-eyeball that’s a very dangerous situation.” Relations between the two neighbours and traditional rivals have been deteriorating steadily this year, ever since a terror attack by militants in the disputed Kashmir region left 44 Indian paramilitary police dead. In response, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi order an air strike on a camp run by militant organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed which New Dehli claimed killed 300 people, although Islamabad denied this. JUST IN: China flexes muscles with show of strength in South China Sea ‘De facto control’

One of the Indian jets downed earlier this year

Days later Pakistan shot down shot down two Indian jets, parading captured pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman on television before handing him back to the Indian authorities “as a goodwill gesture”. More recently, Mr Modi upped the stakes by revoking Article 370, the section of the Indian constitution which guarantees special status to Kashmir and neighbouring Jammu, with Pakistan’s Prime Minister Imran Khan calling it a “historic blunder”. Speaking on Monday, Mr Trump said he hoped India and Pakistan could come together to resolve their differences over Kashmir. However, Mr Khan said he would like the United States to use its influence to help. DON'T MISS:

Pakistan-India crisis: Khan sends war warning to Modi over 'extremism' [ANALYSIS]

India-Pakistan crisis hots up as minister mocks Modi [NEW]

Imran Khan fires back at Modi over Kashmir [INSIGHT]

US President Donald Trump has suggested the two countries

Protests in Kashmir, where Article 370 has been revoked

Mr Trump and Mr Khan met on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly. Mr Trump met Mr Modi later in the week. The president reiterated to Mr Khan as they began their meeting with reporters present that he would be willing to mediate between India and Pakistan over Kashmir. Muslim-majority Kashmir has long been a flashpoint between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan. Both countries rule parts of Kashmir while claiming it in full. Two of the three wars they have fought have been over it.

Both India and Pakistan have nuclear weapons

Speaking in March after the shooting down of the two jets, Joshua Pollack, the editor of the Nonproliferation Review and a senior research associate with the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey, told Express.co.uk: “There has been an entire series of these crises going back to about 2001. “Usually, the White House, State Department, and Pentagon scramble to urge restraint on the parties. Not this time, as far as anyone can tell; they had to figure out how to extricate themselves from this mess.

India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi with Donald Trump

Trending
