Ensure Insurers Know the Climate

By Praveen Gupta

Not everything people insure is benign. Insuring — and reinsuring — anything has its unintended consequences for the climate. With the growing realisation of the environmental and societal implications of insurance, Indian insurers should distance themselves from anything that adversely affects overall sustainability. Globally, enlightened insurers are moving towards a principle of sustainable insurance, thereby attempting to create a more risk aware and resilient society dealing with climate change proactively.

Insurers are known for their expertise in pricing and quantifying risk — underwriting. Unfortunately, in the process, they not only end up insuring what contributes to carbon footprint but also investing their surplus funds into such businesses. So, ‘inadvertently’, they end up aiding and abetting climate change. Two camps are already emerging — players in the US who allegedly continue to support the fossil fuel industry; and the Europeans, who are increasingly distancing themselves from it.

There are compelling reasons why Indian insurers cannot afford to ignore the call for sustainability. Among the top 20 most polluted cities in the world, 15 are in India. We are also witnessing an alarming pace of deforestation, rising seas, eroding coastline, falling groundwater levels, melting glaciers, deteriorating air quality, and vehicular and industrial emissions.

While insurance remains highly under-penetrated, insurers have enough information to be the ‘go to’ for what is generally man-made but referred to as ‘act of god’ perils. By sheer instinct, insurers are caught in their own silos and miss out on leveraging the humongous diversity they have at their disposal.

Take what happened at Salamieh in Syria. One of the finest cotton-growing areas in the world was turned into a desert primarily due to excessive groundwater consumption. The dependent unemployed population moved into the urban hinterland and fuelled the brewing socioeconomic unrest that triggered a civil war.

If only crop or micro-insurers had picked up the early signals, today’s narrative may have been avoided. Insuring and investing in the fossil fuel industry are not the only triggers for climate change. Insuring, say, hydroelectric projects in vulnerable geographies, or asset-creation in earthquake- and storm-prone zones, will also ensure that the insurance, as well as the dependent population and businesses, remain fragile.

Writer Amitav Ghosh could not be more candid when he called flooding vulnerability levels of Mumbai and Chennai to be no different than that of Miami. A Fukushima kind of scenario, with an atomic energy plant sitting in the precincts of Mumbai, seems too far-fetched for most of us. But then, so does the thumb rule of a 1% increase in insurance penetration resulting in a 13% reduction in uninsured losses.

That’s only if we encourage the mushrooming of poor quality assets and then end up insuring them. Insurers invest in instruments prescribed by regulations, and wherever there is some freedom — say, in the equity space — the endeavour is to get the highest yields. The total investment made by the Indian insurance industry last year was Rs 33.15 lakh crore.

The underwriting results — generally challenged as they are — make dependence on investment yields more compelling. In the meantime, something more serious is likely to knock on India’s door — as well as that of all other Asian growth markets — from ‘outside’: ‘dirty’ reinsurance.

If Europe becomes a‘no zone’ for providing reinsurance capacity to carbon-intensive (read: fossil fuel-driven) businesses — which it could, for want of additional capacity —this could potentially creep into our balance sheets. The financials of Indian insurers and reinsurers would, thereby, be further exposed to environment and social factors.

Collateral damage in the form of reputation risk and shareholder activism could also be triggered. What seems to have been forgotten, for instance, is the early murmurs against insurers investing in tobacco business. Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) and some Stateowned general insurers have significant investments in the likes of ITC. Coal India may be no exception.

Given the growth trajectory that the Indian insurance industry has assumed, it is high time to revisit the performance metrics. This ought to be aligned to long-term goals, rather than short-term standards that will not stand the sustainability test. Hitting the top line at any cost, including vying for meaty business to augment individual valuations or writing business from catastropheprone locations, will amount to mindless allocation of capital. That climate change is very much a financial risk that could seriously erode the balance sheets of insurers, and has significant societal ramifications, needs to be recognised and accepted.

For any real impact to ensure both their own sustainability as well as that of the larger world, Indian insurers, like their counterparts elsewhere, must urgently — and consistently — focus on pursuing environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria and sustainability as an essential part and parcel of their metrics.

The writer is former MD-CEO, Raheja QBE General Insurance

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
