Infosys wins UN Global Climate Action Award in ‘Climate Neutral Now’ category

Information Technology (IT) major Infosys has won the United Nations Global Climate Action Award (UNGCAA) in the ‘Climate Neutral Now’ category for “Infosys’ Journey to Carbon Neutrality”. The announcement of winners was made after UN Climate Summit in New York, US was convened by UN Secretary General (UNSG) Antonio Guterres.

Key Highlights

Infosys is India’s 2nd-largest IT company and is one of the first companies of its type to commit to carbon neutrality. With more than 229,000 employees and clients in 46 countries, Infosys has sought to address its significant carbon footprint in all aspects of its global operations.

The award will be presented to Infosys on December 2019, at UN Climate Change Conference (COP25) to be held in Santiago, Chile.

Infosys is the only corporate from India to earn this recognition for its efforts to combat climate change. It was chosen for the UN Global Climate Action Award from 670 applications.

Why Infosys was awarded?

Infosys was recognised for its’ pledge to become carbon neutral, which serves as a beacon for guiding world towards a more sustainable future for all. In 2011, Infosys had made a voluntary commitment to United Nation to become carbon neutral. Since then it has undertaken an accelerated plan and implemented energy efficiency measures as well as switched to renewable energy, while offsetting any remaining emissions through its carbon offset projects.

In October 2018, Infosys also pledged to demonstrate its commitment to moving to a low carbon economy, at ‘Climate Neutral Now’ platform by UNFCCC. The company highlighted that it is transitioning to renewable energy for all its electricity needs, and has reduced its per capita energy consumption by over 51% since 2008.

About United Nations Global Climate Action Award

These awards are spearheaded by Momentum for Change initiative at UN Climate Change.

The projects which are awarded are recognized as an innovative solution that addresses climate change as well as helps drive forward progress on many other sustainable development goals, such as- innovation, gender equality and economic opportunity.

The UN Climate Change’s Momentum for Change initiative is implemented with the support of The Rockefeller Foundation. It operates in partnership with World Economic Forum (WEF), donors supporting implementation of UN Climate Change’s Gender Action Plan and Climate Neutral Now.
