Goenkar making global movie on Abbé Faria

RAMNATH N PAI RAIKAR

Goa experienced the resurrection of the locally produced movies, during the beginning of this century, and the state is now all set to witness a locally rooted movie taking this movement to another level. Gurudas Kamat, the well-known documentary maker and photographer, is planning a film based on Abbé Faria, the Goan Catholic monk, who pioneered in the field of hypnotism.

The film, which promises to be made on a lavish scale, will be shot on the lines of Hollywood productions. Incidentally, the 200th death anniversary of Faria has just been observed around the globe.

“The film being made during Abbé Faria’s 200th death anniversary is just a coincidence,” says Kamat.

“I personally am in awe of Faria. There is an element of mystery behind this great personality, which I felt right from my childhood days. And then many details are missing from his life. His life as a mystic, a priest, the papers on hypnotism he produced, his arrest and term in jail, his interactions with the Pope and the Queen of Portugal, the ‘Kator Re Bhaji’ incident, his conflict with the religion and involvement in the French Revolution, all these incidents collectively make a very good subject for a film,” he elaborates.

Interacting with ‘The Navhind Times’ on his project, Kamat states: “I don’t want to portray Faria as a historical figure with touches of a biopic or a documentary. I will be using him as a character, just like Alexandre Dumas had utilised Faria in his novel, ‘The Count of Monte Cristo’, with Edmond Dantès as the protagonist of the story. At this point, let’s not discuss the storyline, but this is certainly going to be a crossover film. This will be an English film, far from what general Konkani films or Bollywood films are! It would be shot on the lines of a Hollywood production. We have already worked on the script and registered the film around 10 months back. The script is being developed into final draft.”

Kamat is presently busy giving final touches to his documentary on Halakki Vokkaligaru, an aboriginal forest tribe in Karnataka, which is on the verge of extinction.

“The tribe is based in North Kanara,” he informs, pointing out, “I intend to complete this documentary by December, while simultaneously working on the Abbé Faria project.”

Speaking further, the documentary maker-turned filmmaker states, “Abbé Faria had travelled from Goa to various European countries including France and Portugal. When Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Costa visited Goa, I had discussed my crossover film project with Jorge Leonardo, chief of staff of the Minister of Culture, who had accompanied him. Leonardo was very supportive had assured me of all help while shooting the film in Portugal. As regards France, I had been there and have an idea where Faria had resided in that country and all. Furthermore, I have deliberated on my project with film-related personalities from France, who had visited the Film Bazaar, during the past International Film Festival of India.”

“My Film will also work as an ambassador for those countries, where it would be shot. I see my project more of a dark movie on the lines of ‘The Da Vinci Code’, with some elements of adventure and excitement as seen in ‘Indiana Jones’ series of films. Therefore, this film will naturally have lot of VFX/ visual effects and sets depicting locations, besides the actual places. It depends on how the entire thing is put up before the financers,” he notes.

Coming out with plans for his project Kamat informs: “I am a member of a few film-related international organisations, especially those based in Europe. I also have a strong technical team and a division of actors. As soon as my ‘bound script’ is ready, I would be working with producers to decide on this aspect. I would personally desire the alumni from the National School of Drama. As far as technical crew is concerned, there will be some technicians from the Indian film industry, however, I would also prefer to hire few of the foreign technicians as Ramesh Sippy did for ‘Sholay’. I would like to work with Aatish Vaikunth, the noted cinematographer in his own right, and son of the illustrious Goan cinematographer, K Vaikunth. For one, we have spoken about this project, and then we are on the same wavelength on blocking, composition and lighting. I want to make it clear that if quality talent is available locally, including in the research domain, it would certainly be hired.”

“I, till now, have not depended on government for anything. If you see the magnitude of my project, any assistance coming from the government would be pittance, and I would not be able to work on my production with it. The budget of the production will be really huge. What I believed in life is if one undertakes something of really high quality, getting people to finance it is not a problem. I am going in a different way, with creation of special moods, samples and visual effects for the film. I have already been pitching the project with producers and financers, at the national as well as international level, and they have liked it,” he maintains.

Stating that he has been studying the subject of the particular film, as also planning to meet people in Goa as related to the topic, Kamat points out, “However, as you see, I am not producing a biopic or a documentary film on Abbé Faria. It will not be a totally realistic film on the person. Although Abbé Faria would be the protagonist of the film, the production would be a fictionalised account, with lots of creative liberties taken in framing of the story.”

“It’s not like a ‘Bandit Queen’ on the life of Phoolan Devi or say, a film that was produced on the life of Queen of Jhansi. In the entire canvas of the movie, I somewhere want to paint my love and affection for Goa and the unique identity of the state. The story will move in the time span of 275 to 300 years, right from the birth of Abbé Faria to the contemporary world,” he adds.

Speaking about the options before him Kamat says, “I am a firm believer of big thinking. I feel one should think and focus on big projects, and then work and complete them in a period of two-and-a-half to three years, rather than doing many smaller projects. In fact, when I spoke to the producers and financers, they also gave me an option of producing a web series/ film on Abbé Faria for OTT (Over the top) platform. However, then I would not be able to have a theatrical release for the production. I am thinking on both options, and the decision depends on how the funding is going to be made. If I opt to go for OTT platform, then I may have to prepare a pilot episode. I am not ruling out the production taking the shape of 10 to 12 part web series. Anyway, in whatever format I take up this project, it would require a minimum of two years to complete.”

On a parting note, Kamat, who is set to direct his first feature film states, “The visual effects that I need for this film would have cost me a lot of money in earlier days. It is also advantageous for filmmakers here, that now such technological wizardry can be done in India. However, I feel a filmmaker should be able to achieve maximum things required in his film during the shooting itself, that is on the sets or on outdoor locations. It saves substantial cost going into the film during post-production.”

“In fact, the filmmaker should leave minimum things for post-production work, which is much more expensive. And many people don’t realise it. I know that there will be many, many visual effects in my film, but they would not be to the extent as seen in films like ‘Harry Potter’ series or ‘The Lord of the Rings’ series. My film is going to be about a person’s ability and his power of inventions like ‘Lucid Sleep’, and how it could be used in a diabolic way if fallen into wrong hands,” he concludes.
