Club chief absolved of attempt to murder charges

lewd gestures

Bombay Presidency Radio Club president Harish Garg

advocate Ravi Goenka

sexual harassment case

non-cognisable complaint

Bombay High Court

Goenka (right) had accused Radio Club president Harish Garg of trying to strangulate him on the night of December 12, 2018

Advocate Ravi Goenka, who had levelled the charges, has now been booked for makingat a woman member.A Colaba police probe into charges of attempt to murder levelled against, 74, by another member andhas found no evidence to support the charge. According to a sixpage summary report submitted to the Esplanade Court last week, the CCTV footage of the incident did not prove any kind of assault. The police, however, booked Goenka in aon September 21in an unrelated matter. He allegedly made obscene gestures at club secretary’s wife Anchal Sukhija.Goenka, 44, had alleged that on the night of December 12, 2018, while he was dining at the restaurant in the club, Garg had grabbed him by the collar and tried to strangulate him saying, “I will kill you.” When he complained to Colaba police, awas lodged. On December 15, Goenka visited a doctor who diagnosed a soft tissue injury in the neck and left shoulder due to the incident and prescribed some medicines.Dissatisfied with the lack of police action, Goenka approached Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate’s court seeking to lodge an attempt to murder case against Garg under IPC section 307.On February 13 this year, the judge observed that prima facie the matter needs detailed investigation under Section 156 (3) of CrPC and asked Senior Police Inspector Shivaji Phadtare of Colaba police station to conduct inquiry and submit his report. Phadtare obtained the CCTV footage from the club, and recorded statements of 15 eyewitnesses. The report submitted to the court only said that the available footage showed Goenka repeatedly charging aggressively against Garg, and quarrelling with him.The report said that the charge against Garg appeared “exaggerated”. Out of 15 eyewitnesses, while three said Garg tried to strangulate Goenka, seven said there was only a verbal quarrel between the two. The report said Goenka’s injury had been treated by a medical professional and hence there was no threat to his life. “There does not seem to be any intent on part of the accused to attempt to kill the complainant,” the report said.When contacted, Garg told Mirror, “I am thankful to the police for thoroughly investigating the matter and I am happy that their final report submitted to the court, giving me a complete clean chit.” He said Goenka’s allegations stemmed from the managing committee elections of Radio Club held on September 28, 2018 which Goenka contested and lost.A bitter fight has been raging between Goenka and the club officebearers since 2018 over being refused email addresses and phone numbers of club members by Garg. There have been other allegations and counter-allegations over alleged election irregularities.On September 21, the police lodged an FIR against Goenka and his lawyer friend Niyam Bhasin under Section 354A (sexual harassment) based on a complaint by Anchal Sukhija, a Radio Club member and wife of the present Club secretary Shailesh Sukhija for making obscene gestures at her.As per FIR, Sukhija and her family were dining at the club on September 7 when Goenka and Bhasin made lewd gestures at her. She said she went to Colaba police station to lodge a complaint, but due to absence of women officers, her complaint was lodged later When contacted by Mirror, advocate Goenka said he was not aware of the FIR, but alleged that it was part of vengeance against him by the club managing committee over the club elections. “The club had tried to expel me, but theset aside its directive in April. The club filed a defamation case. This FIR is yet another attempt to stop me from fighting the club elections this year, but I will fight these charges in court,” he said.
