Ali Fazal to start shooting with Gal Gadot for Death on the Nile adaptation in London on September 30

Ali Fazal

Agatha Christie

Johnny Depp

After sharing screen space with Academy Award winning veteran actress Judi Dench in the 2017 biographical comedy-drama Victoria & Abdul,is gearing up for his next Hollywood outing. Also featuring Wonder Woman breakout star Gal Gadot, the film is a modern-day adaptation of’s novel Death on the Nile and will be directed by another British heavyweight, Kenneth Branagh, who has earlier helmed the Chris Hemsworth starrer Thor and Murder on the Orient Express, featuringand Penélope Cruz.A source close to the project informs Mirror that Ali will start filming for the project on September 30 in the Queen’s City. “Ali left for London last week and has been prepping for his part with the rest of the actors ever since. The film will be shot across the United Kingdom and Ali will be there for around two months before returning to Mumbai,” the source adds.Death on the Nile was previously adapted for the screen in 1978 with Maggie Smith, Mia Farrow and Bette Davis, among others, and won the Oscar for Best Costume Design at the 51st edition of the award ceremony. When Mirror reached out to Ali, the actor said, “I’ve read the novel and had watched the earlier adaptation a long time ago. It was a great ensemble and now we are revisiting that great masterpiece. I feel blessed because it’s in Sir Kenneth Branagh’s hands. Also, for me the most essential prep is to get to know my costumes and look, once that part is sorted, everything else will follow. I have been focussing solely on that for the past one week.”The film, which also features Call Me By Your Name actor Armie Hammer, is part of a series which earlier saw the highly successful Murder on the Orient Express. “Since I don’t play an Indian in the film, there is a dialect teacher on the set to train me and a bunch of others. I cannot reveal just yet what kind of accents we’re doing. All I can say is that I’m excited as there is a lot to look forward to and some big shoes to fill in. We’ve got an amazing cast,” Ali signs off.
