Priyanka Chopra's father-in-law Kevin Jonas has fought cancer, Reveals with a throwback hospital pic on World Cancer Day!

ALSO -

On the occasion of World Cancer Day, we saw Bollywood actress Sonali Bendre and actor Ayushmann Khurrana's wife Tahira Kashyap, who battled cancer, giving out strong messages on Monday. And now Priyanka Chopra's father-in-law Paul Kevin Jonas aka Kevin Sr. has also revealed that he has fought stage 2 colon cancer. Nick Jonas' father took to Instagram a while ago and posted his throwback picture from the hospital, captioning it -Nick's father had posted about his battle with colon cancer in mid 2017, during his surgeries, sharing the news with fans. Nick in August 2017, had told in an interview, that his father has overcome his battle with cancer- "He's cancer-free now, or on the tail end of it. All is good."Talking about how everyone came together as a family during surgery, Nick added talking in iHeartRadio's Label Defiers podcast then: "Being here with him when he went in to have his tumour removed was a really special thing and really important. I had a lot of things on my schedule, but I said, 'I'm going to be here with you and walk through this with you and the family." He continued: "It was a moment of pride for all of us to say, 'Alright, all that we been through, with the brothers, and Dad being a manager at one time,' to be able to be there with him, be a unit as a family, is something I think, we should be really proud of." During Nickyanka's wedding in India two months ago, Paul Kevin Jonas and wife Denise Miller-Jonas along with family, had a great time enjoying the Indian functions and the gatherings thereupon. Kevin Sr. even welcomed his daughter-in-law Peecee with adorable social media posts along with his wife.A year ago, in February 2018, Kevin Sr. opened up about his fight with cancer speaking to the People Magazine. On March 7, 2017, Jonas went to the doctor for his first colonoscopy and found a large mass in his colon they suspected to be malignant. “My entire life really flashed in front of me,” says Jonas, who was 52 at the time (50 is the recommended age to begin screenings). “In that moment, I thought, ‘Have I lived a good life? Have I been good to my kids and my wife? Have I done right by people?'”. Three weeks later, after he underwent surgery to remove the mass, his worst fears were confirmed: He had stage 2 colon cancer. And then he went on to receive chemotherapy for six months to prevent a recurrence. Finally, on Dec. 22, doctors declared Jonas in remission. -Published in People . We wish Nick's father Kevin Sr. a healthy life ahead.
