Can't rule out terror strike along India’s western coast: Defence Min Rajnath Singh

Can't rule out terror strike along India’s western coast: Defence Min Rajnath Singh

The Defence Minister was speaking at a function organised at Kollam in Kerala by Mata Amritanandamayi on the occasion of her 66th birthday celebration.

news Defence

A terrorist attack along the western coast of India cannot be ruled out, Union Minister for Defence Rajnath Singh said on Friday, adding that the country's maritime forces were fully prepared for any such eventuality.

"We cannot rule out that terrorists from a neighbouring country may carry out an incident on our coastline, which extends from Kutch to Kerala. I would like to assure everyone that our maritime security is absolutely strong. We are committed to ensure foolproof coastal security," said Rajnath Singh.

The Defence Minister was speaking at a function organised at Kollam in Kerala by spiritual leader Mata Amritanandamayi, on the occasion of her 66th birthday celebration.

Navy Chief Admiral Karambir Singh and Indian Army's Southern Commander Lt Gen Satinder Saini had earlier expressed apprehensions about a possible infiltration into the country through the Sir Creek estuary located on India's borders with Pakistan.

“After Pulwama incident, the Indian Air Force conducted airstrike at Balakot in Pakistan. We do not bother anyone, but if we are being bothered, we will not let them rest in peace,” Rajnath Singh said, reports The Hindu.

He also said that no one in the country will be able to forget the sacrifice of the soldiers who died in the Pulwama incident.

Rajnath Singh also stated that everyone has a responsibility to be cautious and save the country from potential threats from enemies.

A sum of Rs 5 lakh was distributed to the families of 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans who were killed in the Pulwama attack, by the Amritanandamayi Matt during the event held on Friday.

Meanwhile, a report in The Times of India states that after the 26/11 terrorist attack in Mumbai, the country’s maritime security could not be breached by enemies because of the efforts of Indian Navy and Coast Guard

(With inputs from IANS)

Also read:

How search for an Ambassador in Kerala ended up in a parade of 167 cars

Kerala's arrack love: How an alcoholic drink banned for 23 yrs is still being produced
