Incessant Rains In Uttar Pradesh, Indian-American Sikh Police Officer Killed + More Top News

Over 44 deaths were reported and several thousands moved to relief because of flooding caused by torrential rains in the state. Densely populated regions on the banks of two main rivers in the state, which are overflowing because of incessant rainfall in the last 24-48 hours, are among the worst hit. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Heroic Indian-American Sikh Police Officer Sandeep Singh Dhaliwal Killed In Line Of Duty In US

In a tragic incident, an Indian-American Sikh police officer died after being shot multiple times from behind in a "ruthless, cold-blooded way" during a traffic stop in the US state of Texas, a senior official said. Sandeep Singh Dhaliwal, Harris County Sheriff's deputy, was shot while conducting a traffic stop, Sheriff Ed Gonzalez said. Read more

2) Former Madras HC Chief Justice Tahilramani Disposed Over 5,000 Cases In One Year Tenure

Over 43 lakh cases are pending in the 25 high courts in the country and more than eight lakh of these are over a decade old. As on June 1, 58,669 cases were pending in the Supreme Court. Read more

3) BJP Minister Says Rising Population Is Like Second-Stage Cancer And May Become 'Incurable'

BJP motormouth MLA Giriraj Singh equated expanding population to "second stage cancer" and called for strict legislation to control it. The MLA said that if the burgeoning population isn’t controlled it will go into the fourth stage and become incurable. Read more

4) Senior IAS Officer Varsha Joshi Opens Up About Facing Harassment & Sexism In Her Own Chambers

North Delhi Municipal Commissioner Varsha Joshi responded to a young girl on micro-blogging site Twitter highlighting how prevalent is sexism in workplaces. Read more

5) We Need To Brace Ourselves As Experts Feel Stronger Earthquake Might Hit India Soon If We Don't Act

A powerful earthquake shook most of the Northern region of India on Tuesday when the ground started shaking vigorously leading people out of their respective homes and offices. Northeast Pakistan region was the most-affected in our neighbouring country with over 38 people reported dead and around 500 injured post the 6.3-magnitude earthquake. Read more
