He has no knowledge of anything: Asaduddin Owaisi on Adityanath's 'Mughals weakened Indian economy' remark

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Yogi Adityanath gave this statement while attending the World Hindu Economy Forum in Mumbai today My only point is what has BJP done in 6 years? What about unemployment, layoff, 5 per cent GDP: Owaisi American historian and philosopher Will Durant in his book 'The Case For India' writes that "Britain’s conscious and deliberate bleeding of India was the greatest crime in all history"

Hyderabad: AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi slammed Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath for his statement where he blamed Mughals and Britishers for India dwindling economy. Owaisi said that the UP CM has proved that he has no knowledge of anything.

“He should ask an expert. He's lucky to be CM of UP. My only point is what has BJP done in 6 years? What about unemployment, layoff, 5 per cent GDP?” he said.

Yogi Adityanath gave this statement while attending the World Hindu Economy Forum in Mumbai today.

The UP CM had said that India used to be a financial powerhouse in the world and almost contributed 1/3rd of the world’s economy; however, after the attack of Mughals and Britishers, the country’s economy was completely destroyed.

The British rule not only destroyed the Indian economy but also led to the death of millions of Indians in famines and epidemics.

American historian and philosopher Will Durant in his book ‘The Case For India’ writes that “Britain’s conscious and deliberate bleeding of Indi was the greatest crime in all history.”

In fact, a report to the House of Commons by one of its investigating committees in 1804 stated: "It must give pain to an Englishman to think that since the accession of the Company the condition of the people of India has been worse than before."

Durant further observed that when the East India Company took control of the country after the chaos following the collapse of the Mughal empire, India’s share of world GDP was 23 per cent, however when the British left it came down to 3 per cent.

The Narendra Modi-led BJP government has come under heavy attack due to economic slowdown with the opposition Congress blaming demonetisation and GST as the reason.

Former PM Manmohan Singh also came down heavily on the government for its flawed policies holding it responsible for the current economic downturn. He further asked Congress party leaders to hit the streets to inform and educate people about the policies taken by the earlier UPA government at the Centre when the worldwide recession started.

Former finance minister and senior Congress leader P Chidambaram, who is currently in Tihar mocked the Modi government's plan to achieve USD5 trillion economy mark by 2024 saying no country has achieved the GDP growth rate of 8 per cent without exports growing at 20 per cent a year.

In August, India's exports fell nearly 6.1 per cent to USD 26.13 billion, while GDP growth during the April-June period came down to 5 per cent from 5.8 per cent.
