Seven youth martyred by Indian troops during search operation in IoK

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – In the fresh act of state terrorism, Indian troops today (Sept. 28) martyred seven Kashmiri youth during search operation in Ganderbal and Ramban districts of occupied Kashmir.

According to Kashmir Media Service, the troops during cordon and search operations martyred three youth in Naranag area of Ganderbal and three others in Batote area of Ramban district in Jammu region. Earlier, one Indian soldier was killed and another injured in an attack in Batote. The operations continued till last reports came in.

On the other hand, people erupted in jubilation, last night, after Prime Minister Imran Khan’s speech in the UN General Assembly where he forcefully and effectively highlighted the sufferings of the Kashmiris due to continued lockdown and communication blackout in the territory.

Despite heavy presence of Indian troops, people at many places came out of their homes and celebrated with firecrackers and dance as soon as Imran Khan’s speech ended. They raised high-pitched pro-Pakistan, pro-freedom and anti-India slogans. The occupation authorities tightened restrictions in Srinagar, today, to prevent people from staging further demonstrations.

Normal life remained crippled on the 55th consecutive day, today, in the Kashmir valley as shops, business establishments and educational institutions remained closed and public transport was off the roads. The occupation authorities kept the communication means including internet and mobile phones suspended and TV channels shut in the Kashmir valley and Muslim areas of Jammu region, adding to the woes of the residents. Shutdown was observed in Doda, Bhaderwah and Kishtwar against Indian occupation and repeal of special status of occupied Kashmir by India.

An officer of Indo-Tibetan Border Police committed suicide by shooting himself with his service rifle in Jammu city. This incident of suicide raised the number of such deaths among Indian troops and police personnel to 442 since January 2007.

In Islamabad, the Convener of All Parties Hurriyat Conference Azad Jammu and Kashmir chapter, Syed Abdullah Gilani, talking to media said that Pakistan Prime Minister, Imran Khan, in his address to the UN General Assembly has effectively represented the aspirations of the Kashmiris. He said that Imran Khan proved himself a real ambassador of the oppressed people of occupied Kashmir.

On the other hand, a large number of people held a protest march in Dhaka, capital of Bangladesh, against Indian state terrorism in occupied Kashmir and demanded of India to end restrictions and communication blockade in the territory.

Former puppet Chief Minister of occupied Kashmir and Indian National Congress leader, Ghulam Nabi Azad, in an interview in New Delhi said that situation in occupied Kashmir was deplorable and a huge crisis was unfolding in the valley where the poor people had nothing to eat.

Indian-American lawmaker Pramila Jayapal and 13 other Members of the US Congress in a joint statement addressed to Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi urged him to address concerns over the human rights situation in occupied Kashmir and lift the communications blackout in the territory.
