World demonstrating criminal silence on blockade in Held Kashmir: moot

The international community is demonstrating a criminal silence on prevailing atrocities and blockade in Palestine and Kashmir, said clerics and leading scholars at the ‘Unity of Ummah: Ulema and Mashaykh Convention’ here on Friday.

Pakistan Ulema Council Chairman Hafiz Tahir Mehmood Ashrafi chaired the conference, while Allama Abdul Haq Mujahid, Maulana Shafi Qasmi, Maulana Asad Habib Shah Jamali, Maulana Aseedur Rehman, Maulana Shakeel Qasmi, Maulana Saadullah Ludhyanvi,Maulana Abdul Raoof, Maulana Azhar Mehmood,Maulana Ammar Masood, Maulana Saadullah Shafiq, Maulana Abdul Mujahid Watto, Qari Umar Usman, Malik Abdul Raheem, Maulana Abdul Khaliq Marali and Maulana Ashfaq Patafi were prominent among those who attended.

The participants of the convention underlined that stability and security of Harmain Al Sharifain and burning issues of Muslims in Kashmir and Palestine could only be settled with unity of Muslim world. The convention also condemned planning of India to make film on life of Hazrat Ayesha (RA) with objective to fan sectarian anarchy and violence within the Muslim sects.

The convention underlined that mosques and seminaries in Pakistan will not become any part of chaos confrontation in the country. The convention also lauded decision of ruling government of Pakistan to link registration of seminaries with ministry of education. Ulema and Mashaykh of the convention also resolved that Islamic sections of the constitution of Pakistan relating Finality of Prophethood will not be annulled. Pakistan will not acknowledge existence of Israel at any cost. The clerics also stated that Kashmir and Palestine are burning issues of Muslim Ummah, which cannot be ignored. Pakistan is not isolated on issue of Kashmir. Enemies of Islam and Muslims hatching organized conspiracies to target stable Muslim countries. The Ummah will not tolerate prevailing drone strikes at oil sites in Saudi Arabia and ongoing atrocities at oppressed people of Kashmir and Palestine.

Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi stated that conspiracies are being made to make sectarian anarchy within Muslim world. He also demanded of the Imran government to ensure implementation on National Action Plan in letter and spiri. He said that 51 days have passed to the blockade of Kashmir and the world community has been demonstrating criminal silence on prevailing atrocities at oppressed people of Kashmir and Palestine.

On other side, oil facilities in Saudi Arabia are being targeted through drone strikes and Israeli Prime Minister threatening to annex Jordan Valley into Israeli. The Muslim Ummah has left with no other option to get unite against these conspiracies of the enemies of Islam and Muslims.

The elements who claim that Kashmir and Palestine are not issues of Muslim Ummah are worst traitors of Muslim world. The OIC and Saudi Arabia have announced to support Pakistan’s stance on Kashmir at every forum in the world. He added that any politics on the faith and belief on Finality of Prophethood will not be tolerated. All the religious sections of Islam condemn Indian conspiracy to make film on Hazrat Ayesha (RA).

Hafiz Tahir Ashrafi stated that India is aiming at making sectarian violence within different religious sects. He also announced that Ulema and Mashaykh conventions will be arranged all over the country. In this connection, a convention will be held in Lahore on September 27 and in Faisalabad on October 29.
