Bengaluru: With deadline to vacate house nearing, tenants set building on fire while owner vacations

It was only after checking the CCTV footage that the real cause of the fire was discovered (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bengaluru: A seemingly simple incident took a rather shocking turn when a fire from a commercial complex on the 9th cross lane of the Chamrajpet was reported to be the work of a tenant and his wife. The tenant and his wife started the fire to take revenge from their landlord.

The reality of the incident came to light after the CCTV footage was seen by the owner. The landlord, Dileep Kumar rented his 14x21 feet shop on the first floor of the Geetha Complex to Misrilal Thali and Indiradevi since the couple wanted to open a hardware store. Kumar, who lives in the same building signed a document stating that rent was Rs 13,000 and the couple agreed to the same.

Also Read: Tamil Nadu: Man beaten to death for sexually harassing girls in Pudukottai, police detain 2

According to the Bangalore Mirror, the couple stopped paying rent after five months and constantly created a scene in the building due to which, Kumar asked them to vacate the shop. Kumar filed a case in the city court of small clauses after the couple refused to vacate. The court asked the couple to vacate Kumar's property in November 2018 and gave them a month's time to do the same.

While Kumar and his family went on a 10-day trip to Rajasthan, he received a phone call informing him that the building was on fire. When Kumar reached the building on December 14, he was told that a short-cicuit was responsible for the fire. However, when Kumar reviewed the CCTV footage of the building, he found the miscreants behind the incident.

According to the footage, Indiradevi left the shop after switching off the lights. Just seconds after Misrilal came out of the shop, smoke was spotted coming from the shop. After being unable to find the keys of his scooter, Misrilal pushed it and the couple escaped from the eyes of the camera. Strangely enough, a relative of the couple arrived and alerted the fire department about the incident.

A case under section 436 for using fire/explosive with the intent to destroy a building was filed against the accused couple by the Chamrapet police. Kumar, however, has agreed to compromise with his tenants and has taken possession of his property.
