Bihar, Eastern UP Flooded After Heavy Rain, 100 Dead In 4 Days: 10 Points

Heavy downpour in different parts of Bihar has caused flooding, disrupting normal life, affecting rail traffic, healthcare facilities and schools. At least 13 trains were cancelled this morning. Delays were also reported on several routes.

Four people died in Patna today after a tree fell on an auto in Khagaul amid heavy rainfall. Three people were killed in Bhagalpur due to heavy downpour.

In Patna, where the weather office has predicted heavy rain till September 30, the district administration has ordered closure of all schools till Tuesday. Visuals showed waterlogging at Nalanda Medical College Hospital, the second largest healthcare facility in the city. "Localities like Rajendra Nagar and S K Puri are the worst affected," District Magistrate Kumar Ravi told reporters.

Eighteen teams of the National Disaster Response Force have been deployed in flooded parts of Bihar. Three teams are deployed in Patna.

Uttar Pradesh received record rainfall - 1700 per cent above normal - on Friday. The eastern parts of the state are worst hit. On Saturday, Prayagraj received 102.2 mm of rain and Varanasi received 84.2 mm of rain, much higher than what is usually received at this time of the year.

Twenty six deaths were reported from different parts of UP on Saturday. Forty seven people died across the state in rain-related incidents on Thursday and Friday. In Lucknow, Amethi, Hardoi and some other districts, schools were closed on Friday and and Saturday due to heavy downpour.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has directed divisional commissioners and district magistrates to take all measures and extend immediate relief to those affected, an official said. The Chief Minister also asked the officials to extend monetary help of Rs 4 lakh each to the family members of those killed.

The weather department has issued a warning of "very heavy rainfall" for the next two days in several parts of the state.

Six deaths were reported from Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh while one person died in Jammu and Kashmir in the last two days in rain-related incidents. Three students were killed in Rajasthan's Udaipur when a wall collapsed at Government Middle School, Thobwara, after the stater-run school was waterlogged on Friday night.
