IOK jubilant at PM Imran's UNGA address

Kashmiris defied India's clampdown in the occupied territory late on Friday after Prime Minister Imran Khan's forceful address to the United General Assembly (UNGA) in which he highlighted the plight of the people since August 5 when New Delhi abrogated special status of the disputed region.Indian forces tightened restrictions on people's movements on Saturday to prevent more protests, deploying additional troops on the streets and putting up razor-wire barricades as normal life remained crippled on the 55th consecutive day in the valley.And in their fresh acts of state terrorism, the Indian troops martyred six Kashmiri youth in Ganderbal, outside Srinagar, and in Batote area of the occupied region on Saturday. Indian authorities claimed that all the six deceased were militants and "suspected" that they were part of a larger network.On Friday night, people at many places came out of their homes and celebrated with firecrackers and dance as soon as PM Imran's speech at the UNGA ended. Despite heavy presence of Indian troops, they raised high-pitched pro-Pakistan, pro-freedom and anti-India slogans.In some areas in occupied Kashmir – including the Soura region near Srinagar, which has witnessed protests in the past against India's August 5 move – people clashed with Indian forces by pelting stones. Police used tear gas to disperse them, according to an Indian official.On Saturday, police vans fitted with speakers made public announcements in Srinagar about movement restrictions, while additional troops were deployed. The troops blocked access to the main business centre of Srinagar with razor wire, witnesses said.In his address, Prime Minister Imran apprised the world leaders of the persecution of innocent men, women and children in occupied Kashmir at the hands of Indian occupation forces, who had illegally placed a population of eight million under detention, in utter disregard to the human rights.He pointed out the rapes of thousands of Kashmiri women at the hands of Indian troops, the detention of the entire Kashmiri political leadership, the abusive use of pellet guns against unarmed civilians, blockade of communication links and deployment of 900,000 security personnel to quell the freedom movement.The prime minister also warned the world community against India's portrayal of protesting Kashmiris youth as terrorists. He said the phrase "Islamic terrorism" allowed India to dismiss human rights and increase the persecution of the people of Kashmir.Despite the warnings, Indian troops continued their acts of terrorism, killing six youths in the so-called cordon and search operations and encounters on Saturday, in the valley. The Indian police claimed that all the deceased were militants.Indian troops during cordon and search operations, martyred three youth in Naranag area of Ganderbal, about 19 kilometres north of Srinagar, and three more in Batote area of Ramban district, located on the highway connecting Jammu and Srinagar. Earlier, one Indian soldier was killed and another injured in an attack in Batote, officials and media reports said.The local police claimed that the three deceased, shot dead in Batote belonged to Hizbul Mujahideen group.However, the Indian media reported that the three youth "entered a house and took the hostage" during "heavy rain" in the area. Later they were shot dead by Indian forces.Similarly, a spokesperson for the Indian army in the region said an encounter took place in Ganderbal.He said that it is "suspected" that the terrorist who was shot dead could be part of a larger group that infiltrated into India from Gurez side since it's near the LoC".Addressing the UNGA, PM Imran warned of the consequences if the world community failed to realise the gravity of the situation in occupied Kashmir. He urged the UN to ask India to lift the inhuman curfew and return the 13,000 young boys lifted from their homes by the Indian security forces."What will happen when the curfew is lifted? Modi says this is done for the prosperity of Kashmir. But what will happen when eight million Kashmiris come out of lockdown and face 900,000 troops? I fear there will be a bloodbath," he said, adding: "This is a test for the UN. You guaranteed the right to self-determination to the people of Kashmir."The prime minister repeatedly warned of another Pulwama-type attack, saying it would be the result of radicalisation due to the persistent denial of justice to the Kashmiri people. He said Pakistan would be blamed should something happen and recalled how the two nuclear-armed nations almost went head to head in February."And this is why the UN has a responsibility. This is why you came into being in 1945!" Imran said. He categorically stated that he was not threatening about nuclear war. "It is a worry... If a conventional war starts between two nuclear countries, anything could happen. It would have consequences far beyond the region."
