Failure in UP, that’s why roaming in WB: Mamta to Yogi

KOLKATA: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerje responding on Yogi Adityanath’s visit to West Bengal said cuttingly that UP CM doesn’t have a place to stand in the state that’s why he’s roaming around in Bengal.

Speaking to reporters from a stage where the TMC chief has been sitting on protest since Sunday, she said: “Ask Yogi to take care of Uttar Pradesh first. So many people have been killed, even the police were murdered…so many people were lynched. He (Yogi Adityanath) himself will lose if he contests elections. He doesn’t have a place to stand in UP, that’s why he’s roaming around in Bengal.”

#WATCH WB CM Mamata Banerjee:Ask Yogi to take care of Uttar Pradesh first. So many ppl have been killed,even police were murdered,so many ppl were lynched,he himself will lose if he contests elections.He doesn’t have a place to stand in UP that’s why he's roaming around in Bengal pic.twitter.com/ijtBwTHdvX — ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019

Yogi Adityanath, denied permission to land his chopper in Purulia district to address a “Ganatantra Bachao (save the republic) rally” on Sunday. After being denied permission, Adityanath addressed the rally in South Dinjapur through a telephone call.

[also_read url=”https://www.siasat.com/news/hows-khauf-bjp-pokes-mamata-banerjee-ahead-yogi-adityanaths-visit-1464006/”]“How’s The Khauf?” BJP pokes Mamata Banerjee ahead of Yogi Adityanath’s visit[/also_read]

The incident kicked off a political storm and was followed by dramatic developments later in the day. The BJP has condemned Banerjee over the obstacles faced by the party in conducting rallies and other events in the state, while also criticising her government for the ongoing tussle between the CBI and the state police.

Banerjee launched her dharna in Kolkata on Sunday night amidst an unprecedented face-off with the Centre over CBI versus state police issue.

She launched her ‘Save the Constitution’ sit-in at around 9 pm after the CBI attempted to arrest Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in connection with the Saradha chit fund case, which was foiled by the state police.

Kolkata: Latest #visuals from the site of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's 'Save the Constitution' dharna near Metro Channel. The stage is currently covered with curtains. The dharna over the CBI issue began on the night of February 3. pic.twitter.com/orN4Krt6sB — ANI (@ANI) February 5, 2019

With agency inputs
