Heavy rains ravage Bihar, UP: Death toll crosses 80; hospitals, homes under knee deep water

Severe widespread water-logging triggered by incessant rains has thrown normal life out of gear in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh as more than 80 people have been killed in the last few days. On Sunday, three people were killed in Bihar's Bhagalpur district when a wall collapsed on them following heavy rains. Many others are feared to be trapped. Besides this, in Khagaul, four people died when a tree fell on an auto due to heavy rains.

The National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and state authorities are carrying out round the clock relief and rescue operations.

In Bihar's capital Patna, floodwater has entered residential areas and many hospitals. People have to wade through waist-deep waterlogged streets to reach hospitals and avail other civic amenities. Several trains in the region have been canceled or are running late by several hours. Healthcare facilities and schools have also been hampered due to heavy rains in the state.

East Central Railway officials said rail traffic was suspended on the Darbhanga-Samastipur section in the morning as tracks at some places got inundated due to heavy rain, leaving at least three trains stranded.

PATNA REELS UNDERWATER

In Patna, Rajendra Nagar is one of the worst-affected areas. Ground floors of all houses have been flooded and the area is without electricity supply for hours. NDRF and SDRF teams have deployed 16 boats to rescue people and provide them food and drinking water.

Other low-lying areas in Patna like Kankarbagh, Gardani Bagh, Dak bunglow and SK Puri are also badly affected.

Houses of several politicians, including Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi, Bihar Road Construction Minister Nand Kishore Yadav, JDU leader Ajay Alok and BJP's Rajya Sabha MP Rajeev Pratap Rudy's house too have been flooded.

#WATCH Vehicles wade through water at Dak Bunglow intersection in Patna, following heavy rainfall in the region. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/FD8txzywwd ANI (@ANI) September 28, 2019

WEATHER ALERTS

The weather department has forecast heavy rainfall for the city till September 30. The Patna district administration has ordered the closure of all schools till Tuesday.

An orange alert has been issued for districts like Shivhar, Setamani, Saaran, Begusarai, Buxar, Jamui, Madhubani and Muzaffarpur. Meanwhile, a yellow alert has been issued for Patna, Gopalganj, Shekhpura, Champaran, Siwan among other districts of Bihar.

HOSPITALS WATER-LOGGED

Flood water has also entered Nalanda Medical College and Hospital, the second largest healthcare facility in Patna, leaving the Emergency and ICU wards flooded with knee-deep water. Many patients who were critical have been shifted to the Patna Medical College and Hospital.

"Water has entered NMCH due to heavy rainfall in Patna. We have shifted the patience to alternative places. The district administration is trying its level best to restore normalcy," District Magistrate Ravi Kumar told India Today TV.

Besides this, premises of Gardanibagh hospital too have been water-logged.

SITUATION BEING REVIEWED

Chief Minister Nitish Kumar reviewed the situation in a video conference meeting with officials who informed him that the state received an average rainfall of 50 mm since Friday with districts like Vaishali and Nawada recording more than 200 mm.

Nitish Kumar said, "There has been heavy rainfall in some areas since yesterday and water in Ganga river is rising constantly. But there are proper arrangements and administration is at the spot and making all the efforts to help people. Such a situation is not in any one's hand, it's a natural thing. Arrangements are being done to provide drinking water to all. Also, arrangements are being made for community kitchens for the flood-affected people."

The district magistrate said a contingent of NDRF and SDRF personnel was pressed into service to rescue residents from the areas alarmingly waterlogged.

Patna: Four people died after a tree fell on an auto in Khagaul, following heavy rainfall in Bihar. pic.twitter.com/wXP3lyjVai ANI (@ANI) September 29, 2019

In Uttar Pradesh, at least 35 people were killed on Saturday in rain-related tragedies, the state government has said. Four people died in Azamgarh and Mirzapur districts while three people died each in Ghazipur and Ambedkar Nagar. Two people each died in Gorakhpur, Firozabad, Unnao, Banda, Balia and Sitapur districts while one person each died in Bulandshahr, Amethi, Saharanpur, Lakhimpur, Fatehpur, Prayagraj, Chitrakoot, Sultanpur and Deoria, according to information provided by the government on Saturday evening.

On Friday, 44 deaths were reported from different parts of the state.

The meteorological department said heavy rain is very likely to occur at isolated places over eastern UP on Sunday as well.

In neighbouring Uttarakhand, six pilgrims from Punjab, who were on their way to the Himalayan shrine of Hemkund Sahib, were killed when a huge rock fell on their vehicle in Tehri district following a landslip triggered by heavy rains, officials said.

(With inputs from PTI.)

ALSO READ | India suffered Rs 3,78,247.047 cr loss due to floods in 65 yrs

ALSO READ | Heavy rains throw life out of gear in Bihar with Patna worst affected

ALSO WATCH | Decoding the link between floods and droughts
