Dance is the most amazing feeling: Shakti Mohan

New Delhi, Sep 29 : After winning reality show "Dance India Dance" in 2010, Shakti Mohan's dance career has been unstoppable, especially with appearances in the songs of movies like "Rowdy Rathore" and "Tees Maar Khan". Her upcoming Remo D'Souza-directed film "Street Dancer" is slated to release in January 2020.

So, IANSlife caught up with the dancer-actor as she, along with her sister Mukti Mohan, was invited by travel agency France by French to the biennial Loire Festival last week.

The cultural fest is Europe's leading five-day inland marine gathering and celebration of the River Loire, its culture and its way of life. The Mohan sisters, who have millions of social media followers, treated their followers with glimpses of the French medieval city of Orleans.

"France has always fascinated me. It is a country that boasts of rich culture, heritage and of course, royalty. Exploring Loire, which is one of the heritage sites, has actually made history come alive. We were exploring the art, culture and music of the place and living every moment of it," Shakti Mohan told IANSlife in an exclusive interview.

Does travel enrich her dancing practice? "Dance like any other art form has no language. Travelling exposes you to diverse culture, art and dance. We could experience and shake a leg with the local dance students here and even danced along the River Loire with live musicians," Shakti Mohan said, adding that travel helps her innovate better.

She called dance "the most amazing feeling" for her. "I have been living and experiencing dance everyday in my life," she said.

Shakti Mohan also opened up about her deep bond with her sisters -- Neeti, Mukti and Kriti.

"Sisters are my besties for life. There is nothing better than having a relationship like I do with my sisters. Endless Love and support for everything." Apart from "Street Dancer", which also stars Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor, Shakti Mohan will soon start shooting for a second season of web dance-comedy series "Break A Leg".

The "Dance Plus" star is currently busy with her dance studio Nritya Shakti which will host a series of workshops with experienced dance teachers around the world.

(Siddhi Jain can be contacted at siddhi.j@ians.in)

-- The story has been published from a wire feed without any modifications to the text
