Noida: RTI activist gets lifer for killing homeless man to fake his own death

Mohan was then apprehended by the police and his girlfriend was then tracked down in Bengaluru | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident happened almost five years ago in 2014 In 2014, the convict was presumed dead after a charred body was found in his burnt car Three months passed, police officers reached to the convict while investigating his girlfriend's missing case three months passed, the investigating police officers reached to Chandra Mohan later while investigating his girlfriend's missing case

Noida: The District and Sessions Court on Saturday sentenced life imprisonment to the RTI activist Chandra Mohan Sharma who in trying to fake his own death had killed a homeless man and burnt his body. The incident happened almost five years ago in 2014.

The police investigation in the case revealed that 43-year-old Chandra Mohan was unhappy in his married life, after which he committed to his 30-year-old girlfriend to enter with her in a live-in relationship. The girlfriend was identified as Preti Nagar who was also jailed for six months by the court under the Section 202 of the Indian Penal Code (Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform).

However, the court's bench has reportedly acquitted Sharma's brother-in-law who was also accused of helping him in committing the crime. According to a report, Harish Shishodia, the assistant district government counsel told a media person that the court pronounced the judgement just after holding Sharma guilty of murder along with criminal conspiracy and cheating. The court has also fined the convict of Rs 1 lakh.

The case goes back to 2014, when Chandra Mohan was presumed dead after a charred body was found in his burnt car on Noida-Greater Noida Expressway. The case came to limelight after the deceased's wife and the political party he was associated with claimed that he had been killed by his political rivals.

Meanwhile, three months passed, the investigating police officers reached to Chandra Mohan later while investigating his girlfriend's missing case. Mohan was then apprehended by the police and his girlfriend was then tracked down in Bengaluru, where they both were living. The case was lodged with the Greater Noida police on June 7, 2014.

Later, the investigation revealed that Chandra Mohan killed a homeless man in the car, whom he had picked up from Ansal plaza in Kasna. After setting his own car ablaze, Videsh dropped Mohan at Pari Chowk from where he took a cab to New Delhi railway station to catch a train to Bengaluru.

Mohan reportedly did all this to live with his girlfriend. He also somehow convinced his brother-in-law that his sister would get Rs 36 lakh and a well-paying job if they showed them that he is dead. However, the accused has been arrested in the case.
