Society Tea uses cinema to convey its core message ‘masala nahi toh mazaa nahi’

Click on the Image to watch the TVC

Society Tea has launched a campaign tilted ‘Masala Nahi Toh Mazaa Nahi’, which revolves around the union of two biggest shared experiences in India —love for cinema and chai.

Fresh from a very well-received brand campaign — For ‘The Tea Society Called India’,where the insight of India being a Tea Society, and Society Tea, melded beautifully — this is also an attempt to attach with an insight that’s top-of-the-category when it comes to masala.What better way than our love for masala movies to be that insight.Society Tea Masala Chai has all the ingredients that people love in their masala chai — clove, lemongrass, cardamom, ginger, black pepper etc,and it’s healthy too.

Advertisement

The TVC captures the different ingredients that make a masala movie through the eyes of an engrossed audience in a typical small town of India, with the camera always focused on them and never showing what’s happening on the screen.

The voiceover, engagingly, takes the viewer through the different aspects of the film, always in tow with the reactions of the audience.And when we show the ‘projector room uncle’ and he speaks, we realise it was he who was the narrator all through — a lovable elderly man who it seems like has been doing this for a long time...he loves his movies and his masala chai. The tea comes in effortlessly in the flow of the film, instead of a forced-fit analogy.

Advertisement

Karan Shah, Director, Society Tea,said,“With our latest masala tea TVC, we at Society Tea wanted to brew a campaign that reflects a beautifully balanced emotion between our country’s two favourites —cinema and chai. And what better way to do it than our quintessential ‘Dadi Ma Ki Masala Chai’. Society Tea’s Masala Tea is all about the highest quality, the traditional taste which is fortified with spices, an original masala recipe that is an excellent elixir and we definitely recommend you to try our grandmothers’ personal recipe blend. Titled ‘Masala Nahi Toh Mazaa Nahi’, the TVC has beautifully captured a perfect blend of human emotions and an all-season national favourite beverage — Masala Tea.”

The ad campaign has been conceptualised by Black Swan Lifeand produced by Skylark Productions.

Advertisement

The TVC has been released in Hindi and Marathi across Maharashtra, Nasik, Nagpur, Aurangabad and Raipur. The bi-lingual method is in sync with Society Tea’s strategy of augmenting their Maharashtra and nearby regions’ target audience.

The TVC:

Advertisement

Credits:

Client: Society Tea

Agency:Black Swan Life

Director: Prashant Madan

Production House:Skylark Productions

Executive Producer: Savio Shenoy

Info@BestMediaInfo.com
