8 Celebrities & Billionaires Who've Donated Large Sums Of Money To Fight Climate Change Globally

While the changing climate has become a matter of concern with every passing day, more efforts are being made to sustain and keep a check on climate change due to the advent of global warming around the world. Even with the amount of effort put into conserving our environment, the progression of change is rather slow. But there are people out there who've realised the importance of reviving a dying planet and are doing all they can to change the scenario around.

© Getty Images

A major chunk of difference around climate change is made through known celebrities and billionaires who become an inspiration by starting a dialogue around change and donating hefty sums of money for environmental causes. They urge and pledge people around the world to help sustain our environment though any possible means and their contribution is an important part in conserving the last resources our planet has to offer.

Here are a few celebrities and billionaires who've contributed towards the welfare of our planet and it's time we seek inspiration from them and do our bit.

(1) Billionaire Stewart And Lynda Resnick

© Shuttershock

Recently the co-owners of The Wonderful Company, the largest producer of almonds and pistachios whose brands include Fiji Water, pledged to donate a sum of $750 million to the California Institute of Technology, to aid climate change research. The sum is the largest ever for such research received by Caltech and they're definitely going to put it to some good use.

"In order to comprehensively manage the climate crisis, we need breakthrough innovations, the kind that will only be possible through significant investment in university research. Science and bold creativity must unite to address the most pressing challenges facing energy, water, and sustainability," Stewart Resnick said in an interview with a popular publication.

(2) Elon Musk

© Forbes

Elon Musk is known widely for his fight to combat climate change, apart from describing the release of carbon dioxide as “the most dangerous experiment in history.” The billionaire tech entrepreneur has donated nearly 7 times as much cash to Republican campaigns and political committees, as much as he has to the Democrats, to fight climate change.

(3) Leonardo DiCaprio

© Leonardo Dicaprio foundation

The Oscar winning actor is known widely for his environmental activism. In 1998, he founded the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, the mission of which is to 'help restore balance to threatened ecosystems, ensuring the long-term health and well-being of all Earth's inhabitants'. In July he donated $4 million to help tackle the Amazon Fires and he has made plenty of donations in the past for climate change while his organisation actively helps in rebuilding ecosystems around the world.

(4) David Gilmour

© USA Today

Renowned guitarist from the psychedelic rock band of the 50s and 60s, Pink Floyd literally rocked news headlines with his charity. The former guitarist sold off 123 of his precious and famed guitars, achieving the record of largest guitar collection sold at a charity auction. The collection sold raised $21,198,250, which went directly to charity to help the climate change cause. How generous!

(5) Mark Zuckerberg, Bill Gates, Richard Branson & Jeff Bezos

© YouTube

A few years ago, some crazy tech leaders around the world came together to launch 'Breakthrough Energy Coalition', an outfit created to combat climate change through a new partnership. Through the partnership, the group's members have committed to use a substantial portion of their hundreds of billions of dollars in collective net worth to invest in early stage clean energy companies.

"Solving the clean energy problem is an essential part of building a better world. We won't be able to make meaningful progress on other challenges—like educating or connecting the world—without secure energy and a stable climate." Zuckerberg had said in an interview a few years ago.

While many more celebrities like Arnold Schwarzenegger, Mark Ruffalo, Will Smith and even Prince Harry are doing their bits and pieces to combat climate change around the world, in India the nature of the charity is still different. Celebrities and millionaires in our country contribute for internal causes like poverty, education, sanitation and child trafficking a lot more than climate change. While that's an important aspect for social development as well, we need to start a dialogue on climate change and how it's important to focus on right about now. We're glad we have some good Samaritans doing their bit for the changing environment and we hope they can be inspiration enough for everyone to make a difference somehow.
