Who is Devoleena Bhattacharjee Bigg Boss 13 contestant? All you need to know about TV's Gopi Bahu

All you need to know about Devoleena Bhattacharjee Bigg Boss 13 contestant | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Devoleena Bhattacharjee is one of the contestants who will be seen in Bigg Boss 13 The actress is quite popular for essaying the role of Gopi Ahem Modi in Saath Nibhaana Saathiya

About the contestant

Devoleena Bhattacharjee, a television actress, and trained Bharatnatyam dancer are one of the contestants who will be seen in the upcoming season of Bigg Boss. Devoleena who hails from a Bengali family in Upper Assam is arguably one of the highest-paid actresses in the telly industry.

She was popular for...

Over the years, Devoleena has starred in quite a few shows like Saath Nibhaana Saathiya, Kundali Bhagya, Laal Ishq and more. Although her role as Gopi Ahem Modi in Saath Nibhaana Saathiya helped the actress garner immense popularity, she was first noticed as a contestant on the popular reality show Dance India Dance 2. Apart from her acting prowess, Devoleena made headlines quite a few times but for different reasons. Last year, the actress got embroiled in a diamond trader, Rajeshwar Udani's murder case. The trader went missing on November 28, 2018, and later his decomposed body was found in Panvel on December 7. The actress' was summoned for an inquiry when her phone number was found in Rajeshwar's call details. In a statement, the actress revealed that her name only cropped up in the investigation because she had attended Rajeshwar's daughter's wedding. She further revealed that the two had met only thrice, during the course of which Devoleena only spoke to him about her business endeavours.

Marital status

The actress was earlier rumoured to be dating her Saath Nibhaana Saathiya co-star, Vishal Singh, but she refuted those rumours. According to reports, the actress is single now.

Not only this, but the actress also gained limelight for sharing sizzling photos of herself on Instagram. The pictures that the actress posted on the social networking website, garnered limelight from all quarters.

What to expect from the contestant

The 29-year-old actress was earlier rumoured to be dating her Saath Nibhaana Saathiya co-actor Vishal Singh, but when asked about it, Devoleena declined having any link-ups with Vishal. Well, Devoleena's fans are quite excited to see the actress in the next season of Bigg Boss. If asked what is expected from the diva, we think that Deevoleena should shed the image of her famous character Gopi Bahu and should give her fans a glimpse into what she really is as a person. Hina Khan is one such example. Before she entered the Bigg Boss house, Hina was widely known as Akshara from Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai. But during her stint in Salman Khan's show, the diva had a successful makeover and fans loved Hina for who she actually was.

What is left to see is how Devoleena sustains in the Bigg Boss house and how she would bring out her real self leaving behind the 'Gopi Babu' image, that would garner appriciation from the audience.




