'Gem of a person, a beautiful soul': Houston mourns trailblazing Sikh deputy Sandeep Dhaliwal

As tributes poured in Sunday for the trailblazing sheriff’s deputy slain in Texas during a traffic stop, Houston police were building a case against his alleged killer while mourning the shocking loss of one of their own.

Sandeep Dhaliwal, a 10-year member of the Harris County force who in 2015 was granted an accommodation to wear a turban and beard on patrol to honor his Sikh faith, was shot twice in the back of the head Friday while returning to his patrol car, police said.

Robert Solis of Houston, who has a history of violent crime and was wanted for parole violations, was apprehended after fleeing the scene and charged with capital murder. He was being held without bond Sunday. Solis, 47, has been ordered to undergo a mental health evaluation.

Dhaliwal, 42, was the first Sikh sheriff’s deputy in Harris County, part of a Gulf Coast region where an estimated 7,000 to 10,000 people share his faith, according to the Houston Chronicle. His hiring in 2009 was regarded as a step toward improving relations with the Sikh community.

The sheriff’s office will hold a candlelight vigil for Dhaliwal on Monday evening, two days before his funeral.

“He was just a gem of a person. He was a beautiful soul,” said Simran Jeet Singh, a senior religion fellow at the New York-based Sikh Coalition. “Everyone who knew him admired him greatly.”

Sheriff Ed Gonzalez said Dhaliwal was shot about a mile from the place where Darren Goforth, a fellow deputy and close friend, was gunned down four years ago.

“There are no words to speak to how heartbroken we are, how devastated,’’ said Gonzalez, who marveled on Twitter about the outpouring of support from the community following Dhaliwal’s shooting.

“So many have shared pics they took with Deputy Dhaliwal and the many kids he met in the community and named ‘honorary HCSO junior deputies,'" Gonzalez tweeted.

A father of three, Dhaliwal had a soft spot for children, as illustrated by a video sent by a local resident to the sheriff’s office, which tweeted it out. The video shows Dhaliwal, who was at a restaurant with other deputies, allowing a young boy to put him in handcuffs, then showing him how to take them off.

“He laughed and joked with all of us, and left a bright impression on my son who is deaf,” the boy’s mother told the sheriff’s office.

Friends of Dhaliwal said his life showed how the presence of multiple cultures and faiths can enrich the country.

“It’s such a powerful message to send to the community that a man in a turban and beard is just as much American as you,” Singh said.

Sikhism, which shares some philosophical concepts with the much-older Hinduism, was founded in the 15th century in the Indian region of Punjab. It has about 27 million followers worldwide, most of them in India, and more than half a million in the U.S.

Authorities have given no indication that the killing was a hate crime. Solis was wanted for 2017 parole violations for assault and possession of a prohibited weapon. He was likely to be sent back to jail, where he served 12 years of a 20-year sentence for two felonies he was convicted of in 2002 after he shot a man, the Chronicle reported.

Citing court records, the newspaper also said that during the incident Solis barricaded himself in his home with his 4-year-old son “with intent to use (him) as a shield.’’

Contributing: The Associated Press
