Delhi: 19-year-old arrested for attacking woman journalist in CR Park area, probe underway

Later. the police analysed the CCTV footage to identify the accused involved in the case and ascertain the sequence of events. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman journalist was attacked by two-bike borne robbers on September 22 The Delhi Police department has also suspended three officers after their response to the incident was not "up to the mark" The victim was dragged out of a moving auto-rickshaw and robbed

New Delhi: The Delhi Police have apprehended a 19-year-old man on Sunday in connection with the snatching incident in south Delhi's CR Park area. A woman journalist who was attacked was grievously injured during the accident.

A news agency reported that the accused has given vital clues about the recovery of the items robbed from the woman. Meanwhile, the police are trying to nab other accused involved in the incident. The journalist was attacked by two-bike borne robbers on September 22 in the national capital's Chitranjan Park area.

The woman who is employed with a news organisation was attacked while she was returning home in an autorickshaw during the evening hours. She was reportedly dragged out of a moving auto-rickshaw and robbed. She had to be rushed to a hospital as she was seriously injured. The victim in her police complaint stated that after shopping in CR park, she was returning home in an autorickshaw when two men on a motorcycle snatched her mobile phone. In the struggle, she fell from the autorickshaw while the men fled from the spot.

Irked over the police negligence the woman told media that traffic was moving slowly when the rider held her right hand and the pillion held her left hand and pulled her out of the moving auto, and in between the commotion, they took her phone and managed to escape from the spot.

She added that "I am appalled. Where are the CCTV cameras? I was attacked in broad daylight. What if a speeding car would have hit me? Is this how unsafe the capital is."

Later. the police analysed the CCTV footage to identify the accused involved in the case and ascertain the sequence of events. The passerby rushed the woman to All India Institute Medical Science (AIIMS), where she was given first aid as she had suffered jaw fracture. During the course of the investigation, the Delhi Police department has also suspended three officers after their response to the incident was not 'up to the mark'. However, further probe in the matter is underway.
