PM Modi visit to Chennai: I can see the dreams of the future in your eyes, he tells IIT-Madras graduates

Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrived in Chennai on September 30 to take part in the 56th Convocation of the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. He will address the Singapore India Hackathon 2019 at the IIT-M Research Park and deliver the Convocation address at the institutes’s Students Activity Centre at 11 a.m.

Since he will be arriving and leaving the campus by a helicopter, there will be no traffic snarls on roads, say police. He is expected to leave the city by 1.15 p.m.

12: 00 a.m.

You are making Brand India stronger globally, says PM Modi

Addressing the 56th Convocation of the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, PM Modi said that there is confidence in the abilities in the young people of India.

"During my visit to the U.S., in our discussions there was one thread common. It was optimism about New India. The Indian community has made a mark for itself all over the world, especially in science, technology and innovation. Who is powering this? Lot of them are your IIT seniors. You are making Brand India stronger globally.

"The number of IIT graduates in UPSC will surprise both you and me. You are making India a more developed place. Go to the corporate world, you will see many many who studied in IIT. You are also making India more prosperous.

"Today as India is aspiring to become a $5 billion dollar economy, your innovation and aspiration of technology will fuel this dream. It will become the bedrock of India to become the most competitive economy.

"India's innovation is a great blend of economics and utility. I am told students here intern with start-ups and work hard without food and sleep...I hope the spirit of innovation and excellence will continue in the time to come.

"We have work to create a robust ecosystem for research and innovation in our country. There are Atal Incubation Centres being created in many institutions. The next step is to find a market for the startups.

"Your hard work made the impossible possible. There are many opportunities awaiting you, not all of them are easy. Never stop dreaming, keep challenging yourself. That way you will become a better version of yourself.

"No matter where you work, where you live, do also keep in mind, the needs of your motherland, your Mother India. Think of how your work, research, innovation will help your motherland. It is also your social responsibility

"Today, as a society, we want to move beyond single use plastics. What can be an environmentally friendly replacement that offers similar use but not similar disadvantages? This is when we look towards our young innovators like you.

"There are two types of people- those who live and those who exist." Quoting Swami Vivekananda, PM Modi said that those who live for others live a happy and fulfilled life.

He added that education and learning is a continuous process and ended his address by requesting the students to continue learning and exploring even after leaving the institute.

11: 30 a.m.

PM Modi arrives at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras

Prime Minister Narendra Modi received a warm welcome at the IIT-M and was joined by Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit, Chief Minister Edappadi K. Palaniswami and deputy CM O. Panneerselvam at the convocation.

Bhaskar Ramamurthy, Director of the Indian Institute of Technology Madras speaking at the 56th Convocation on September 30, 2019

After the address of Director Bhaskar Ramamurthy and Pawan Goenka, CMD, Mahindra and Mahindra, PM Modi distributed the awards.

Kavitha Gopal received the President of India medal. She is the first women in the history of IIT Madras to get the prestigious award for the highest CGPA in B.Tech and Dual degree.

"I can see the dreams of the future in your eyes," PM Modi says in his convocation address at IIT-M. "The State of Tamil Nadu has a special distinction. It is home to the oldest language in the world- Tamil. And it is home to one of the newest languages in India- the IIT-Madras lingo."

11: 00 a.m.

As Modi visits Chennai, Twitter war is back

On a day when Prime Minister Narendra Modi visits Chennai, two contrasting hashtags trend on Twitter. #gobackmodi and #TNWelcomesModi took the first and third places respectively perfectly summarising a divided Twitterati.

The trend has been continuing since April last year, when the Prime Minister arrived in Chennai for inaugurating a Defence Expo. Since then, every time Mr. Modi visits the metropolis, these two hashtags surface.

10: 30 a.m.

We want Indian solution for global problems, says PM Modi

PM Modi distributed the awards to the winners of the Singapore India Hackathon 2019 at the IIT-M Research Park and congratulated all the participants. "Your willingness to confront challenges and find workable solutions, your energy, enthusiasm is of much greater value than just winning a competition.

"For me, each of you is a winner. You are winners because you are not afraid of taking risks, you are committed to your efforts without worrying about the results. I had suggested this idea of a joint hackathon last year when I visited Singapore.

Interacting with young innovators at the #SingaporeIndiaHackathon. Watch. https://t.co/NBuTlMymcL — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 30, 2019

"The ideas shared in today's hackathon is tomorrow's start-up ideas. Today India is poised to grow into a $5 trillion economy. For this innovation and start-ups will play a crucial role. India is now among the top 3 start-up ecosystems.

"We are encouraging innovation and incubation for two big reasons. We want easy solutions, we in India want to find solutions for the World. We want Indian solution for global problems.

"Let me take this opportunity to suggest a joint hackathon for all ASEAN countries and develop solutions for reducing global warming and climate change."

9: 30 a.m.

World has “great expectations” from India, says PM

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Chennai on Monday, September 30, 2019.

PM Narendra Modi arrived at the Chennai International Airport and addressed the gathering. "When I was speaking in the U.S., I said Tamil was a very old language in the World. That news is now still doing the rounds in the U.S. media...There are lots of expectation in the U.S. from India. All 130 crore Indians need to work together for it," he said.

Speaking at Chennai Airport. Watch. https://t.co/7qWBSkMO5R — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 30, 2019

On his first visit to Tamil Nadu after retaining power in this year’s Lok Sabha polls, the Prime Minister reiterated his campaign against single-use plastic. “During my (just concluded) U.S. tour I saw the world has great expectations from India, which is growing... we will certainly ensure the welfare of India, and swiftly, but we will make it such a great nation that it will be useful for the world,” he said.

(With inputs from PTI)

8: 30 a.m.

Increased security at IIT-M

More than 1,000 policemen have been deployed inside and outside the campus in connection with Mr Modi’s visit. “Our men are patrolling the campus and the commandos are combing the forest area. We have installed over 50 CCTV cameras apart from the existing ones in the premises,” said a senior police officer.

As a precaution, the police have also deployed over 600 traffic police personnel from the airport to IIT-Madras to manage the situation in case the PM’s convoy has to take the road for some reason. “This is highly unlikely,” added the officer.
