Hindu nationalism on campus touches political nerve

Hindu nationalism on campus touches political nerve

The introduction of an undergraduate course on the history of Hindu nationalism at a government university has led to accusations against the governing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of promoting a divisive ideology.

The controversy centres on the role of the Rashtriya Swayam Sewak Sangh (RSS) or National Volunteer Organisation, which is also the parent body of the BJP. It is associated with the movement known as Hindutva, a term coined in 1923 to describe the promotion of Hindu values in the political and social sphere.

Academics and critics from the Indian National Congress, the main opposition party, have accused the RSS of exaggerating its role in national development and undermining the secularism on which the country was founded.

"The RSS played no role in the Indian independence struggle. It did not even unfurl the tricolour on its buildings until recently and opposed the Constitution," said Dr Nitin Raut, president of the Congress committee in Maharashtra state. "Moreover, it has been opposed to the concept of unity in diversity which is the bedrock of Indian secularism."

The role of the RSS in nation building has been added to the syllabus of the History of India (1885-1947) course that is taught to second-year BA students at Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University in the coming semester.

Dr Raut said his party would fight against the imposition of the syllabus because it was an attempt to take the country back to 1947 when India was divided on the basis of religion.

Dr Shyam Koretti, chairman of the university's Board of Studies, calls the protest much ado about nothing. He said the board simply decided to offer undergraduates the same material that has been taught at the post-graduate level for the last 17 years.

Dr Koretti said that the syllabus already included the history of Hindu Mahasabha, an organisation involved in the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, and the Muslim League, which campaigned for creating Pakistan on religious grounds. In that context, he asked rhetorically, what was wrong in teaching the role of the RSS in nation building?

The same course is also being taught in three other universities including Delhi University, so Nagpur University was not the first to introduce the subject, he told Asia Focus.

Nagpur, a city in the heart of India, is also the headquarters of the RSS. The BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi emerged from the RSS, which is also the fountainhead of numerous other groups. They include Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and its youth brigade Bajrang Dal, two militant groups that allegedly had a role in the demolition of the disputed Babri Mosque structure in Ayodhya. The RSS, the VHP and the Bajrang Dal were banned for about a year after the incident in 1992.

Dr Raut, who is also president of the scheduled caste cell of the Congress, accuses the RSS of promoting discrimination. "They are against secularism and reservation for weaker sections," he said. In Nagpur, he said, the Congress was fighting a constant battle against RSS ideology. He pointed out that before 2014, the city elected a Congress parliamentarian for several years.

Dr Satish Chaturvedi, a former Congress legislator who held the seat where the RSS headquarters are located, said the BJP and the RSS were trying to control the school and university education. "They are changing history. They are radicalising school and college students," he said, blaming the RSS and its cohorts for branding the Congress as an anti-Hindu and a Muslim party.

The BJP platform contains key pledges linked to Hindu nationalist identity. They include a plan to build a grand Ram temple at the site of the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya. It also aims to push through a Uniform Civil Code to replace the current system in which each religious group can deal with matters such as marriage, divorce and inheritance, according to laws defined by faith and customs. However, critics say the code would impose Hindu values in many cases.

The BJP-led government recently fulfilled a long-held goal to scrap Article 370 of the Constitution, which gave special status to Muslim-majority Jammu & Kashmir state, a move that has been condemned at home and internationally.

The RSS and the BJP see nothing wrong in introducing RSS history for undergraduates. "All universities should follow Nagpur University in introducing RSS history. It is after all one of the most patriotic and biggest organisations," RSS spokesman Rajiv Tuli said.

Mr Tuli said that unlike communism which had become irrelevant, RSS ideology was still very relevant. If the Congress wants to challenge the decision of the university, he added, it should do so in a court instead of making noise in the media.

He also claimed all Indians were children of a Hindu and had not migrated from the Vatican.

Pravin Gatke, president of the BJP in Nagpur, asked if communism, socialism and other movements could be taught in a syllabus, then what was wrong in teaching the role of the RSS in nation building? He believes students should be taught about all ideologies and allowed to follow the one they agree with.

He rejected the charge that the decision of the Nagpur University was influenced by BJP leaders, who also control the Maharashtra state government.

The RSS was set up in 1925. It has always promoted the cause of an undivided India, with Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan part of that territory. The organisation has a presence in almost all sectors. Bharatiya Majdoor Sangh (BMS), or the Indian Workers' Organisation, is its representative in the labour sector while Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) spreads the word on college campuses.

The organisation is well regarded for its ability to mass huge numbers of volunteers to help out during natural and man-made calamities. It also campaigns against religious conversion and inter-community marriages. It has been opposing marriages between Hindus and Muslims in particular, terming them "love jihad". Its leaders are known for their Spartan lifestyles. Many of them have never married, saying service of the nation comes first.
