Movies this week: Hrithik Roshan, Tiger Shroff's WAR and Joaquin Phoenix's Joker releasing on October 2

Checkout the movies that will release this week

Key Highlights This week, two of the highly anticipated films are all set to release on Wednesday, October 2nd Bollywood film WAR will clash on the silver screen with Hollywood flick Joker. Moviegoers are definitely excited for October 2nd

Whether you're a cinephile or not, Friday is always the best day of the week. Not just the day marks the beginning of an exciting weekend, but Friday is also about new stories that will hit the 70mm screen. With a dose of unrequited wishful thinking, and a tub full of popcorn accompanied by a can of cold drink, who would want to miss going to the cinema hall.

However, this week the weekend comes early, the most anticipated films of the years - WAR and Joker are all set to release this Wednesday. This Wednesday, there are a couple of exciting films lined up to treat you with some great content. So fire up some popcorn in the microwave and get ready to book your tickets instantly.

This week, both Bollywood and Hollywood stars are all set for the release of the much-awaited films, leaving the movie buffs confused about which one to opt for. While fans in India are eagerly waiting for Hrithik Roshan and Tiger Shroff's on-screen faceoff, Joaquin Phoenix too is all set to give the audience chills with his acting skills.

Without further ado, take a look at all the upcoming movies for this week...

1. WAR: Starring Tiger Shroff, Hrithik Roshan and Vaani Kapoor in the key roles, WAR is all set to release on October 2nd on Gandhi Jayanti. Talking about the movie, Hrithik told IANS, "It is very difficult to write an intelligent action entertainer. It is not easy. People think action is about blowing up cars. It's not. Action needs intelligent writing. Action is in the process, in planning, it's in the strategising of how the attitude of the hero comes into the piece of the action, as well as the attitude of other characters".

2. Joker: The release of the much-anticipated comic book antihero film Joker, starring Joaquin Phoenix in the key role, was preponed in India. The film, which was scheduled to release on October 4, will now hit the screens on October 2.

So which of these two fils are you excited to watch on the big screen?
