The 'other' in brother: Boris and Jo Johnson, Malvinder and Shivinder Singh - famous siblings turned rivals

Bob had urged Harvey to seek medical treatment for what the former mistakenly thought was sex addiction.

It’s been an honour to represent Orpington for 9 years & to serve as a minister under three PMs. In recent weeks I’… https://t.co/HsERmUFFc5 — Jo Johnson (@JoJohnsonUK) 1567678685000

Hinduja Vs Hinduja; Ambani Brothers In Arms, And Other Family Feuds Of India Inc







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 11 It's NOT All In The Family Conventional wisdom dictates that family, almost always, comes first. But India Inc has shown that conventional wisdom doesn't always hold true. Over the years, a number of prominent business families have faced separation woes. And many have had to take some hard calls.



The Ambani vs Ambani saga that captured the country's imagination in 2004, and gave birth to various kinds of theories, saw rapprochement (of sorts) last year when elder brother Mukesh bailed out younger sibling Anil by paying Rs 453 crore dues in the Ericsson case, and thereby preventing the latter from being jailed.

And while the Ambanis have done course-correction, family ties seem to be shaking at the Hinduja household. The brothers, who run the $11.2 billion conglomerate, are not seeing eye to eye over the Switzerland-based Hinduja Bank. The disagreements have left the family's patriarch SP Hinduja and his daughters on one side, and the other three brothers - Ashok, Gopichand and Prakash on the other.



In Pic: Hinduja Brothers (L), Mukesh and Anil Ambani (R). Falling Apart The once closely-knit Hinduja brothers have become the latest business family to find themselves in the middle of a tussle over the future of their $11.2 billion fortune. Fissures have emerged among the four brothers, one of the world's richest, over a letter signed by them in 2014. According to the document, the assets held by one brother belong to all, and that each man will appoint the others as their executors.



However, the group's patriarch 84-year-old Srichand Hinduja and his daughter, Vinoo, want the letter declared worthless.



The dispute came to a light in a ruling delivered by a London judge, who said that the three other brothers, Gopichand, Prakash and Ashok, tried to use the letter to take control of Hinduja Bank - an asset that was in Srichand’s sole name.



The court also allowed Vinoo, SP’s younger daughter, to act as his ‘litigation friend’ to safeguard his interests, since he is said to be suffering from a form of dementia.



The ongoing litigation in the London court began in November last year. Vinoo is seeking to have the July 2014 agreement declared null and void. Not All Good At The Godrejs The 122-year-old $5-billion Godrej group seems to be the latest India Inc family to have been hit by an internal feud after differences cropped up among family members over development of land holdings owned by Godrej & Boyce.



Brothers Adi and Nadir Godrej control the group’s three listed companies — Godrej Consumer Products Ltd (GCPL), Godrej Properties and Godrej Agrovet. Godrej & Boyce, the holding company of the group with business divisions including aerospace, consumer, office and industrial products, furniture and appliances, is owned by all family members with Jamshyd Godrej as its chairman.



The dispute reportedly arose after the family members were split over the development of a 1,000-acre land parcel they own in Mumbai. According to reports, the crux of the issue is the concentration of the family’s land holding in Godrej & Boyce and its commercial exploitation by the group’s listed arm Godrej Properties.



While Adi and Nadir are in favour of development of the land, the Jamshyd Godrej side is believed to be against excessive development.



JM Financial chairman Nimesh Kampani and lawyer Zia Mody are advising Jamshyd Godrej, while Kotak Mahindra Bank CEO Uday Kotak and Cyril Shroff of legal firm Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas are assisting Adi and Nadir Godrej untangle the situation.



The family business board is led by group chairman Adi Godrej and includes brother Nadir, cousin Jamshyd and brother-in-law Vijay Crishna. The fourth generation of the family, which includes the children of Adi, Jamshyd, Nadir and Crishna who are past 18 years, attend meetings as invitees.





In Pic: (L-R) Adi, Nadir and Jamshyd Godrej inaugurate the 'Godrej Interio' store, a joint venture between Godrej & Boyce's Jamshyd Godrej and designer Krsna Mehta, at Godrej Bhawan in Mumbai on February 24, 2010. The Tale Of Two Brothers The Ambani war was no silent affair. From defamation suits, letters to the PM to dragging each other to court, the once-close brothers did it all.



India’s richest man Mukesh Ambani and his brother Anil Ambani's bitter feud began soon after the death of their father Dhirubhai Ambani, the founder of Reliance Industries, in 2002.



Ambani Sr. hadn't left a will, so his elder son Mukesh became Chairman and MD of Reliance Industries Ltd while Anil was Vice-Chairman.



The feud for control led to the split of the Reliance Group. However, in 2005, their mother, Anandiben, brokered a de-merger, giving Mukesh control of oil and gas, petrochemicals, refining and manufacturing, while Anil got electricity, telecoms and financial services.



Even though some shareholders opposed the decision, the Bombay High Court had approved the de-merger.



But that didn't settle things. Rather the oil wars continued between the brothers, with Anil even accusing involvement of the Government in supporting Mukesh.



Anil's Reliance Natural Resources Ltd. had even placed newspaper ads alleging that the Indian government had sided with Mukesh's Reliance Industries. And It Continued Till 2019 ... Things only went from bad to worse for the brother. In 2008, Anil filed a $2.12 billion defamation suit against Mukesh for remarks he made during an interview with The New York Times.

What started off as a family feud, was termed a matter of 'national interest' by India's then-finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, who requested the brothers to resolve the dispute privately.



After going to the Supreme Court in 2009 over the gas dispute (the court ruled in Mukesh's favour), Kokilaben once again intervened in May 2010 to broker a peace agreement. Officials of both their companies received notes that said the Ambani brothers would draft a non-compete agreement.



Soon after, Anil withdrew his defamation suit.



Now a few years later, the brothers are often seen together at family functions, and other events.

One urged his sibling to mend his ways, another allegedly blamed his for their failure.Siblings who fall out make for a riveting, though heart-breaking, tale.In a recent book, the reporters from The New York Times, who first broke the story of sexual harassment by Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein , revealed a letter from his brother and business partner, Bob. In the letter, Bob urges Harvey to seek medical treatment for what the former mistakenly thought was sex addiction. “You have brought shame to the family and your company through your misbehaviour,” Bob wrote in the letter. “Your reaction was once more to blame the victims, or to minimise the misbehaviour in various ways. If you think nothing is wrong with your misbehaviour so in this area, then announce it to your wife and family.”Joseph ‘Jo’ Johnson is the younger brother of UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson . Jo is also the former Member of Parliament for Orpington, London, and a member of his brother’s cabinet overseeing business and education.In a tweet, Jo said, “It’s been an honour to represent Orpington for 9 years & to serve as a minister under three PMs. In recent weeks, I’ve been torn between family loyalty and the national interest — it’s an unresolvable tension & time for others to take on my roles as MP & Minister.” Jo campaigned strongly against Britain’s exit from the European Union in 2016, a position that put him at odds with his more famous brother.The Western India Bakers Pvt Ltd, makers of the eponymous Wibs bread, temporarily took its products off the shelves following a family dispute. Wibs is owned by Khodadad Irani and brothers Hoshang and Sheriar. Khodadad recently filed a petition in the Bombay High Court to dissolve the partnership after a dispute with Sheriar, following the death of Hoshang earlier this month. According to reports, a settlement has been reached and production resumed last week.In February, Malvinder Singh filed a complaint against brother Shivinder Singh and the head of the Radha Soami Satsang, Gurinder Singh Dhillon, alleging financial fraud and death threats. The Singh brothers helmed Ranbaxy and Fortis Healthcare before losing control of both the companies. Malvinder’s complaint said, “Gurinder Singh Dhillon has threatened the complainant through his lawyer Ferida Chopra that if he did not agree to the demands of Gurinder Singh Dhillon, he would be eliminated by persons from the Radha Soami Satsang.”The trouble between the brothers became public in September 2018 with Shivinder formally distancing himself from his brother and blaming Malvinder for the problems with Fortis Healthcare Group. A few months later, the battle reached a new low, with Malvinder alleging that he was assaulted by Shivinder.In August, David Koch of Koch Industries, which is America’s second-largest privately held company, passed away. David and his brother Charles ran the multi-billion dollar company. David was Manhattan’s wealthiest resident and was socially more prominent than his brother Charles, who lived in Kansas away from the limelight. Charles is reportedly the brains behind the company’s success. In June 2018, David retired from Koch Industries and it has been reported in The New Yorker that Charles allegedly pushed David out of the family business.
