Selfie: Colourful walls across the city turn backdrop for photoshoots

Until recently, it was common to find youngsters getting their profile pictures taken at Sirpur lake, Gulawat or even Regional park, amidst the manicured lawns and rustic wilderness. Now, the city’s colourful walls that have received a fresh dash of colour in preparation for the third Swachh Survekshan, have caught the fancy of selfie enthusiasts and budding models alike. These walls around the city are a showcase of folk art and kitschy, pop art, highlighting Indian culture. The boundary wall and over-bridge of Indore railway station feature paintings of famous monuments of the state, that pop out in a 3D effect created by the painters. These areas have become the newest photoshoot hubs in the city. City youngsters tell us more...This is the most common opinion among those who have been shooting at such locations. Aishwarya Mathur, a finance professional who has got her profile shoots done along the Jungle Book theme at Indore Zoo, says, "I wanted a fresh perspective for my social media profile. Once, while crossing the zoo, I spotted the newly painted jungle theme. I thought what better than this to give everyone a glimpse of my inner child. After all, I’m a 90s kid who grew up on tales of Mowgli !"Aishwarya feels that shoots like these are more candid, casual and there is no stress to dress up. "Besides being fun, such shoots also give others around the country a glimpse of our city," she adds. The thought is resonated by CS student Kunal Bagora, who has also had quite a few profile shoots done after the walls got a fresh dose of paint. "Every time I looked at pictures of influencers and bloggers from Delhi, Mumbai, Kochi and Pune posting pictures in front of such walls and murals, I used to wonder why Indore didn't have such wall art. Now that we do, I get maximum pictures, even selfies with the art in the background and flaunt them to show others how colourful my city is," Kunal says.One of the perks of shooting in front of these walls is that it is completely free of cost. "For a professional shoot one has to shell out `5,000-8,000, and an additional `1,500-2,000 for indoor locations like cafés that have artsy décor. Getting portfolio shots in front of these walls is certainly more economical for me," shares Vaishnavi Bundela, a budding model from the city.And photographers agree. Akhilesh Singh, a professional photographer who specialises in fashion shoots shares, "Since most of the indoor locations - be it café, hotels or studios - charge a minimum location cost, the client hesitates. With these public locations we don’t have to worry about increasing cost. And the art is already so vibrant that we don’t have to think much."While indoor locations amount to a rise in shoot cost, most outdoor locations like lakeside boulevard and parks need prior permission from authorities, "which is sometimes very tedious and time-consuming," adds Akhilesh. "Not just the park, but even at heritage monuments like Krishnapuri Chhatri or Footi Kothi there is always someone who will interrupt the shoot for permission. We understand that they’re just doing their job, but it puts off the momentum of the shoot," says Abhishek Pawar, another budding model.Besides, there's no time constraint with these locations which becomes an added advantage. "To shoot at these usual locations one has to wait for opening time and get everything wrapped within the given time slot or before closing time. However, there is no such constraint with public locations that are open and free 24/7," freelance photographer Udita Soni points out.* Dress according to the art so colours don’t clash* Never try stunts at these locations, as most of them are around busy roads* Give a shoutout to the artist if you know who it is* Do not interrupt traffic while shooting
