Why Bihar flood is a warning sign for Nitish Kumar

Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar inspecting rise in water level in River Ganga, which is in spate causing flood in the state. (Photo: Twitter/@NitishKumar)

Flood is considered more as a natural calamity than a man-made disaster. In Bihar, it can also be a political disaster and tragedy. In the post-Congress Bihar, two major regime changes were accentuated by floods.

In the first instance, Lalu Prasad came to the fore and in the second, Nitish Kumar earned a nickname for himself - Sushashan Babu (Mr Good Governance). The current spell of flooding in Bihar is a definite warning sign for Nitish Kumar.

First, an update of the flood situation in Bihar.

Late upsurge in monsoonal rain has led to incessant rainfall in over a dozen districts of Bihar with three of them - capital Patna, Kaimur and Bhagalpur - being the worst affected. Situation in Patna is particularly bad with many areas submerged under 4-6 feet of flood water.

Patna has not seen such floods since 1975, both the people and authorities say. Other badly affected districts are Araria, Banka, Munger, Muzaffarpur and Samastipur.

Around 30 people have died in rain and flood related incidents. The aam aadmi have blamed the "lacklustre" approach by the Nitish Kumar government over the years for this state of flood in Bihar, which was recently hit by a severe drought which followed a devastating flood in many districts.

However, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has blamed nature - excessive rain - for the flood fury and not the lack of preparedness of the government or "poor response" from the state agencies.

On Sunday, Nitish Kumar said, "There has been heavy rainfall in some areas since yesterday and water in Ganga River is rising constantly. But there are proper arrangements and administration is at the spot." People don't seem to agree and say the government is not at the spot but "in a spot of bother" as it heads into the final year of its term. Bihar will go to the polls next year.

Bihar is still rain-deficient.

The Nitish Kumar government is said to be working on a compensation package for flood affected regions. It is only ironical that just days back on September 13 the Nitish Kumar government announced a compensation package for drought-affected families.

A compensation of Rs 3,000 each was announced for drought-hit families in 18 districts of Bihar. However, this came with a rider that only those families that did not receive compensation as victims of the July flood could claim the relief. The government had given Rs 6,000 to flood-affected families.

Bihar has had two previous spells of flood this year in July and August. The July flood was much severe. More than 125 people had died in flood-related incidents by the end of July.

Bihar saw severe flood in July. This photograph shows a man swimming through floodwater to a safer place in Araria district of the state. (Photo: PTI)

Flood watchers blamed the scale of the loss of life and property due to flood on the communication gap with Nepal, whose southern part forms a big catchment area for the rivers flowing through Bihar. The state and the central government have blamed each other for years for this lack of communication.

Despite frequent spells of flood, Bihar is still rain-deficient. It was facing a rain-deficit of about 20 per cent till September 19. The ongoing heavy rain has compensated a better part of the shortfall but the state is still, as of September 29, rain deficit by 2 per cent. However, with the MeT department predicting late monsoon swing to stay till first week of October, the rain-deficit is likely to be overcompensated.

Before flood, it was drought.

The year began on a worrying note for Bihar and the Nitish Kumar government. About two-thirds of the 38 districts of Bihar were reeling under drought. In some districts, the situation had become so bad by April-May that people did not have a water source for drinking water. Irrigation was out of question.

Villages in districts such as Darbhanga, which is known for an intricate web of rivers and consequent floods year after, had run dry. Wells and tube-wells did not have any water. The situation was so bad that the district had run out of submersion pipes for pumping out groundwater as people went deeper in the earth in the search of water.

The 2018 monsoon season had left Bihar mostly dry with the Nitish Kumar government declaring 280 (out of 534) blocks in 25 out of 38 districts as drought-affected. Nearly 15 lakh farmers were affected in these districts. Now, in most of these districts, the farmers are battling floods.

A villager crosses the dry bed of River Tilaiya in Nawada district of Bihar earlier this year when the state witnessed a harsh drought situation. (Photo: Chandradeep Kumar/India Today)

Flood has a history in Bihar.

Bihar is the worst flood-prone and flood-affected state of India. Floods are an annual certainty in Bihar. This was confirmed by the data presented by the home ministry in the Lok Sabha in July this year. Bihar tops the list of states in terms of death of citizens due to floods.

A total of 970 people were killed in Bihar during 2016-19 followed by 756 in Kerala, 663 in West Bengal and 522 in Maharashtra - 6,000 died across India due to floods.

Two of the severest floods in Bihar were seen in 1987 and 2004. The 1987 flood was unique as most of India witnessed drought-like situation due to what many call "mid-way flight of the monsoon". Around 1,500 people were killed in Bihar in the 1987 flood. It was followed by a massive earthquake in 1988. On both occasions, the state government was found lax, fueling people's anger.

This is a photograph, clicked near the Nalanda Medical College and Hospital (NMCH) in Patna, shows patients being taken to the hospital wading through floodwater. Several areas of Patna are under waist-deep water. (Photo: PTI)

In the next election, the Congress was voted and practically rooted out of Bihar. This was 1989. Lalu Prasad emerged as the mass leader. The Congress has been tottering ever since.

The next big flood was in 2004, when about 900 people lost their lives. The Lalu Prasad government was voted out in 2005. His Rashtriya Janata Party remained in political exile for the next ten years. Lalu Prasad had to forge an alliance with Nitish Kumar and hype on anti-Modi sentiments to come back to power, which the RJD lost in just two years' time.

A big flood, to conclude, carries a political message in Bihar. Nitish Kumar must be wary of that warning sign.
