Death sentence commutation of Beant Singh’s assassin: Grandson calls Centre’s decision ‘shocking’

Ravneet Singh Bittu, the grandson of slain Punjab chief minister Beant Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The then Punjab CM Beant Singh, credited for curbing terrorism in the state, was assassinated on August 31, 1995 Dilawar Singh, an employee of the Punjab Police, had acted as a human bomb Balwant Singh Rajoana, the Babbar Khalsa terrorist, was the second human bomb

New Delhi: Ravneet Singh Bittu, the grandson of slain Punjab chief minister Beant Singh, on Monday described the Union Home Ministry’s decision to commute the death sentence of assassin Balwant Singh Rajoana to life imprisonment as “shocking”.

“It will be a black day (in the history of Punjab) if it is true,” added Bittu, the Ludhiana MP.

Bittu had yesterday accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of 'double standards'.

“On the one hand, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is talking about eradicating terror in the world when this is happening in the country. Home Minister Amit Shah knows about the Blue Star operation and 1984 riots but no actions are being taken," Bittu had said.

However, the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) today supported the Centre's decision and claimed it as a "dark day for the Congress, which murdered many Sikhs".

"It is a dark day for the Congress because they killed over 1 lakh young Sikhs. This did not happen anywhere in the country and the world that people of the same party committed massacres in many places in the country including 1984 Sikh riots and killings in Sri Raj Darbar. It is really a dark day for Congress," DSGMC president Manjinder Singh Sirsa said.

The then Punjab CM Beant Singh, credited for curbing terrorism in the state, was assassinated on August 31, 1995, in an explosion outside the Civil Secretariat in Chandigarh.

The terror attack had also claimed 16 other lives. Dilawar Singh, an employee of the Punjab Police, had acted as a human bomb.

Balwant Singh Rajoana, the Babbar Khalsa terrorist, was the second human bomb in case Dilawar Singh would have failed in assassinating the Congress leader.

In July 2007, a special court had awarded the death sentence to Rajoana and another terrorist Jagtar Singh Hawara in the assassination case of Beant Singh. Rajoana was scheduled to be executed on March 31, 2012.

However, on March 28, 2012, the then United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government at the Centre stayed Rajoana’s hanging after Shiromani Gurudwara Prabhandak Committee filed a mercy petition.

The President had then forwarded the plea to the Home Ministry.

On Saturday, a Home Ministry spokesperson said the government would release eight Sikh prisoners, kept in different jails across the country for committing crimes during the militancy period in Punjab, on the occasion of Shri Guru Nanak Dev’s 550th birth anniversary in November as a token of goodwill.

The spokesperson had added that the death sentence of another Sikh prisoner has been commuted to life imprisonment through a special remission.

"In one case, the decision has been taken to commute the death sentence to life imprisonment. In eight cases, the decision has been taken for premature release of prisoners serving life sentences and other sentences, through special remission," the Ministry of Home Affairs had said.

It became clear on Sunday that this prisoner is Rajoana.
