4 injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

4 injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

JAMMU, Sep 29: Four civilians, including three women, sustained splinter injuries as Pakistan for second consecutive day continued to shell forward border posts and villages on the Line of Control in Balakote and Mendhar sectors in Poonch district on Sunday.

Few houses also got damaged in shelling from across the border.

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation by Pakistan, said, “Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by resorting to intense firing of small arms and shelling with mortars in the Balakote sector at about 3.15 PM.” “Indian army also retaliated befittingly,” he said. He, however, said that the casualty suffered by the Pakistan army in the retaliatory action was not known immediately.

Pak army later resorted to intense shelling in Mendhar sector also, thus ensuing heavy exchange of fire between two sides. It continued till 6.30 PM.

In Pak shelling, four civilians, including three women, sustained splinter injuries. The injured were identified as Gulsaid Bi, 36, wife of Mohammed Qadeer resident of Balakote, Motiyan Bi, 42, wife of Mohammed Razzaq, resident of Sandot, Angreza Bi, 55, wife of Mohammed Razzaq resident of Basooni and Mohammed Imran, resident of Beruti. Medial Officer at PHC Dhar Gloon Dr Lateef told KTNS that except Angreza Bi, three other injured were brought to PHC. “They were given first aid at PHC Dhar Gloon and then shifted to District Hospital Rajouri,” he said. Angreza Bi was directly rushed to Rajouri hospital. Out of four injured, the condition of Gulsaid Bi, who sustained splinter injuries in her abdomen, was serious, the doctors said.

“Three women and a boy have received splinter injuries in the Pakistani shelling on their villages,” District Development Commissioner of Poonch, Rahul Yadav told reporters. He said all the injured were evacuated and taken to a hospital and their condition was stable. The rescue teams were rushed to the affected area, Yadav added.

Meanwhile, BMO Mendhar Dr Pervaiz Ahmed Khan issued advisory for public residing along border in Balakote sector requesting them to remain inside their houses and keep their cattle also inside following unprovoked shelling along the border. In case of any emergency, people were asked to contact BMO and others doctors. “We have put medical teams along with ambulances on high alert and have also deputed medical teams to shelling areas,” BMO Mendhar said.

On Saturday evening also, Pakistani troops had resorted to mortar shelling and small arms firing in Shahpur and Kerni sectors in Poonch district, prompting strong retaliation by India.

The exchange of fire between the two sides lasted for several hours but had caused no damage.

This year, according to officials, Pakistan violated the ceasefire over 2,000 times along the LoC, leaving 21 people dead and scores of others injured. India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to ask its forces to adhere to the 2003 ceasefire understanding and maintain peace and tranquility along the LoC and the International Border.
