Civil Society meet on Kashmir situation; Call for restoring normalcy in Valley

Civil Society meet on Kashmir situation; Call for restoring normalcy in Valley

NEW DELHI, Sep 29: In the backdrop of clampdown and blockade of communication network for the last 55 days in Kashmir, a Seminar was convened at IIC Delhi on September 28, 2019 to deliberate on the plight of Kashmiris.

The seminar was organised under the auspices of the Centre for Peace and Progress. The participants, over 60, were drawn from all over the country from different disciplines, mainly academics, social workers, human rights activists, journalists and legal experts. The participants expressed their serious concerns about the prolonged shutdown and restrictions on internet services, due to which people are unable to realise their Constitutional rights of accessing education and health care facilitates. The participants expressed solidarity with the people of Kashmir and commitment to help and support them for realising their socioeconomic aspirations.

In an intense debate and focussed deliberations on various aspects of human conditions, it was resolved to ask the government to end the stalemate due to which there is unprecedented violations of human rights.

The participants urged for a slew of steps to be urgently taken by the Centre to restore normal life in the Valley.

A resolution adopted at the meeting said that the Government has the onerous responsibility to protect the Constitutional rights of all the citizens to enable them to live with dignity. “The people of Kashmir are cut off from their families and friends, and are unable to conduct routine socioeconomic activities. The Government’s action to withdraw internet and mobile telephony services have hampered the normal life of people. Delivery of services linked to internet, namely Ayushman Bharat for medical treatment are totally disrupted. Due to prolonged restrictions on transport and communication people are unable to procure essential medicines and supplies. School going children are unable to attend schools. We therefore urge upon the government to restore communication network, including internet and mobile services to fulfil its obligations to promote welfare of the citizens,” it said.

The group also pointed out that a number of alleged human rights violations have been committed due to the misuse of pellet guns, harassment of women and children by the security forces. “Evidence of such violations are already in public domain, which does not augur well for winning the hearts and minds of Kashmiris. The government is therefore required to take appropriate action to control human rights violations and to provide relief to all those who have unduly suffered,” it said.

The resolution adopted by the group stated that the Government ought to adhere to fundamental principles of democracy, which is that the party in power should not bluntly exercise its powers to lock up its political opponents who have not committed any crime. “Such an action is unprecedented and is a blot on India’s vibrant democracy. Without the release of all the detainees, it may not be possible to initiate political processes for conducting elections of local bodies and Assembly. The government must therefore release all the detainees, political and non-political persona who are under house arrest ever since the Article 370 was revoked. And, all the due elections must be conducted at the earliest to improve democratic governance in J&K,” it added.

The process of abrogation of the Article 370 was questioned by some participants while some others justified it. As several petitions have already been filed with the Supreme Court (SC) and the legality of unilateral decision by the government is already under review by the SC, the participants urged upon SC to expeditiously decide the matter to settle the legal issue. This may go a long way in cooling down angers among the Kashmiris, they said.

They also called for ensuring that the functioning of educational institutions and medical services, transport and communication services are restored. Credible and reputed media persons must be allowed to interact with people of J&K to provide feedback for removing grievances, improving social mobility, including business, trade and tourism which are the backbone of local economy, they said.

Kashmir imbroglio is closely related to political dispute between India and Pakistan, which in parts occupy the original J&K region, they observed and reasoned that “because of this dispute, both the countries have not only fought three wars but also continue to engage in proxy wars, resulting in heavy militarisation of the region, cross-border firings, militancy and insurgency. Huge resources have thus been wasted without any tangible gains. It is urgent therefore to initiate a dialogue process with Pakistan as per the Shimla Agreement 1972 to resolve all the contentious issues to ensure sustainable peace and development in the region. In effect, terror activities will be contained through mutual understanding and cooperation.”

“Insurgency and militancy in the region have adversely affected the development of economic infrastructure due to which local economy largely dependent on seasonal tourism is unsustainable. Lower quality of education and skills development, inadequate health care facilities and lack of jobs opportunities have deprived the people of better quality of life. Youths are therefore alienated and delusion among them leads to extremism and participation in militancy related activities. With a view to effectively addressing the issue of alienation among youths, the Centre has launched the PM’s Scholarship Scheme for J&K students for meeting full costs of higher education and Udaan Scheme for entrepreneurial training and employment since 2011. These schemes have never been implemented in letter and spirit. It is the time to do the needful to win the hearts and minds of youths,” the group further said.

The group also emphasized that the promises made to Kashmiri Pandits for return to their home land must be fulfilled at the earliest.

The participants noted with concern that the life and liberty of ordinary people in Kashmir are highly deplorable due to prolonged shutdown and blockade of communication network. People of Kashmir have as much human rights and freedom as the rest of people of India. Any discriminatory treatment of people on grounds of region or ethnicity would breed extremism, which must be resisted. “The Central government is therefore duty bound to act fast to restore normalcy in the Valley in order to actualise the idea of embracing Kashmiris, as Prime Minister Modi has often said,” they added.
