MHA commutes death sentence of former Punjab CM Beant Singh's assassin to life term; eight Sikh prisoners to be released on Nanak Jayanti-India News , Firstpost

Centre has decided to commute the death sentence of Balwant Singh Rajoana, who was convicted for the assassination of former Punjab chief minister Beant Singh, to life imprisonment, while also releasing eight other Sikhs currently in jail for committing crimes during the militancy in Punjab

New Delhi: The Home Ministry has decided to commute the death sentence of Balwant Singh Rajoana, who was convicted for the assassination of former Punjab chief minister Beant Singh, to life imprisonment, officials said on Sunday.

Beant Singh, credited for ending terrorism in Punjab, was assassinated on 31 August, 1995.

"A decision has been taken to commute the death sentence of Balwant Singh Rajoana. The process of issuing a formal notification is underway," a home ministry official said.

On 31 August, 1995, the then chief minister Beant Singh was killed in an explosion outside the Civil Secretariat in Chandigarh. Sixteen others also lost their lives in the terror attack in which Punjab Police employee Dilawar Singh had acted as a human bomb.

The Babbar Khalsa terrorist was the second human bomb in case the first one would have failed in killing the Congress leader.

On Saturday, a home ministry spokesperson said eight Sikh prisoners, lodged in different jails in the country for committing crimes during the militancy in Punjab, would be released by the government on the occasion of 550th birth anniversary of Shri Guru Nanak Devji as a humanitarian gesture.

Through a special remission, the death sentence of another Sikh prisoner has been commuted to life imprisonment, the spokesperson had said. It came to light on Sunday that this prisoner is Rajoana.

Rajoana and eight others are lodged in different jails in the country.

The eight others were convicted by the various courts in the country for the offences committed by them during the militancy period in Punjab.

The decision was taken by the Central Government as a token of goodwill in response to the long-pending demands of the release of Sikh prisoners articulated by various sections of the Sikh community, the spokesperson said on Saturday.

The 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Devji will be in November.

A special court had on July 2007 awarded the death sentence to Rajoana, along with another terrorist Jagtar Singh Hawara, in the Beant Singh assassination case.

Rajoana was scheduled to be hanged on March 31, 2012.

However, the execution was stayed on 28 March, 2012, by the then UPA government at the Centre after Shiromani Gurudwara Prabhandak Committee, the Sikh religious body filed a mercy petition.

The Shiromani Akali Dal, which was then in power in Punjab, campaigned against his execution.

The President had forwarded the plea to the Home Ministry to take a call on it.
