21 killed as bus falls into gorge in Gujarat, PM Modi and Amit Shah offer condolences

Twenty-one people were killed and 32 injured after a bus carrying over 50 passengers fell into a gorge near Ambaji in Banaskantha district of Gujarat, on Monday.

Four children, 14 men and three women are among the victims of the tragedy. The injured have been taken to Civil Hospital in Palanpur. Five persons are in a critical condition.

The bus driver lost control of the vehicle as the roads were slippery due to heavy rainfall in the area.

PM Narendra Modi expressed grief over the loss of lives and tweeted, "Devastating news from Banaskantha. I am extremely pained by the loss of lives due to an accident. In this hour of grief, my thoughts are with the bereaved families."

He said the local administration is providing all possible help to the injured. "May they recover soon," he tweeted.

Devastating news from Banaskantha. I am extremely pained by the loss of lives due to an accident. In this hour of grief, my thoughts are with the bereaved families.



The local administration is providing all possible help to the injured. May they recover soon. Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 30, 2019

Home Minister Amit Shah also offered his deepest condolences. "Deeply anguished and pained by the loss of lives due to a tragic bus accident in Banaskantha, Gujarat. Have spoken to the state and local authorities, they are doing everything possible to help the people in need," he tweeted.

"My deepest condolences. May the injured recover at the earliest."

Deeply anguished by the loss of lives due to a tragic bus accident in Banaskantha, Gujarat. Have spoken to the state and local authorities, they are doing everything possible to help the people in need.



My deepest condolences. May the injured recover at the earliest. Amit Shah (@AmitShah) September 30, 2019

Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani said he had instructed officials to do needful. Saddened by the loss of lives due to a road accident near Trisulia Ghat (On Danta road). Instructed officials to do needful. May those who have been injured recover at the earliest. I pray for the departed souls. Om Shanti.

Saddened by the loss of lives due to a road accident near Trisulia Ghat (On Danta road). Instructed officials to do needful. May those who have been injured recover at the earliest. I pray for the departed souls.



Om Shanti... Vijay Rupani (@vijayrupanibjp) September 30, 2019

Earlier during the day, five people were killed when their SUV rammed into a trailer truck on the Ahmedabad-Vadodara Expressway.

The accident took place around 7.30 am when the SUV (sports utility vehicle) hit the truck from its rear side while trying to overtake it near Mehmedabad on the Expressway, a police official said.

Five occupants of the SUV, including its driver, were killed in the mishap, he said.

The deceased were identified as Pragnesh Joshi (51), Mahendra Chauhan (38), Rignesh Patel (40), Birendra Shah (42), and Rajesh Patel (48).

The bodies were sent to a community health centre in Mehmedabad for postmortem, he added.

(With agency inputs)
