Losing Its Stripes | India Today Insight

If the tiger range states in the country were to organise a party to celebrate the jump in tiger numbers, Chhattisgarh would be one state that would definitely not be getting an invite. While most tiger range states in the country contributed to the increase in tiger numbers from 2,226 to 2,967 between 2014 and 2018, as per the All India Tiger Estimation, 2018, the findings of which were announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on July 29 -- the central Indian state has emerged as a laggard in this regard. In Chhattisgarh, tiger numbers dropped from 46 in 2014 to 19 to 2018 -- making it the only large state that recorded a substantial decline in population.

Chhattisgarh has 44 per cent, or 59,772 sq. km, of its landmass under forests. It is the state where the erstwhile ruler of Surguja, Ramanuj Saran Singh Deo, is said to have shot a majority of the 1,1oo (as per some records) or 1,700 (as per other records) odd tigers he did in the 20th century. Till the mid-1990s, tigers were reported 100 km from Raipur and 20 km from Jagdalpur town. But now suddenly they are gone, except sporadic populations in the north, west and southwest of the state. What really happened?

Officials in Chhattisgarh suggest that in two of the state's three tiger reserves -- Indrawati in Bijapur district and Udanti Sitanadi in Gariyaband district -- they could not place the camera traps effectively or optimally, owing to the area being controlled by left-wing extremists.

While they can't say this on record, forest department officials in Bijapur claim that almost 70 per cent of the Indrawati tiger reserve that borders Maharashtra is out of bounds for them. Similarly, about 40 per cent of the Udanti tiger reserve is a no-go area for them. Placing camera traps proved to be impossible since access was an issue. There were also reports of camera traps being damaged and stolen from the reserves while the enumeration exercise was on. "In this census, only camera traps and scats were accepted as evidence, both of which are not easy to set up or find in reserves where there is a law and order problem," said Chhattisgarh Chief Wildlife Warden, Atul Shukla.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Why making e-cars is going to be difficult in India

Another theory suggests that tiger numbers reported from the state in 2014 were a bit inflated. In 2006 and 2010, 26 tigers were reported from the state, a number that jumped to 46 in 2014. But since good news is seldom questioned, it was celebrated with great fanfare.

Two tiger population areas in Chhattisgarh are contiguous with Madhya Pradesh which, incidentally, recorded the highest increase in population over the previous time and, with 526 tigers, emerged as the top tiger state in the country. Foresters in Chhattisgarh feel that some of the tigers in Chhattisgarh often cross over to the MP side through the Kanha-Bhoramdeo-Achanakmar Tiger Reserve inter-state corridor and the Sanjay-Guru Ghasidas Tiger Reserve corridor and could have been counted in MP. Also, the counting of tigers outside Protected Areas in Chhattisgarh has been as effective as in other states.

Chhattisgarh's conservation record is similar to MP's, the state out of which it was carved out in 2000. While MP has nine national parks and 25 sanctuaries, Chhattisgarh has 3 national parks and 11 sanctuaries. In MP, about 10 per cent of the total forest area is under protected areas (sanctuaries and national parks); in Chhattisgarh, too, about 6,200 sq. km or a little more than 10 per cent of the forest area is under protected areas. There is, however, no doubt that post-bifurcation, MP got the better wildlife habitats such as Kanha, Bandhavgarh and Pench, with assignments in the wildlife wing deemed high-profile compared to territorial postings. In contrast, in Chhattisgarh, wildlife has never been a priority posting. MP also retained the better-trained wildlife officers who went on to serve as managers of the high-profile tiger reserves in the state. Consequently, Chhattisgarh has been unable to retain the wildlife numbers it inherited when the state was created. The state's wildlife wing has been preoccupied with human-pachyderm conflicts in the past few years, and the tiger -- the apex predator -- has been less of a priority.

Chhattisgarh has also been unable to pull off radical wildlife management initiatives such as the relocation of villages from reserves. MP, on the other hand, has been able to do this with a fair deal of success, thus creating an inviolate habitat for wildlife. One reason for this is the influence of LWE organisations in the state; another is the large number of titles given out as under the Forest Rights Act or FRA. A total of 386,206 titles had been given out under the FRA in Chhattisgarh till October 2017, as against the 852,530 applications made. Nationally, 1,759,955 titles were awarded in the same period. Chhattisgarh's share in the total number of titles given out is thus more than 20 per cent and exceptionally high. This suggests the administration turned a blind eye to encroachments on forest land, indicating poor governance. Besides individual rights, a total of 14,161 community claims too have been honoured in Chhattisgarh. A weak and ineffective force at the ground level in the forest department has clearly capitulated to pressures of encroachment.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | The Dada Saheb Phalke Award for Big B

Fragmentation of forest land is a major issue both in north and south Chhattisgarh. Lack of continuity between forest areas prevents dissemination of wildlife populations, with habitats turning into islands capable of supporting only a certain number of animals.

At the reserve level, the Achanakmar sanctuary, perhaps the best-managed tiger reserve in the state with the least issues, has been experiencing a peculiar problem. The number of tigresses presently recorded in the reserve is far too low for the population to grow.

Chhattisgarh has also had an issue with prey base availability to sustain its big cat population. Even in the olden days, the herbivore population in Bastar region, despite the area being heavily forested, was recorded to be lower than other regions in the state. The area, however, did have a substantial tiger population. Low prey base in the region could be a contributing factor to the high incidence of man-eating tigers recorded in the area. Till as recently as in the mid-1990s, incidents of tigers turning man-eating were frequently recorded in the region. One reason for the low prey base is said to be the annual tribal hunt or paarad during which almost everything seen in the forest is killed. There have been attempts to sensitising tribal populations about not participating in the hunt but there is a fine line between advocacy and interference in culture that is easy to blur.

Interestingly, most states that border Chhattisgarh have recorded a jump in tiger population. Bordering states affected by Maoism, such as Jharkhand and Odisha, have either recorded a minor rise or retained the numbers from four years ago. However, other bordering states such as MP, Maharashtra, and even UP with all its problems, have recorded an increase in numbers.

The crisis, meanwhile, seems to have spurred the Chhattisgarh forest department into action. There is talk of a tiger reintroduction programme in Barnawapara sanctuary with technical support from MP which has been successful in this regard.



ALSO READ | Aromatic plants in UP tiger reserve to check man-animal conflict

ALSO READ | Decoding Tiger Census 2018

ALSO WATCH | So Sorry: Pehle ek tha tiger, ab 2,967 tigers zinda hain


