Maharashtra elections: Over 200 Shiv Sena workers resign over giving Navi Mumbai seats to BJP

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has already handed out mandatory A-B forms - a form which mentions the official party candidate - to his party's candidates despite no announcement on how many seats Sena will contest. (PTI file photo)

Uncertainty over the seat-sharing arrangement between the Bharatiya Janata Party and Shiv Sena is causing an uproar in the ranks of both parties ahead of the Maharashtra assembly polls.

Now, the seat-sharing plan has caused dissension in Shiv Sena's Navi Mumbai cadre. More than 200 Navi Mumbai Shiv Sena workers including the city chief and district vice-president have submitted resignations.

The leaders are allegedly upset over reports that the Airoli and Belapur seats have been offered to the BJP, especially to new defector from NCP Ganesh Naik.

The Navi Mumbai area has traditionally seen a poll battle between strongman Ganesh Naik and the Shiv Sena.

Ganesh Naik, who joined the BJP on September 11, has been a cabinet minister for 15 years holding important portfolios.

His son and Airoli MLA Sandeep already joined the BJP last month. The Naik family has ruled the satellite town of Navi Mumbai for years.

The cash-rich Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation is ruled by Naik family supporters.

BJP-Sena finalise alliance

Meanwhile, the BJP and Shiv Sena have finalised the seat-sharing deal for the Maharashtra assembly elections 2019.

However, the two parties are yet to announce the numbers of the seat-sharing arrangement.

The development comes a day after Uddhav Thackeray handed out mandatory A-B forms - a form which mentions the official party candidate - to his party's candidates, including to son Aaditya Thackeray.

In the 2014 Assembly elections, the BJP and the Sena had contested separately over a dispute over sharing of seats.

The BJP won 122 out of 260 seats it had contested while the Sena bagged 63 out of 282 seats.

After the BJP formed the government in October 2014, the Sena joined it in December the same year.
