[Photo] Rana Daggubati leaves fans worried with his drastic weight loss; check out comments

Rana Daggubati leaves fans worried - find out why! | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Rana Daggubati's recent Instagram post has left fans asking if he is sick Rana seems to have lost a lot of weight and looks quite lean now Check out the photo and comments right here

While Rana Daggubati was already a popular star who had done quite a lot of good work in the industry, it was Baahubali’s Bhallaladeva that increased his fan base significantly. The actor had beefed up for the costume drama and it was quite an impressive transformation. Looks like Rana has lost a lot of weight and he has left fans worrying for him. The actor put up a promotional post on Instagram and fans are asking him if he is sick. Some are even asking if something really happened to him since he looks so much leaner now. Well, this could be for Rana’s upcoming series of films.

Check out Rana’s Instagram post here.

Here’s what fans are commenting on the post.

Well, this is not the first time that Rana’s transformation has been in the news. Pictures of a leaner Rana went viral in July, too, along with rumours of him undergoing a kidney transplant. He responded to the rumours and told IANS, “I think there was enough speculated about it and I am tired of clarifying that I am absolutely fine and healthy. So, I think rumours about my health are now a boring topic. Whenever I leave Hyderabad, people get apprehensive, but I am thankful for the love and the concern people have been showering on me.”

Rana is currently prepping for his upcoming film with Sai Pallavi, titled Virata Parvam 1992 and lost weight for his role in the film. Rana recently wrapped up shoot for Haathi Mere Saathi and will also be seen in Housefull 4. The actor also played the role of Chandrababu Naidu in the NTR biopic. Though the film didn’t really work that well, Rana’s performance got a thumbs up from critics.

Stay tuned with us for more updates and tweet to us @zoomtv.
