United Kingdom duo running charity charged with fraud

Two British Sikh siblings running a high-profile community youth organization in Birmingham were charged with fraud on Monday, the first to be formally charged following counter-terrorism raids on five Sikh households in the Midlands and London in September 2018.Detectives from West Midlands Counter Terrorism Unit (WMCTU) charged Deepa Singh (Kaldip Singh Lehal), 38, and his sister Rajbinder Kaur, 50, who live in Birmingham.Kaur has been charged with money laundering on six counts of theft amounting to £50,000 (Rs 43 lakh) and one count under Section 60 of the Charities Act 2011 -- knowingly or recklessly providing false or misleading information to the Charity Commission.Singh has only been charged with the latter offence.2018 PROBEA West Midlands police spokesperson said, “The charges followed a number of search warrants in September 2018 as part of an investigation by WMCTU into suspected terrorist offences in the UK relating to activity in India as well as fraud offences.”Charity fraud accused alleges witch huntThey were first arrested on July 3 and will appear at Birmingham Magistrates Court on October 31.Sikh Youth UK is a community group which claims to help young Sikhs tackle alcohol and drug abuse and speaks out on human rights campaigns. The group has been vocal on the detention of Scottish Sikh Jagtar Singh Johal – known as Jaggi - in Punjab. On November 15, 2018, the Charity Commission, which regulates UK charities, opened a statutory inquiry into funds held and raised by Sikh Youth UK – even though it is not a registered charity - after being notified by West Midlands Police of concerns relating to the organization’s receipt and use of charitable funds. The commission said it had jurisdiction due to the funds being charitable.The inquiry is examining the financial management of the organization and the conduct of the trustees. “We have worked closely with the police to support their investigation,” a Charity Commission spokesperson said.A West Midlands police spokesperson said, “The charges followed a number of search warrants which were carried out in September 2018 as part of a long-term investigation by WMCTU into suspected terrorist offences in the UK relating to activity in India as well as fraud offences.” While Monday’s charges relate to alleged fraud offences, the investigation into suspected terrorism offences continues, the spokesperson said. “In last September, a large quantity of material was seized, much of it relating to digital media such as mobile phones, computers and storage devices.”Deepa told TOI that police seized his passport, computer and phone, as well as material relating to “Free Jaggi” campaign. “All five Sikh activists that were raided in September 2018 were very vocal on the Jaggi campaign and they link this to extremist activity in India,” he said.These charges are “false allegations,” he said. “We will plead not guilty at court. They are trying to say we are trying to fund some militancy in Punjab... I believe this is a witch hunt against me because I was the one leading the protests against the police preventing them setting up recruitment stalls at the gurdwaras and Baisakhi celebrations."
