Markets Podcast: ETMarkets Evening Podcast: Bears again flex muscle; what's next?

Transcript

Hi there! From ETMarkets.com, this is Abhinav Kaul with Your Evening Briefing.



LET’S START WITH THE TOP HEADLINES AT THIS HOUR



>> GST collection drops below Rs 1 lakh crore mark to Rs 91,916 crore in September, a 19-month low.

>> Tuesday turmoil costs equity investors Rs 1.85 lakh crore

>> Mahindra to take control of Ford's India auto business

>> Many Indian lenders face simultaneous blackout of online services

>> Roadshows for BPCL sale soon, govt aims to attract foreign players

>> Uday Kotak gets 1-year extension on IL&FS board.

>> Credit profile of companies worsens in H1, says Crisil



Now, a quick look at what happened in the stock market.



Sensex ended 362 points lower at 38,305. Nifty settled at 11,360, down 115 points. India VIX surged 5.22%.



YES Bank cracked 23% amid fears of exposure to Indiabulls Housing and stake sale by promoters Rana Kapoor and others.



BSE Midcap and BSE Smallcap dropped 1.54 per cent and 1.61 per cent.



Let’s go across to Ajit Mishra of Religare Broking for market fundamentals.



Ajit what were the key reasons behind market fall today?



Where do you see value buys in this market?



Which factors will give direction to the market from here on?



Ajit, do you think the bears will takeover again?



Nifty50 settled below its 100-day moving average on Tuesday, but respected the 200-day moving average, as buying emerging at lower levels. The index formed a large bearish candle with a long lower wick, reflecting the intraday recovery.



We have with is Manav Chopra of Indiabulls Ventures to know about market technicals.



Manav, please throw some light on the daily moving averages and outlook of the market?



What are you advising your clients?



That’s all for now, folks. Do check out ETMarkets.com for detailed market analysis and download the ETMarkets app on your phone for round-the-clock market coverage, investment tips and dozens of stock recommendations.
