Spoiler Alert! This Baahubali actress is a part of Chiranjeevi's Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy

This Baahubali actress is a part of Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Anushka Shetty will play a key role in Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy is slated for an October 2 release

South Superstar Chiranjeevi's 151st film Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy has been making headlines since its inception and for all the good reasons. Helmed by filmmaker Surender Reddy, the flick revolves around the story of freedom fighter Uyyalawada Narasimha Reddy who started a movement in Southern India to rebel against the British East India Company. The biopic is one of the most anticipated releases of the year and what makes it even more special is the fact that the film would mark the first on-screen collaboration of Chiranjeevi and megastar Amitabh Bachchan, who plays a key role in the flick. While fans are eagerly waiting for the release of the Chiranjeevi starrer, here's a spoiler that will surely leave viewers even more excited for the film.

Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy is a period drama that will feature a stellar star cast including Vijay Sethupathi, Kichha Sudeep, Tamannaah and Nayanthara. Now, if a recent report is anything to go by, Anushka Shetty too will essay a key role in the film. The actress will essay the role of freedom fighter Rani Laxmi Bai and will also be the narrator of the upcoming film. Apparently, in a scene, the actress narrates the story of Narasimha Reddy to her army, right before they fight a war with the British soldiers.

The makers of the film have been making fans excited by dropping several posters and a couple of trailers of the upcoming flick. The last trailer of the flick released yesterday and is garnering appreciation from all quarters. For those who haven't seen the video yet, check out the trailer of Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy below:

Recently, Amitabh Bachchan and Chiranjeevi came together for an interaction with actor Farhan Akhtar and the duo spilled beans on various topics ranging from their upcoming film to how Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy was Chiranjeevi's dream project. During their conversation, Big B revealed that he had advises Chiranjeevi to not join politics, but the latter decided to go ahead with his decision and is now regretting the same. Big B was heard as saying, "One day he said sir you know, I think that I need to join politics. I said sir please don't make that mistake. I have told Rajni the same thing but he never listens. He says 'I don't know what to do sir'. Then I said please don't do this. Anyhow he went in, so he said, 'I am sorry sir but I have gone in now'. Then after some time he came out and said, 'but I have come out of it now'." said Big B. Chiranjeevi added and to Big B's revelation and said, "Yes. Now we are regretting."

Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy is being bankrolled by Chiranjeevi's son Ram Charan and is slated for an October 2 release.

Stay tuned for further updates.


