'Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy' Movie Review: Chiranjeevi and Amitabh Bachchan starrer is full of life even in death

Film: Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy

Critic's Rating: 3.5/5

Cast: Amitabh Bachchan, Chiranjeevi, Vijay Sethupathi, Sudeep, Nayanthara, Tamannaah Bhatia

Director: Surender Reddy

Written By: Paruchuri Brothers

Music: Julius Packiam; Amit Trivedi

Duration: 2 hours 51 minutes

Language: Hindi

Review:

Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy is the story of India's first rebellion against the East India Company. The film is an absolute mix of all the best things South Indian film industry can do. At the same time, it also brings the iconic way of storytelling. Amid Jhansi's Rani Laxmibai's battle with the British Army, when her men are about to give up, she takes the time out to motivate them with the story of the first freedom fighter, Sye Raa Narasimha Reddy. It is the story of a man who conquered death at his birth.

Sye Raa who was born dead grows up to become a well-known personality among his people. He was a Polygar that lights the fire for rebellion all around the country and becomes the emperor of Rayalaseema region of Andhra Pradesh. As Laxmibai tells the story of the brave warrior, we find out about his first love, his wife and the devotion he had for his people. He is shown to have left the life of a royal, to live with his people and fight with them, while the love of his life sung songs of his victories and inspired many more to follow him. In the movie, Britishers have been painted with the same picture as the crude rulers who were only interested in our women and wealth.

The makers have taken creative liberty to add more drama to the story. Various scenes will remind you of other iconic scenes from some new and age-old films. For example, there are a few similar ones from Baahubali series, another one from Kranti (1981) and one scene is a constant reminder of Jack Sparrow's hanging escape. Direction and cinematography by Surender Reddy and R. Rathnavelu are somewhat inspired by their previous projects. We have a hero who is incredible since his birth and has the world going for him. We also come across some staggering introductory acts that prove the world is either in love with him or fear of him.

What works best for the film is the big cast. Even in the dubbed Hindi version, songs, music and dialogues have just as much of a collective effect on the audience. What doesn't work is selective scenes that feel incomplete right at the climax. Some moments even seem out of place. Amitabh Bachchan, even in a brief appearance, is up to the mark. Chiranjeevi, on the other hand, runs the second half of the film on his shoulders solely. Sudeep and Tamannaah Bhatia have a stronger role than others. Sudeep as Avuku Raju becomes his ally from being an old archenemy while Tamannaah as Lakshmi, the love of his life, is the reason for his victories.

Some of the best technicality and writing includes solo scenes of Chiranjeevi and Tamannaah Bhatia. Another thing worth mentioning is the action scenes - some of which were performed by the actor himself. Overall the film brings life to a love story, which talks about Sye Raa's passion for his nation and the sacrifices he made for his land and his people.

Verdict: Sye Raa has enough strength to start a rebellion even today. It is a tale of how the warrior changed the future with his life and even in death.
