Most Commented News Stories, Top Commented Articles

Mastermind of Ludhiana court explosion arrested in Germany Germany has arrested prominent Khalistani terror plotter Jaswinder Singh Multani in what marks a breakthrough for India’s counter-terror effort to foil plans of Pakistan’s Inter State Intelligence to engineer terror attacks in Punjab and other parts, including Mumbai. He is currently in German custody and will be questioned by Indian investigators.

Seers slam hate speech at Haridwar 'Dharma Sansad' Prominent seers in Haridwar have condemned the provocative statements that were made at the ‘Dharma Sansad’ held recently in the holy city. Several speakers at the meeting had then lashed out at the minority community, with one even threatening to kill former PM Manmohan Singh for his alleged “appeasement views”.

Maybach added to PM Modi's security detail cost one-third of the price quoted in media: Govt sources Amid speculation on the price and other details of the Mercedes Maybach added to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's security detail, government sources said on Wednesday that the new cars are not an upgrade but routine replacement as BMW had stopped making the model used for him earlier.

Election Commission unlikely to put off polls; govt says step up tests, jabs After being briefed in detail on the extent of Omicron cases in UP, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Goa and Manipur as well as the status of vaccination in these states, the EC has now asked the health secretary to follow up on its instructions to step up the pace of vaccination and come back in a week’s time with a fresh report. The EC will then take a call on fine-tuning guidelines for Covid-safe campaigning and polling in the five states.

Mukesh Ambani talks succession for 1st time as RIL chief In his first statement on succession plans, RIL chairman Mukesh Ambani on Tuesday said the younger generation is now ready to take on leadership roles, and emphasised that he would like the process to be accelerated. “We should guide them, enable them, encourage them... and sit back and applaud as they perform better than us,” said Ambani.

Kanpur's perfume businessman Piyush Jain spent the night lying on jail floor Perfume businessman Piyush Jain, who had allegedly stashed unaccounted cash at his various premises, was sent to jail in 14-days judicial custody by the remand magistrate of Kanpur court where he was produced by the Directorate General of GST Intelligence (DGGI) team on Monday.

In Hyderabad, rush for nikahs ahead of new marriage law The brides at these hurried ceremonies are all between 18 and 20 years of age. Most were supposed to get married sometime in 2022-2023, but fear of the bill being passed has made their families wary of waiting until then. The bill, supposed to be applicable to all communities, seeks to raise the legal age of marriage for women from 18 to 21 years.

Remarks on Mahatma Gandhi: 'I don’t regret my statement,' says seer Kalicharan Maharaj In a video statement issued by Sadhu Kalicharan Maharaj after an FIR was lodged against him in Chhattisgarh for his remark against Mahatma Gandhi and praising his assassin Godse, he said that despite the FIR, he doesn’t regret his speech and he would continue to hate Gandhi.

Andhra Pradesh BJP president Somu Veerraju promises to give liquor at Rs 50 BJP AP president Somu Veerraju on Tuesday promised to supply 'quality' liquor at Rs 50 per quarter bottle, if the BJP was elected to power in Andhra Pradesh. At present a quarter bottle of quality liquor is sold at over Rs 200.

Punjab polls: BJP, Captain’s party and Dhindsa’s SAD will have common manifesto BJP is likely to play the role of senior partner in its alliance with Amarinder Singh’s Punjab Lok Congress and Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa’s SAD (Sanyukt) in Punjab, and the coalition is unlikely to project any chief ministerial face in the run-up to the election, sources said on Monday. BJP’s Punjab in-charge Gajendra Shekhawat announced that all three parties will contest elections and will come up with a common manifesto.

National daily Covid cases double at record pace The explosion of cases has been sudden and widespread since overall Covid numbers had been falling till last week. At least 18 state and Union territories, spread across the country except the northeast, have registered a rise in cases this week as compared with the corresponding days of the previous week.

Omicron surge: Delhi Metro, offices, restaurants to operate with 50% capacity; schools, cinema halls shut Amid a rise in Covid cases, Delhi has ordered closure of schools, colleges, cinemas and gyms with immediate effect and put various restrictions on the functioning of shops and public transport as a yellow alert was sounded under the Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP).

Sourav Ganguly admitted to hospital after testing positive for COVID-19 Ganguly is double vaccinated and has been travelling extensively, taking part in all professional activities. The 49-year-old was rushed to a hospital late on Monday night as a precautionary measure after his RT-PCR test returned positive.

Covid vaccination: Children between 15-18 years can register on CoWin from Jan 1, on-site from Jan 3 Children between 15 and 18 years can register online on CoWin from January 1 or onsite at vaccination centres to receive Covaxin shots from January 3. They can register themselves online through an existing account or create a new one. Among healthcare workers and those aged 60 and above with comorbidities, prioritisation and sequencing would be based on completion of 9 months from the date of the 2nd dose as of Jan 10.

India may face intense but short outbreak as Omicron spreads India may see a spurt in Covid-19 growth rate within days and head into an intense but short-lived virus wave as the highly-infectious omicron variant moves through the crowded nation of almost 1.4 billion.

FCRA renewal application of Mother Teresa's charity rejected; didn't freeze bank accounts: MHA The Union home ministry on Monday said that the FCRA renewal application of Missionaries of Charity (MoC) founded by Mother Teresa was refused on December 25 for not meeting certain eligibility conditions.FCRA or Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 provides for a legal mechanism to deal with violation of its provisions by NGOs.

Chandigarh civic polls: AAP wins 14 of 35 wards, BJP bags 12; Arvind Kejriwal says victory 'sign of change' in Punjab In what was dubbed as "a sign of change" by new entrant Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the party put up a spectacular show in Chandigarh Municipal Corporation polls and won 14 of 35 wards while pushing the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to second place.

Mumbai Covid cases highest in 7 months, Maharashtra numbers maximum in 75 days Maharashtra reported a 75-day high in new Covid infections with 2,172 cases on Tuesday. Mumbai, which is largely driving the surge, saw its highest daily detection (1,333) in seven months. The silver lining was the low count of Covid fatalities-22 in the state and one in Mumbai. The state also didn't detect any new Omicron infections on Tuesday, thereby restricting the cumulative tally of the new variant to 167.

I decided to join politics to help people get rid of mafia: Yogi Adityanath Mafia is mafia. It should not be linked with caste, community or religion. Mafia is the enemy of society and it is worse than coronavirus, said UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath, in an exclusive interview with TOI.

Uttar Pradesh: Perfume businessman Piyush Jain would ride old scooter, 4-wheelers, lead simple life According to locals, whenever Piyush Jain visited his ancestral home in Chhipaiti area of Kannauj, he could be seen riding his old Bajaj Priya scooter. He used to lead a very simple life, they said. He also avoided using high-end cars and used to drive in old vehicles to avoid attention.

Farm groups’ ‘vote ki chot’ may hit other parties in Punjab The announcement by around 20 farm groups to make a political front in Punjab has only added to the already prevailing political fluidity in the state. If, earlier it was the infighting within Congress, which continues to send out signals of disunity, that added to this fluidity, now farm groups have done it.

PM Narendra Modi launches blockchain-based digital degrees at IIT Kanpur convocation Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday launched blockchain-based digital degrees at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kanpur.

These numbers show how India's economy grew steadily — before Omicron hit India’s economy was expanding at a steady pace in November, a month that saw the omicron variant of coronavirus induce fresh concerns about risks to the recovery.

A Mumbai landlord’s fitting response to rising intolerance in the city When I began looking for a tenant for my apartment, I wanted to speak up for my city, the city that I grew up in and the polity that I want it to remain

Punjab: PM Modi stuck on road for 15-20 mins; MHA seeks report from state on 'security lapse' Prime Minister Narendra Modi was stuck on a flyover during his Punjab visit on Wednesday- a lapse the Centre has blamed on Punjab government and sought a report. MHA said the PM's convoy decided to take the road due to poor weather, but the the Punjab government did not deploy additional security as a contingency plan to secure any movement by road.

Centre froze bank accounts of Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity, claims West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee The Centre has frozen all bank accounts of Missionaries of Charity founded by Mother Teresa, West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee claimed on Monday.

Covid: 60+ won’t need doctor’s certificate for 3rd vaccine dose People above 60 years with comorbidities will not be required to upload or provide a medical certificate to be eligibile for the “precautionary” dose of Covid vaccine. However, they must consult their doctor before taking the jab, the Centre said on Tuesday. States have been advised to set up separate vaccination centres dedicated for children between 15-18 years.

Man arrested inside Windsor Castle on Xmas Day believed to be Sikh seeking Jallianwala revenge A man arrested by armed police inside the grounds of Windsor Castle carrying a crossbow and detained under the Mental Health Act is believed to be an Indian-origin Sikh who wanted to assassinate the Queen in revenge for the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919. Armed police responded to a security breach at 8.30 am on Christmas Day within the grounds of Windsor Castle and arrested a 19-year-old man from Southampton.

Money laundering: ED files chargesheet against former Maharashtra home minister Anil Deshmukh Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Wednesday submitted a chargesheet against former state home minister Anil Deshmukh before the special PMLA court in connection with money laundering case.

Punjab polls: Navjot Singh Sidhu wants CM face, party says 'no'; Charanjit Singh Channi eyes top job As Congress struggles to keep its flock together and PCC chief Navjot Singh Sidhu pushes for the announcement of a name for the party’s candidate for Punjab CM, election campaign committee chief Sunil Jakhar has made it clear that the party high command would not announce its CM candidate before the polls.

Punjab: Ex-India cricketer Dinesh Mongia, 2 sitting Congress MLAs join BJP A day after the formal announcement of alliance among BJP, former Punjab CM Amarinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa, former Akali Dal veteran, several prominent faces from the state, including former India cricketer Dinesh Mongia and two sitting Congress MLAs, joined BJP on Tuesday. The Congress legislators who joined BJP are Fateh Singh Bajwa, MLA from Qadian and Balwinder Singh Laddi, sitting MLA from Hargobindpur.

India vs South Africa: Virat Kohli and the off-side trap A reprise of the consistently wrong choices Virat Kohli used to make in the channel outside off-stump in his early years seem to have crept back in, accounting for the greatest Indian modern batter's barren, century-less run stretching back to Nov 23, 2019. This was when he last scored a hundred, in any format, in the pink-ball Test against Bangladesh.

Aamir Khan gives a peck on daughter Ira Khan's cheek as they celebrate Christmas together Ira Khan has shared quirky pictures with her father Aamir Khan from their Christmas celebrations. She took to Instagram and gave a glimpse of the father-daughter time.

'Apne CM ko thanks kehna ... ': PM Modi's dig at chief minister Channi over security lapse in Punjab Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who was stuck on a flyover in Punjab for 20 minutes due to a protest on his route on Wednesday, took a dig at chief minister Charanjit Singh Channi for the "major security lapse." According to news agency ANI, PM Modi on his return to Bhatinda airport told officials there, "Apne CM ko thanks kehna ki mein Bhatinda airport tak zinda laut paaya (Say thanks to your chief minister that I could return alive till Bhatinda airport)."

India vs South Africa: Virat Kohli dismissal highlights that familiar failing Virat Kohli’s 32-ball stay for 18 runs ended in similar fashion to the first innings, another loose waft at a ball on fifth or sixth stump resulting in another edge. The story was the same in the first innings in Centurion. And the same on the tour of England earlier in the year.

Anil Deshmukh, family laundered Rs 50cr, says ED chargesheet Former Maharashtra home minister Anil Deshmukh and his family have laundered Rs 50 crore through companies associated with them, said the Enforcement Directorate in its 7,000-plus pages chargesheet submitted in the special PMLA court on Wednesday. The chargesheet named Deshmukh’s two sons, Hrishikesh and Salil, and their CA Bhavik Panjwani as accused in the case.

India vs South Africa, 1st Test: Five-star Shami puts India in driver's seat against South Africa Mohammed Shami's sheer artistry with new and old ball fetched him another five-wicket haul as India seized control of the first Test against South Africa on the third day by extending their overall lead to 146 runs that could prove to be decisive.

Mukesh Ambani talks of leadership transition at Reliance; wants to accelerate the process Richest Indian Mukesh Ambani on Tuesday mentioned about leadership transition at his energy-to-retail conglomerate, saying he wants the process to be accelerated with seniors, including him, yielding to the younger generation.

Uttar Pradesh: Minor dalit girl brutalised over suspicion of theft, three arrested Police were hunting the third accused who also surfaced in the video. The video shows two men holding a teenage girl to the floor while a third rains blows on the soles of her feet with a stick. The girl was reportedly accused of theft.

India vs South Africa: The fortress has fallen - India closing in on conquering 'final frontier' The fortress has fallen. A first ever Test win for India in Centurion has helped Virat Kohli and co. breach the traditional South African fortress. With this win, India have also become the first Asian nation to win a Test at Centurion. Incredibly this is only India's fourth Test win on South African soil in 21 Tests, since they first toured the Rainbow Nation in 1992.

Kerala tops Niti Aayog's health performance rankings, UP at bottom Kerala has again emerged as the top ranking state in terms of overall health performance among larger states, while Uttar Pradesh is the worst, according to the fourth health index launched by Niti Aayog. Tamil Nadu and Telangana have emerged as the second and third best performers.

Chhattisgarh Police arrest Kalicharan Maharaj for hate speech Chhattisgarh police on Thursday arrested Kalicharan Maharaj from Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh for his hate speech and derogatory remarks against Mahatma Gandhi on December 26.

India vs South Africa, 1st Test: Brilliant Mohammed Shami swings Test India's way Magic unfolded from the Indian pace battery in Centurion on Tuesday. India bowled as a pack to seize control of the first Test, with the third day’s play showcasing Test cricket in all its dramatic finery. As many as 18 wickets fell across three innings, the most in a day at this ground, as the pitch awoke early to the contest before settling down again later in the day.

After online storm, BJP MP Tejasvi Surya withdraws 'ghar wapsi' remark BJP MP Tejasvi Surya on Monday unconditionally withdrew his controversial statements made on 'ghar wapsi' at the Udupi Sri Krishna Mutt.

Delhi: Doctors allege cops thrashed them during protest march, but police deny The Federation of Resident Doctors’ Association (FORDA) of India, which is spearheading a protest over the delay in NEET-PG counselling, on Monday alleged that several doctors who were participating in a march from the Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC) campus to the Supreme Court were manhandled and thrashed by police. Police, however, denied the charge.

All parties want UP elections to be held on time: Chief Election Commissioner Sushil Chandra Addressing the media after a three-day visit to poll-bound Uttar Pradesh for a review of the preparedness, Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) Sushil Chandra said that there will be no delay in the upcoming polls. "Representatives of all political parties met us and told us that elections should be conducted on time following all Covid-19 protocols," Chandra said at the press conference.

If HAM(S) withdraws support, Bihar govt will fall: Jitan Ram Manjhi The ongoing spat between the BJP and the Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) took an ugly turn on Monday with the Jitan Ram Manjhi-led party threatening to withdraw support from the NDA government in the state. The BJP and HAM(S) functionaries have been at the loggerheads over Manjhi’s recent controversial remark on Brahmins.

India vs South Africa, 1st Test: India sniff big win as South Africa depend on Elgar and rain Jasprit Bumrah produced a couple of magic deliveries at the fag end of the fourth day as India remained on course for an emphatic victory against a rattled South Africa in the first Test on Wednesday. Chasing a never achieved victory target of 305 at the SuperSport Park, South Africa finished the day at 94 for 4.

AAP single largest party in Chandigarh civic polls on debut Debutant AAP on Monday dealt a double whammy to the old guard in the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation elections, relegating BJP to second place and pushing Congress to third in the seat stakes with a tally of 14 out of 35. Congress doubled its 2016 tally to win eight seats and garnered the highest vote percentage of 29.8% overall.

Maharashtra: Will decide on school, college classes in 15 days, says Aaditya Thackeray The state government will take stock of Covid situation in Maharashtra after a fortnight and take a call on whether schools and colleges should be kept open or classes should again be conducted online only.

‘BJP set for comfortable UP win, alliance may bag 230-249 seats’ BJP is set to comfortably win the assembly polls in Uttar Pradesh making Yogi Adityanath the first CM in the state to serve two consecutive terms since 1985, an opinion poll done for Times Now Navbharat by VETO has projected. The poll predicts 230-249 seats for the BJP-led alliance in the 403-member house.

NEET-PG 2021 counselling: Protesting doctors return lab coats, hold march As the protest continued, patient care remained affected at three Centre-run facilities -- Safdarjung, RML and Lady Hardinge hospitals -- and some of the Delhi government-run hospitals.

How I went from hero of Gorakhpur hospital tragedy to villain In August, 2017, 34 children and 18 adults died due to oxygen shortage in a UP hospital. In this extract from his new memoir, the pediatrician talks about how, despite saving lives, he took the fall for it, leading to two suspensions and two jail terms in four years, followed by a dismissal from service

Mumbai: Congress says it will fight all 236 BMC seats on its own The Congress on Tuesday said that it will fight the upcoming BMC elections alone and field candidates for all 236 seats. Mumbai Congress chief Bhai Jagtap made the announcement while speaking at the Congress’s 137th foundation day celebrations on Tuesday.

Eight West Bengal MLAs quit BJP WhatsApp group, spark dissent buzz Four BJP MLAs from Bankura pulled out of the party's WhatsApp group a day after four from North 24 Parganas and Nadia took the same route, indicating the growing dissent within the Bengal BJP, an issue that raised concern in the party meeting presided over by national general secretary (organization) B L Santosh on the National Library premises on Monday.

1st JEE (Main) may be put off till March due to state polls The government has decided to conduct the JEE (Main) exams four times — February, March, April and May — from this year onwards. “However, considering the pending elections, the schedule could be tweaked this year. The first exam is likely to be scheduled in March followed by April, May and June,” said a senior official.

Tamil Nadu ranks second in Niti Aayog’s health index Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana emerged as the top three states in terms of overall performance according to the Niti Aayog’s health index, while Uttar Pradesh topped the table on incremental performance despite being at the bottom.

Even Lok Sabha follows open voting, says Maharashtra deputy CM Ajit Pawar Deputy CM Ajit Pawar said on Tuesday, “We decided to defer the (speaker’s) poll to give due respect to the Governor’s views and ensure there are no legal or constitutional hurdles,” said . He added that an MVA delegation would meet the Governor once again to resolve queries and misunderstandings. “Even the Lok Sabha follows open voting for the Speaker’s poll,” he pointed out.

Australia retain Ashes after crushing humiliated England England resumed on 31/4, still 51 runs behind, after a disastrous final hour on Monday against some outstanding fast bowling that left their Ashes dreams in tatters. Their survival rested on skipper Joe Root, but when he fell for 28, it was just a matter of time before the rest followed. Boland took 6-7 off four overs, equalling the record for the fastest five-wicket haul in 19 balls.

India vs South Africa: Credit for pace unit's success should only go to players who worked hard for it, says Shami The credit for India's world class pace attack should always rest "only and only" with its playing members, feels Mohammed Shami, whose five-wicket haul has put India in complete control against South Africa in the first Test. Shami's sixth five-for in Tests also brought up a personal milestone of 200 wickets on a day when the four-pronged attack bowled the Proteas out for 197.

Karnataka: Family of nine in Bhadravati reconverts to Hinduism A family of nine members said they have converted to Hinduism in the presence of VHP leaders at Antaragange village of Bhadravati taluk.

Night curfew in Delhi from 10pm to 5am after yellow alert sounded under GRAP in view of rising Covid-19 cases The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP)-led Delhi government imposed night curfew in Delhi from 10pm to 5am as yellow alert was sounded on Tuesday under Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP) in view of rising Covid-19 cases.
