Ishrat Jahan’s mother doesn’t want to fight for justice anymore

Fed-up with the way investigation and trial in the alleged fake encounter of her daughter Ishrat Jahan has progressed in the past 15 years, quinquagenarian Shamima Kaushar on Tuesday informed the CBI court, occupied with the trial, that she is now tired of the long judicial process to secure justice for her daughter. She clarified that she would not contest the case any further.

In a letter dated September 18 written to CBI which investigated the case, she has requested that it should be conveyed to the court that she no longer wants to be a party in the judicial proceedings. Kaushar’s advocate Shamshad Pathan tendered the letter to the investigation agency as well as the court on Tuesday.

She has also complained about the state government’s lack of sanction against the accused police officials in the case, who were eventually discharged from it.

“After this prolonged fight for justice, I now feel hopeless and helpless. More than 15 years have passed, all the accused, including police officials, are on bail. Some of them were reinstated by the Gujarat government even as they faced prosecution for the murder of my daughter. After 15 years, the trial has barely begun,” she has written in the letter.

Fake Encounter Case Ishrat Jahan, a 19-year-old woman from Mumbra near Mumbai, along with Amjadali Akbarali Rana, Zeeshan Johar, and Javed Shaikh alias Pranesh Pillai, was killed by a team of Gujarat police in an encounter on the outskirts of Ahmedabad in June 2004.

Kaushar has also pointed out: “Gujarat government has declined sanction in a case where CBI, the premier investigative agency of the country, has stated on record that Ishrat Jahan was killed in a pre-mediated manner after being illegally abducted and confined and then killed in cold blood in a staged fake encounter”.

The woman has also written that she has instructed her counsel, Vrinda Grover, that she has lost her will to fight and would no longer participate in the proceedings before the CBI court. She said she is tired and frustrated by the long-drawn and labyrinthine judicial process.

“I had never imagined that seeking truth and justice could be an uphill, arduous, life-consuming, and almost an impossible task,” she has written in the letter. She has also stated that it is now the job of CBI to prosecute the 11 accused officers and to secure justice.
