Graveyard shift—some of the most haunted places in India

Would you dare to frequent these haunted places in India and face the troubled spirits refusing to pass into the afterlife? These horror places in India will test your courage with haunted activity. The horror stories of India are varied in nature but they do can scare the daylights out of you!Read More..... India’s Most Haunted The 178-year-old Brij Raj Bhavan Palace in Kota, Rajasthan, which was converted into a heritage hotel in the 1980s, has a resident ghost! The gentleman ghost of Major Burton is said to be harmless.Mighty forts of Bhangarh arouse a strange sceptical feeling in the atmosphere and cause restlessness and anxiety among visitors on their tour to this fort. If rumours are to be taken seriously then people here have even went missing! These folklores have added immensely to the popularity of cheap flights to India with many wanting to check out the most haunted place in India. With an utmost enigma to be unfolded, Bhangarh Forts promise to thrill tourists who travel to this haunted destination.A big ticket draw for ghost hunters and 'ghost lovers', Ramoji Film City is said to be haunted by notorious ghosts of dead soldiers. This film city is built on the war grounds of Nizams and if locals are to be believed then this place is haunted big time!India's capital city of New Delhi has its own share of ghosts and ghost stories! Delhi is well connected with other parts of the country via road-links, rail networks and airways. Therefore travellers do not face many hassles in an effort to meet Delhi's most famous ghost or more appropriately 'ghostess'! The area around Delhi Cantt is said to be haunted by a vengeful spirit of a lady, clad in white dress, who asks motorists for lift and then suddenly disappears!The Dumas in Gujarat is a haunted cremation site where many locals have complained to have heard weird voices. Especially at night people have heard strange whispers warning of the danger around the proximity of this beach. It is believed that this Hindu crematorium is lurking full with spirits of dead people!The rumour that has been doing rounds is that Rajeev Gandhi International Airport located in Hyderabad is haunted by the spirits of those who were killed during the airport's construction. No wonder, anyone with even a mild interest in the paranormal can be seen haggling hard for cheap flights to India that land up in Hyderabad.This top Indian hotel has welcomed almost every major global celebrity who has taken flights to India. But the luxurious environ and top of the line services do not devoid the hotel of its spookiness! The hotel is said to be haunted by the ghost of its architect.A mighty fort built by the rulers of Peshwa Dynasty contains many bone-chilling stories within its walls. None is as heartbreaking as what happened hundreds of years back at this mighty fort. A prince, heir to the royal throne, was killed on his close relative's orders. It is said that visitors taking a trip to the fort after nightfall can still hear his cries for help.Kuldhara, also known as the 'Ghost Village of Rajasthan' is considered to be one of the most haunted places in India. This unique mysterious place needs to be on your must-visit list. This deserted village does make you feel sad and wonder what the poor people of the village might have gone through that made them decide to flee their homes overnight along with people of 84 other villages. It is said that Salum Singh, the diwan of the region, levied huge taxes because of which it became extremely difficult for Paliwals to survive in the village. Also, he had his eyes on one of the girls of the community and desired to marry her, but was disapproved by the community. He then threatened the villagers that if he doesn't get what he desires then they will have to face dire consequences. Due to this, Paliwals along with the people of 84 other villages left Kuldhara to preserve their dignity and honour. These disheartened people cursed that no one will ever be able to live here, and till date, these villages remain deserted.Assam is often associated with mysteries and mythical tales and the hill village of Jatinga is just another page in the book of Assam's unsolved puzzles. A sleepy hamlet in the North Cachar Hills (a district in Assam), Jatinga is located at a distance of 9 kms from Haflong, the district headquarters. Take a bus ride to Haflong from Guwahati and from there on you can take local conveyance to reach this mystic village. The most bizarre phenomenon that Jatinga witnesses, is the annual mass bird suicide which is yet to find any conclusive scientific explanation. From September to November every year, hundreds of birds commit mass suicide just after sunset - they move down from the sky, plunging to their deaths by crashing into buildings and trees. One possible reason behind this is the theory that the birds get disoriented by the late monsoon season amid wind and dense fog.The story that surrounds the D'Souza Chawl in Mahim might sound as if it's straight out of a horror movie, but it has many takers, nevertheless, not to mention eyewitness accounts. Families living in the chawl testify to a woman's tragic death after she accidentally fell inside a well some decades ago. Ever since then, her reluctant spirit is said to roam the chawl complex. Call its somebody's fertile imagination or the work of gossip enthusiasts, people living in the chawl prefer to stay indoors after sunset. Agrasen ki Baoli is a stunning piece of architecture, a stepwell with 103 steps in the centre of Delhi. A stepwell of its proportions and brilliant architecture is a wonder in itself and so are the many tales that have caught the fancy of many. Legends say that the black water of the well lures people and leads them to drowning themselves. As per the legends, the lure strengthens as you go further down the stairs, with nothing but the echo of your own footsteps following you. This one ranks quite high in the wishlist of people looking for some thrill.This old building serves as an office to administrative employees but such is the reputation that no employee stays back after sunset. Some of the rooms in the building are vacant and have not been opened for decades. As per the many stories that make for this place's reputation, these closed rooms are haunted and evenings bring about strange occurrences like high-pitched giggles, screams and whispers. Investigations have revealed no specific reasons for any of these happenings, making the place quite spooky.The largest library in India is much more than a haunt for just book lovers. This treasure trove for bibliophiles attracts the lovers of ghost stories in equal numbers. The story of Lady Metcalfe's ghost haunting its corridors has been there for quite some time; a lot of testimonies support the story with people reporting the presence of someone simply watching them. Add to it the mystery of the hidden chamber that was discovered by the Archeological Survey of India (ASI) in 2010, a chamber that is rumoured to have served as a torture chamber during the British rule in India. As per witness accounts, such paranormal experiences increased all the more after 12 labourers lost their lives in an accident during some renovation work at the site. Sounds like some grist for the rumour mill.A haunted church might sound like an oxymoron but holds true if you believe in the story that surrounds the Three King Church in Goa. According to a legend, this church saw the killing of two kings by a rival king who wanted the entire kingdom to himself. He poisoned himself shortly after murdering the two kings in the wake of public outcry; the church is haunted by the spirits of the three kings ever since then. Locals and visitors to the church have reported hearing strange noises and "a strange, ominous presence" in and around the church. While the church precincts make for a perfect sunset point, most of the crowd disperses by late noon because of the horror tales that are associated with it.The name is not without purpose in this case. The place is infamous because of its reported connect with the paranormal. It is used by the Parsi community as a graveyard, where the bodies of the demised are left on the terrace for vultures and other scavengers to feast. With a reputation like that and people reporting of "an eerie presence" while crossing the area, this place ranks quite high in the list of Mumbai's most haunted places.Another addition to the list of most scary places in Mumbai can be the Madh Island Road (this one, reportedly, has a bride's ghost chasing people) and Mukesh Mills (a popular movie location which gets deserted as soon as the sun sets). While most of these places have people keeping a vigil to keep away anyone who wishes to enter after sunset, visiting one of these supposedly haunted places in Mumbai even before it gets dark is enough to scare the daylights out of anyone.This old, deserted mansion wears the crown of the most haunted place in Bangalore. It was built in the year 1943 by EJ Vaj, who gifted it to his two daughters - Dolce and Vera. The story took a brutal turn on a fateful day in 2002 when Dolce, a piano teacher, was stabbed to death in the house; her body was buried in the premises by an unidentified attacker. Vera moved out of the house soon after, leaving the place as it was. People soon begun to witness ghostly apparitions in the house, including songs being played on the piano inside the deserted house. A bunch of ghostbusters also reportedly found an inverted cross and headless statues of Jesus and Mary inside the house. The building was razed to the ground some years back, yet nobody dares to venture near this area.An easily accessible landmark in the town of Meerut, GP Block is notorious for its various ghost stories. Some really bizarre occurrences have been reported around this two-storeyed building, which is apparently home to many evil spirits. One of the most popular and common among those spook tales is the sighting of four people having alcohol in the building. All the first person accounts have the same details, making it grow into public psyche. Apart from this, the sighting of a girl stepping out of the house in a red dress also adds more fizz to already existing spook fest.The Shimla-Kalka Railway stretch, apart from the stunning landscape that it traverses through, is famous for a fascinating supernatural tale involving the tragic suicide of a British engineer in the early 20th century. Tunnel no. 33, also known as the Barog Tunnel, is often referred to as the straightest train tunnel in the world but that is not the only special aspect about it. The story began in 1903, when the British government assigned Colonel Barog with the task of building a tunnel in the then remote area. A dedicated professional, Colonel Barog however committed a fatal mistake in calculation and ended up digging parallel tunnels. This led to the public shaming of him and, in utter depression. Colonel Barog shot himself inside the unfinished tunnel. Nevertheless, another engineer completed the tunnel but, as reported, it appeared that Colonel Barog never really left that place. Eventually, a small town grew around that tunnel with a railway station bearing the name of the disgraced engineer. Locals hold that the spirit of Colonel Barog can be seen time and again in and around the tunnel. Here, it is important to mention that the ghost of Colonel Barog is believed to be a friendly one and no report of any kind of fatal encounter can be found!Tunnel no. 103 on the Shimla-Kalka Railway route is the breeding ground of two very popular ghost stories. The damp and dark tunnel is the perfect setting for the spooky experience of standing witness to a British spirit talking to the passengers. The other tale records the bone-chilling story of a woman's spirit passing through the tunnel walls! Locals, however, believe that these two are not the only spirits that live inside the tunnel, there are many more!A small hill station near Darjeeling, Kurseong is a beautiful place famous for its world-class residential schools. But this scenic town has its own dark side, replete with stories of murder and horror. Victoria Boys' School of Kurseong is believed to be a haunted place plagued with many spirits. Locals claim that they hear footsteps, whispers and other noises coming from the school even when it remains closed. The forest area of Kurseong, on the other hand, is the setting for the tale of the headless boy. Woodcutters, who wander into the forest in line of duty, have reported spotting a young headless boy. They add that the spirit disappears into the trees after some time.Just off the Khairtabad flyover, there is a ruined building that was once a science college. Due to several reasons, the building was left abandoned but they did not dispose of the bodies in the biology lab. Now, this dilapidated building is a haunted point of the city with people telling stories of walking skeletons and disturbing noises. The mysterious death of a guard stationed at the building further cemented the ghost theories.
