BSF jawan, civilian injured; India, Pak trade fire in Kathua, Poonch

BSF jawan, civilian injured; India, Pak trade fire in Kathua, Poonch

JAMMU, Oct 1: A civilian and a BSF jawan were injured as Pakistani army continued ceasefire violations by targetting forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) and the International Border (IB) in Poonch and Kathua districts on Tuesday.

India, Pak trade fire in Kathua, Poonch

A Border Security Force Constable suffered splinter injuries in cross border firing along International Border in Hiranagar sector of Kathua district on Monday night, officials said.

According to them, BSF Constable Abhishek Roy (28), resident of West Bengal, posted in Samba, on suffered splinter injuries in cross border firing at Manyari Post. He was shifted to Samba district hospital from where he was referred to the Government Medical College Jammu. His condition was stated to be stable.

In Poonch, a civilian sustained injuries Tuesday morning when Pak army violating ceasefire resorted to mortar shelling and small arms firing targetting forward border posts and villages on the Line of Control in Shahpur-Kerni sector. Officials said that mortar shelling from across the border was intense in Shahpur, Kerni and Qasba sectors along the LoC, where a number of shells also fell in the close vicinity of revered shrine of famous Sufi saint Sain Baba Miran Bakash.

Police said, "This morning at around 07.45 AM, Pak army opened unprovoked fire on civilian areas and Indian forward posts along LoC in Kerni and Shahpur sectors. Shelling continued till late evening in which a civilian was injured."

The injured civilian was identified as Mohammed Bashir, son of Mohammed Hussain, resident of Shahpur Gultrian.

Mohammed Fareed, a local, said, "Pak shelling for the third consecutive day created a sense of insecurity among villagers. We did not have sufficient numbers of bunkers. We're scared as one of our brothers, sustained injuries in Pakistani shelling."

SSP Poonch Ramesh Kumar Angral said, "Pak army second time in a day violated ceasefire using heavy weapons. One person was injured in Pak shelling. We are monitoring the situation. We've also instructed the people to move towards safer places."

DC Poonch Rahul Yadav said, "Today Pakistani army violated ceasefire multiple times in which a civilian was injured. We provided him immediate financial assistance from Red Cross Fund and he is stable now."

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation, said, "This morning at around 8.47 AM, Pak initiated ceasefire violation in Shahpur and Kerni sector of district Poonch. Indian army also retaliated befittingly."

Seven persons were injured in the shelling by Pakistani troops in Poonch on Sunday.

According to officials, Pakistan violated the ceasefire over 2,000 times along the LoC this year, leaving 21 people dead and scores of others injured.

India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to ask its forces to adhere to the 2003 ceasefire understanding and maintain peace and tranquillity along the LoC and the International Border.
