Tamil Actor Siddharth Slams Union Home Minister Amit Shah Over His NRC Pitch In West Bengal

Union Home Minister Amit Shah has become the eye of the storm after his pitch to introduce National Register of Citizens (NRC) in West Bengal. The union home minister said that the centre will take the National Citizenship Registry across the country. "No matter how much the Trinamool Congress opposes it, the BJP will get it done"

“I today want to assure Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Buddhist &Christian refugees, you will not be forced to leave India by the Centre. Don't believe rumours. Before NRC, we will bring Citizenship Amendment Bill, which will ensure these people get Indian citizenship,” he added as quoted as saying by ANI.

Amit Shah in Kolkata: I today want to assure Hindu,Sikh,Jain,Buddhist &Christian refugees, you will not be forced to leave India by the Centre. Don't believe rumours. Before NRC, we will bring Citizenship Amendment Bill, which will ensure these people get Indian citizenship pic.twitter.com/zcWhmL10xl — ANI (@ANI) October 1, 2019

Reacting to the same, Tamil actor Siddharth, who is best known for his role in Rang De Basanti, lashed out at Amit Shah. He said that telling the refugees that only Muslims will be thrown out is against the Constitution.

How is the Home Monster allowed to speak like this? Is it not against the constitution to tell refugees that only the Muslims among them will be forced to leave India by the govt? What is going on? These are the seeds of ethnic cleansing being sown in the open for all to see! https://t.co/YQSPV0Oj0s — Siddharth (@Actor_Siddharth) October 1, 2019

“How is the Home Monster allowed to speak like this? Is it not against the constitution to tell refugees that only the Muslims among them will be forced to leave India by the govt? What is going on? These are the seeds of ethnic cleansing being sown in the open for all to see!,” he wrote on Twitter.

Not only Siddharth, Amit Shah’s comments have received massive flak from opposition as well.

Twitter

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said, "Please don't create rift among people. Bengal is known to respect leaders of different faiths for ages. None can spoil that. Everyone is welcome to our state and enjoy the hospitality of our people. But please don't profess any divisive politics ... It will not work in Bengal.”

Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury also slammed him.

India rejected the two-nation theory put forth by Savarkar and Jinnah, and that is our constitutional principle. India belongs to all Indians, irrespective of their caste, creed, gender, colour, creed, faith, eating habits, occupation or political beliefs. (1/2) https://t.co/XkpPuWZa8P — Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) October 1, 2019

All faiths means ALL faiths: Jews, Parsis, Hindus, Jehovah's Witnesses, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, non-believers & every other. No law that excludes any faith stands the test of India. HM must stop fostering divisions & attempts to damage India and hurt Indians https://t.co/iMa8svVBMY — Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) October 1, 2019

“All faiths mean ALL faiths: Jews, Parsis, Hindus, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, non-believers & every other. No law that excludes any faith stands the test of India. HM must stop fostering divisions & attempts to damage India and hurt Indians (sic),” Yechury said in a tweet.

The Home Minister is saying clearly that only undocumented Muslims will have to fear NRC, while others will get Indian citizenship@AmitShah I know you are allergic to it, but try reading the Constitution, FOR ONCE. Religion based citizenship is illegal and will be struck down https://t.co/vJTGD3vKry — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) October 1, 2019

All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi also lashed out at Amit Shah. "The Home Minister is saying clearly that only undocumented Muslims will have to fear NRC, while others will get Indian citizenship @AmitShah I know you are allergic to it, but try reading the Constitution, FOR ONCE. Religion based citizenship is illegal and will be struck down."
