‘Hatiye’: Apathy drips in flood-ravaged Bihar, CM Nitish Kumar shoots the messenger

Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar with flood-affected residents of Patna on Tuesday. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Deputy CM Sushil Modi had to be rescued from his residence by NDRF personnel on Monday The Bihar CM had yesterday claimed that his government was doing every possible thing in its capacity to mitigate the losses and aid relief efforts Flood water on Tuesday entered the residence of state Health Minister Mangal Pandey in Patna

Patna: Even as several districts in Bihar face nature’s fury, the apathy of politicians has drowned the citizens further in the flood-ravaged state that has seen over 40 people lose their lives so far.

Such is the impact of the floods in the eastern Indian state, deputy chief minister Sushil Modi had to be rescued from his residence by National Disaster Response Force personnel on Monday after he was marooned for a couple of days.

However, when he was asked about the paralysed state of his state, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar brushed aside the questions and in turn blamed media persons of being insensitive.

“Hum puch rahe hain ke desh ke kitne hisso mein paani aaya hai? Aur duniya ke kitne hisso mein paani aaya hai? Sirf Patna ke kuch mohalle mein paani aaya hai, wohi hai samasya? America mein kya hua? Kya matlab hai ye sab ka? Aap logon ko jo mann mein aaye woh kariye. Aap logo ki koi zarurat nahi hai. Aap toh jann-jagaran ke liye bhi koi kaam nahi kariyega (I am asking in how many parts of the country & across the world, there have been floods? Is water in some parts of Patna the only problem we have? What happened in America?),” Nitish asked reporters.

#WATCH Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar after visiting flood-affected areas in Patna: I am asking in how many parts of the country & across the world, there have been floods? Is water in some parts of Patna the only problem we have? What happened in America? #BiharFloods pic.twitter.com/9XfNcuZr0H — ANI (@ANI) October 1, 2019

His attitude drew the ire of even his NDA ally, with Bihar BJP chief Sanjay Jaiswal slamming his government and blaming it on its administrative negligence on handling the flood situation in Patna.

#WATCH A woman who was rescued from flooded Kankarbagh area of Patna breaks down while trying to recall her ordeal. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/0DQcnQlPkl — ANI (@ANI) October 2, 2019

The Bihar CM had on Monday claimed that his government was doing every possible thing in its capacity to mitigate the losses and aid relief efforts.

“We are extending every possible relief effort to those affected by floods... No one is sitting idle. This is nothing but a natural calamity magnified by climate change,” Nitish was quoted by news agency ANI as saying.

Flood water on Tuesday entered the residence of state Health Minister Mangal Pandey in Patna.
