Ajit Doval Meets Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman, Discusses Kashmir

The National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval had a one-on-one meeting with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman on Wednesday on his visit to Saudi Arabia. The meeting lasted for almost two hours and a wide range of issues were discussed on various aspects of bilateral relations. Top sources have confirmed that a discussion on Jammu & Kashmir did take place. “Saudi Crown Prince expressed understanding about India’s approach and actions in J&K,” said a source privy to the meeting.

The 2016 joint statement, issued by the two countries following Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit, had very strong references to combating terrorism. Saudi Arabia made it clear that Pakistan’s narrative on Kashmir was not acceptable due to a far better appreciation of India's position.

READ| NSA Ajit Doval visits J&K for second time to review security situation

Saudi Arabia has backed India when it comes to combating terrorism. The 2016 joint statement is a case in point where both the countries called on all states to reject the use of terrorism against other countries and to cut off support to those perpetrating terrorism from their territories against other states.

India and Saudi Arabia's relationship

The visit will further strengthen the deep bonds between the two countries and help identify specific areas of cooperation at a time when Saudi Arabia is looking to diversify its economy in line with the Crown Prince’s vision 2030.

This important visit highlights the regular and ongoing close consultations at the highest levels between the two sides on issues of mutual importance. NSA also had a meeting with Saudi NSA, Musaid Al Alban, who chairs the Council of Political and Security Affairs of Saudi Arabia. He is also Chairman of the National Cyber Security Authority.

They both discussed issues of national and regional security. Both sides highlighted the importance of close security ties. NSA is also expected to interact with the top leaders of the UAE.

READ| Mohammed bin Salman warns, war with Iran will 'collapse world economy'

READ| A day after Riyadh condemns Pulwama terror attack, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman delays his visit to Pakistan
