Navi Mumbai fire officer hangs self, family alleges harassment by seniors

Shinde's family members demanded that an FIR on charges of abetment to suicide | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Shinde was a sub-fire officer at Kharghar fire station The deceased's relatives staged a protest outside the fire station The fire officer was being mentally abused by his seniors

Mumbai: A Navi Mumbai fire brigade official committed suicide inside Kharghar fire station on Monday night. The deceased was identified as Ramesh Shinde. The deceased's relatives staged a protest outside the fire station claiming that the officer was

being pressured by his superiors over various issues.

According to a report, Shinde was a sub-fire officer at Kharghar fire station. On Monday night, he took the extreme step by hanging himself from a beam in an empty room. An official from the fire station said that as of now an accidental death report has been registered in the matter.

Meanwhile, the deceased's relatives and co-workers alleged that the fire officer was being mentally abused by his seniors. One of the relatives told a media person that his brother was in a lot of stress and all of could see that. He added that Shinde's seniors kept bullying him, and made him do weird shifts, he was also being pressured at work

Shinde's family members demanded that an FIR on charges of abetment to suicide should be lodged against his superiors at the workplace. They claimed that his seniors are responsible for his death.

However, an FIR has been lodged in the matter and further probe in the case is underway. AN officer told media that if it is found that other people are guilty, they will lodge an FIR. Although, no suicide note has been found yet.

In another case of suicide was reported from Uttar Pradesh Muzaffarnagar, a former village head committed suicide by shooting himself. The deceased was identified as 60-year-old, Udayvir, who took the extreme step on Monday evening at his house in Umerpur village under the Khatoli police station area. He was rushed to a hospital, where he was declared brought dead. The body was sent for a post-mortem examination. Meanwhile, the police have lodged a case in connection with the incident.

According to the wife of the deceased, Udayvir was worried over a bank loan he had taken.




