Mahatma Gandhi: Many firsts and fasts began in Mumbai

India

Arabian Sea

Apollo

Pedder Road

Bombay has never disappointed me," the Mahatma had once said about the salty city that was not only the first to set foreign clothes ablaze but also generously crowdfunded many of his causes including the Rs-1-crore-worth Non Co-operation Movement for which its masses coughed up nearly a third of the amount.It was in this island city that Gandhi made his nervous debut as a blazer-clad lawyer and later delivered grand, rousing speeches as a loin-cloth-clad leader, moving many women into handing over their ornaments in the end. However, today, even as the nation celebrates the Mahatma's 150th birth anniversary, many of Gandhi's historic footprints in the city - spanning 1915 to 1946 - have been lost to the invisible spinning wheel called time.These footprints were still tentative in November 1891 when 21-year-old Gandhi-fresh from his sojourn as a law student in London - first arrived to an airy, slim Bombay to study the "tedious business" of Indian law. This was the time when the Bombay high court would see a young Gandhi showing up diligently and dozing off often and proudly. While it did not gift the intimidated young lawyer much by way of education, the court did obliquely ensure Gandhi's good health. In his autobiography titled 'The Story of My Experiments With Truth', the Mahatma attributes his immunity from the illnesses that often found his friends to the fact that he would cover the 45-minute distance from his Girgaum residence to the court and back daily on foot. After months of floundering for work in the city, Gandhi would soon join his brother in Porbunder as a petty pleader, and eventually pack his bags to work for a trading firm in South Africa.Gandhi resumed his high court naps a decade later in 1902 when he returned toand rented a house in Charni Road. But when typhoid afflicted his second son Manilal, Gandhi decided to move out of the damp tenement to an airy bungalow in Santa Cruz that is no longer traceable. Soon, South Africa beckoned him and thirteen years later, when he would return to the familiarcoast via London, his eyes would be moist.Garlands threatened to swallow Gandhi and his wife Kasturba when their ship, SS Arabia, kissedBunder on January 9, 1915. The next day, Gandhi delivered his first speech at Hira Baug hall in Girgaum in the presence of Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Soon, receptions held for him at JB Petit's bungalow onand at Mangaldas House off Lamington Road, would be attended by the likes of Mohammed Ali Jinnah and Pherozeshah Mehta.Many landmark meetings followed. If Fort's Excelsior theatre and Charni Road's Shantaram chawl saw him demanding the abolition of indentured labour, Walpakhadi near Dongri witnessed the leader chatting with "untouchable" castes. In fact, Gandhi's tryst with the charkha began in 1917 when he started staying in Mani Bhavan, the modest two-storey home of his friend, Revashankar, in Gamdevi's Laburnum Road. He had asked a passing carder to prepare slivers from cotton and soon became the most ardent pupil of an in-house spinning class. In addition to khadi, Mani Bhavan-his headquarters for the next 20 years-would also churn out a host of freedom movements.By the time Quit India Movement was launched to slogans of 'Do or Die' from Gowalia Tank in 1942, Gandhi had moved to businessman G D Birla's Malabar Hill house. In that historic week, when Birla asked Gandhi why he was eating very little, he replied, "Bombay has plenty of ozone in the air, and the metabolism is so low that one does not need much of food here." Gandhi would fastidiously pace the small patch of lawn in Birla House, sometimes taking an about turn in the middle of discussing a serious issue "to ensure balanced exercise to the body".It was in 1946 that Gandhiji last visited the city. Like his ashes that were scattered in the Arabian Sea in 1948, some of the places binding him to the city-like the Santa Cruz bungalow for instance-too have dissolved into sepia oblivion. "Bombay's charity," the leader says in a quote from 'Gandhi in Bombay', "has covered a multitude of her sins."
