Malaysia to play its rightful role in highlighting Kashmir issue, President Arif Alvi hopes

-

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan: President Dr Arif Alvi on Wednesday hoped that Malaysia would play its rightful role in highlighting the Kashmir issue at all international fora to help prevent threats to peace and security and facilitate a peaceful resolution of Jammu & Kashmir dispute.

In a meeting with a delegation of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of Malaysia which led by the Speaker Sri Dato’ Mohamad Ariff Bin Md Yusof met him at the Aiwan-e-Sadr in Islamabad, the president said that India’s illegal and unilateral alteration of the disputed status of Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir (IOJ&K) and its demographic structure contravenes numerous United Nations Security Council resolutions, international law and India’s own prior commitments.

Dr Arif Alvi said that Jammu and Kashmir was not an internal matter of India, rather it was a longstanding internationally recognized dispute on the agenda of the UN Security Council.

The president informed the delegation that India had deployed 900,000 troops in IOJ&K and there had been a clampdown in the valley, with continued curfew, communications blockade and a severe shortage of food and medicines since August 5, 2019. He said that this serious human rights and humanitarian situation was accompanied by grave risks to peace and security. He said that Indian fascist regime was alienating the minorities through its fascist policies and had given the RSS extremists a license to kill. He further said that there was possibility of false flag operations by India, imperiling peace in the region.

Talking about Pakistan-Malaysia relations, the president said that both the Countries enjoyed friendly and cordial relations, which had been further cemented by the recent high level visits from both sides. He said that both the Countries had a convergence of views on world affairs that translated into cooperation and support for each other at various international fora, he added.

President Arif Alvi further said that the existing friendly ties would be further strengthened to the mutual benefit of the people of our two Countries in the years ahead.

The president also appreciated the leadership of Turkey, Malaysia, and Pakistan for establishing an English News Channel to effectively highlight the message of Islam and combat Islamophobia. He also appreciated Malaysia for its support to Pakistan on Kashmir at UNGA, on FATF and ASEAN.

The Speaker of the House of Representatives of Malaysia Sri Dato’ Mohamad Ariff Bin Md Yusof presented a memento to President Dr Arif Alvi.

The Speaker National Assembly Asad Qaiser was also present on the occasion.
