Large amount of cash, jewellery worth nearly Rs 200 crore seized at Borivali railway station

Borivali Railway Station

Key Highlights Around 35 gold bars were recovered and the estimated value of cash and jewels stands at Rs 200 crores Earlier, the Income-Tax (I-T) Department seized over Rs 4 crore in unaccounted cash Maharashtra is set to go polls on October 21

Mumbai: Ahead of October 21 Maharashtra state Assembly elections, a large amount of cash and jewellery were seized at Borivali railway station on a train going to Gujarat. The Income Tax department is investigating whether if it has anything to do with the upcoming The 288-member Maharashtra Assembly elections. Around 35 gold bars were recovered and the estimated value of cash and jewels stands at Rs 200 crores.

So far, the Income-Tax (I-T) Department has seized over Rs 4 crore in unaccounted cash in India’s finance capital. The department, however, did not clarify whether the cash was linked to any political outfit.

Maharashtra is set to go polls on October 21. The BJP and the Shiv Sena have decided to contest the polls together. However, there is no clarification on seat distribution yet.

Nonetheless, several formulae for seat-sharing between the BJP-Sena and allies have been floated since the past few days, but none have been considered as final.

The BJP will fight the elections together with the Shiv Sena, the Republican Party of India-A, the Rashtriya Samaj Paksha, the Shiv Sangram Party and the Rayat Kranti Sanghatana.

Meanwhile, a day after announcing its Haryana list of candidates, the saffron party released its list for Maharashtra. In the first list, the BJP released names of 125 candidates, including present Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis who will be contesting from the Nagpur South West seat.

BJP state chief Chandrakant Dada Patil will be fighting from Kothrud while Manohar Bhadane has been named from Dhule rural and BJP Minister Pankaja Munde from Parali seat.

The Shiv Sena also released a list of constituencies which it will be contesting however it did not name anyone. The biggest surprise was the announcement of Aaditya Thackeray as a candidate from Worli.

Hailing the decision Sena leader Sanjay Raut said: “Due to a technical error, recently, the 'Chandrayan' couldn't land on the moon. But Aaditya is a 'Suryayan' which will land with precision.”

Raut's comments came two days after party president Uddhav Thackeray said that he had promised his father, the late Bal Thackeray, that one day he would make a Shiv Sainik the Chief Minister of Maharashtra.

Meanwhile, Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) has announced that it will contest the state Assembly elections. Talking to IANS, party President Raj Thackeray said that they will contest the Assembly elections and shall also win. He further said that names of the candidates and the seats will be announced shortly.
