Congress uses Gandhi birth anniversary to stage show of strength, attack BJP

New Delhi: The Congress took to the streets Wednesday to stake claim to the legacy of Mahatma Gandhi, using his 150th birth anniversary to attack the BJP and stress its point that those who indulge in the politics of falsehood cannot understand his ideals of truth and selfless service.

In a show of strength, perhaps the first since the party’s Lok Sabha poll debacle in May, Congress president Sonia Gandhi as well as her children, former party chief Rahul Gandhi and general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, were out on the streets accompanied by thousands of party workers.

Sonia Gandhi waited at Rajghat while Rahul Gandhi led a march of party workers to the memorial site. Gandhi was in Lucknow.

Sonia Gandhi, while paying homage to Mahatma at Rajghat, told party workers and leaders that the Mahatma’s soul would be pained by what has been happening in India in the last few years under the present dispensation. She claimed that the Congress was the only one party that followed the path shown by him and carried on his legacy.

Sonia Gandhi also participated in the oath that Congress workers took to achieve the India of his dreams by keeping faith in constitutional values.

Sonia Gandhi also attacked the BJP government for seeking to appropriate Mahatma Gandhi’s legacy. “How can those who pursue the politics of falsehood understand that Gandhiji was the worshipper of truth? How can those who can do anything for power understand that Gandhiji was a worshipper of non-violence? How can those thirsty for power, understand the meaning of Gandhiji’s Swaraj? Those who claim to be supreme at the first opportunity, how can they understand the value of selfless service of Gandhiji,” asked Sonia attacking those in power.

Terming it a historic, pious and auspicious day, the Congress chief described Mahatma Gandhi as a ‘great personality’ who inspired not only India but the entire world to adopt the path of non violence and ‘satyagraha’.

Sonia Gandhi also pointed out said there has never been any dearth of those who tried to distract India from the path shown by Gandhi while citing his name.

“Despite all this, if India has not been distracted it is because its foundation is laid on the values of Gandhiji. India and Gandhiji are synonymous with each other. It is a different thing that some people are adamant on reversing this. They want the RSS and not Gandhiji to become the symbol of India.

“I want to tell them clearly… there cannot be any thought except Gandhiji’s all-inclusive system, that includes the composite culture, civilisation and society of India,” asserted Sonia.

Priyanka Gandhi meanwhile in Lucknow said the BJP should first pursue the path of truth and then talk about Mahatma Gandhi. She made the remarks before participating in a silent three-kilometre march that culminated in GPO Park, where floral tributes were paid to Mahatma Gandhi

PTI
