NDA owes apology to people of Patna, says Giriraj

Union Minister criticises the Nitish Kumar government over its handling of the rain crisis

The BJP-led NDA in Bihar, which has been ruling the State for about a decade and a half, owes an apology to the people of Patna who have been reeling from inundation following heavy rain, Union Minister Giriraj Singh said here on Wednesday.

The firebrand BJP leader also attacked the Nitish Kumar government saying an alert had been sounded ahead of the downpour but it failed to ensure attentiveness in the administrative machinery, which could have lessened the severity of the crisis.

“It is not a failure of the people of Patna. It is our failure. Residents of the city have reposed so much trust in the NDA, especially the BJP. We owe an apology to them,” said Mr. Singh, the Lok Sabha MP from Begusarai.

A former member of the Nitish Cabinet, the Union Minister is a known detractor of the Chief Minister and his deputy Sushil Kumar Modi, a senior BJP leader.

“The government issued an alert asking the people to be on guard. But was it on guard itself? Had it been so, people would not have been compelled to suffer so much of misery,” he said.

The slow pace of relief operations has fuelled anger among the people affected by a flood-like situation, particularly in Patna, parts of which have been under water for days. On Wednesday, water was being pumped out of the inundated areas in the State capital. Mr. Kumar urged people to “have patience”, but lost his cool on Tuesday night in the face of persistent queries from a journalist about the waterlogged streets of Patna. The Chief Minister shot back at the scribe, asking him whether there was similar outrage when Mumbai was deluged or when floods disrupted life in the U.S.

17 lakh people affected

A State government statement put the total number of people affected by the rains at 17.09 lakh. The districts hit by the rainfall were Patna, Bhojpur, Bhagalpur, Khagaria, Samastipur, Begusarai, Lakhisarai and Vaishali, situated on either side of the Ganga. According to the State disaster management department, 42 deaths have been reported from areas affected by rainfall, though a district-wise break-up was not yet available.
