Siege to continue in Gangbal forest for some more days: J&K police

SRINAGAR: After two terrorists were killed by security forces in Gangbal area of Naranag forest belt in Central Kashmir a couple of days back, J&K police on Wednesday said that the ongoing search operation in the area would continue for some more days due to suspected presence of one or two more terrorists there. The operation is being carried out jointly by Army, police and paramilitary forces.

The encounter that started on Sunday morning in the dense woods of Trumkhal in Gangbal has so far seen the killings of two terrorists. In the first exchange of firing on Sunday, one terrorist was killed and the encounter continued. On Monday morning, a second terrorist was neutralised. Since then, search operations in the area are on.

Police on Wednesday confirmed that it was an infiltration bid and the terrorists had entered from Gurez-Bandipora sector. They were hiding in the forest belt after entering this side. “For the past one month, we had stepped up vigil given the fact that the area has traditionally provided infiltration routes to terrorists from Pakistan. On Sunday, security forces killed one terrorist from the group that infiltrated first,” Ganderbal senior superintendent of police (SSP) Muhammad Khalil Poswal told reporters on Wednesday.

The SSP said the second terrorist was killed on Monday morning. Asked whether there were any more terrorists present in the area, he replied: “The exact number of terrorists is not known, but there can be one or two more still holed up in the area.”

The search operation would continue till security forces satisfied themselves about the presence of no terrorists in the area, the SSP said.

A police source said that security forces have set up a temporary operation base in the area to foil any possible infiltration bid. “Army is maintaining the highest level of vigil on the Gurez-Bandipora ridge and other passes from where terrorists may try to sneak in. The aim is to foil all infiltration bids before the onset of winter,” he said.

The Gangbal encounter is the third gunfight in Kashmir after Parliament scrapped Jammu and Kashmir’s special status under Article 370 on August 5. The first encounter after the defanging of the said Article took place in Baramulla’s Old Town, followed by the second one at Sopore, where two Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorists were killed.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
