Man who ''mediated'' between STF cops, drug peddlers commits suicide

amansharma@tribunemail.com

P K Jaiswar

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, October 2

A day after a Special Task Force constable was shot dead by drug peddlers, a man, who acted “mediator” between STF cops posing as decoys and drug peddlers, on Wednesday committed suicide.

The body of Simarjit Singh alias Deba, who ran a religious dera at his home, was found hanging with a tree at Wadala village on Rayya-Gaggarbhana village road.

Amritsar (rural) SSP Vikram Jeet Singh Duggal said they were looking for Simarjit since the arrest of two drug peddlers — Parwinder Singh and Harpreet Singh. A motorcycle found from the spot, where the cop was shot, belonged to him.

“Apparently Simarjit was unable to come to terms after his name figured during the investigations of killing of STF cop Gurdeep Singh and that he was also allegedly involved in drug trafficking,” said the SSP. He added Simarjit had assured the cops posing as customers of heroin at cheap rates. He gave his motorcycle to the drug peddlers, which was found abandoned at the spot following the shootout.

Since the incident, Simarjit avoided arrest and did not even went home. Today, his body was found hanging at Wadala village.

The SSP said a manhunt has been launched to nab the remaining suspects whose names have cropped up in the probe.

Meanwhile, a local court here today sent two drug peddlers to four-day police remand. According to information, the police have also recovered 500gm heroin from the spot which the peddlers were to deliver to the cops posing as decoys. The contraband fell on the ground while the accused were fleeing.

STF constable Gurdeep Singh who was shot dead during an operation against drug peddlers in the Jandiala Guru area was posted at STF Jalandhar. He along with two other cops had come to Beas and laid a trap to nab drug peddlers by posing as decoy customers. When Gurdeep and team met drug peddlers they got suspicious. When one of the cops tried to nab the drug peddlers, they entered into a scuffle. One of them snatched Gurdeep's pistol and shot him.

Gurdeep received a bullet at neck piercing through the organs in the chest. He was rushed to a private Hospital at Amritsar where doctors declared him dead.
