man stabs neighbourer: Punjab: Man stabs neighbour for asking him to maintain distance from his wife

LUDHIANA: A man stabbed a labourer to take revenge - two years after their fight - in a labourer quarter of New Ashok Nagar of Salem Tabri in Ludhiana on Tuesday night.The injured person was sleeping in a one-room accommodation with wife and children when the accused barged into the room and escaped after injuring man with knife.It is alleged that the victim had deterred the accused to maintain distance from his wife which was the reason of their fight.Dinesh Kumar (35) - a labourer of New Ashok Nagar of Salem Tabri - is married to Priayanka Devi (29) and the couple has three children from this marriage.In his compliant to police Priyanka stated that she along with her husband and children lived in the labourer quarter from past eight years. The accused - Ajay Kumar of village Beer Banda of Uttar Pradesh - started living in their labourer quarter three years ago.She added that Ajay Kumar befriended her. However, her husband Dinesh did not like Ajay’s friendly behaviour with her. Two years ago, on her husband’s objection, she started avoiding Ajay. Meanwhile, Dinesh and asked Ajay to maintain distance from her, which triggered an argument and both had a quarrel. After that fight Dinesh left the accommodation and started living somewhere else in Salem Tabri area.Priyanak alleged that Ajay nurtured rivalry against Dinesh. Once Ajay met her on a road and that time too he threatened to teach Dinesh a lesson.Investigating officer ASI Janak Raj from police station Salem Tabri said that on Tuesday when Priyanka and Dinesh were sleeping at the house with three kids, Ajay barged in their room. He attacked Ajay with a knife for at least six times in face, neck and arms. Meanwhile, Priyanka woke up and raised alarm. Other residents of labourer quarter huddled on spot. They locked accused Ajay in the same room and also rushed injured Dinesh to Civil Hospital from where he was referred to a private hospital.ASI added that meanwhile Ajay with the help of knife broke open the window of room and managed to flee from there leaving his scooter outside labourer quarter. It is suspected that the accused has taken revenge of fight after two years. Initially, Dinesh and Ajay had cordial relation as Dinesh also helped Ajay to get a job.The police have lodged an FIR against Ajay Kumar, 25, under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC. The police are trying to trace the accused. Meanwhile, the condition of Dinesh is stated to be stable and he is undergoing treatment at hospital.
