Is India really open defecation free?

PM Modi on Wednesday said that India built 11 crore toilets for 60 crore people within 60 months. But is India truly open defecation free? (Representative Image: PTI)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday announced that 99 per cent of rural villages in India have declared themselves open defecation free. Making the announcement in front of village-level workers involved in Swachhta mission at a mega event to mark the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi at Sabarmati Riverfront in Ahmedabad, the Prime Minister said that India amazed the world by building 11 crore toilets for 60 crore people within 60 months.

But is India really open defecation free? India Today TV's ground report found that several people in villages across India, including the national capital, were still forced to defecate in open due to lack of toilets, especially in impoverished colonies.

Speaking to India Today TV Consulting Editor Rajdeep Sardesai, Secretary Jal Shakti Ministry Parameswaran Iyer defended the ODF tag assigned to rural India and claimed that it was a dynamic process.

"Swachh Bharat revolution has been able to bring 550 million people out of open defecation habits. The use of toilets has gone up by 90 per cent, but it is a dynamic process," Parameswaran Iyer said.

The Jal Shakti Ministry official said that those areas which have been left out must give a shout out and assistance will be provided to ensure that they too become ODF.

On being asked about the burden of caste bias in the implementation of the Swachh Bharat campaign, Parameswaran Iyer said that it did not exist. In fact, it brought people closer together, he said.

Also read | Bihar: Over 1 lakh families await reimbursement promised for building toilets

"Swachh Bharat revolution has brought communities together. In many ways, it has brought down caste lines. I completely refuse the argument that caste is stopping the project from moving forward," Parameswaran Iyer said.

The top official claimed the project and its success has raised the community social capital in the country as people often come together to take pride in the ODF status of their village.

Parameswaran Iyer also claimed that the Swachh Bharat Mission's majority beneficiaries were people from the weaker economic section.

Presenting the other side of the story, Bezwada Wilson of the Safai Karamchari Andolan, said that the SBM was an anti-poor project. "India has around 90 lakh homeless people, how can they have homes? How can India be open defecation free?" he asked.

"Soon, they will declare these homeless people criminal for defecating in open, when they don't even have a choice," he said.

Bezwada Wilson termed the death of two Dalit boys, who were killed for defecating in open in Madhya Pradesh a few days ago, as a gruesome murder.

"Dalit boys they killed in MP's Shivpuri was a gruesome murder and we are declaring it a revolution (sic)," Bezwada Wilson said.

However, Parameswaran Iyer termed the incident of two Dalit boys being beaten to death for defecating in open as an aberration. "Dalits boys being killed was an aberration. An advisory was immediately issued against it. The project only focuses on positive behaviourial change, it does not condone violence," Parameswaran Iyer said.

The national convenor of the Safai Karmachari Andolan also raised the issue of sanitation workers, which he claimed has been ignored in the Swachh Bharat Mission.

Claiming that Swachh Bharat Mission had a caste burden, Bezwada Wilson said that those who were killed in gutters were majorly Dalits.

"What has happened to manual scavenging abolition? Who dies in gutters? How is it not linked to caste? There is a caste link to Swachh Bharat. One and a half lakh Dalit women still carry human litter every day," Bezwada Wilson said.
