Simplicity marks his final resting place,visitors say Bapu even more relevant now

NEW DELHI: There is no mausoleum to mark the Mahatma’s life, no tombstone with elaborate epitaphs — just a black marble platform located in an open air complex at Rajghat . The memorial, surrounded by a neatly manicured lawn, dotted by trees planted by dignitaries, was designed by architect Vanu G Bhuta to reflect Gandhi’s simple life. At one end of the black slab burns an eternal flame, while the other end has just two words: ‘ Hey Ram ’. These were the last words the Father of the Nation is supposed to have uttered after he was shot by Nathuram Godse Gandhi’s life and message are summed in the words of the 15th century poet, Narsimha Mehta’s ‘Vaishnav jan toh taine kahiye’. One of Gandhi’s favourite bhajans, it plays on a loop at Rajghat, reminding visitors of his teachings: respect everyone, renounce cravings and forsake greed.On Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary , visitors trickled into Rajghat, and they remembered the man who was not just central to India’s freedom struggle but also became a moral compass for the world.Members affiliated to a citizen-led initiative called Jai Jagat , which aims to be a “wake-up call to respond to the deepening economic, social and environmental crisis”, started a padyatra from Rajghat, which would reach Geneva next year on October 2. Peace activist Dayaparan , a member and citizen of Sri Lanka who had come for the celebrations, told TOI that the padyatra would pass through 10 countries, including Afghanistan and Iran, to spread the message of equality for all.“Gandhi taught us an alternative and moral way of achieving our goals, be it economic or social. His message of truth and non-violence were not politically motivated and that’s why these are timeless. Gandhi is more important than ever before. We have seen a consolidation of power in the hands of a few, and that has led to a huge imbalance. We need to correct this imbalance by following in his footsteps,” he added.On weekdays, the memorial sees at least 5000 visitors. The number doubles on weekends, say officials. The site is managed by the Rajghat Samadhi Committee, which comes under the ministry of housing and urban affairs. Over the past two years, authorities have come under fire from the Delhi high court at least twice over poor maintenance of the site. The issue is resolved now, claims an official, adding that the committee does not employ permanent staff for maintenance but has outsourced the work to Central Public Works Department, which manages the site.When TOI had visited Rajghat a week ago, authorities were busy repairing and renovating the site. A construction worker from Madhya Pradesh, who did not know that Rajghat was the Mahatma's final resting place, recognised Gandhi's name. “We have been working here for the past three months. I knew that this place is called Rajghat but I did not know that Gandhiji was cremated here. Everyone knows Gandhi. Who doesn't know him? He fought for our independence and made us free," said a worker, enthusiastically adding that she would pass on the information to other workers. And it is perhaps in this enthusiasm that Gandhi's universal appeal lies. He is known by all, owned by many and appropriated by some — from religious groups to social causes, from politicians to businesses, and from teachers to labourers.
