UK court rules in favour of India, dismisses Pak’s claim over Nizam’s funds

shalender@tribune.com

London/Islamabad, October 2

The UK High Court on Wednesday ruled in favour of India and dismissed Pakistan’s claim over funds belonging to the late 7th Nizam of Hyderabad at the time of Partition in 1947 and now worth around 35 million pounds.

The ruling marks an important conclusion to the over 70-year-long legal dispute which also witnessed the Indian government, the descendants of the 7th Nizam and the administrator of his estate burying their differences and entering into a confidential settlement agreement last year, which meant the case was effectively an India-Pakistan clash in the British courts.

In his judgment handed down at the Royal Courts of Justice in London, Justice Marcus Smith ruled that the “Nizam VII was beneficially entitled to the Fund and those claiming in right of Nizam VII — the Princes and India — are entitled to have the sum paid out to their order”.

“Pakistan’s contentions of non-justiciability by reason of the foreign act of state doctrine and non-enforceability on grounds of illegality both fail,” the verdict noted, in a setback to Pakistan.

The dispute revolves around 1,007,940 pounds and nine shillings transferred in 1948 from the then Nizam of Hyderabad to the high commissioner in Britain of the newly-formed state of Pakistan. That amount has since grown into 35 million pounds as the Nizam’s descendants, supported by India, claimed it belongs to them and Pakistan counter-claimed that it is rightfully theirs.

“We are delighted that today’s judgment recognises His Exalted Highness the VIII Nizam’s rights to funds which have been in dispute since 1948. Our client was still a child when the dispute first arose and is now in his 80s. It is a great relief to see this dispute finally resolved in his lifetime,” said Paul Hewitt, partner in Withers LLP, who have acted for the VIII Nizam since Pakistan issued proceedings in 2013.

“Justice Smith’s judgment covers a complex historical and legal set of issues, interpreting facts and events that occurred 70 years ago to establish that the funds, which now amount to 35 million, were always held in trust for our client’s grandfather, the VII Nizam. The judgment also makes important findings on justiciability… and whether a nation state can be a trustee,” he noted.

Meanwhile, over 100 descendants of the last ruler of erstwhile Hyderabad state are hoping to get their due share. The descendants say they all have the share in the funds and not just Prince Mukarram Jah, the titular eighth Nizam and his younger brother Muffakham Jah.

Nizam's grandson Nawab Najaf Ali Khan said they welcome the court verdict.

“The court has rightly rejected Pakistan’s claim in favour of India, and the descendants of Nizam VII. The family has long awaited this judgment,” he said According to him, there are 120 legal heirs of seventh Nizam, Mir Osman Ali Khan. He hopes that the funds lying in NatWest Bank plc will be distributed among the legal heirs without further legal wrangling.

The Nizam’s family members will wait for the next development in the case known as Hyderabad Funds case. They, however, believe that Pakistan has no strong grounds to challenge Wednesday’s court order.

Claiming the legal right to the funds, they say they were party to a confidential settlement agreement was reached last year between the Indian government and the Nizam Estate. — Agencies
