India-Pakistan nuclear war to send world back to ‘Ice Age’ with death toll of 125million

India-Pakistan is a 'dangerous situation' says Malloch Brown

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Tensions in the disputed Kashmir region have been incredible fraught since Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi revoked Article 370. Under the Indian constitution, Article 370 guarantees the special status of the Kashmir and Jammu regions.

Since then, both Modi and Pakistan’s Imran Khan have warned of potential disaster in the region in the event of an all-out war. In a report published, in Science Advances, any potential conflict could result in horrific destruction in the region. The tense relations between the two countries has even been likened to the “unfortunate example” set by the United States and Russia during the Cold War era. The report states: “India and Pakistan may be repeating the unfortunate example set by the United States and Russia during the ‘cold war’ era: that is, building destructive nuclear forces far out of proportion to their role in deterrence.

India-Pakistan: Conflict could kill millions

India-Pakistan: Mr Khan warned of a nuclear conflict

“Should a war between India and Pakistan ever occur, as assumed here, these countries alone could suffer 50 to 125 million fatalities, a regional catastrophe.” Recently, Mr Khan warned the United Generations Assembly that the possibility of a nuclear conflict is very much possible. Mr Khan warned that the conflict between the two states is similar to that the potential disaster has “proportions that no one here realises". Moreover, the report also stated that there will be a huge environmental impact on and trigger conditions not seen since the last Ice Age. JUST IN:India vs Pakistan: Trump urged to stop nuclear disaster

India-Pakistan: Modi revoked Article 370

The report added: “In addition, severe short-term climate perturbations, with temperatures declining to values not seen on Earth since the middle of the last Ice Age, would be triggered by smoke from burning cities, a global disaster threatening food production worldwide and mass starvation, as well as severe disruption to natural ecosystems.” The two states have fought conventional wars since they split from the British Raj more than 70 years ago. Although it did not amount to war, tensions escalated following a terrorist attack which killed 44 Indian paramilitary in Kashmir. In response, Modi ordered an airstrike on a camp run by the militant organisation, Jaish-e-Mohammed. DON'T MISS Pakistan-India: Modi threatened with ‘nuclear armageddon’ India-Pakistan tensions surge as war-games undertaken at border Jason Isaacs Hotel Mumbai interview: Terrorists killed 174 people

India-Pakistan: A jet was shot down during the skirmishes

India-Pakistan news: Modi and Khan have exchanged skirmishes

Following the infringement on Pakistani territory, two Indian jets were shot down, thrusting the two countries close to an all-out war. The pilot of one of the downed planes, Abhinandan Varthaman, was then paraded on television before being returned to India as a “goodwill gesture”. President of Azad Kashmir - the Pakistan administered region - Masood Khan, has also warned of the serious situation in the region. Speaking to US publication, Newsweek, Masood Khan said: “We have beefed up security, we remain vigilant.

Nuclear map

“India with its aggressive and aggravating steps has pushed the region to the brink of war. “We are in a state of war right now, but the situation could escalate even further. “Any military exchange will not remain limited, it can and we fear it would escalate to the nuclear level, that is tantamount to nuclear armageddon.”

India-Pakistan news: Mr Khan recently met with trump

Trending
