Man murders foster father over 10 bighas of land in UP's Jalaun

When the argument escalated, Shafi took a stone and attacked Nabi Baksh on the head (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An 87-year-old man was attacked by his adopted son at a village in Uttar Pradesh The accused allegedly attacked the elderly man for 10 bighas of property The deceased was attacked with a stone and was strangled to death

Kanpur: A man allegedly attacked his foster father in Chamarsena village, Konch Kotwali village of Jalaun district in Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday. The 87-year-old man was strangled to death by the accused after being attacked with a stone.

The deceased has been identified as Nabi Baksh. Around 26 years ago, Nabi Baksh adopted Shafi. Baksh had been living with Shafi, Shafi's wife Akhtari - his daughter-in-law, and their four children. He is jobless and is financially dependent on his foster father - Baksh.

Nabi Baksh owned 14 bighas of land out of which, he had registered 10 bighas under the name of his grandson Arif. Shafi allegedly wanted 10 bighas of agricultural land to be registered under his name.

A police official said, "Shafi, who is a son of Nabi Baksh's brother-in-law, was adopted by him some 26 years ago. Nabi Baksh got him married to Akhtari from whom he has four children, including 10-year-old grandson Arif. Shafi is unemployed and is dependent on his father's farming business."

Late night on Tuesday, Shafi went to Nabi Baksh's room, asking him to remove his son's name from the registry. He asked his father to register the land under his name. When the 87-year-old refused to change the name, the two had an argument. When the argument escalated, Shafi took a stone and allegedly hit his father's head multiple times.

He then took a lungi and allegedly strangled his foster father to death. After Nabi Baksh died, Shafi locked himself in his father's room. When he did not come out for long, Shafi's wife and children rushed to the neighbours for help. The neighbours informed the police control room.

The police reached the deceased's house and broke open the door of the room where Shafi had been hiding. Nabi Baksh was found lying in a pool of blood. The police sent the senior citizen's body for a post-mortem and took the accused into custody. A police officer said, "During interrogation, Shafi told the police that his father was not ready to register 10 bighas of agricultural land in his name, so he killed him. "

The police have said that they are investigating the case from "all possible angles". Awadhesh Kumar, assistant superintendent of police (ASP) Shafi has been sent to judicial custody and a case has been registered against him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
