Five stocks on top of D-Street’s watchlist for October F&O series

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of RBL Bank Ltd moved down by 4 in 3 months on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of RBL Bank Ltd is 1 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

5 stocks that can offer solid returns in an uncertain market







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 5 Bajaj Finance | Buy | Target Price: Rs 4,550 With the upcoming festive season and several planned online and offline mega sales events ahead, Emkay Global has named Bajaj Finance as the best bet to play the India consumption story. The brokerage maintained that both AUM and EPS CAGRs of ~36% over FY19-21E (after adjusting for tax cuts), backed by a solid cross-selling franchise and a high-quality sourcing mechanism. The company's board has approved a QIP worth Rs 8,500 crore, which provides comfort over its valuations. The brokerage upgraded FY20/21 EPS estimates by ~10%/9%. Key downside risks include elevated consumer leverage and prolonged rural distress.



(Source: Emkay Global) NMDC | Buy | Target Price: Rs 140 The latest amendments made by the government in Mineral Rules, 2015 provide a shot in the arm for NMDC. Edelweiss is of the view the changes have far-reaching impact as they: 1) are likely to facilitate a resumption of the Donimalai mine; and 2) will set a precedence for renewal of other mines of NMDC and other PSUs. Earlier, the Karnataka High Court had struck down the state government’s demand for an 80% premium. The brokerage now believes there is little room for ambiguity on renewals going ahead. Donimalai resumption would be EPS accretive to the extent of 12-15% on an annualized basis, the brokerage said.



(Source: Edelweiss) Oracle Financial | BUY | Target Price: Rs 3,910 This stock has underperformed the Nifty IT Index by 26% YTD and trades at 15.1 times 12-month forward EPS, a 34% discount to the 5-year median. JM Financial finds the pessimism excessive. OFSS should sustain at-least 12% FCF CAGR over FY19-22 on stable margin and cash-conversion (67% OCF/Ebitda) assumptions which translate to a healthy 6% dividend yield (at c.100% pay-out); could be higher given the nil pay-out in FY19 (ostensibly to evaluate a share buy-back) and Rs 386 cash per share.



(Source: JM Financial) Brigade Enterprises | Buy | Target Price: Rs 245 Motilal Oswal remains confident about Brigade’s commercial and residential growth. The firm's annuity income (excluding CAM) from office and retail is likely to increase from Rs 2.5 billion in FY19 to Rs 5.3 billion in FY22E (BRGD’s share) while residential segment growth will be driven by launches in affordable and mid-income segment, the brokerage said. The pace of under construction work at one of its key projects (BTG in Bengaluru) and project velocity of its first AFH offering (El Dorado) is likely to help the company in tracing the right growth path.



(Source: Motilal Oswal Financial Services) Galaxy Surfactants | BUY | Target Price: Rs 1,834 A rise in demand for HPC products implicitly induces growth for Galaxy Surfactants. Owing to the inherent nature and universal consumer usage of these products, their demand is largely inelastic. GSL witnessed stronger demand in FY17/18 (12.2/11% YoY) vs FY19 (8.8%), led by 18.8% YoY growth in the (high margin) specialty category. HDFC Securities expects strong traction to continue in this category driven by strong demand in developed markets. The stock should trade at a multiple closer to chemical and at a discount to FMCG companies, the brokerage said.



(Source: HDFC Securities)

The October F&O series has seen a dip in investor confidence on concerns over the continued troubles in the country’s financial sector. Most of the stock futures which have seen a surge in open interest are from the sector. Auto makers are also seeing build-up of bearish bets. ET takes a look at five stocks which are gaining momentum in the October series and details their near-term outlook.CMP: Rs 38.6OI change in October series: 23.85%Spot price change in October series: -9.06%IDFC First Bank has seen the biggest increase in open interest in October series. Morgan Stanley sees 45% downside in the stock. “Corporate asset quality has surprised negatively despite high past recognition and provisioning, and remains vulnerable given that around 60% of the credit book is still non-retail and we continue to see rating downgrades in India. Further, we have concerns on retail asset quality given the riskier profile of borrowers and have raised credit cost forecasts,” said Morgan Stanley in a September 30 note, cutting target price to Rs 24 from Rs 30, while retaining ‘underperform’ rating. Sandeep Porwal, technical analyst at Ashika Stock Broking, said the stock has failed to sustain above its 50-day moving average level of Rs 42. “Since then we have witnessed sharp sell-off. Fresh leg of downside is expected once it starts trading below Rs 36,” said Porwal.CMP: Rs 255.9OI change in October series: 13.57%Spot price change in October series: -8.98%The stock is seeing build-up of short positions on concerns over exposure to stressed borrowers and uncertainty around its asset quality. Morgan Stanley said there is a credit crunch going on in India among weaker-rated borrowers as flow of credit from challenged lenders has stalled and it sees no signs of this reversing yet, implying risk of continued defaults at these borrowers. “Given SBI’s size, it is one of the largest lenders to many of these stressed borrowers,” said Morgan Stanley in a recent note, downgrading the stock to ‘equal-weight’ from ‘over-weight’. The stock is a short if it breaks the Rs 250-level, said Rajesh Palviya, head-technical and derivatives at Axis Securities.CMP: Rs 299.3OI change in October series: 17.86%Spot price change in October series: -18.27%Concerns over the health of the banking industry have also affected the shares of RBL Bank, which were among the biggest laggards in Tuesday’s sell-off in banking stocks. The stock has fallen over 42% in the last one year compared to a gain of 14.6% in the Bank Nifty during the same period. “It has been making lower top-lower bottom and the trend is in pressure as the stock is trading at its multipleyear low levels. The price pattern suggests build-up of short positions,” said Chandan Taparia, derivative analyst at Motilal Oswal. Taparia expects the stock to fall to Rs 275-Rs 280 in the near term.CMP: Rs 412.6OI change in October series: 17.05%Spot price change in October series: -6.09%The stock is at its lowest level in a year and is seeing build-up of short positions as the drug maker recently received 12 observations from the US Food and Drug Administration for its manufacturing facility in Goa. Brokerage Edelweiss believes that risks are priced in, and has upgraded the stock to ‘buy’ from ‘hold’ while retaining target price of Rs 500. “Though branded franchise in India, private label in South Africa and generic business in the US are on track, volatile performance has led to valuation de-rating... the company’s performance will normalise from H2FY20 and accelerate from FY21,” said Edelweiss. However, the outlook for Cipla remains bearish on technical charts. “Outlook is bearish for Cipla as it has broken important support level of Rs 457. We have seen follow-up correction. One has to see the level of Rs 433 being crossed for a minor short covering bounce,” said Porwal of Ashika Stock Broking.CMP: Rs 493.9OI change in October series: 11.82%Spot price change in October series: 5.13%The stock has been gaining momentum, led by short covering, amid news that the government may off-load stake in the refiner and fuel retailer to foreign and private firms as part of its strategic disinvestment plan for this year. “With a Committee of Secretaries recommending BPCL’s complete stake sale... we think the likelihood of its privatisation has considerably increased,” said Nomura, retaining a ‘buy’ rating with target price of Rs 480. “If there is significant investor interest, on our preliminary estimates, we think the valuation for the deal could easily be Rs 750-850/share,” added Nomura. One can buy the stock around Rs 480 levels for a target of Rs 535-Rs 540 in the next 10 to 20 days, said Palviya of Axis Securities. Palviya advises keeping a stop loss of Rs 465.
