Raids conducted at 9 locations in Delhi after 'red alert' over potential JeM terror strikes

Delhi Police special cell personnel conducted raids at 9 locations in NCR on Wednesday | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights A red alert was issued in Delhi after an intelligence note warned of 3-4 JeM terrorists entering Delhi Raids were conducted at Seelampur, North East, Jamia Nagar, Paharganj and other areas

New Delhi: A special cell of Delhi Police conducted raids at nine locations in the Delhi-National Capital Region (NCR) after an intelligence input warned of the possibility of the presence of terrorists in the region.

Delhi Police special cell moved swiftly after the A-category threat was issued on the possibility of ‘three to four highly-motivated terrorists’ from the terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) entering the NCR region.

A red alert was sounded after the intelligence note warned that JeM terrorists might strike at certain locations in Delhi in retaliation of abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution scrapping the special status of Jammu & Kashmir.

The raids by Delhi Police special cell started late Wednesday night in Seelampur, North East, Jamia Nagar, Paharganj area and a few other locations of Delhi.

Delhi Police Special Cell is conducting raids at several locations in the city after receiving inputs on likely terror strike. pic.twitter.com/ctXXro53Rd — ANI (@ANI) October 3, 2019

“Terrorist could belong to To JeM and have come here for or execution of any attack,” as per the input.

Delhi police personnel and sleuths of intelligence agencies conducted the raids across nine locations in Delhi starting 9 pm Wednesday.

It was earlier reported that security was beefed up at defence installations after an ‘orange’ terror alert was issued for the national capital.

Last month it was reported that a module of around 8-10 JeM terrorists might carry out a suicide attack against the Indian Air Force (IAF) in and around Jammu and Kashmir, intelligence agencies warned on September 25.

Air Force bases in Srinagar, Awantipora, Jammu (all in Jammu and Kashmir) Pathankot (in Punjab), Hindon (in Uttar Pradesh) have been put on a high alert at ‘orange level’. Government sources have said that senior officers are reviewing the security arrangements round the clock to tackle the threat. The alert was sent out after intelligence agencies monitored the movements of Jaish terrorists.
