Ola driver abandons woman on road at 3:30 am, 'emergency button' of no help

Police said that they asked the cab aggregators' service not to let drivers take the Begur Road once it is dark. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman was asked to step out of the cab on the poorly lit road after she insisted the driver to change the route The woman pressed the 'emergency button' on the Ola app at around 3:30 am The driver called his supervisor and told him in Kannada that the woman passenger was drunk

Bengaluru: A senior manager with a software company on her way back from Kempegoda International Airport (KIA) was abandoned by a driver of the cab aggregator service Ola at 3:30 am on Monday. The woman was asked to step out of the cab on the poorly lit road after she insisted the driver to change the route.

The incident happened nearly two months after a 32-year-old Kolkata model and event manager was murdered by her cabbie on Bengur Road. The woman was on the way to KIA from her Electronics City home when the incident happened.

According to a report in this case, the victim boarded her cab at 3:18 am from the airport to her residence i Indiranagar, after she landed from a trip to Colombo. The 32-year-old woman recalled that within 10 minutes of the journey, she realised that the driver was not taking the usual route via tolled NH-44. He instead was driving towards the Begur Road. When the woman asked him to turn around and take the tolled road, the driver responded he would only follow the map. Asking him again to change the route, she told the driver that there is no highway and NH-44 is the right way.

The incident reminded her of the Kolkata woman who was murdered around July 31, she added. The woman then raised an alarm and pressed the 'emergency button' on the Ola app at around 3:30 am. The driver then asked the woman to get off the cab. Meanwhile, the driver called his supervisor and told him in Kannada language that the woman passenger is drunk and wasn't letting him drive and follow the map.

At this time, the woman got off the cab. The victim recalled, the driver did not agree to drop her back to the airport, instead, he dropped her on a deserted road with no streetlights. The woman then called a friend who deboarded at KIA along with her and asked him to pick her up. Meanwhile, after pressing the Emergency button the woman received a support call but shockingly, the call was put on hold saying it would be transferred to the supervisor and later they allegedly hung up.

On Monday evening, the woman reached the KIA police station narrating the incident. Police said that they had asked the cab aggregators' service not to let drivers take the Begur Road once it is dark.
