How to find Gandhi today: Column by Ashis Nandy

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi

Hind Swaraj

Martin Luther King

Nelson Mandela

Prime Minister Narendra Modi pays tribute to Father of Nation Mahatma Gandhi on his 150th birth anniversary at Parliament House

It is’s misfortune that he has become an icon in India — as a symbol of honesty and non-violence, projecting a utopia that modern India has nothing to do with. As a result, Gandhi has become a highly venerable, saintly person who has no practical significance in everyday life and politics.His birthday is now an “official” event, where you take your family to listen to bhajans in the morning and tame, didactic speeches in the evening. And you think that you have done your duty. Nothing much of Gandhi has remained in Indian public life.For instance, Gandhi said armed nationalism was no different from imperialism. This stance cannot even be mentioned in India today. Gandhi’s avowed guru, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, once said that Gandhi’s bookwas the work of a lunatic; it went against everything that the great sons of India had said.Yes, Gandhi remained an unapologetic dissenter. When, during his last days, an American journalist asked him whether he would change anything in his fierce critique of modern civilisation in Hind Swaraj, Gandhi said he wouldn’t change even a word. The official Gandhi today has now become a pale shadow of his own self — benign, saintly, house-broken and perfectly irrelevant to daily life and normal politics.Gandhi was not merely a person. He was a representative strand of our culture. He has survived as a vector in our public lives and as a dangerous, demanding part of our collective conscience. Rulers everywhere fear him because the most successful movements against autocracy in the last 70 years have been led by people who have been called Gandhians, fromin the United States toin South Africa and Lech Walesa in Poland to the Dalai Lama of Tibet.Whenever people launch successful movements that are peaceful and non-violent yet effective, they are called Gandhian. In this sense, Gandhi is also a universal propensity.To complicate matters, the strand of consciousness Gandhi represents in global politics is clearly androgynous. His fight was always against hyper-masculinity and his location of his androgynous self was set not in the context of conjugality but maternity. It is not surprising that his granddaughter, Manuben, when she wrote a book on her grandfather, titled it Gandhi, My Mother.In this hyper-masculine India with its phallocentric set of political leaders, Gandhi cannot but be a threat with his distinctive concepts of courage and bravery. Till the last day of his life, despite four or five earlier attempts on his life, he refused to accept any security. It was as if he was inviting death as his final contribution to a humane India committed to daya, karuna and caritas.It did not need any courage to kill him, an unarmed, unprotected person daring to face his assassins’ bullets as a sacrificial victim on behalf of that other India, marginalised by a gang of cowardly, conspiratorial, brainwashed young men who were convinced that by killing Gandhi, they had killed his ideas.A few weeks ago, I had the chance of seeing an old cartoon drawn and published after Martin Luther King was shot dead. It shows Gandhi saying to King: “The odd thing about assassins, Dr King, is that they think they have killed you.” This cartoon should be redrawn for India, with King saying to Gandhi: “The odd thing about anarchists is that they think they have killed you, Mr Gandhi.”The grandeur of Gandhi’s icchamrutyu — self-chosen death — has given him a different kind of longevity that he himself, with his wish to live for 25 years, had not dreamt of. It was his last and most lasting intervention in Indian politics.Until now, I have not answered the question implicit in the title of this essay. Here it is: To find your Gandhi, look within.The writer is an acclaimed political psychologist, social theorist and critic
