Murder of ISRO employee Suresh Kumar in Hyderabad: Police detain one suspect

Murder of ISRO employee Suresh Kumar in Hyderabad: Police detain one suspect

The suspect, Srinivas, working in a diagnostic centre would regularly visit Suresh at his apartment.

news Crime

A day after the murder of ISRO employee S Suresh Kumar, who was working in the photography department of National Remote Sensing Centre, came to light, the SR Nagar police have detained one suspect in the crime. According to police, it was a pre-planned murder.

Suresh was found dead in his apartment in Ameerpet on Tuesday. The ISRO employee was staying alone in the apartment, as his wife Indira, a bank employee was working in Chennai, and his daughter and son were away.

According to The New Indian Express, based on call data, the probe officials have detained a person identified as Srinivas. The apartment's watchman also told police that Srinivas would regularly visit Suresh at his flat.

Srinivas works in a diagnostic centre. Police suspect that Srinivas must have visited Suresh's flat on Monday night, the day of the crime.

“Suresh returned home from the office at around 5.30 pm on Monday. Around 7.30 pm, Suresh called a friend, Prabhakar, to enquire about the cost of a washing machine spare parts. That was the last call made by the victim. His phone was switched off sometime later during the night,” a police official told the Times of India.

A police official working in the case told TNIE that it was a pre-planned murder. “We are probing the case based on the call data of Suresh's mobile. Hours after Suresh arrived in the city from Ahmedabad, he talked with someone known to him. We are also scanning the CCTV of the apartment to probe the case.”

Suresh’s death came to light when the house help who visited the apartment found the flat locked from outside. Later, his wife and employees tried reaching but to no avail. As the house remained locked, the neighbours who grew suspicious alerted police at 11.30 am.

After police broke into the apartment, they found Suresh’s body with injuries to his head. His body was shifted to Gandhi hospital for post mortem.
