Man stabbed for asking neighbour to keep distance from wife

Ludhiana: Two years after their fight, a man stabbed a labourer in the labour quarter of New Ashok Nagar of Salem Tabri on Tuesday night. The man was sleeping in one room accommodation with wife and children when the accused barged into his room and escaped after injuring the man with knife. It is alleged that the victim had told the accused to maintain distance from his wife which triggered the fight earlier.The injured has been identified as Dinesh Kumar, 35. He is married to Priayanka Devi, 29, and the couple has three children.In his complaint to police, Priyanka said she along with her husband and children had been living in the labour quarters for the past eight years. The accused Ajay Kumar of Beer Banda village of Uttar Pradesh started living in the quarters three years ago. Initially, Dinesh and Ajay had cordial relations as Dinesh had helped Ajay in getting a job.She said Ajay befriended her, but her husband Dinesh did not like Ajay’s friendly behaviour. Following his objections, she started avoiding Ajay. Dinesh also asked Ajay to maintain distance from his wife, which triggered an argument and both had a quarrel. Dinesh left the accommodation and started living in Salem Tabri area. Priyanak alleged that Ajay developed animosity against Dinesh and once threatened to teach Dinesh a lesson.ASI Janak Raj, investigating officer from Salem Tabri police station, said on Tuesday when Priyanka and Dinesh were sleeping along with their kids in the room, Ajay barged in and attacked Dinesh with a knife for at least six times in the face, neck and arms. In the meantime, Priyanka woke up and raised the alarm. Other residents of labour quarters rushed to the spot. They locked Ajay in the same room and took Dinesh to the civil hospital from where he was referred to a private hospital.The ASI said Ajay broke open the window of room and managed to flee, leaving his scooter outside labour quarters.The police have lodged FIR against Ajay Kumar, 25, under Section 307 ( attempt to murder ) of the IPC. The police are trying to trace the accused.Condition of Dinesh, who is undergoing treatment in the hospital, is stated to be stable.
