No idol immersion in Ganga and its tributaries, violators to pay Rs 50,000 fine, says Centre

Meanwhile, the authorities have also asked the chief secretaries of the 11 states to submit an action-taken report within seven days from the end of each festival | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The 15-point directive has been issued by the National Mission for Clean Ganga The meeting was attended by the officials from Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal Adequate arrangements should be made for designated idol-immersion sites within the municipal area or bank of river Ganga

New Delhi: The central government has issued a directive cordoning off ghats and imposing a fine of Rs 50,000 for immersing idols in the Ganga river and its tributaries.

The 15-point directive has been issued by the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) to the chief secretaries in 11 Ganga basin states. The directive stated that "No idol immersion into river Ganga and its tributaries and on their banks". It was issued after a meeting between the representatives of states and MMCG officials last month.

According to a report, the meeting was attended by the officials from Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal. The directive has also been issued to Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Haryana and Rajasthan.

Reportedly, the officials have been guided to strictly implement the rules against the idol immersion and disposal of puja material in the river and its tributaries. The directive has been issued under the section-5 of The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

The directive also stated that "River Bank and Ghats should be Rs 50,000 fine for idol immersion in Ganga, tributaries: Centre to states cordoned off and barricaded to prevent any stray immersion of idols in the river or its banks. Adequate arrangements should be made for designated idol-immersion sites within the municipal area or bank of river Ganga and its tributaries by constructing temporary confined ponds with removable synthetic liners at the bottom.”

Meanwhile, the authorities have also asked the chief secretaries of the 11 states to submit an action-taken report within seven days from the end of each festival (Durga Puja, Diwali, Chath Puja, Saraswati Puja, Vishwakarma Puja and Ganesh Chaturthi). The NMCG has also directed that District Magistrates enforce these directions by ensuring monitoring and enforcement of the rules and regulations. During these festive occasions, a sudden spurt in pollutants has been recorded.
