Speaker of the House of Representatives of Parliament of Malaysia call on President Dr. Arif Alvi

Islamabad, October 02, 2019 (PPI-OT): President Dr. Arif Alvi said that India’s illegal and unilateral alteration of the disputed status of Indian occupied Jammu and Kashmir (IoJ and K) and its demographic structure contravenes numerous UNSC resolutions, international law and India’s own prior commitments. Jammu and Kashmir was not an internal matter of India, rather it was a longstanding internationally recognized dispute on the agenda of the United Nations Security Council, he added. The President said this while talking to a delegation of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of Malaysia, led by the Speaker, Sri Dato’ Mohamad Ariff Bin Md Yusof, who called on him at the Aiwan-e-Sadr, Islamabad today.

Speaker, National Assembly, Asad Qaiser was also present on the occasion. The President informed the delegation that India had deployed 900,000 troops in (IoJ and K) and there had been a clampdown in (IoJ and K), with continued curfew, communications blockade and a severe shortage of food and medicines since 05th August 2019. This serious human rights and humanitarian situation was accompanied by grave risks to peace and security, he added. He said that Indian fascist regime was alienating the minorities through its fascist policies and had given the RSS extremists a license to kill.

He further said that there was possibility of false flag operations by India, imperiling peace in the region. He hoped that Malaysia would play its rightful role in highlighting the issue at all international fora to help prevent threats to peace and security and facilitate a peaceful resolution of Jammu and Kashmir dispute. The President also appreciated the leadership of Turkey, Malaysia, and Pakistan for establishing an English news channel to effectively highlight the message of Islam and combat Islamophobia.

He also appreciated Malaysia for its support to Pakistan on Kashmir at UNGA, on FATF and ASEAN. President Dr. Arif Alvi said that Pakistan and Malaysia enjoyed friendly and cordial relations, which had been further cemented by the recent high level visits from both sides. Both countries had a convergence of views on world affairs that translated into cooperation and support for each other at various international fora, he added. He further said that the existing friendly ties would be further strengthened to the mutual benefit of the people of our two countries in the years ahead.

For more information, contact:

Principal Information Officer,

Press Information Department (PID)

Tel: +92-51-9252323, +92-51-9252324

Fax: +92-51-9252325, +92-51-9252326

Email: piopid@gmail.com

Website: www.pid.gov.pk
