Amazon’s web series raises a toast to women’s vigour

BHUBANESWAR: As the internet buzzes with various modern shows, ‘Four more shots Please’ narrates a fresh story of both feminists and non-feminists having a field day in the city. Women of the capital seem to have developed a strong connect with the new show.

The story revolves around four young women who are sexy, smart and fiercely independent with a mind of their own. However, reality has other things in store for them as men of the society offer them stiff challenge in living their dreams.

In such a scenario, their only solace is ‘Truck Bar’ where they have Tequilas to sort out their own problems. The first 10 episodes have already captured the imagination of young viewers. Orissa Post interacted with a few youngsters to delve deeper into the subject.

Urvasi Chaina, an entrepreneur residing at Patia, said, “I am in love with this new series. Although it has some traces of ‘Sex and the City’, the Indian adaptation and character treatment is unique. Finally, India is discussing topics like orgasm, sex and LGBT. I sincerely hope that authorities won’t ban the show due to adult content.”

Rati (name changed) who is in a lesbian relationship with her fiancée Nirmala (name changed) feels that it’s time to recognise the LGBQT community, especially lesbians. “My parents have accepted my relationship. However, I am still fearful as my girlfriend’s parents are yet to discover it. The best part of such shows and movies is that these are changing the way society perceives such issues,” she said.

Counsellor Nikita Bhatia said, “Four friends want to adore life on their own terms and conditions while enjoying heady self-indulgent pleasures of the world. They celebrate trivial, hard-earned victories or drown crappy woes with endless rounds of shots at the bar, hence the name of the show. Kirti Kulhari, Sayani Gupta, Maanvi Gagroo and Bani J have been truly kick-ass in their respective roles.”

Apart from the hot women brigade, the natural acting of Prateek Babbar (Bar Owner), Neil Bhoopalam (as an immature husband), Milind Soman (Gynaecology professional) has enhanced the appeal of the show.
