Jaish terror shadowon festival eve

Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) commander Abu Usman held a meeting at an apple orchard in J&K’s Bandipore 5-6 days ago to announce that the people of Kashmir will soon hear good news of big attacks in Jammu and Delhi as our brothers have already reached these places. This information is part of a threat report shared by Intelligence teams with multiple agencies, including the Delhi Police, on Wednesday. MAIL TODAY has accessed a copy of the report.

One Pakistani and two Kashmiri terrorists, carrying AK-47 rifles, pistols and grenades, were present at the meeting with Usman who had a sniper rifle with him, says the report that has put the input in A’ category (highly reliable) and identified many potential targets.

Here’s the real threat: four JeM terrorists have already entered Delhi and are planning to strike during the festival season, inputs received by security agencies have revealed. An alarmed Delhi Police’s Special Cell has carried out raids at more than 20 locations in Delhi-NCR.

Cops are also reported to have picked up a few suspects, said sources. Based on their confessions, besides human and tech surveillance, more raids are being conducted.

The operation will continue till all terror suspects are nabbed, said a senior official. Raids have been carried in areas of Southeast, Central and Northeast Delhi, multiple police sources have confirmed. Some of the precise locations include Seelampur, Jamia and Paharganj. Some residents there have also been spoken to, sources said. Security has been beefed up in a highly unusual way. About 20,000 additional cops have been deployed. Special teams are guarding markets, schools, malls, Metro stations, Akshardham Temple and Ramlila venues in city, said an official.

Vande Bharat Express (or Delhi-Katra Train 18), flagged off by Home Minister Amit Shah on Thursday, is also a potential target, sources said. About 3,000 cops are doing foot patrol and 250 PCR vans and 2,000 motorbikes, besides sniffer dog squads, have been pressed into service. Sanjay Singh, Special Commissioner of Police (Law & Order), North Zone, was himself part of a night patrolling on Wednesday. Hotels, guesthouses and PG accommodations are being scanned for suspects.

Some tenants and workers, who recently came here, are under the scanner. Social networking sites are also being scanned for hate comments and posts, said police sources, adding that suspects have gone underground. CCTV monitoring of all vital areas is also being done 24x7. There are also threats to Delhi’s IGIA 29 other airports in other cities as inputs include an apparent Jaish threat letter received by the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security. It talks about revenge for the government's Article 370 abrogation decision. Senior officials are doing regular checks at vital installations and VIP routes. With human and tech surveillance, Delhi’s sensitive areas like India Gate and Vijay Chowk are being monitored 24x7, said Eish Singhal, DCP (New Delhi).

INDIA ON ALERT TOO

Security agencies have received multiple inputs in recent weeks about possible terror attacks in retaliation to the government's decision to end special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 and split it into two union territories. India has been in a state of high alert after intel warnings of a terror plan to target Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval.

The home ministry has put 30 major cities on alert. The Indian Air Force (IAF) is also alert to threats to frontline bases following multi-agency inputs. An "orange alert", which is a notch lower than the highest state of emergency, is in place at important installations and security has been tightened at IAF bases in Srinagar, Awantipora, Jammu, Pathankot and Hindon near Delhi. According to inputs, JeM has been plotting a suicide attack on airbases.

Also read: Delhi on alert after intel warning of 4 Jaish terrorists entering capital

ALSO WATCH| Jaish terror threat: Security heightened at Srinagar, Amritsar, Pathankot airports
