Here's How You Can See Objects Invisible To Naked Eye Using This New Laser Technology & Carrots!

We have all been told by our elders that we should eat carrots because they are good for our eyes. They help strengthen our eye vision. But could they help see invisible items? Scientists at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras have done a research and proved that carrots can even help us see objects that are invisible to the naked eye.

Times Of India reported that carrots can turn out to be an effective medium to produce a bio-compatible laser with application in photonics, a branch of technology dealing with photons (light).

When a research scholar named Venkata Siva Gummaluri was shooting a blue laser light onto a processed carbon, it turned out to be a scattered laser light in the green-to-red wavelengths. This was a small step towards the first successful experiment in the development of photonic technologies using green materials.

Photo: Times Of India

“At present, nobody uses a biological material to produce lasers. This doesn’t replace existing technology, but here is the possibility of generating biocompatible lasers using carrots,” said a Physics faculty member C Vijayan.

The experimental process first involves washing a piece of carrot and cooking it in ethanol or alcohol. A continuous wave of blue laser light is shot through the carrot which upon absorption produced greenish-reddish wavelengths.

Scientists have termed this process as ‘Kitchen Laser’ because it makes use of edible materials instead of any optics. This effect was first observed by Nobel winning physicist from Chennai C V Raman in 1922, just that it has happened with a vegetable this time.

The kitchen laser technique can, therefore, be used in temperature sensing, like a thermometer, as the light emitted shows a linear response to temperature. It can also be used in bioimaging like microscopy which is used in research labs and in diagnostic equipment. The development has shown that green materials can be used to develop photonic technologies.
