Indian Banks Are Not Doing Enough to Address Climate Change, Shows Analysis

Representational image (SL Shanth Kumar / BCCL, Navi Mumbai)

Even as Indian banks are battling the economic issues of non-performing assets, over-dues, and capital inadequacy, another huge threat is lurking around the corner: climate change.

According to the first edition of Fair Finance Guide India released this week, Indian banks fail on policies of environment and human rights. Fair Finance India is a civil society-led coalition aiming to ensure sustainability in the Indian financial sector. As per the assessment, the failure to adopt environmental policies are making the banks vulnerable to investment risks due to climate emergencies.

The organisation scored top eight Indian banks based on their environmental, social and governance (ESG) policies. The scorecard shows that the banks do have policies on financial inclusion and corruption. However, climate change, human rights, labour rights and nature have taken a back seat in the banking policy domain.

Advertisement Even globally, the majority of the largest banks have failed to make sustainable finance commitments in response to climate change. As per the new findings from the World Resource Institute released on Thursday, only 23 of the world's 50 largest private banks have committed to financing projects for sustainable energy. Even among these 23, only seven banks have sustainable finance targets higher than the investment they make for fossil fuel-related sectors.

Seven out of the eight banks in India have scored zero on climate change and nature. Being a tropical country, India is slated to be one of the worst-hit due to environmental calamities. While the government policies encourage private sector companies to invest more in climate change mitigation, the failure of financial institutions in the country to focus on this pressing issue is alarming.

The Fair Finance India assessed the banks based on their own emissions and the emissions from the companies that they finance. The scorecard recommends that the financial institutions must "establish measurable reduction objectives in line with the 2°C limit(and further to 1.5°C) set in the Paris Agreement, for their financed emissions."

"Banks can choose to support companies that support living wages, integrate labour rights in their supply chains, respect human rights and protect the environment. This way, the banking sector can contribute to making India a truly sustainable and inclusive economy," the report said.
