Ola driver held after B’luru woman's complaint over use of alternate route from airport

Ola driver held after B’luru woman's complaint over use of alternate route from airport

The woman had filed a complaint against the driver who had dropped her on an abandoned area on Begur road while coming into the city from the airport.

news Arrest

Bengaluru police have arrested an Ola cab driver following a complaint given by a 32-year-old woman from the city who had filed a complaint after he opted to take an alternative route while coming into the city from the Kempegowda International Airport.

It all began on Monday when the woman Shikha*, was travelling in an Ola cab from Bengaluru’s Kempegowda International Airport. She noticed within minutes of the ride that the driver was not taking the NH44 route and was instead going towards the BK Halli-Bagalur route. She asked the driver to stop the car and repeatedly pressed the emergency button. She was in an empty and isolated area and asked the driver to call his supervisor. Not only did he refuse, but he also asked her to get out of the car.

Shikha claimed that she received no help from Ola for over two hours and that she finally managed to call a friend who was leaving from the airport and got a ride with them. She then filed a complaint at the Bengaluru Airport police station, but said that an FIR had not been filed as there was “no offence.”

The airport police have also issued a notice to Ola and have reportedly asked them to respond within two days.

After the woman's complaint, DCP (northeast) Bheemashankar S Guled had stated: "We have already taken a case against the concerned at Airport station on 30th itself.Ola cabbie has been identified and secured sir. There is a lacuna on the part of Ola as a service provider and will be dealt as well."

The police said the driver had claimed he was following the map.

Earlier, Police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao warned cab aggregators against ignoring commuter safety. "We will initiate action against Ola for ignoring passengers’ security despite repeated directives. The aggregator has been told to ensure its vehicles don’t take Begur Road from KIA at night as the stretch lacks streetlights," ToI reported.

Rao had also tweeted, “Women’s Safety is paramount. We will identify the Ola Cabbie who offloaded a Lady in the middle of night near Begur endangering her Safety. Rest assured, will take action and Revert (sic)."

Many cab drivers opt to take the BK Halli-Bagalur instead of the NH44 road as this alternate road allows them to reach the airport quicker from areas like Whitefield. Additionally, drivers are also able to avoid paying the toll on NH44.

This isn’t the first time that a passenger’s safety has been threatened while traveling on this road. Earlier in August, a 32-year-old model from Kolkata was murdered by a cab driver who allegedly tried to rob her. The driver was later arrested by the police and he confessed to the crime.

"Safety of customers is a top priority for us and we have taken several proactive measures in this regard such as multiple levels of driver verification, 24/7 helpline, in-app emergency button to name a few. We are closely working with the authorities to further integrate solutions that will help create a safe and reliable mobility experience in our cities," Ola said in a statement.

Name changed*
