As D-Street biggies get bigger, value emerging across market

Bajaj Finance | Buy | Target Price: Rs 4,550 With the upcoming festive season and several planned online and offline mega sales events ahead, Emkay Global has named Bajaj Finance as the best bet to play the India consumption story. The brokerage maintained that both AUM and EPS CAGRs of ~36% over FY19-21E (after adjusting for tax cuts), backed by a solid cross-selling franchise and a high-quality sourcing mechanism. The company's board has approved a QIP worth Rs 8,500 crore, which provides comfort over its valuations. The brokerage upgraded FY20/21 EPS estimates by ~10%/9%. Key downside risks include elevated consumer leverage and prolonged rural distress.



(Source: Emkay Global)

NMDC | Buy | Target Price: Rs 140 The latest amendments made by the government in Mineral Rules, 2015 provide a shot in the arm for NMDC. Edelweiss is of the view the changes have far-reaching impact as they: 1) are likely to facilitate a resumption of the Donimalai mine; and 2) will set a precedence for renewal of other mines of NMDC and other PSUs. Earlier, the Karnataka High Court had struck down the state government’s demand for an 80% premium. The brokerage now believes there is little room for ambiguity on renewals going ahead. Donimalai resumption would be EPS accretive to the extent of 12-15% on an annualized basis, the brokerage said.



(Source: Edelweiss)

Oracle Financial | BUY | Target Price: Rs 3,910 This stock has underperformed the Nifty IT Index by 26% YTD and trades at 15.1 times 12-month forward EPS, a 34% discount to the 5-year median. JM Financial finds the pessimism excessive. OFSS should sustain at-least 12% FCF CAGR over FY19-22 on stable margin and cash-conversion (67% OCF/Ebitda) assumptions which translate to a healthy 6% dividend yield (at c.100% pay-out); could be higher given the nil pay-out in FY19 (ostensibly to evaluate a share buy-back) and Rs 386 cash per share.



(Source: JM Financial)

Brigade Enterprises | Buy | Target Price: Rs 245 Motilal Oswal remains confident about Brigade’s commercial and residential growth. The firm's annuity income (excluding CAM) from office and retail is likely to increase from Rs 2.5 billion in FY19 to Rs 5.3 billion in FY22E (BRGD’s share) while residential segment growth will be driven by launches in affordable and mid-income segment, the brokerage said. The pace of under construction work at one of its key projects (BTG in Bengaluru) and project velocity of its first AFH offering (El Dorado) is likely to help the company in tracing the right growth path.



(Source: Motilal Oswal Financial Services)
