Karnataka: Farmer commits suicide after losing entire crop

CHIKKAMAGLURU: A paddy farmer, who lost his crop in the floods in August, committed suicide by consuming poison in Chikkamagaluru district ’s Mudigere taluk, about 260 km from Bengaluru, on Wednesday night.Locals claimed Chandregowda, 53, who lived in SK Megal village, a part of Samse gram panchayat , had been depressed following the crop loss and feared that he would not get adequate compensation.This is the second farmer suicide in the district in the past month. On September 14, Channappagowda, a farmer in Kargadde village, shot himself dead.Wednesday’s tragedy is likely to intensify the criticism of the BS Yediyurappa government, which has been accused of failing to promptly secure financial assistance from the Centre for flood relief and rehabilitation.As the news of Chandregowda’s reached more villages, upset farmers shut down Kalasa town, a little over an hour’s drive from Mudigere, demanding that the state and central governments act quickly. They threatened to march to Bengaluru if funds for flood relief were not released soon.Kalasa police, whose jurisdiction covers Chandregowda’s village, took a formal complaint from his elder son, Shashi Kumar, who said Chandregowda consumed poison after dinner.“In his statement, Kumar, said paddy grown on one acre of the family’s field was washed away. Chandregowda had encroached on two to three acres of adjoining land for farming. Crops on this area were also destroyed,” an officer said. “Kumar said his father was upset as he thought he would not get any compensation for the damage on the encroached land.”Many farmers in the region use vacant plots beside their fields to grow crops. The government does not consider this encroached area as part of their landholding and pays compensation for crop loss only on the land they own.Ganesh Gowda, the son of Chandregowda’s elder brother, alleged none of the government agencies offered him monetary relief after the floods. “Uncle was very sad after the crop loss. He had borrowed Rs 1.5 lakh in the name of his children for agriculture,” Ganesh said.Yamuna MB, panchayat development officer, Samse, said the village accountant visited Chandregowda’s house and paddy fields in August itself. “There was no damage to his house or cow shed, so no compensation was paid (for property). Agricultural loss was assessed, and an application was sent for consideration of flood relief,” she said.Citing a conversation with his son, Yamuna claimed Chandregowda had not been depressed. “I spoke to his son today (Thursday) and he informed me Chandregowda was not under depression and there were no obvious signs of trouble. After dinner on Wednesday, he retired to his room,” she said.She added: “Chandregowda’s son told me his father was upset because the government doesn’t offer compensation for crops destroyed on encroached land.”
