Sanjay Nirupam launches blistering attack on Gandhis, says Congress disconnected from ground reality

Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Senior Maharashtra Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam on Friday launched a blistering attack on the party leadership, saying it was disconnected from the ground reality. A day after Nirupam announced that he will "not campaign" for the Congress for the October 21 Assembly Elections in Maharashtra, the senior leader also said the party was not even prepared for the polls.

Alleging that he was being mistreated and his suggestions were being ignored, Nirupam, who was once the Congress state president, said he might be forced to quit the party if things do not change.

“I don't think I would want to leave the party. But if things within the party continue to be like this, then I don't think I can be in the party for long. I will not take part in election campaign,” Nirupam said.

Nirupam, a three-time MP, had yesterday made the announcement about not campaigning for the party after his suggestion for nominating at least one Muslim or minority candidate from each district in Maharashtra was rejected by the party.

Today, while addressing a press conference, Nirupam alleged a conspiracy and said people working under interim Congress president Sonia Gandhi were biased.

“I believe every district should have at least one Muslim candidate. People sitting in Delhi are not realising it. While some districts have 3-3 candidates each, other do not have even one,” he said, referring to his recommendation for fielding a Muslim candidate from Versova which was rejected.

“The candidate who has been selected is old and has no track record,” he said.

Nirupam rued the lask of system in the party for selection of candidates.

“Congress doesn’t have a system anymore. No survey is done, no ground feedback taken. Decisions are being taken sitting in Delhi. My suggestions about candidates for four seats were rejected, I wasn’t even consulted,” Nirupam said further.

Indicating that he might not stay for long in the party, the former Maharashtra chief said: “I want the Congress party to make a comeback across the country. I want to work for the party in future as well but the way I am being treated, it would not be long that I might be forced to quit.”

“The party leadership has to learn, it has to change according to the changed circumstances,” he added.

He even challenged the party to sack him if it thought he had crossed the line.

Post Nirupam's announcement yesterday, there was speculation that he might cross over to the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and contest from Borivali Assembly seat. However, the Congress leader has refused to comment on this.
