After four years in separate jails, Peter, Indrani end 17-yr marriage

MUMBAI: A 17-year marriage with a unique estrangement behind bars ended with a mutual consent divorce on Thursday for Indrani and Peter Mukerjea , both accused in the 2012 murder of Indrani’s daughter Sheena Bora Peter, a former media honcho, is 63 and Indrani is 16 years his junior. She turns 48 next January. They were arrested in 2015 and have been in separate jails since.Principal judge S S Sawant of the Bandra family court granted them divorce by mutual consent. This plea has a six-month cooling-off period, at the end of which the court assesses if the consent still exists and grants a decree after ensuring compliance of the consent terms.The couple came and left in separate police vans on Thursday for the amicable divorce proceeding. Indrani was the first to arrive at noon, with four policewomen escorts. She was barefoot, and wore white kameez and white jeans with a yellow dupatta. She is observing the Navratri fast and yellow was Thursday’s colour according to a popular ‘festive code’.Peter reached 45 minutes later. He was slimmer, had a wide belt strapped around him below his chest, and a white cloth belt with Velcro for his trousers—leather belts are banned in jails. He recently underwent heart surgery.The two had filed a joint plea for divorce through their lawyer Edith Dey last October. “It was an amicable divorce with both cooperating during the proceedings,” said Dey after the proceedings.The consent terms include flats in Mumbai and Goa, properties in Marbella in Spain and England, bank accounts, jewellery, watches, Tiffany and Bristol Blue lamps and Picasso prints.Dey later said: “They stand finally divorced. The court perused all documents to see the compliance of consent term and granted divorce on being satisfied that it was a fit case for divorce.”The compliance required her share of a Goa flat to be given to daughter Vidhi, some slight amendments were made to ensure effective execution and affidavits were filed. The entire process took a few hours and the divorce was granted minutes after 6pm. The last joint counselling session for both lasted about an hour with the principal marriage counsellor.The police had arrested Indrani in August 2015 and filed a chargesheet against her, her driver Shyamvar Rai—who later turned approver and state witness—and her former husband Sanjeev Khanna in the murder case of Sheena, her biological daughter with her first partner. Indrani had claimed Sheena was her sister.The day the police chargesheeted the trio in November 2015, they also arrested Peter and charged him too with murder and conspiracy in the case.The couple spent three years since, separated by jail yards and cells in the same neighbourhood. Indrani is in Byculla women’s jail and he in Arthur Road prison. Their common meeting ground has been the regular visits to trial court for the murder trial before special trial judge J C Jaddale.This April, Peter underwent a bypass surgery for complete blockage of one major artery and major blockages in a few others. As a result, the six-month cooling off period passed with him in post-operative rehabilitation. While his heart healed, the marriage solemnised in November 2002, his second, now stands broken.On the walls outside the courtroom, handwritten posters on yellow paper said: “There is no love in marriage. Love is in people and people put love in marriage.” And another said, “No relationship is all sunshine, but two people can share one umbrella and survive the storm together.” The Mukerjeas now no longer joined by marriage will, however, continue to be in court together to face the criminal trial.
