Gandhi’s ashes stolen on his 150th birthday by thieves who scrawl ‘traitor’ on a poster of his at Indian memorial

THIEVES have stolen Mahatma Gandhi's ashes and scrawled "traitor" over a poster of the "father of the nation" on what would have been his 150th birthday.

The remains were stolen on Wednesday from the Bapu Bahwan memorial in Madhya Pradesh, central India where they had been since 1948.

3 The word 'traitor' was graffitied over a poster of Gandhi and his ashes were stolen Credit: Kashif Kakvi

Police confirmed they were investigating the theft on a breach of the peace and grounds "prejudicial to national integration."

The devout Hindu icon continues to spark controversy among some hardliners who believe he was a "traitor" for promoting Hindu-Muslim unity.

Mangaldeep Tiwari, caretaker of the Bapu Bhawan memorial, where the ashes were being held, said the theft was "shameful."

He said: "I opened the gate of the Bhawan early in the morning because it was Gandhi's birthday.

"When I returned at around 23:00 [17:30 GMT], I found the mortal remains of Gandhi missing and his poster was defaced."

Gurmeet Sing, leader of the local Congress political party filed a police complaint following the theft and vandalism.

He told The Wire: "This madness must stop, I urge Rewa police to check CCTV cameras installed inside Bapu Bhawan."

HINDU-MUSLIM TENSIONS

Gandhi was shot dead in January, 1948 by Nathuram Vinayak Godse - a right-wing advocate of Hindu nationalism and a member of political party the Hindu Mahasabha.

Godse and accomplice Narayan Apte were sentenced to death following a trial where a statement Godse gave on his motives was banned by the Indian government.

Gandhi, who led the Indian independence movement against British rule promoting ahimsa - non-violence and peace - was cremated with his ashes sent across India for memorial services - with some sent to Bapu Bahwan.

Gandhi had a number of Muslim followers whom he encouraged to join him in the fight against British rule in India.

Inter-religious tensions were high in the country following the British partition of the sub-continent in 1947 into India and Pakistan.

Many lost their lives or were uprooted as a result of ethnic or communal violence.

Gandhi fought in vain against the partition of Hindus and Muslims into two separate states and was publicly against the partition.

However, some hard-line Hindus welcomed the move.

He staged non-violent civil disobedience, organising boycotts against British institutions in a tactic that would influence the world.

The political and spiritual leader famously went on 17 hunger strikes during his long-running freedom campaign, the longest lasting 21 days.

The remains were stolen on the national holiday, Gandhi Jayanti which celebrates the figure's birthday.

WHAT IS GANDHI JAYANTI? The festival is celebrated every year in India on October 2 and is one of the country's three national holidays.

It marks the birth of Indian activist Mahatma Gandhi, who was born October 2, 1869.

The day is marked with prayers and services across India - including Gandhi's memorial in New Delhi where he was cremated.

In June 2007, the UN announced October 2 will be celebrated as the International Day of Non-Violence.

Public buildings, banks and post offices are closed on the day.

3 The 'father of the nation' is a controversial figure for some hardliner Hindus Credit: AFP or licensors

3 A statue of the spiritual leader adorned with flowers Credit: Rex Features

Mahatma Gandh arrives in England to speak to members of the Indian National Party

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at

tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
