[Photo] Rajinikanth wraps up shoot for AR Murugadoss' Darbar

Rajinikanth wraps up shoot for Darbar | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Rajinikanth has wrapped up shoot for his much-awaited film, Darbar Directed by AR Murugadoss, the film is all set to release during Pongal 2020 Check out this photo of Thalaiva and the director on the sets of Darbar here

Rajinikanth’s Darbar has been in the news ever since it was announced. Be it leaked stills from the sets of the show or new posters revealing the actor’s look, every news about him that hits the internet goes viral. The actor has now wrapped up shoot for his highly anticipated film, Darbar. The film will be releasing during Pongal 2020 and the post-production work on the movie will begin soon. A picture of director AR Murugadoss and Thalaiva is doing the rounds on the internet along with the news of the actor wrapping up shoot for the film. Fans are really excited to see him in his cop avatar once again after such a long time.

Nayanthara will be playing the female lead in the film and she finished shooting for the film a while back. A major portion of the film has been shot in Mumbai and even Nayanthara’s look from the film was leaked during the shoot. The film is a complete mass entertainer and we’ll also be seeing Thalaiva romance Nayanthara on the big screen after quite some time. Thalaiva has not signed any other film yet and will reportedly focus on his political career post the film.

Check out this still of Thalaiva with the director on the sets of Darbar.

We are eagerly looking forward to catching the teaser, trailer and songs from the film before it hits the screens. Anirudh Ravichander will be composing music for the film and this will be the second time this year that he will be making music for Thalaiva’s film. He had also composed songs for Petta, which became a hit among fans and on the internet.

The buzz is quite high around Darbar and for all the right reasons. Stay tuned with us for more updates on the film.
