CISF Personnel To Be 'permanently' Deployed At Baglihar Dam In J&K

The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) is all set to have a permanent deployment of more than 300 highly-trained personnel at Baglihar Hydro Electric Power plant in Jammu and Kashmir, which is also one of the most sensitive hydroelectric plants. The CISF is currently guarding the Baglihar plant on a temporary basis. According to sources, more than 300 personnel, who will be headed by a Commandant rank officer, will guard the plant.

"Consistent threats on Baglihar Dam"

The Baglihar Dam is situated in the Ramban district where security forces gunned down two militants along with a top Hizbul Mujahideen commander last week. Construction of the Baglihar Hydro Electric Power plant was also opposed by Pakistan earlier. A senior government official confirmed that the Home Ministry had cleared the file of CISF deployment and the deployment process is underway. "A team of more than 300 personnel has been sanctioned by the government to secure the dam. After threats of several terrorist attacks, CISF was deployed to guard the dam on a temporary basis," he added. Another senior government official also said that there have been consistent threats on Baglihar Dam as Pakistan has opposed its construction claiming it as a violation of the Indus Water Treaty of 1960.

READ | 3 Hizbul Mujahideen Terrorists Arrested In Kishtwar: Jammu IG

READ | CISF Organises Cycle And Bike Rallies To Commemorate Gandhi Jayanti

Pakistan's opposition

According to the sources, due to the sensitivity of the location, 10% of the total CISF deployment in Jammu & Kashmir has been allocated to Baglihar. At present, approximately 3,000 personnel of the CISF battalion have been deployed with the highest deployment of the battalion being at the Uri Dam. A total of around 600 personnel are also guarding Uri-1 and Uri-2 dams, with multiple intel reports regarding attacks on the dam. Before it was resolved in 2010, Pakistan and India held meetings on the design of the dam from 1999 to 2004. Pakistan also raised an objection at the International level.

READ | CISF Seizes Rs. 71 Lakhs Foreign Currency From Passenger In Mumbai

READ | CISF Apprehends 32-year-old Man Posing As 81-year-old At Delhi Airport
