[PHOTO] Balakot airstrike comes to life at Durga Puja pandal in Kolkata

A Durga Puja pandal in central Kolkata has recreated Balakot airstrike with 65 clay models and digital projection. | Image Courtesy: Twitter/SSanyal/ANI

Key Highlights A Durga Puja pandal in central Kolkata has recreated Balakot airstrike As many as 65 models have been crafted by artisans from East Midnapore district The pandal's key attraction is a life-size model of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman

Kolkata: A Durga Puja committee in Kolkata has recreated scenes of Balakot airstrike to spread awareness about the achievement of the Indian Air Force. The Young Boys Club Sarbojanin Durga Puja Committee in central Kolkata, which is celebrating its 50th anniversary this year, has created replica models to depict scenes from the airstrike.

The events have been recreated using clay models and digital projections at the Durga Puja pandal. As many as 65 models have been crafted by artisans from East Midnapore district. A life-size model of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman will be the key attraction for people.

West Bengal: Durga puja pandal with 'Balakot airstrike' made in Kolkata. #durgaashtami pic.twitter.com/0nLlUf12Fc — ANI (@ANI) October 6, 2019

Abhinandan became a national hero after he shot down a Pakistani fighter jet during an aerial engagement with Pakistan Air Force on February 27. He was captured by the Pakistani army and released two days later.

A model of MiG-21 Bison that Abhinandan was flying has also been installed.

Guess what's come alive in a #Kolkata #DurgaPuja pandal now. The #Balakot strikes. And standing tall is #WgCdrAbhinandan. Creative juices are flowing and how! pic.twitter.com/52UxyCO08i — Sourav Sanyal (@SSanyal) October 3, 2019

"Sixty-five models of IAF personnel and terrorists will be placed at the pandal's entrance with a model of an IAF aircraft hovering over it. We will create both the Indian and Pakistan sides to depict the airstrike accurately," Vikrant Singh, youth president of the puja committee, said.

"We wanted to celebrate our 50th year in a big way. Through this particular theme we want to spread awareness among visitors on the achievement of IAF pilots," Singh further said.

The forest cover surrounding the terror camp has been recreated through digital projection.

The Balakot airstrike in Pakistan was conducted on February 26 after a suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama on February 14.
