65 Journalists Killed in line of duty, Uttar Pradesh tops the list: Study

Home >> Delhi 65 Journalists Killed in line of duty, Uttar Pradesh tops the list: Study

Uttar Pradesh comes out as the most dangerous state for journalists in the study with as many as 12 journalists were reported killed during the period - highest among states.

New Delhi:The freedom of press is passing through a challenging phase in India with journalists are continued to be persecuted through cases and threats. A study - Silencing Journalists in India, launched yesterday, revealed that 65 journalists have been killed in the line duty from the year 2000 to 2018.

Uttar Pradesh comes out as the most dangerous state for journalists in the study with as many as 12 journalists were reported killed during the period - highest among states. From Gauri Lankesh, editor of Gauri LankeshPatrike who was shot dead outside her home in Bangalore on 5th September 2017 to the Rising Kashmir editor, Shujaat Bukhari who on 14 June 2018 was killed by terrorists in Srinagar, the study profiled all 65 journalists who have laid their lives for writing fearlessly.

The study ‘Silencing the Journalists in India’ published by Human Rights and Law Network (HRLN) in partnership with Press Club of India, Mumbai Press Club, Indian Women Press Corps, Delhi Union of Journalists, Brihmumbai Journalists Union and Media studies Group, also complied the cases being initiated against journalists in an attempt to silence them.

The book also features 31 journalists who were framed in various cases for their critical writing in 12 states between 2000 and 2018.

Speaking on the release of the book Senior Supreme Court lawyer and founder of Human Rights Law Network Colin Gonsalves highlighted the misuse of sedition law to silence journalists critical to governments. Gonsalves proposed a committee for the defence of journalists which will work in synergy with lawyers, journalists bodies and civil society to protect media persons from the onslaught.

Anant Bagaitkar, President of Press Club of India underlined the challenges the media is facing and said that civil society, press clubs and media bodies should come together and create a platform to safeguard freedom of press.

Anil Chamadia, senior journalist and convener of Media Studies Group said attacks on media persons are well orchestrated and corporates and governments are taking advantage of loops holes in legal system to put curbs on media freedom.
