Woman jumps out of 13th floor apartment, falls on retired teacher in Ahmedabad

The woman was visiting her parents (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman and the retired teacher died on the spot, said police She was not in the right frame of mind at the time of the incident The woman was visiting her parents from her husband's home in Surat

Ahmedabad: In a tragic case that has come to light from Gujarat, two people were killed after a woman jumped from the 13th floor of a building in Ahmedabad's Amraiwadi area on Friday morning. The incident came to light when residents of the high-rise building alerted the local police and informed them of the deaths.

Addressing media outlets today, Ahmedabad police officers said that the incident occurred around 6:30 am in the Parishkar residential society in Amraiwadi. The victim, identified as 30-year-old Mamta Rathi, jumped from the balcony of a 13th-floor apartment in the society's E block Phase 2.

Rathi fell on 69-year-old Balubhai Gamit. Eyewitness accounts suggest that Gamit, a retired teacher and resident of Parishkar residential society, was out for his daily morning walk. Both Gamit and Rathi were rushed to a hospital but are believed to have died on the way. A preliminary investigation has revealed that the woman was not in the correct state of mind at the time of the incident. More details are awaited as the matter is under active investigation by the police.

According to a report, the woman lived with her husband in Surat until recently when she moved in with her parents at the Parishkar residential society. Amraiwadi police station in-charge RT Udavat said that the woman was on medication for the past few days and was visiting her parents. No suicide note has been recovered from the home as of yet.

Similar Incident:

A similar incident had come to light not too many days ago. In September of this year, a 14-year-old girl fell to her death from the fifth-floor apartment of her parents' home in Lucknow's Husainganj. Uttar Pradesh police suspected that the child committed suicide. A student of Class 8, she left behind a handwritten note as an apology to her mother who scolded her the night before for talking on the phone past midnight.

The daughter of a banker, her parents found her missing from her room in the middle of the night. It took them no time to realise that the sliding shutter of the window was open. They rushed downstairs only to find their daughter lying in a pool of blood. The child died on the spot. A police officer familiar with the matter said that the child took the extreme step after her mother scolded her for talking on the phone late at night despite having an examination in school the next morning.
