Three men charged with gang-raping 17-year-old girl days after she was 'raped by Indian politician'

Three men have been charged with gang-raping a 17-year-old girl just days after she was allegedly raped by an Indian politician.

Naresh Tiwari, Brijesh Yadav Singh and Shubham Singh have been named by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and have been charged with rape.

The CBI claim the girl was raped on June 11, 2017, after she was allegedly raped on June 4 by a member of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party - Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

Sengar is currently in prison awaiting trial while the other three men are out on bail.

Three men have been charged with gang-raping a 17-year-old girl just days after she was allegedly raped by a member of the ruling party in India, Kuldeep Singh Sengar (pictured)

Tiwari, Yadav and Singh are accused of kidnapping and raping the 17-year-old.

The rape victim's father was allegedly assaulted and framed with illegally possessing firearms after Sengar was accused of rape.

The girl then attempted to commit suicide but failed and her father died the next day on April 9, 2018, while in custody in hospital.

In April 2018, nearly a year after her alleged assault, the girl tried to set herself on fire outside the home of Uttar Pradesh leader, Yogi Adityanath in a bid to get justice.

The girl, now 19, was involved in a car crash earlier this year that left her fighting for her life.

She was critically injured after a lorry struck the vehicle on a state highway in Uttar Pradesh on June 28.

Her family say the crash was planned by the government to stop the rape case from going to trial.

Kuldeep Singh Sengar was accused last year of raping a teenage girl. Sengar was taken into custody after intense questioning last April

Indian activists and students hold placards and shout slogans during a protest against the alleged political silence over the rape of a child near Jammu and a rape case in Uttar Pradesh state last April

She was travelling with her lawyer and two aunts when their car was hit by a truck, leaving her two relatives dead and her advocate critically ill in hospital.

Her family claim the accident was 'planned' in a bid to 'wipe them out' and stop the case going to trial.

Her mother told the Times of India: 'It was not an accident but a conspiracy to eliminate all of us. The son of a co-accused in the case, Shahi Singh, and another youth of the village had threatened us. They said that they will deal with us.'

The case has shone a spotlight on India's atrocious record on rape. Nearly 40,000 cases are reported every year, according to official figures.

Campaigners say the real number is higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma and a lack of faith in investigators.
