Indian National Emblem painting gifted to envoy

By: Times News Service

Muscat: Kavitha Ramakrishna, an ardent practitioner of Tanjore paintings, a traditional Indian art form, accomplished yet another feat when she presented one of her recently-completed works to Munu Mahawar, Indian Ambassador to Oman, on the 70th Republic Day of India.

The painstakingly done painting, the Indian National Emblem, is the latest addition to her portfolio. The National Emblem of India is an adaptation of the Lion Capital of Ashoka at Sarnath.

For setting high standards in promoting art and culture, Ramakrishna was recently honoured with the “Al Mar’a Excellence Award” at a special ceremony held in Oman. The Al Mar’a Special Award for Promoting Arts and Culture was presented to Ramakrishna at an event held under the auspices of Maitha bint Saif Al Mahrouqi, Undersecretary, Ministry of Tourism.

As part of her endeavour to promote India’s cultural identity, Ramakrishna has been single-mindedly promoting the classical language, Sanskrit, and the ancient art form of Tanjore paintings in Oman.

Most importantly, Ramakrishna has also played an important role in promoting cultural ties between India and Oman.

Recognising her talent, Ramakrishna was given the rare opportunity to showcase her work at Oman’s Ministry of Tourism’s exhibition held during the 44th National Day commemoration of the Sultanate.

She was also invited to participate in an event honouring 60 years of diplomatic relations between Oman and India, which focused on the close ties between the two countries. Her work of Tanjore paintings, at both the exhibition and event, focused on Omani culture and art.

The gifted artist’s Tanjore paintings depicting Oman’s national emblem, forts, mosques and jewellery decorate the walls of some of the prestigious institutions in the Sultanate.

Honouring her, over the years, the Indian Embassy in Muscat has hosted three of her solo exhibitions where she earned widespread appreciation from diplomats and citizens from different countries.

Ramakrishna, who has lived for more than a decade in Oman, has captured the distinctive character of the land in a book in the Kannada language titled “Na Kanda Muscat”. She is now set to release her extensively researched book on salutations to the sun titled “Tamoghna”.

For her contribution to Indian culture, Ramakrishna has been recognised with several awards and accolades.

She was recently conferred with the “Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Award”, a civilian honour annually presented by the Indian state of Karnataka. She was chosen for her contribution to promoting Indian art and culture outside the country.
