At US$57.35, Is WNS (Holdings) Limited (NYSE:WNS) Worth Looking At Closely?

WNS (Holdings) Limited (NYSE:WNS), which is in the it business, and is based in India, received a lot of attention from a substantial price movement on the NYSE over the last few months, increasing to US$64.28 at one point, and dropping to the lows of US$57.35. Some share price movements can give investors a better opportunity to enter into the stock, and potentially buy at a lower price. A question to answer is whether WNS (Holdings)'s current trading price of US$57.35 reflective of the actual value of the mid-cap? Or is it currently undervalued, providing us with the opportunity to buy? Let’s take a look at WNS (Holdings)’s outlook and value based on the most recent financial data to see if there are any catalysts for a price change.

View our latest analysis for WNS (Holdings)

Is WNS (Holdings) still cheap?

WNS (Holdings) appears to be overvalued by 27% at the moment, based on my discounted cash flow valuation. The stock is currently priced at US$57.35 on the market compared to my intrinsic value of $45.21. This means that the buying opportunity has probably disappeared for now. If you like the stock, you may want to keep an eye out for a potential price decline in the future. Since WNS (Holdings)’s share price is quite volatile, this could mean it can sink lower (or rise even further) in the future, giving us another chance to invest. This is based on its high beta, which is a good indicator for how much the stock moves relative to the rest of the market.

Can we expect growth from WNS (Holdings)?

NYSE:WNS Past and Future Earnings, October 4th 2019

Future outlook is an important aspect when you’re looking at buying a stock, especially if you are an investor looking for growth in your portfolio. Although value investors would argue that it’s the intrinsic value relative to the price that matter the most, a more compelling investment thesis would be high growth potential at a cheap price. With profit expected to grow by 27% over the next couple of years, the future seems bright for WNS (Holdings). It looks like higher cash flow is on the cards for the stock, which should feed into a higher share valuation.

Story continues

What this means for you:

Are you a shareholder? It seems like the market has well and truly priced in WNS’s positive outlook, with shares trading above its fair value. However, this brings up another question – is now the right time to sell? If you believe WNS should trade below its current price, selling high and buying it back up again when its price falls towards its real value can be profitable. But before you make this decision, take a look at whether its fundamentals have changed.

Are you a potential investor? If you’ve been keeping tabs on WNS for some time, now may not be the best time to enter into the stock. The price has surpassed its true value, which means there’s no upside from mispricing. However, the optimistic prospect is encouraging for WNS, which means it’s worth diving deeper into other factors in order to take advantage of the next price drop.

Price is just the tip of the iceberg. Dig deeper into what truly matters – the fundamentals – before you make a decision on WNS (Holdings). You can find everything you need to know about WNS (Holdings) in the latest infographic research report. If you are no longer interested in WNS (Holdings), you can use our free platform to see my list of over 50 other stocks with a high growth potential.

We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.



If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com. This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
