Pragmatic approach needed to popularise horseracing

DARK HORSE



At the end of last Saturday’s racing, the Royal Western India Turf Club’s administration took a pragmatic decision to invite the local trainers for an informal discussion related to the start of the Mumbai racing season. Earlier, the trainers’ association had arrived at a timely decision to request the club to extend the Pune season because the scheduled start of the racing season in mid-November was likely to be delayed.



As Mumbai’s inclement weather left no options for them, the club was only too happy to accede to the trainers’ request. It is almost certain now that racing at Mahalaxmi will start in the first week of December. The Western Indian trainers’ demand was largely in the interest of race-horse owners’ whose stakemoney earnings would have been hit.



No matter how small it may seem, this development certainly allows the new managing committee to approach the forthcoming racing season with a positive mindset. That said, the precarious situation of the RWITC and the sport is almost same, if not worse, as it was last year.



Detrimental rule



The only silver lining for the crisis-ridden club is that it has Rs 10 crore received from Gallops Restaurant in its kitty. However, the horses reaching Mahalaxmi later next month could be less than last year’s number.



Earlier, in its bid to resolve the issue of poorly contested fields and also mitigate its financial difficulties, the club reduced the number of race meetings. But it didn’t work.



Unless the club authorities take a serious look at the way the racing programme is designed and make meaningful changes, their efforts to make horseracing a spectator sport may not yield results. Meanwhile, the club had recently decided that select events, which don’t have a minimum number of runners, will be declared void. This too hasn’t helped.



Strangely, this provision has proved to be detrimental on some occasions and the RWITC stewards, it seems, are unaware of it. On Saturday last, five runners were declared to start for a Class 1 event but the field was reduced to four as one of the contenders was withdrawn from the fray as it bolted after dropping the rider on its way to the gates.



Combating triviality



Another event, the September Handicap, which had six runners was also run on the same day. Curiously, however, the Amorous Knight Plate, a Class 3 event with six runners was declared void at acceptance stage as per the club’s criteria.



As if all this was not intriguing enough, the club hosts the Fourth Estate Trophy today which will be contested by six maiden 3-year old horses. Guess what, the six-horse field has four horses from Pesi Shroff’s yard competing for the trophy!



When such races are framed or trainers have to go around the stables and often request each other to enter horses to prevent races from going void, it’s clear that something is seriously wrong with club’s prospectus.



Now that the Mumbai season is on the anvil, the RWITC stewards should adopt a different strategy to combat this problem. For example, instead of conducting the sport every Thursday at Mahalaxmi, they should try hosting it on alternate Thursdays.



This move could possibly enhance the hitherto missing competitive quotient of races held on Sundays and provide a fulfilling experience to the racing fraternity.


