Mahatma Gandhi, India’s father of independence, memorial vandalized and ashes gone

People pay homage at the Mahatma Gandhi memorial on the 150th birth anniversary of Gandhi at Rajghat in New Delhi, India October 2, 2019.ADNAN ABIDI/Reuters

He is the revered father of Indian independence, and it was what would have been his 150th birthday. And yet, Wednesday, vandals attacked a memorial to Mohandas K. Gandhi, painted “traitor” in lurid green across his picture and may have stolen some of his ashes.

Police officials in Rewa, in central India, site of the memorial, said they thought it was an inside job because there were no signs of a break-in and the thick green paint defacing Gandhi’s picture was being used by workmen at the memorial.

Given Gandhi’s status as a titan of peaceful resistance, the vandalism might seem unthinkable. But it appeared rooted in the kind of Hindu nationalism that inspired his assassin in 1948 and which has been on the rise in India in recent years.

Chanchal Shekhar, Rewa’s inspector general of police, said that detectives were taking writing samples from the memorial workers to see if they matched the scrawl found on Gandhi’s picture.

There were widespread reports that a small container of Gandhi’s ashes was missing from the memorial, suggesting that vandals they had taken it. But Shekhar said that was still unclear: While an urn of Gandhi’s ashes that the memorial received after his death is now missing, it may have been moved years ago.

This is hardly the first such attack. In June, a Gandhi statute in eastern India was decapitated.

Similarly, some right-wing Hindus have built statues to Gandhi’s killer, Nathuram Godse, the Hindu fanatic who shot him.

Ramachandra Guha, a leading Gandhi biographer, said right-wing Hindus have long hated Gandhi. But under the current government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party, which is rooted in Hindu nationalism — “they have become more emboldened.”

“It’s worrying,” Guha said. “Gandhi is our greatest export. Gandhi is to India what Shakespeare is to England.”

Gandhi, also known as Mahatma Gandhi, was a lawyer from an upper-caste family who mobilized millions of Indians in peaceful protests in the 1930s and 1940s, pressuring British colonizers to leave. That set the ball rolling for large parts of Africa and Asia to also seek independence.

His methods — boycotts, mass strikes and seizing the moral high ground — inspired Martin Luther King Jr., Nelson Mandela and many other champions of social change.

But India’s far-right wing is still furious at Gandhi for urging equality between Hindus, who make up about 80% of Indian society, and Muslims, about 14%. Gandhi accepted the creation of Pakistan, a Muslim-majority state that was also carved out of British India.

In a New York Times Op-Ed article published Wednesday, Modi commemorated Gandhi’s birthday and praised his unswerving bravery, peaceful tactics and devotion to the poor. “In Gandhi, we have the best teacher to guide us,” Modi wrote.

But what was missing was any mention of the religious harmony that Gandhi espoused.

Many Indian intellectuals believe India is more dangerously polarized between Hindus and Muslims than it has ever been and have been urging Modi to condemn hate crimes against Muslims. Modi is unusually quiet; so far he has said nothing about the attack on the memorial.

“Modi’s relationship to Gandhi is curious and interesting,” Guha said.

When Modi was chief minister of Gujarat, Gandhi’s home state, he did not talk much about Gandhi or make a big deal of his birthday, Guha said.

But since he became prime minister five years ago, Modi has channeled Gandhi to appeal to moderate Hindus and people outside India. He adopted the image of Gandhi’s famous circular glasses as the symbol of his Clean India campaign and has taken foreign leaders, like Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, to pay respects at memorials.

After Gandhi died, some of his ashes were sprinkled in the Ganges River, and dozens of small batches were given to memorials around India.

Ram Kirti Sharma, an activist with the Indian National Congress, the leading opposition party, of which Gandhi was a member, said he was shocked when he visited the memorial in Rewa on Wednesday and heard that ashes were missing and saw that the picture had been defaced.

“I just couldn’t believe my eyes,” he said. “This can only happen in today’s India. It is sad; I feel disgusted, angry, but also frightened.”

Gandhi died long ago, he added, but now “people want to kill his ideas.”
