From 'Pati Patni Aur Woh', 'Gulabo Sitabo' to 'Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl', 'Bala'; Lucknow calling for Bollywood

Lucknow, known for its mehmaan nawazi, tehzeeb and old-world charm, has found a prominent place in Bollywood films. Though movies have been capturing the essence of Uttar Pradesh’s capital on celluloid for years, they are doing it with a lot more alacrity now. In the last two months, Pati Patni Aur Woh remake starring Kartik Aaryan, Bhumi Pednekar and Ananya Panday, Gulabo Sitabo toplined by Amitabh Bachchan and Ayushmann Khurrana, Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl, which has Janhvi Kapoor, and Bala, which reunites the Dream Girl star and Bhumi on screen, were shot there.

Other movies filmed there this year include Article 15, Jabariya Jodi and Prassthanam. Even the web series Mirzapur 2 headlined by Ali Fazal and Pankaj Tripathi has been shot here. While it’s obvious that narratives in the heartland have taken centre-stage in Bollywood, we asked actors and filmmakers what makes this mofussil town special.

GOOD INFRASTRUCTURE AND LINE PRODUCERS

Filmmaker Anubhav Sinha, who shot Mulk and Article 15 in the city, says that there are two reasons Lucknow is most favoured for shoots. “The audiences at large seem to be more accepting of films based out of rural India. So, a hinterland location is a natural choice and Lucknow becomes more feasible for filmmakers, especially, for me, because over the last six years, there’s been good infrastructure development there. There’s good line production and I think somewhere behind the scenes, the government is supportive, and there are not many hurdles. So, there is ease of shooting and people, in general, are welcoming and accommodating. I love it,” he shares.



Article 15

Director Amar Kaushik, who shot a portion of Bala there, adds the local linemen (for production) are quite aware and professional. “They know which areas should be cordoned off while shooting, where the vanity van should be, etc. so, there’s no logistics problem. Also, Lucknow is no longer a small town — roads are wide, hotels are five star, but at the same time, the market place gives a small-town feel. There’s no river or mountain to give it cinematic appeal, but it gives a realistic touch to filmmaking,” he explains.

BLEND OF OLD AND NEW

The man-of-the-moment, Ayushmann recently shot for Shubh Mangal Zyada Saavdhaan in Varanasi, but he has filmed so many movies in the land of kebabs that he jokes, “I guess people there think I’m a native of Lucknow. I should buy a house there and that will be my second home!” He adds that people there are extremely friendly. “They always give me home-cooked food, which I crave. The place is good with language, culture, food and literature, so this is my kind of a city. Though I learn from every destination I shoot at, Lucknow has become more special because I have filmed the most there.”

A CITY THAT CONNECTS YOU WITH HINDUSTANIYAT

Bhumi Pednekar, who has co-starred with Ayushmann in three films finds that people in UP have a lot of swag, “which is endearing”. What she loves most about the city is its culture, tehzeeb, history, food and clothes, especially Chikankari, which the actress loves to buy.



Ayushmann Khurrana and Bhumi Pednekar

“There is an ada in everything about Lucknow. It’s a city that connects you back with Hindustaniyat. There is such a beautiful mix of cultures and religions. Every street has so much character. I personally feel as an actor shooting in Lucknow takes you to a different world. It engulfs you in its milieu. And I guess that’s the reason filmmakers keep coming back here. There are so many films being shot here that the hotel lobby feels like Bombay,” she laughs.

With more and more films being set against the backdrop of small towns, it looks like Lucknow will continue to dominate the Bollywood landscape for a long time. After all, as Ayushamnn says, it has got a great mix of a small and big city. “It gives good texture in a film with visuals which are new-age, and the bylanes of old Lucknow,” he signs off.
