Helicopter downed by own fire, admits IAF chief

NEW DELHI: The Indian Air Force (IAF) confirmed for the first time on Friday that it shot down one of its own helicopters during skirmishes with Pakistan in February over occupied Kashmir, killing all six on board.

“A court of inquiry was completed and it was our mistake that our missile hit our chopper,” said the head of the Air Force, Air Chief Marshal Rakesh Kumar Bhadauria.

“We will ensure such mistakes are not repeated in future,” he told reporters.

The military helicopter was downed on Feb 27 as Indian and Pakistani aircraft engaged in dogfights over occupied Kashmir in their most serious military skirmish in years.

The helicopter crashed close to the airport on the outskirts of occupied Srinagar.

ISPR director general says India will soon acknowledge other losses as well

Bhadauria said the air force is taking punitive act­ion against two officers. He said the inquiry had found “vital gaps” in communication and coordination between the ground staff and the crew of the chopper.

Military sources said the probe found the ‘Identification of Friend or Foe’ system on board the helicopter had been switched off. It also found violations of standard operating procedures.

The Press Trust of India news agency said a surface-to-air missile shot down the Mi-17 aircraft on Feb 27. A day earlier Indian aircraft had dropped some bombs in the Balakot area of Pakistan.

That was said to be in retaliation for a suicide attack in occupied Kashmir on Feb 14 that killed 40 Indian troops.

The Indian military at the time gave no reason for the helicopter crash, although media reports cited unnamed sources as saying it was friendly fire.

After the dogfights Pakistan said it had downed two Indian fighter jets, but India said it had lost only one. India also claimed that it had shot down a Pakistani F-16 — a claim that was repeated by Bhadauria on Friday.

However, the director general of Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR), Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor, rubbished the claim of IAF chief and said he was lying.

“They are liars. I have given them response many times,” he said in a statement.

In a tweet, the ISPR chief said that India military would soon acknowledge the other events as well.

“IAF acknowledges Mi17 fratricide. Remaining acknowledgments soon: (26 Feb) PAF denied IAF strikes across LoC; (27 Feb) 6 Strikes by PAF across LoC from within Pak Airspace; PAF shot down 2 IAF Jets; IAF pilot arrested, no F16 shot down; Heavy losses to Indian Army on LoC”.

Published in Dawn, October 5th, 2019
