ISRO Scientist Killed By Gay Sex Partner Over Money Dispute, Claims Hyderabad Police

New Delhi:

A 56-year-old senior scientist Suresh Kumar working with the National Remote Sensing Centre of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), who was found murdered in his apartment in Hyderabad on October 1, was killed by a man blackmailing him for money in exchange for gay sex.

Taking a swift action soon after the unfortunate incident was reported, police formed three teams and solved the case after verifying CCTV footage, the mobile data of the victim. The police arrested Janagama Srinivas who was responsible for killing Suresh. It is to be noted that 39-year-old Janagama Srinivas is a Lab Technician of a private Pathology lab.

In a statement, the police said, “A 39-year-old lab technician was on Friday taken into custody for allegedly killing a scientist with the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), following a dispute over payment of money after having unnatural sex with the latter.”

In a press release, city police commissioner Anjani Kumar said, “He was a technical expert with the NRSC and was staying alone as his family was away. His loneliness induced the suspect working with a private diagnostic centre to get closer to him in the name of blood collection.”

"Exploiting his loneliness and urge to perform unnatural act, the suspect expected monetary favours in return. As he did not get the expected amount, he hatched a plan to kill him. He bought a knife, and went to his flat on September 30 and spent time with the scientist and after having a physical relationship with him, he attacked him with the knife causing serious head injuries," the commissioner said.

“Later, the victim's wife, who stays in Chennai, informed her relatives that her husband was not answering the phone after which her relatives who were staying in the same apartment on the ground floor went and found the flat's door locked from outside and informed her,” he added.

“She immediately came to Hyderabad on the evening of October 1. With the assistance of the police, the door was broken open and based on her complaint, a case was registered,” Commissioner Anjani Kumar noted.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
