PM Modi May Visit Saudi Arabia, Hold Talks With Crown Prince: Reports

PM Narendra Modi is likely to visit Saudi Arabia, as per news agency ANI's report. As per the report, he is expected to hold bilateral talks with top Saudi leadership, including Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. The Prime Minister is also expected to attend an investment summit hosted by the Gulf nation in capital Riyadh, the report adds. There is no official confirmation from the Prime Minister's Office about PM Modi's Saudi Arabia visit.

WATCH: Kashmiri activists slam state's political dynasts on abrogation

Doval's trip to Saudi Arabia laid ground for PM's visit, says report

National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval's recent visit to Saudi Arabia prepared the ground for the Prime Minister's visit expected in November. Doval discussed various aspects of bilateral issues and also explained the Saudi leadership about India's decision to abrogate Article 370 of the Constitution that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir, to which the latter reportedly said that it understands India's position in this regard. The National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval had a one-on-one meeting with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman on Wednesday during which the talks happened. The meeting had lasted for nearly two hours with both Doval and the Crown Prince MBS discussing various aspects of bilateral relations.

READ | J&K Governor's adviser: 'Detained Kashmir leaders will be released'

Ajit Doval, Crown Prince MBS discuss Kashmir

Top sources have confirmed that Ajit Doval and Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman had a discussion on Jammu & Kashmir. “Saudi Crown Prince expressed understanding about India’s approach and actions in J&K,” said a source privy to the meeting. Saudi Arabia has not opposed on global platform India's move of revoking Article 370. India had passed a Bill to integrate Kashmir with India.

India-Saudi Arabia 2016 statement on cooperation against terrorism

In 2016, in a joint statement, issued by the two countries following Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit, had very strong references to combating terrorism. Saudi Arabia made it clear that Pakistan’s narrative on Kashmir was not acceptable due to a far better appreciation of India's position. Saudi Arabia has backed India when it comes to combating terrorism. The 2016 joint statement is a case in point where both the countries called on all states to reject the use of terrorism against other countries and to cut off support to those perpetrating terrorism from their territories against other states.

READ | NSA Ajit Doval meets Abu Dhabi Crown Prince, condoles uncle's demise

India's global outreach on Kashmir

India also launched a diplomatic outreach to apprise major countries about its decisions on Jammu and Kashmir. Saudi Arabia, known to be a key ally of Pakistan, has been siding with India in its campaign to rid the region of terrorism and pledged to extend all cooperation to effectively deal with the challenge. Both countries already signed several agreements in the field of security, including an extradition treaty. During Salman's visit here in February, the two countries decided to constitute a comprehensive security dialogue and set up a joint working group on counter-terrorism to effectively deal with the challenges of terrorism.

READ | Ajit Doval meets Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, discusses Kashmir
