Ghaziabad: Wife of slain businessman takes to Twitter, seeks faster probe

GHAZIABAD: The family of a businessman who was shot dead outside his house a few days ago has taken to social media, calling for a faster probe by police. Anubha, the wife of Amit Seth, has started a campaign “#justiceforamitseth” and posted tweets tagging the Prime Minister and chief minister.Amit, a nephew of Shiv Sena functionary Mahesh Ahuja, was shot dead by three miscreants in daylight on September 25 in Kavi Nagar. On the basis of a complaint by the family, an FIR has been lodged against eight persons under Section 302 ( murder ).Anubha, a teacher in a private school in Ghaziabad, said, “A few preachers of hate snatched away Amit from me a day before his 46th birthday. My world came crashing down after I came to know about the murder. I didn’t even get a chance to hold his hands one last time.”Amit and Anubha have two sons — Siddhant (8) and Manan (14). Anubha said her 8-year-old son still asks when his father would come home. He has been told that Amit is on a business trip to Russia and would celebrate his birthday with the family once he is back.For three days before the murder, Amit looked tense and had apparently told his wife he was worried over his business prospects. He wanted to invest in Russia and was scheduled to go there after Diwali. “Almost all the time, he would talk over the phone. When I asked him if he was worried, he told me all was not well with his business,” Anubha said.The family suspects two persons behind the murder. Amit, his wife said, had given over Rs 95 lakh to one Rohit, a resident of Raj Nagar, and had been prodding him to pay back. Another person, Ankit Saxena, had taken a loan over a crore from Amit, and had mortgaged his property against it.“Amit had asked Ankit to return the money but he pleaded saying he had no cash at hand. So, Amit decided to sell some of Ankit’s properties to get his money, but Ankit opposed it. There was a heated exchange between them,” Anubha said.Amit’s wife plans to stage a protest along with her two sons and other family members outside Kavi Nagar police station if the cops don’t act soon. “All of us are cooperating with police, but they are still dragging their feet on the probe,” she said.The family claimed to have given the cops at least 15 CCTV clips in which the assailants can be seen.SP (city) Shlok Kumar said, “This is a high profile case and police don’t want to take any wrong steps. We have some leads and we hope to solve the case soon. Four police teams have been assigned the case.”
