Go here for the best experiences this Dussehra

The memory of sitting on my dad’s shoulders as a little girl and cheering for Lord Ram on the day of Dussehra in an overly crowded Chitrakoot ground of Varanasi is still so fresh in my mind! And once again, it’s that time of the year and the entire country is gearing up for the grand Dussehra celebrations in India (also known asand Vijayadashami), the festival which marks Lord Ram’s victory over the demon king Ravana and Goddess Durga’s triumph over the evil Mahishasura. This particular festival is not only religiously significant, but is also socially acclaimed in our country. In fact, a lot of hard work goes into the making of idols and in the entire process of Ram Lila enactment.The scene of Ravana Dahan from the Indian epic Ramayana happens on a grand level, wherein the actor playing the character of Lord Ram shoots a burning arrow in the dummies of Ravana, Meghnath and Kumbhakarna. All over the country, melas or fairs are organised at various Ram Lila grounds. These vibrant melas are those events that people look forward to every year. Dotted with a variety of food stalls, game stalls and giant wheels, these fairs somewhere or the other define our culture. However, this does not go exactly the same way in all the regions of India and every destination has its own legend and meaning of Dussehra which may differ from the prominent existing believes. Let’s find out those places in India where Dussehra or Dussara celebrations are the best!The entire nation and world is aware of Mysore Dasara celebrations. The event takes place on such an extravagant level that people from all across the globe visit the city to witness vibrant processions during Dasara. The Mysore Dussehra celebration lasts for nine days with the tenth day marking the festival of Vijayadashami. A grand procession is carried out on the last day and the whole Mysore city comes under the spell of magical festivities. The entire Mysore Palace is lit up and it looks like tiny little stars have been woven to the cemented walls of the palace! One of the main parts of the celebration is the Chamundeshwari Temple , one of the city’s prominent landmarks. As per Hindu mythology, Chamundeshwari Devi, a form of Goddess Durga killed the demon king Mahishasura here, after which the city is named.: Mysuru or Mysore comes from Mahishasura and it’s a fact that many may not be aware of.: Dasara kite festival, Jamboo Savari and Torch Light Parade, Dasara ExhibitionThe history of Kullu Dussehra celebrations goes back to 17th century, when Kullu used to be home to kings and royals! Dussehra festivities in Kullu happen on a very different level, wherein ardent devotees carry the statues of other lords on their heads in a procession and meet the main God of Kullu, Lord Raghunath (Lord Ram) in his temple grounds. This seven-day festivities involves dancing, singing, cultural programmes and a lot of international travellers and devotees. The entire celebration is then taken to River Beas and devotees put fire on a pile of wood which is symbolic of burning Ravana's home country Lanka. When mountains, greenery and legends attached, something as amazing as Kullu Dussehra happens. If you wish to join this vibrant fanfare, get your tickets booked soon!: Devotees carry the idols of other gods on their shoulders/heads and meet the prime God of Kullu, Lord Raghunath in his temple.: Folk dance, music, ceremony of wood burning near Beas RiverBastar’s Dussehra festivities are the longest spanning over 75 days! One of the most stunning destinations in the state of Chattisgarh, Bastar is known for its olden tribes and natural splendour and Dussehra celebrations. During this time, all the tribes in the region unite to make this a successful event. Be ready to witness some weird and witchy happenings, as there’s lot of dark magic and tribal beliefs involved! This 75-day festival is a perfect way to get an insight into the lives of tribal people of Bastar. However, this celebration doesn’t involve Lord Ram or any other characters from the Ramayana. As per legends, Bastar or Jagdalpur Dussehra was started during the 13th century by the Kakatiya kings who ruled the place. Purushotam Dev, the then king of Bastar, had immense faith in Lord Jagannath of Puri. The king visited Lord’s temple in Puri. The Lord happy with his devotion gifted him with a huge 16-wheel wooden chariot. Since then, the chariots have become a crucial part of the festivities. It’s indeed once in a lifetime kind of experience. Book ahead as all the hotels and guesthouses in the area get pack with international travellers mostly.: One of the longest Dussehra celebrations in the world that goes on for 75 days.: Chariot procession, tribal celebrationsIt is believed that Varanasi’s Ramleela is the oldest in the world, which is more than 475-years-old! This fact finds its mention in Ramcharitmanas, an epic poem penned by the noted saint Tulsidas. The Chitrakoot grounds of Varanasi turns into a mega stage during this day and people from all over visit to witness the scene of Ravana Dahan. Varanasi Ramleela excels in terms of sets, performances and statues. Mythological places from the epic Ramayana such as Ashok Vatika, Janakpuri, Panchvati and Lanka comes to life on stage. The entire ground looks like one fine movie from the bygone era, when gods used to walk on earth. With vibrant light and soft music, everything looks like a dream sequence.The play ends with Lord Ram burning the effigies of Ravana, Meghnath and Kumbhakarana which looks grand. When you see thousands of people applauding and shouting Jai Shri Ram in unison, it will kind of give you goose bumps! Most definitely, you need to experience this colourful spectacle once in your life, if you haven’t yet.: Considered one of the oldest documented Ramleela in the entire world.: Ravana Dahan enactment, grand stages, vibrant fairOctober 8, 2019The festival of Dussehra is celebrated in every part of the country, though its reason might differ from place to place but the significance remains the same; victory of good over evil. As per the Hindu epic Ramayana, Dussehra marks the triumph of Lord Ram over the evil king Ravana, who had kidnapped Sita (Ram’s consort) with evil motives.
