Jason Dalton sentenced to life in prison for 2016 Kalamazoo killings

KALAMAZOO, MI — Jason Dalton will spend the rest of his life in prison.

The 48-year-old Cooper Township resident was sentenced Tuesday, Feb. 5, to life in prison without the possibility of parole for shooting eight people and killing six in a rampage around Kalamazoo County on Feb. 20, 2016.

Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Judge Alexander C. Lipsey said a number people have asked why Dalton went on the shooting spree.

“That, as best the court can see, is only known to you and to your creator," Lipsey said before telling Dalton that he would be sentenced to prison for life.

“By your actions, Kalamazoo has been given an opportunity to show the world, in the words of Desmond Tutu, that goodness is stronger than evil, love is stronger than hate, love is stronger than darkness and life is stronger than death," Lipsey said.

Dalton remained silent throughout the proceedings Tuesday.

Dalton pleaded guilty Jan. 7 to six counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and several felony firearms charges for the shootings. Dalton pleaded guilty just before the prosecutor and defense attorney were supposed to start voir dire, the process of questioning 112 potential jurors in his case.

Kalamazoo Uber shooter sentencing Families of Kalamazoo Uber shooter victims face Jason Dalton in court Posted by MLive.com on Tuesday, February 5, 2019

The guilty plea surprised family members of the victims, who had waited for more than two years as Dalton’s case went through appellate courts. Dalton’s defense attorney, Eusebio Solis, said Dalton entered the plea against his legal advice.

Dalton will serve a mandatory sentence of life in prison for each of the first-degree murder convictions.

Dalton shot Tiana Carruthers, 25, in the parking lot of the Meadows town home complex, 5066 Meadows Blvd,, just before 6 p.m. on Feb. 20, 2016. Dalton shot and killed father and son Rich, 53, and Tyler Smith, 17, in the parking lot of Seelye Kia on Stadium Drive just after 10 p.m. that same evening. He then shot four women and a 14-year-old girl in the parking lot of Cracker Barrel, 5581 S. 9th St. in Texas Township.

Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda; Mary Jo Nye, 60, Dorothy “Judy” Brown, 74, and Barbara Hawthorne, 68, all of Battle Creek, were killed and the 14-year-old girl, Abigail Kopf, survived but was critically injured.

Dalton drove erratically that afternoon, picking up Uber fares between the shootings. In an interview with detectives after his arrest, Dalton said the Uber app “literally took over his mind and body” on Feb. 20 when the color of the app’s symbol changed from red to black. Dalton told the detectives the image for the app changed colors when he spoke the name of the Eastern Star symbol.

The six people that were killed on Feb. 20, 2016 (from top left) Dorothy "Judy" Brown, 74, of Battle Creek, Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Battle Creek, Richard Eugene Smith, 53, of Mattawan, Mary Jo Nye, 60, of Battle Creek, Barbara Hawthorne, 68, of Battle Creek and Tyler Smith, 17, of Mattawan. (Courtesy photos)

On Tuesday, Feb. 5, family members of the victims had the chance to face Dalton in court and tell him how his crimes changed their lives. In all, 10 family members and survivor Tiana Carruthers spoke, with several more submitting written victim-impact statements.

“We’ve waited nearly three years of difficult delays for this evil murderer to be brought to justice,” Jeff Reynolds, son of victim Dorothy “Judy” Brown, said. “Each delay of the trial has reopened wounds for myself and each of the families, and it sometimes has felt like this will never end.”

Reynolds said while the court case may be coming to an end, families of the victims and survivors will never see closure.

“I, and all of the individuals and families whose lives you have shattered, are at least pleased to know you will never walk free again," Reynolds said. "We will never have a day where we can walk free of the devastating loss you have needlessly caused.”

Reynolds said he hopes Dalton’s prison sentence gives his time to ponder his atrocious crimes.

“I am a man of faith, and I trust that the almighty God will haunt you eternally starting now with the fact that you are nothing but a pile of worthless evil. Worthless," Reynolds said.

Laurie Smith, wife of victim Richard Smith and mother of victim Tyler Smith, said in her victim-impact statement she lost her soulmate and her baby boy.

“You have children and you have a spouse, so why did you decide to take mine away from me?" Smith said.

Smith said her husband was loving, caring, and thoughtful, someone who would do anything for anyone. She said her son was a friend to everyone, including her.

“I hope you realize what you’ve done to all of the victims, to my family, to your kids, to your family, your parents, and to the community as a whole," Smith said. "I hope it haunts you and I hope you experience deep sorrow to your soul for the rest of your life.”

Smith’s daughter, Emily Lemmer, said she was supposed to grow up with her brother. She said living without her dad and brother is impossible. She said she is terrified and anxious and is afraid something is going to happen and she is going to lose more people she loves.

“What kind of a person walks up to a father and son and shoots them over and over and over again until they don’t move?" Lemmer said. "A coward, that’s who.”

Kalamazoo County Prosecutor Jeff Getting addressed Dalton in court before his sentence was handed down.

“1,080 days in jail is barely a down payment for the damage you’ve caused,” Getting said. “It’s nothing, nothing in comparison to the loss of a loved one, to the alteration, to the change in the future for Abigail (Kopf) and Alexis (Cornish), and Tiana (Carruthers).”

Getting said he estimates Dalton will spend around 10,000 days in prison.

“Ten thousand days in a Michigan prison where I hope that every morning you wake up seeing the faces of those you killed and injured,” Getting said to Dalton. “When you lay down at night I hope the last thought is the damage you’ve done to this community, to those families, to your own. Ten thousand days doesn’t come close to what you deserve. I wish somehow it could be more because you deserve more.”

Getting said today is the last day that Kalamazoo will suffer Dalton.

“Tomorrow we’ll continue to be a community that has somehow rallied together, that will support these victims’ families, that will support our survivors, that will continue to be stronger despite everything that you have done. We’ll celebrate that you will never, ever, ever be with us again.”
