Rampaging gangs of violent monkeys attacking monastery visitors every day

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Violent gangs of monkeys are attacking children and "taking over" an Indian monastery, a charity claims.

Residents have been driven out of the living quarters of the ashram, in Vrindavan, India, after the previously peaceful macaques suddenly turned "aggressive" and started "attacking and intimidating residents".

A desperate fundraising appeal has now been launched to install bars on the windows to keep the marauding primates, which carry rabies, out of the pilgrimage site.

Humanitarian charity Sri Radhey Seva Trust writes on JustGiving: "In the past the monkeys were not aggressive but now unfortunately they are.

(Image: JustGiving)

"The monkeys come daily in gangs and have been chasing members of the ashram and also visitors including children who have recently been attacked."

The charity say previous methods to keep the monkeys at bay are no longer working and they may soon completely take over.

(Image: JustGiving)

"The monkeys are slowly taking over areas on the upper level of the building which includes the bathrooms, making it difficult to bathe or use the toilet," the trust said.

"The upper level includes also residents living quarters and a kitchen. It is a constant struggle to manage the situation and to carry out basic living needs.

"We are getting increasingly concerned as they are becoming more confident in entering living areas and taking over."

(Image: JustGiving)

Around £1,400 is needed to install metal grilles to stop the monkeys from entering and keep the residents and visitors safe. So far £170 has been raised.

It's believed thousands of rhesus macaques live in Vrindavan, which has a temple sacred to devotees of the Hindu deity Krishna.

They are considered sacred by the Hindu religion and are regularly fed with bananas and pampered by devotees, meaning their numbers continue to rocket.

(Image: JustGiving)

Non-harmful methods to keep them at bay are also needed because monkeys are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972.

Despite their favourable treatment, the furry friends have gone feral, repaying the town's residents by forming gangs and biting back.

In July, local Nikunj Goyal parked his scooter and was walking to his front door when he was viciously attacked by a gang of 10, in moment captured on CCTV.

Footage showed Nikunj turning a corner where a group of monkeys were hanging around near a dumpster.

One monkey suddenly charging towards him before jumping onto his back and grab his legs as he approaches the entrance to the building.

He fell to the ground in the struggle and eventually made a run for it as the group gave him an evil stare.

Despite the town employing monkey catchers and larger, more ferocious langur monkeys to go after groups of Rhesus macaques the problem is getting worse.

You can donate to help the ashram keep the opportunists at bay, here.
