Mumbai BJP on fire-fighting mode after biggies denied ticket

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, October 5

Senior BJP leaders at the state and central levels were on fire-fighting mode for the second day on Saturday after several ministers and veteran legislators were denied tickets to contest the Maharashtra assembly elections.

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and state BJP president Chandrakant Patil were working the phones to ensure that those denied tickets and their supporters do not work against the BJP’s official candidates.

Among the biggies who were denied tickets include Power Minister Chandrashekar Bawankule, Minister for Higher Education Vinod Tawade, BJP’s chief whip in the assembly Raj Purohit, former ministers Eknath Khadse and Prakash Mehta and others. In all some 19 sitting MLAs have been dropped. Only a few like Khadse have been placated with their relatives being given tickets by the BJP.

With the Maharashtra BJP sensing victory, disappointed supporters of the dropped MLAs have reportedly indulged in violence in different parts of the state. Parag Shah, who has been fielded in place of former housing minister Prakash Mehta, found himself surrounded by an angry mob that vandalised his car on Friday. Police had to rescue Shah.

In Borivli, Tawade’s supporters blocked out the signboard of the BJP at its party office and shouted slogans against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah.

Tawade, who started his career in the ABVP, was among the first ones to fall in line and reiterate his support for the BJP.

“I will introspect and find out what went wrong. I urge my supporters to work for the official candidate Sunil Rane,” Tawade said in a statement.

With his daughter being given the ticket from his Mukhtainagar seat, Eknath Khadse dismissed rumours that he would join the Nationalist Congress Party. He further announced his retirement from politics.



At other places, local BJP leaders said they would not work for the party’s candidates. In Kankavli, where the BJP fielded Nitesh Rane, son of former Chief Minister Narayan Rane, the local BJP leaders said they would rather stay at home rather than work for the party’s candidate.

The Shiv Sena, which has had a running battle with the Ranes ever since he quit the party, has fielded a candidate against Nitesh despite the alliance between the two parties.






