Marauding gangs of monkeys are 'taking over' an Indian monastery as they attack visitors

A gang of monkeys are 'taking over' an Indian monastery as they launch vicious attacks on children, a charity has claimed.

The community living in the ashram in Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh, have abandoned their homes after the onslaught from the 'aggressive' and 'intimidating' macaques.

But residents are fighting back as they put barricading on their windows to deter the primates.

The community living in the ashram in Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh, have abandoned their homes after the onslaught from the 'aggressive' and 'intimidating' macaques. But residents are fighting back as they put barricading on their windows to deter the primates (pictured)

Sri Radhey Seva Trust, a humanitarian charity, wrote on its JustGiving page: 'In the past the monkeys were not aggressive but now unfortunately they are.

'The monkeys come daily in gangs and have been chasing members of the ashram and also visitors including children who have recently been attacked.'

The post added there is a fear the monkeys will take over the pilgrimage site as the monkeys grow in confidence.

Sri Radhey Seva Trust, a humanitarian charity, has written on its JustGiving page: 'In the past the monkeys (pictured) were not aggressive but now unfortunately they are'

It continued: 'The monkeys are slowly taking over areas on the upper level of the building which includes the bathrooms, making it difficult to bathe or use the toilet,' the trust said.

'The upper level includes also residents living quarters and a kitchen. It is a constant struggle to manage the situation and to carry out basic living needs.

'We are getting increasingly concerned as they are becoming more confident in entering living areas and taking over.'

The Trust is looking to raise around £1,400 for metal grilles, but just £170 has been donated so far

The Trust is looking to raise around £1,400 for metal grilles, but just £170 has been donated so far.

There are thought to be thousands of the animals - which often carry rabies - in Vrindavan.

The city boasts an impressive Hindu temple for those worshipping Krishna.

Yet because these monkeys are seen as sacred, they are often fed bananas and petted by visitors - leading to an explosion in their population.

The animals cannot be dispatched with using force as they are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

The danger the monkeys can pose was shown in a video from July, where Nikunj Goyal, an incense-seller in Vrindavan, was running home from work around 10.30am.

CCTV captured the macaques following him down the street before once pounces, knocking him to the floor.

Nikunj Goyal, an incense-seller from northern India, was walking home from work around 10.30am when he was attacked by a troop of macaque monkeys (pictured, one jumps at him)

Two other monkeys then jump on him and bite him before he throws one off and manages to get to his feet.

He then runs off down the road as a neighbour comes outside with a broom in an attempt to help him fend off the primates.

Goyal suffered bites and scratches in the attack, and had to be treated for rabies afterwards.

As the monkeys jumped up at him Goyal stumbled backwards and fell to the ground, prompting them to cling to his back and bite him
