Hundreds Of Trees Cut In Aarey Forest, Kerala Serial Death Mystery Solved And Other News

The Aarey Colony in Mumbai has once again turned to a venue of a showdown between environmentalists trying to save the thousands of trees there and the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation which is hell-bent on cutting them to make space for a car shed.

The latest round of showdown began on Friday night after the MMRC began cutting trees in there, just hours after the Bombay High Court dismissed the petition filed by environmentalists to declare the area like a forest. Read more

Netizens Recall How PM Modi Told Bear Grylls He Cares About Forests But Now He Remains Silent On Aarey

PM Narendra Modi's initiatives on environment protection are in place but when the actual need for it arises, everyone in the ruling dispensation seems to go mum on the issue.

Protests erupted on Friday at Mumbai's Aarey forest area after the Bombay High Court dismissed all petitions against the proposed cutting down of over 2,500 trees to make way for a metro car shed in the area- a green strip that lies at the heart of the bustling Mumbai city. Read more

Six Unnatural Deaths In The Same Family In 12 Years, Turns Out They Were All Poisoned By Daughter-In-Law For Property

Six members of a family in Kerala's Kozhikode district were killed one-by-one by a relative allegedly for the family property.

The first to die was Annamma, a 57-year-old retired school teacher in August 2002. According to the family, she immediately after having food one day. Read more

In A Classic Example Of Communal Harmony, Muslim Man Keeps Alive Family Tradition Of Making Dussehra Effigies

Vijayadashami or Dussehra is days away and a Muslim man is busy preparing the effigies to be used on the occasion that is majorly celebrated across India to mark the victory of Lord Rama over Ravana, the demon king of Lanka.

Jafar Ali, who hails from nearby Mathura said that his family has been doing this work for the past three generations and is an example of communal harmony and brotherhood in the country. Read more

Mystery Solved As Hyderabad ISRO Scientist Was Murdered By Gay Sex Partner Over Money Dispute

Police in Hyderabad has said that they have cracked the murder case of an ISRO scientist who was found dead in his flat.

The cops have arrested a man identified as Srinivas, who worked as a technician in a diagnostic lab in SR Nagar in connection with the murder. Read more
