Six Unnatural Deaths In The Same Family In 12 Years, Turns Out They Were All Poisoned By Daughter-In-Law For Property

People of Kerala have been left shell shocked after a sinister murder plot that could put the best crime thriller movies to shame unraveled after nearly a decade.

Six members of a family in Kerala's Kozhikode district were killed one-by-one by a relative allegedly for the family property.

The first to die was Annamma, a 57-year-old retired school teacher in August 2002. According to the family, she immediately after having food one day.

The next to die was her husband Tom Thomas, a 66-year-old retired Education Department official. He died on August 2008. In his case too, the death happened immediately after consuming food and died before even reaching the hospital.

The next to be found dead was their son, Roy Thomas, in September 2011, who, again had food and went to the washroom where he collapsed and died before reaching the hospital. Roy's post-mortem had revealed that there were traces of potassium cyanide in his body, which led to the assumption that he committed suicide and there was no further probe.

The next to die was MM Mathew, the brother of Annamma. He was found dead in his residence in February 2014, when his wife was away. He had reportedly expressed doubts over the death of Roy. The next to die was Alfine, a 1-year-old girl in March 2014. In her case too she became sick after consuming food and died in a hospital. This was followed by another death, in January 2016, when Sili, the 44-year-old mother of Alfine under similar circumstances.

Almost a year later, Shaju, the husband of Sili got married to Jolly, the wife of Roy who had died in 2011.

The lid of the well-plotted murder blew after Roji, another son of Annamma and Tom who is settled in the US came to know that Jolly had got the family property registered in her name using fake documents.

He then approached the police demanding a probe into the recent deaths. The cops who on Friday exhumed all the bodies and collected samples for forensic examination. Eyewitness accounts also confirmed that Jolly was present at the spot when all the six deaths happened. She also refused to cooperate with the investigation and rejected a police demand to undergo a polygraph test.

Police on Saturday arrested Jolly and two others including a relative who used to work in a jewelry shop and is believed to be the person who supplied the cyanide used for the murders.
