“Prison became my safe place... I couldn’t wait to return to it after hearings”

underworld gangster Chhota Rajan

Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act

Behind Bars in Byculla: My Days in Prison

Byculla Prison

(L) Former journalist Jigna Vora

Jigna Vora on what it took to prove her innocence after being accused in journalist J Dey’s murder.On the day she was arrested, all 37-year-old journalist Jigna Vora could think about at the time, as six police vehicles whizzed past the iconic Metro Theatre at Marine Lines on a nippy November afternoon in 2011, was how long would it take for her to be free again. “They were screening Dirty Picture that day,” she recollects.Accused of instigatingto murder her colleague and senior crime journalist Jyotirmoy Dey, it took the single mother all of eight months in prison and seven years of a gruelling legal battle, to clear herself of all charges, especially those under the draconianOn June 11, 2011, J Dey, the 56-yearold crime investigations head with a city tabloid, was gunned down near his house in Powai. Chhota Rajan and his men were accused of the murder. Five months on, Vora was arrested.By the time she was “set free”, she was scarred by the indignities she suffered in prison; the humiliation, for instance, of being stripped naked while on her period by two ruthless prison guards. She also underwent a spiritual transformation, following conversations with terror accused and now BJP MP Pragya Singh Thakur.“Scars can also help you remain grounded,” Vora tells Mirror in a café, a day after the Mumbai launch of her book,(co-published by Penguin Random House and Blue Salt). The book chronicles her years as a legal and crime correspondent with different newspapers before her arrest, the people she met in prison, the deplorable conditions people find themselves in behind bars and how little she knew of J Dey, a journalist 20 years her senior.Dressed in a purple kurta and with a striking tribal neckpiece adorning her neck, today Vora has, started to slowly resemble how she once looked in photographs when she was a journalist. But even the slightest mention of the word “arrest” triggers “JV” — as her former colleagues would call her — causing her to break down.What was it like being behind bars as an undertrial at the“Even bone-chilling is an understatement”, Jigna says. After a few days of inedible meals, she was finally allowed home cooked food, but a few weeks later when she asked her lawyer to rescind the plea, even the judge was surprised. “My cousin would come in the morning with the dabba and by the time it was lunch, the heat of prison would spoil the food,” she says. “I would sleep hungry on most days. That’s when the watery dal became bearable... After a few weeks in prison, that place became my safe place. I couldn’t wait to return to prison after my court hearings, I felt like it was the place where I belonged, where no one would judge me.”When Jigna was granted bail eight months later, her bail order restricted her from speaking to the media, until the trial came to a close, which is why she has opened up now about her arrest and the time she spent in prison. On May 2, 2018 Jigna along with another accused Paulson Palitra were acquitted of all charges. Only last month the Bombay High Court refused to admit the prosecution’s appeal against her acquittal.More than worry about herself, it was the concern for her son, “the apple of her eye”, that would keep her up most nights. According to Vora, he discovered an article about her arrest in his boarding school library, in Panchgani. “It was sometime in December, nearly a month after my arrest, during which time he would keep writing me emails, asking me why I hadn’t come to see him. That’s when he read it,” she says.The 10-year-old started acting up: “He didn’t know who to ask. He started crying in his sleep and that’s when someone from the family had to be summoned,” she says, unable to fight back the tears. Even when he returned home — he had come down with chicken pox — no one wanted to tell him the details of my arrest. “My mother told him I was visiting some friends in Hyderabad, my grandfather told him I was busy on some story in Delhi, and my grandmother told him another story,” she says.On one occasion, Jigna says she was offered an unusual job profile in prison. Seema Kapoor, accused of heading a prostitution racket, was granted bail and was leaving Byculla prison. “She handed me her number and asked me to call her up [when out of prison],” she says. “She said I would make at least a lakh a week.”After Vora walked out of prison she understood the ridiculous offer and the paucity of rehabilitation services for people acquitted of crimes.Over the years, without a steady job in hand, the once deputy bureau chief of a broadsheet, started picking up the pieces of her life. She started learning how to read tarot cards and indulged in astrology. “I needed to heal myself,” she says. “I needed to forgive a lot of people, I needed closure.” Jigna says she is a changed person today — spiritual, not just religious.There are several theories that continue to float around about her arrest. Some say it had to do with the rivalry in the police force, but she steers clear from speculating about it. “I don’t know who did this to me and why. While I will always wonder about this, I don’t want to really know.”
