HC refuses stay on tree-cutting

HC refuses stay on tree-cutting

Bombay High Court

NGO Vanshakti

Tree Authority

MMRCL

Is the grass greener in Amazon?



Amazon Rainforest

flora and fauna

On August 28, our city’s guardians tweeted their pledge to protect the flora and fauna

‘This feels like house arrest’

Aarey Colony

Therefused to grant a stay on the felling of trees after observing that there was nothing on record to show that such a request was made on Friday, when the court dismissed a clutch of PILs on the issue. “We cannot proceed on any oral understanding,” a special bench constituted of justices SC Dharmadhikari and Anil Menon observed while refusing to grant relief to the petitioners, activist Zoru Bhathena andThey further observed that granting a stay would amount to disregarding the high court order passed on Friday.On October 4, the HC upheld the August 29 decision of theto allow felling of 2,185 trees and transplantation of 461 trees.On Saturday, Bhathena’s advocate Sonal submitted that after the judgment was pronounced on Friday, the bench headed by the chief justice expectednot to go ahead and cut the trees. She said that expectation was belied by the ground level situation and from Friday evening tree cutting was in progress. She urged that MMRCL be restrained until the parties moved the Supreme Court for relief. She also said that the apex court was closed for Dussehra and would open only on October 14, and therefore a stay should be granted till then.However, Advocate Akshay Shinde, for MMRCL, countered that the request was made orally for a stay before the CJ’s bench on Friday. He said it was not proper to refer to any oral understanding in the court for that was not reflected in the judgment or in the record. Opposing grant of any relief, Shinde also said bearing in mind the huge investment and delay in the project, the public interest would suffer.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Mumbai Police appear to have experienced a change of heart in their love for the environment over the last two months. On August 28, our city’s guardians tweeted their pledge to protect the flora and fauna, after a fire destroyed a significant portion of the Amazon rainforest, some 14, 831 kilometres away, and affected the indigenous tribes, animals, trees and fish in the river. "Loss of theis a loss to the entire Mankind. Let us all resolve to protect and conserve ourbefore it is too late. If not us, then who?If not now, then when?," the Mumbai Police handle tweeted with hashtags SaveAmazon and SaveMotherEarth.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------With all routes to Aarey cordoned off, many chose to stay home.As protests kicked off on Friday night, police cordoned off all three routes to(from Saki Naka, Marol and Goregaon), making tribals living in the forest feel like they had been locked in. Though they were being allowed to move, in the absence of any public transport, they had to walk long distances to reach schools, colleges and workplaces.“It feels so much like house arrest,” said Prajapurpada resident Asha Bhoye. Her son Devendra, who works in Sakinaka, said he had to walk 30 minutes to Vijay Nagar. “Others had to walk for much longer than me. My friends from other villages who work in Goregaon and Powai had to walk for at least an hour before they could even spot an autorickshaw. The entire stretch is full of barricades and armed guards, who stop us to check our IDs every few minutes,” he said.Another villager, Laxman Shankar Dalvi from Gavdevipada, said he decided to stay home, as did many of his neighbours. “Walking for hours to get out of Aarey Colony… the trouble didn’t seem worth it. Some who did venture out, like autorickshaw and tempo drivers, were sent back as vehicles were not allowed to leave the area. Now we are all bundled in our homes and hearing the thuds of tree after tree falling,” Dalvi said.
