Paramour’s killer on run, cops form team

Ludhiana: A day after a quack, who had a mobile medical stall, allegedly murdered a 40-year-old woman with whom he had illicit relation, cops on Saturday constituted multiple teams to nab him.

Jagraon City police had booked Kuldeep Singh of Talwandi Bhangariyan village in Moga for allegedly carrying out the crime on suspicion of infidelity.

Inspector Nishan Singh, SHO, Jagraon City police station, said the accused is on the run and at least three teams have been formed to nab him. He said they would send a team to Moga to trace the accused.

Police said after the crime, the accused had switched off his mobile phone and his last location was traced around Nanaksar. Cops are trying to get information about the possible hideouts of the accused through his acquaintance. During preliminary investigations, it has come out that Kuldeep had not visited his native place since 1999. “The accused did not have much social interaction with shopkeepers at the religious place. They do not have much information about him.”

They said the CCTV footage of the accused from the area too has not helped in ascertaining if he had gone towards Moga or Jagraon after committing the crime, the police said.

Meanwhile, deceased’s father Baldev Singh in his statement to police has said his daughter lived alone in Moga and used to visit Nanaksar Gurdwara often and had developed relations with the accused. He used to visit her place in Moga as well. The complainant said that he had also met the accused and had even visited his room in Nanaksar.

On the day she was killed, the complainant said that he was at his daughter’s place when the accused called her over the phone and asked her to come to Nanaksar. The complainant said he followed his daughter to Nanaksar where she met the accused in langar hall of the gurdwara. Both then went to his room near the hall and as he started climbing the stairs, he heard cries of his daughter. The complainant said that on hearing the cries, he went to the room and saw the accused hitting her with a weapon. He said after seeing her falling on ground, he raised the alarm but the accused fled.

Regarding the motive, police while quoting Baldev Singh said that the accused suspected her of infidelity.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
