60 held as tree cutting starts in Aarey

editorial@tribune.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, October 5

The Mumbai police have arrested more than 60 persons for violating prohibitory orders while protesting against the axing of nearly 2,700 trees in suburban Aarey for constructing a metro car shed.

After the Bombay High Court refused to stay felling of the trees on Friday, officials of the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRCL) rushed in bulldozers and electric axes and began cutting the trees at night.

As protesters arrived on the spot, the police imposed section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) in Aarey Colony and surrounding areas. More than 60 persons were detained of whom 29 were sent to judicial custody, the police said on Saturday evening. Some of the arrested persons have been accused of assaulting cops on duty.

Several activists moved the Bombay High Court on Saturday and sought a week’s stay on cutting of the trees so that they could file a petition in the Supreme Court. However, Justice SC Dharmadhikari and AK Menon dismissed their petition. Later, the police cordoned off all roads leading to Aarey colony. Several Shiv Sena leaders, including former Mumbai Mayor Shubha Raul rushed to Aarey, however, all of them were detained, the police said.

Ashwini Bhide, CEO, MMRCL, said the organisation was working on a tight schedule to complete Mumbai Metro Line 3 whose car shed is to be constructed in Aarey.

‘Shameful, disgusting’

"The vigour with which the Mumbai Metro 3 is slyly and swiftly cutting down an ecosystem is shameful and disgusting" Aaditya Thackeray, Shiv Sena leader

‘A False propaganda’

"A new false propaganda is in the air that a 15-day notice is required after the order getting uploaded on the website. This is baseless." Ashwini Bhide, MD, MMRC

‘Stabbing the lungs’

"We are not against the car shed but constructing it inside Aarey forest will be catastrophic. It’s like stabbing yourself in lungs" Milind Deora, Congress leader

Javadekar backs Metro move, says it’s not a forest

Lucknow, October 5

Amid strong opposition from green activists, Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar on Saturday cited a Bombay High Court order to defend the Mumbai Metro Corporation’s move to fell trees in Aarey Colony, saying it was “not a forest”.

“Basically, the HC has ruled that it is not a forest,” Javadekar said. “You can’t fell anything that is forest.” His comments came after the corporation began cutting trees in Aarey Colony for a proposed car shed. He said trees had to be cut for Delhi Metro also and it was opposed by activists even then. “But for each tree cut, five saplings were planted. All have become trees in 15 years.”— PTI
