Mumbai fashion designer arrested for pushing model into prostitution

The accused was produced before a court and remanded in police custody. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused is booked under the provisions of Prevention of Immoral Trafficking Act, 1986 (PITA) The police rescued the well-established model, while she was asked to meet a client for the sex trade The police officials said that Rao was well-connected with people in fashion and media

Mumbai: In a case reported from the commercial capital, a fashion designer was arrested by the Oshiwara police for pushing a model into flesh trade. The accused was identified as 42-year-old Shefanjali Rao, who has been booked under the provisions of Prevention of Immoral Trafficking Act, 1986 (PITA).

Acting on a tip-off, the police rescued the well-established model, while she was asked to meet a client for the sex trade. The police had laid a trap at Rao's housing society in Oshiwara but she changed the location to a hotel at the last moment. The police then reached the hotel and rescued the model. Meanwhile, on October 1 the police arrested Rao.

According to a report, the police officials said that Rao was well-connected with people in fashion, media and television industries. However, further probe in the matter is underway.

In another case reported from Mumbai's Oshiwara, the Mumbai police claimed to have busted a prostitution racket by raiding a flat at Patliputra Society. The accused was identified as 45-year-old Shabana Sheikh. who allegedly acted as agent in the flesh trade.

Reportedly, most of the flats in the housing society belongs to IAS, IPS and other senior-ranking bureaucrats. Two women were rescued while another woman, who allegedly acted as a pimp, was arrested by the police. The police raided the flat while acting on a tip-off and rescued two women aged 21 and 19, apart from seizing some cash.

The accused was produced before a court and remanded in police custody. The rescued women were sent to a correction home. Further probe in the matter is on.
