Impersonators held after their car hits a lawyer on HC campus

It was around 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday when a luxury car sped into the Madras High Court campus and hit a motorcycle-borne lawyer right behind the family court building. The lawyer suffered minor injuries and was rushed to the hospital but what tumbled out of the luxury car was more shocking than the accident.

Immediately after advocate P.S. Muralidhar Rao was knocked down from his motorcycle, a group of men in black robes called the 108 ambulance and shifted the injured to the government hospital. Later, they ghearoed the car driver and the backseat passenger.

The advocates were initially taken aback to find the stickers containing the logo of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the Interpol on the windshield of the car. When they made enquiries with the backseat passenger, he flashed an identity card purportedly issued by the “Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), Government of India.” It went on to identify him as “Dr. P. Prasad, Assistant Commissioner, E&S-I Protocol.” Suspecting the genuineness of the identity card, the lawyers quizzed the passenger further and confirmed that he was an impersonator when he claimed to be an Assistant Commissioner of CBI serving in the PMO.

Complaint lodged

Immediately, advocate V. Anand, 47, lodged a police complaint against car driver M. Mohana Vel, 38, of Jafferkhanpet and the passenger S. Prasad, 33, of T. Nagar with the High Court Police Station and a First Information Report was registered against both of them. The police arrested the duo and seized the car as well as the fake identity card.

Charges under Sections 170 (personating a public servant), 419 (cheating by impersonating), 463 (creating false documents), 467 (forging a document), 471 (using as genuine a forged electronic record), 297 (rash driving) and 337 (causing hurt by act endangering life) of the Indian Penal Code were also pressed against the duo. The incident created a lot of buzz on the High Court campus.
