Avadi double murder: Cops nab domestic help and wife in Haridwar

Avadi double murder: Cops nab domestic help and wife in Haridwar

Podalippu Suresh Kumar, the domestic help, is believed to have over 30 criminal cases pending against him in Andhra Pradesh.

news Crime

Ten months after the gruesome murder of an elderly couple in Avadi, Chennai, police have arrested their former domestic help and his wife from Haridwar.

The couple - Podilappu Suresh Kumar and his wife Bhulakshmi - were traced all the way to Haridwar in Uttarakhand based on a tip off. They were reportedly living there with their son. A senior police officer told TNIE that seven teams had been formed to trace and nab the duo in Haridwar.

According to reports, Suresh Kumar, who hails from Andhra Pradesh, has over 30 cases ranging from murder, rape and robbery pending in his home state.

The murder

On November 28, 2018, 68-year-old Jegadeesan and 61-year old Vishalini, both retired from the government press in Tamil Nadu, were found murdered in their farmhouse in Sekkadu near Avadi. Police officers investigating the case had confirmed that 50 sovereigns of gold jewellery were missing from the scene of crime following the incident.

During investigations, police had also recovered a bloodied iron rod which is believed to have been the weapon used to murder the couple.

Two days before the murder, CCTV footages also showed Suresh waiting at the Avadi railway station at 11.56 pm on November 26.

In December 2018, the Chennai police released photographs of the suspects along with other circulars and pamphlets to alert residents to be on the lookout for the duo.

A team of police officers had also visited Suresh’s native town in Andhra Pradesh to find out more information on him.

Jegadeesan is survived by his sons Priyesh Kumar, 38, a resident of Annanagar and Karthik, 36, who lives in Nigeria, from his first wife Sukumari.

Also read: Kerala woman held: Allegedly confessed to giving cyanide to husband and five relatives
