JeM Terrorist Arrested In Baramulla; Arms & Ammunition Recovered

Jammu and Kashmir Police, busting a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) module arrested a terrorist, who was affiliated to the Pakistan-based organisation. The terrorist was nabbed from north Kashmir's Baramulla district, arms and ammunition were recovered from him. In a press brief by Jammu and Kashmir Police, the DIG said that the terrorist, who had joined JeM on August 30 was caught in a joint operation after a specific intelligence input.

He said, "We had specific information last night, in this. Mohsin Manzoor Salhea had joined the militant outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed on 30.08.2019 (August 30, 2019). We had the information about his movement in the area and accordingly we put up barricades. The Baramulla Police and CRPF unit caught him in a joint operation and retrieved a pistol, a magazine. As per the recoveries, he was planning a cop killing. The investigation is going on. A mission complaint against him was lodged on August 23, 2019, and he joined the terror organisation on 30 August. The main purpose is to create fear among the public. Further investigations are ongoing."

J&K: A local, Mohsin Saleh who had joined Jaish-e-Mohammed recently has been arrested in Baramulla. Md Suleman Choudhary, IG Baramulla says,"He was caught in a joint op by Baramulla police&CRPF. From the items recovered from him, we deduce that he was planning a cop killing". pic.twitter.com/TP2mZ6Xv4U — ANI (@ANI) October 6, 2019

READ| Pakistan-Taliban Meet Irks Afghanistan, Questions Legitimacy Of Meet

Delhi JeM raids

Several raids were conducted in the national capital after intelligence agencies warned the Delhi Police of a probable JeM terror threat on October 3.

Following the intelligence reports, the Police conducted nine raids across Delhi after concerns of terror infiltration were raised by the intelligence community. Raids were conducted at Jamia Nagar, Paharganj, ISBT area, South Delhi, Northeast Delhi and Silampur areas of Delhi, however, no arrests were made.

Founder of the terror organisation, Masood Azhar has been seeking refuge in Pakistan. According to intel sources, Jaish-e-Mohammed chief had been secretly freed by Pakistan early in September, despite facing the heat of FATF. According to Republic sources, Masood Azhar's last known location was Markaz Subhan Allah, Bahawalpur. His health, according to reports, has considerably improved however the terrorist avoids giving sermons. On March 1, Foreign Minister of Pakistan Mehmood Qureshi had inadvertently admitted that Masood Azhar was in Pakistan but is 'unwell,' and even that the Pakistani administration is in contact with the UN-designated terrorist.

READ| Chargesheet filed against 4 JeM terrorists, Pulwama-type plot busted

On September 27, the United States asked Pakistan to prosecute UN-designated terrorists like LeT chief Hafiz Saeed and Jaish-e-Mohammed founder Masood Azhar, asserting that the de-escalation of India-Pakistan tensions is dependent on Islamabad's seriousness to deal with terror brimming on their soil.
