Telangana: Trainer Aircraft Crashes In Vikarabad District, Two Pilots Killed

New Delhi:

Two pilots were killed after a trainer aircraft crashed in Telangana’s Vikarabad district on Sunday, reported The New Indian Express. One of the deceased was recognised as Prakash Vishal, who was a trainee pilot.

It is to be noted that the trainee aircraft crashed in a cotton field at Sultanpur village in Vikarabad district, around 100 km from Hyderabad. The New Indian Express further said that the the aircraft had lost contact with the Begumpet Station in Hyderabad after 11.55 am.

Soon after the tragic incident, farmers and villagers rushed to the crash site and also alerted the police. Police found two persons on board were dead. A team from the Department of Civil aviation also rushed to the spot from Begumpet airport. The area was cordoned off and the investigation is underway.

The report also noted that the aircraft belonged to a private flying institute based at Hyderabad and was on a sortie when the incident took place.

However, the news agency ANI said that a pilot was killed was killed after a trainer aircraft crashed at Sultanpur village in Telangana’s Vikarabad district.

Telangana: Pilot killed in trainer aircraft crash at Sultanpur village in Vikarabad district. pic.twitter.com/b7bNfDmIss — ANI (@ANI) October 6, 2019

Last month, a Cheetah helicopter of the Indian Army had crashed in Bhutan while it was enroute from Khirmu in Arunanchal Pradesh to Yongfulla Bhutan on duty. As per the reports, two including an Indian Army pilot and a pilot from the Bhutanese Royal Army were killed in the tragic crash.

Also, a MiG-21 combat trainer aircraft of the Indian Air Force (IAF) had crashed in Madhya Pradesh in the month of September this year. However, both the pilots ejected safely.

Madhya Pradesh: MiG 21 Trainer aircraft of the Indian Air Force crashed in Gwalior, today. Both the pilots, including a Group Captain and a squadron leader, managed to eject safely. pic.twitter.com/Gdmik5RhTN — ANI (@ANI) September 25, 2019

The aircraft was on a routine training mission from the Gwalior airbase when the crash occurred at around 10 am soon after taking off around 10 km from the Air Force station Maharajpur, IAF officials had said.

For all the Latest India News, South News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
