naked capitalism

This is Naked Capitalism fundraising week. 1193 donors have already invested in our efforts to combat corruption and predatory conduct, particularly in the financial realm. Please join us and participate via our donation page, which shows how to give via check, credit card, debit card, or PayPal. Read about why we’re doing this fundraiser and what we’ve accomplished in the last year, and our current goal, burnout prevention.

‘Incredibly rare’ monkey born at Australian zoo Channel News (furzy)

Report Shows ‘Stunning and Dramatic’ Scenes of Thawing Permafrost in Siberia That ‘Leaves Millions on Unstable Ground’Common Dreams

150 Years of Mirza Ghalib: How His Genius Took the Ghazal to New Heights and Depths The Wire

Spanish police plucked from ocean by drugs smugglers they were chasing Guardian

Thomas Cook handed over millions to 30 advisers in dying days FT

Class Warfare

Lawyers accuse Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes of not paying them for defending her in a civil case and say they have ‘no expectation’ that she’ll ever pay them due to her ‘current financial situation’ Daily Mail (BC)

A Tesla Recall? NHTSA Could Review If Model S And Model X Should Have Been Recalled In May International Business Times

Gunz

Joshua Brown, key witness in Amber Guyger murder trial and neighbor of Botham Jean, shot to death in Dallas CNN (DK)

FEARING FOR HIS LIFE The Verge

Brazil

China

China Is Breeding Giant Pigs the Size of Polar Bears Bloomberg

Syraqistan

India

Misery of a nuclear war between India and Pakistan would be global Ars Technica

New Cold War

China?

Brexit

2020

Waste Watch

Billionaire-backed foundation contributes $300M to new plastics initiative Waste Dive UserFriendly: “Not that the MSM would ever touch this because it makes trump voters look good, but remember back when Trump called Baltimore ‘rat and rodent infested’? This kid who was a volunteer and door knocker for Trump got a bunch of MAGA’s to go clean up Baltimore. They have been at it since then.” We picked up 10 tons of trash in 10 hours. In 3 months, we’ve removed 29 tons of trash from the streets of Baltimore. #AnActOfLove pic.twitter.com/J1XXTUW2cR — #ThePersistence (@ScottPresler) 5 October 2019

737 MAX

Boeing Reportedly Scrapped 737 Max Safety System as It Was Too Expensive Interesting Engineering

Singapore to decide what’s fake and what’s real Asia Times (The Rev Kev)

Trump Transition

Antidote du Jour (via):

See yesterday’s Links and Antidote du Jour here.
