Now I feel accepted as daughter of India: Ravi Khanna's wife after his inclusion in National War Memorial

Nirmal Khanna | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: A day after Indian Air Force (IAF) gave a nod to include martyred Squadron Leader Ravi Khanna's name on the National War Memorial, his wife Nirmal Khanna thanked the IAF and asserted that now she feels like a daughter of India. Ravi Khanna was killed in a terror attack in 1990, however, his name was missing from the list of martyrs at the war memorial when it was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi earlier this year.

After hearing the news of IAF's decision to finally include Ravi Khanna's name in the martyr's list at the National War Memorial, Nirmal Khanna said, "What else can a soldier long for? When a soldier wears the uniform, he knows it's a coffin. I am thankful to the Indian Air Force and 130 crore Indians."

"Now, I feel accepted as a daughter of India. I had to fight for War Widows Pension for a long. But as good citizens we should first know our duties and then take our rights," she added.

RELATED NEWS Martyred IAF Squadron Leader Ravi Khanna's name to be inscribed on National War Memorial

Ever since the war memorial's inauguration in February this year, Nirmal Khanna had been vehemently demanding inclusion of her husband's name in it. It was on Saturday that the IAF finally approved the case to include the name of Squadron Leader Ravi Khanna on the National War Memorial in New Delhi.

Back on January 25, 1990, Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) had carried out a terror attack in which Ravi Khanna and three other IAF personnel lost their lives. The attack was led by separatist leader Yasin Malik.

After the attack, Malik was charge-sheeted by the CBI before the TADA court in Jammu on August 31, 1990, in connection with the case. Malik, who has been arrested in a terror funding case by the NIA and currently lodged in Tihar Jail, is likely to be produced in the special court through video conferencing.
