Balakot Strikes: Minty Agarwal's 601 Signal Unit To Be Honoured

Minty Agarwal, a Squadron Leader in the Indian Air Force who recently became the first woman awardee of the Yudh Seva Medal will soon be conferred with another honour. Her 601 signal unit will be awarded the unit citation for their role in the Balakot airstrikes. Reportedly, they blocked the aerial attack by Pakistan on February 27. Notably, Minty Agarwal was a part of the team of seven fighter controllers which guided Indian fighter jets during the tussle with Pakistan's F-16.

READ | Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman’s Squadron To Receive Award

Squadron Leader Minty Agarwal’s 601 Signal unit to be awarded the unit citation for their role in Balakot aerial strikes and for thwarting the aerial attack by Pakistan on February 27. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/Lvih07Ud7P — ANI (@ANI) October 6, 2019

WATCH | RKS Bhadauria: "We Are Prepared For Next Balakot, No Doubt"

Minty Agarwal, the recipient of Yudh Seva Medal

A unit citation is an honorary mention of a unit’s specific and remarkable performance, especially in a battle. For her service in the Air Force, Agarwal was awarded the Yudh Seva Medal on August 15, 2019; and not long after the Squadron Leader and her unit will be receiving this new honour. Agarwal had cautioned the IAF teams after she spotted a group of Pakistani Air Force planes heading towards Nowshera area of Jammu and Kashmir on February 27. This came a day after India carried out Balakot strikes.

READ | Air Marshal RKS Bhadauria To Be New IAF Chief Of Air Staff: MoD

Abhinandan Varthaman’s Squadron to be awarded unit citation

Abhinandan Varthaman, Wing Commander's 51 Squadron is to be awarded unit citation by the IAF Chief Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria for blocking the aerial attack by Pakistan. The Squadron also shot down a Pakistani F-16 on Feb 27. The award will be received by commanding officer Group Captain Satish Pawar on October 8. Abhinandan who was captured from his MiG-21 which was shot down by the Pakistani Air force was released by the Government of Pakistan after India exerted pressure. The international community also condemned the move and asked for him to be released. Abhinandan was earlier conferred with Vir Chakra, which is the third-highest wartime gallantry award.

READ: Wing Commander Abhinandan Flies Again, Netizens Miss His Moustache

(With ANI inputs)
