It’s disadvantage all main parties : The Tribune India

editorial@tribune.com

Geetanjali Gayatri

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, October 6

Haryana’s main political parties have gone into the Assembly elections at a disadvantage, which is weighing them down as campaigning gathers pace.

The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is grappling with the problem of plenty, while the Congress is battling infighting. The Janayak Janta Party (JJP) and the Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) are together suffering the fallout of a split, while others parties such as the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), the Swaraj India and the Loktantra Suraksha Party are struggling to make their presence felt on the political scene.

In the run-up to the elections, the BJP inducted several leaders of rival parties. Some of them have managed the party ticket as well within weeks of joining the party, causing heartburn among its local leaders. Then, 12 of its legislators, including two ministers, were denied tickets, resulting in the fear of undercutting by those overlooked.

Though the BJP leadership claims it faces no threat of rebellion and apprehends little threat from its “disciplined soldiers”, sources maintain the only adverse impact, if any, could be nothing more than reduced margin of victory.

The infighting within the Congress and the inability of its leadership to present a united “election face” is a cause for concern for the party divided in several factions. Former state Congress chief Ashok Tanwar’s exit from the party is an added blow, as the party under the new team of state chief Kumari Selja and Congress Legislature Party (CLP) leader Bhupinder Singh Hooda hopes to make a comeback.

Congress candidates are in a direct contest with the BJP in most of the segments, though it remains to be seen if the party can get its act together. As for the INLD, it faces an existential crisis with its senior leaders quitting the party and opting for “better” options. The situation of the JJP, the INLD’s splinter group, is no better. It needs to win a few seats to prove it is here to stay. For the two parties, the Assembly elections are more about one-upmanship over the other.

The other parties have been unable to make their presence felt, hoping to open their account even as this election has shrunk to being a contest between the main political parties.
