US weighing options short of war with Iran

By NDT Special Bureau

The deadly drones and missiles attacks on the world’s biggest crude oil processing facility in Saudi Arabia crippled Saudi oil production to a greater extent.

The attack carried out on September 14, was so horrifying that Saudi oil production slumped to half of its regular supply. Saudis displayed remnants of drones and missiles that were presumably used for attacks stressing it was “unquestionably sponsored by Iran”.

Tehran vehemently denied its involvement and even went ahead to warn the US to retaliate immediately if targeted. The attacks reignited fears over a wider conflagration in the region. And responses poured in. Saudi Arabia said the strike was a “test of global will”.

The US asserted repeatedly that Iran was behind the attacks and promised to present evidence to back that up. The US President Trump spoke of multiple options short of war with Iran. “There are many options. There’s the ultimate option and there are options that are a lot less than that. And we’ll see,” Trump told reporters in Los Angeles. “I’m saying the ultimate option meaning go in — war,” he added.

Trump ordered the US Treasury to “substantially increase sanctions” on Iran in retaliation to the September 14 attacks and told reporters that the unspecified, punitive economic measures would be unveiled within 48 hours.

The US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo visited Saudi Arabia and described the attacks as “unprecedented” and “an act of war” on the Kingdom, the world’s largest oil exporter.

“The Iranian regime’s threatening behaviour will not be tolerated,” he warned. Washington stood solidly behind Saudi Arabia’s “right to defend itself”. Pompeo discussed the security issue with Saudi Crown Prince Salman in Jeddah to shape probable response.

Pompeo next met with the United Arab Emirates’ powerful Crown Prince, Zayed Al Nahyan. The UAE is a close ally of Saudi Arabia and has joined the Kingdom in its war in Yemen against the Houthis.

The UAE announced having joined a US-led coalition to “ensure global energy security and the continued flow of energy supplies to the global economy” with intent to protect waterways across the Mideast after the attack.

Tensions remain pretty high over Iran’s collapsing nuclear deal with the world powers. The US formed the coalition after attacks on oil tankers that American officials blame on Iran, as well as Iran’s seizure of tankers in the region.

Iran denies being behind the tanker explosions, though the attacks came after Tehran threatened to stop oil exports from the Persian Gulf. Saudi Arabia even joined the coalition in which Australia, Bahrain and the United Kingdom are also taking part.

Pakistan’s Prime Minister Imran Khan said that the US President Trump had asked him to help defuse tensions with Iran. He is mediating with Iran and claimed having already spoken with Iranian President Rouhani but effused to elaborate further right now as Islamabad is “trying and mediating”.

Prior to arriving in New York Imran had visited Saudi Arabia and spoken to Saudi Crown Prince Salman who also asked him to talk to Rouhani. When Trump was asked about Imran’s remarks, he said the premier would like to mediate, adding: “We have a very good relationship and there’s a chance that that could happen”.

Tehran and Washington have been at loggerheads since Trump’s abandonment of 2015 nuclear deal and began re-imposing sanctions on Iran.

“A lot of people would like to get us to the table. We’ll see what happens but so far we have not agreed to a meeting”, Trump had said on a possible meeting with Rouhani while both were in New York during the UNGA.

Like this: Like Loading...
