SAD chief Sukhbir Badal was on hit list of terror module behind September 5 blast in Punjab’s Tarn Taran

Sukhbir Singh Badal | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The terror module had hatched a plan to kill Badal to avenge the sacrilege of Guru Granth Sahib at Bargari The module had planned to kill Sukhbir Singh Badal on November 2016 in another bomb attack The terror module had carried out September 2016 blast at Pandori Gola village in Punjab’s Tarn Taran

Chandigarh: The terror module that carried out September 5 blast at Pandori Gola village in Punjab’s Tarn Taran had planned to kill then deputy chief minister and Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) chief Sukhbir Singh Badal in November 2016 in another bomb attack.

According to a probe conducted by the Punjab Police into the terror attack, the terror module had hatched a plan to kill Badal to avenge the sacrilege of Guru Granth Sahib at Bargari.

The terror module had reportedly planned to kill former Punjab deputy chief minister during his Amritsar visit in November 2016.

The terror plot was revealed during the interrogation of those arrested for their alleged role in the last month's blast in which two people were killed. During the police investigation, it was learnt that a person from Austria had hatched a conspiracy to kill Badal during his visit to Golden Temple in Amritsar. However, the plan failed after Badal arrived at the Golden Temple with tight security.

The details of the case have been handed over to the National Investigation Agency (NIA) by the Punjab Police for further investigation.

On September 5, two accused in the case were killed and one was seriously injured in a blast that took place in an agricultural field in Tarn Taran district. The two accused -- Vikram alias Vicky alias Bikkar Singh and Harpreet Singh alias Happy -- died on the spot in the blast while Gurjant Singh sustained injuries while they were trying to dig out the bomb planted by them in a vacant plot on the outskirts of Pandori Gola village.

Last week, the NIA arrested the main accused and the conspirator of the accidental blast - Gurjant Singh after his release from a private hospital where he was admitted after receiving injuries in the explosion, news agency IANS reported. Subsequently, he was sent to NIA custody till October 11 after being produced before the Special NIA Court in Mohali.

Punjab Police, which was earlier probing the case, had filed an FIR on September 5 under charges of culpable homicide not amounting to murder of the Indian Penal Code, and Sections 3 and 4 of the Explosive Substances Act. It later invoked Sections 10, 11 and 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act on September 15.

The case was later taken over by the NIA in view of its national and international ramifications, and the suspected links of the accused to the Pakistan-backed Sikhs for Justice (SFJ). After taking over the investigation, the NIA added Sections 16, 18, 20 and 23 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.

Punjab Police had earlier arrested seven persons -- Mandeep Singh, Chandeep Singh, Malkiat Singh, Amrit Singh, Harjit Singh, Amarajeet Singh and Manpreet Singh in connection with the case. The Special NIA Court later sent Amrit Singh and Harjit Singh to NIA custody till October 11.
