Jilted lover tries to kill NICMAR student

A student of National Institute of Construction Management and Research (NICMAR) escaped unhurt — just because she did not stay at her own hostel room on Monday night — during a murderous bid by her jilted lover on Tuesday morning.The youth, Suraj Soni (25) of Gwalior, later jumped from the second floor of girls’ hostel at NICMAR at Balewadi, trying to commit suicide after opening blank fire. Chaturshringi police have registered a case against Soni under sections 307 (attempt to murder), 309 (attempt to commit suicide) and 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), besides relevant sections of the Arms Act.Soni used to study in the city earlier. As per the police complaint registered by NICMAR security guards, he came to campus around 6.15 am. He put a country-made revolver on the torso of the security man and asked him to open the gate as he wanted to meet a girl. Soni entered the hostel and couldn’t find her in the room. He opened fire thrice in the room, waking up the inmates. Then, he jumped from the second floor of the building, only to be admitted to a hospital.The police officials said Soni was having an affair with a college mate while pursuing engineering in Bharati Vidyapeeth here. The youth went to his hometown while the girl stayed in Pune to pursue further courses.Soni used to come to the city frequently but the relationship between the duo turned sore eventually, and she broke up with him. With this, around a month ago, he uploaded nude pictures of her on Facebook. “This was seen among their mutual friend circles and Soni was forced to take down the photos. He had been trying to force the relationship on the girl. She changed her mobile phone numbers due to the stalking. Finally, he came here with the intent to kill her, but couldn’t find her at the hostel,” said a friend of the victim, who did not wish to be identified.Police officials said Soni came from Indore and brought along a country-made revolver. “The girl was in the city itself, but not at her hostel and luckily escaped. There were no eyewitnesses to the incident as it happened early in the morning. The guy hails from a middle class family and seems to be insane,” said assistant police inspector Dattatray Shinde, who is probing the case.Soni has suffered vertebra injury and was admitted to Sassoon General Hospital. “The accused is not in a serious condition. He will be taken to custody on discharge,” Shinde added.Although NICMAR officials have intensified security on the campus, they refrained from commenting on the incident.
