SBI Life Insurance brings to you the ‘Real Life Real Story’ of Chhau dancers

On the auspicious occasion of Durga Puja, SBI Life Insurance continues its journey of ‘Real Life Real Stories’ by releasing another inspirational video on the life of Chhau dancers. The heart-warming video is in tandem with SBI Life’s philosophy of showcasing extraordinary acts of ordinary people which have made a difference to the larger community.

A group of men prevalent in mainly the tribal belts of eastern India collectively participate during the regional festival to preserve the art form. Conceptualised by WATConsult, the video highlights the cultural nuances of the Chhau dance form through the expedition of the dancers who are looking to revive this form of art.

Speaking on the release of the latest video, Ravindra Sharma, Chief of Brand & Corporate Communications, SBI Life Insurance, said, " SBI Life’s endeavour has been to encourage youth to drive the desired change for a better life for themselves and communities at large. ‘Real Life Real Stories’ serves as a powerful platform in showcasing inspiring acts of common people. The digital video of Chhau dancers is an attempt to highlight the perseverance and dedication of this community towards revitalising the dying art form. The inherent aim of releasing this video is to instil the same sense of responsibility among others.”

Prevalent mainly in the states of West Bengal, Jharkhand and Odisha, the dance movement comprises of mock combat techniques, gaits of birds and animals and also that of simple village beings. The dancers perform a repertoire that explores a variety of subjects like mythological episodes along with contemporary issues and worthy situations that facilitate direct learning of moral behaviour.

A year back, SBI Life, took this unconventional route of showcasing inspirational real life stories of common, yet incredible people to encourage and inspire every Indian. The brand’s Real Life Real Stories series on social media also showcased the empowering journey of Pabiben, Robinhood Army, Mumbai Fire Brigade and will also be seen revealing more such stories this festive season.
