Carry out attacks, target police and politicians: Pakistani handlers divide tasks among top terror groups

Security forces on alert in Jammu and Kashmir | File image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Intelligence agencies say three terror groups' leaders met recently in Pulwama Pakistani handlers have issued instructions to LeT, JeM and HuM Pakistan Army and ISI has divided tasks among the three terror groups

New Delhi: In alarming news, three terrorist groups sponsored by Pakistan are reported to have distributed tasks amongst themselves with regard to carrying out attacks in India, especially Jammu and Kashmir.

It was reported that the distribution of ‘responsibilities’ was done among Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HuM) and Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) at a meeting held recently in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, where a terror attack on a CRPF convoy in February led to the killing of 40 jawans and triggered an unprecedented in spike in tensions between India and Pakistan.

The assigning of responsibilities among the three terror groups has been facilitated by the Pakistan Army and the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), Pakistan’s spy agency.

A document whose details were reported by news agency ANI, shows the tasks include carrying out attacks in Jammu and Kashmir, other parts of India, and for political and police killings.

The briefing to the three terror groups was done at the Pulwama meeting by their Pakistani masters, the document shows.

"There is a credible input that terrorists have recently held a joint meeting at an unspecified location in Pulwama in which different operational responsibilities were assigned to different terrorist groups as a future strategy," the document states.

"JeM has been assigned the responsibility of carrying out the attack along the national highway. LeT has been given responsibility to carrying the attack on interior security installations, while HM has been assigned the task to ensure shutdown and police/political killings," the document, prepared by the intelligence agencies, adds.

Additionally, Hizb-ul has also been tasked to trigger unrest in the Valley and attack local people. Further, all three groups have been asked to ensure shutdown in Jammu and Kashmir and immediately carry out attacks in case there is any positive development.

Meanwhile, security forces have been put on alert and asked to strictly follow standard operating procedures. The forces have also been asked to remain in close co-ordination with intelligence agencies, local police and Indian Army.

"Pakistan-sponsored terrorist outfits, especially Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed and Hizb-ul-Mujahideen have been pressuring people not to carry out their daily chores. They forced people to close shops and petrol pumps, but pumps are open and we have ensured that shops are open wherever people want to open them," Jammu and Kashmir Police chief Dilbagh Singh had told ANI last month.

It may be recalled here that on August 5 this year, the Central government revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir and decided to divide the state into two union territories.
