Karnataka must adopt zero death strategy to combat Kyasanur Forest Disease, says expert

Follow Goa model, reduce mortality

SHIVAMOGGA/MANIPAL: Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) or monkey fever continues to haunt parts of Shivamogga. Though KFD season begins from November to May (winter to summer) the virus exists in the nature and good surveillance will help early detection of cases.Dr G Arunkumar, Director, Manipal Institute of Virology (MIV), Manipal Academy of Higher Education, stressed on the need to develop one-time potent vaccine to control KFD and urged the state to develop zero death strategy.He told TOI, KFD is a situation that the state will have to deal for years. “There is a need for single dose lifetime protection vaccine, so that the entire village is vaccinated.”Under the current system, two doses of vaccination are administered for the first time and then the person must be vaccinated every year. This way, the demand for vaccine supply and logistics for vaccination increases year by year. Dr Arunkumar said, “The vaccine that was developed in 1960 is procured from the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals and is supplied to five states. New vaccine must be developed for which research is necessary. Research was limited because KFD was a disease restricted to a small area and tested only on a limited population. Due to Manipal’s intervention in 2014, the disease was recognized in five states- that have the same flora and fauna along the western ghat,” he said, suspecting that the disease could be prevalent in areas with similar topography and geography.“A vaccinated village may find some protection, but where the next outbreak would be reported is not known. Development of new vaccine may take some time. The disease is not present in any other country except India. However, a very closely related Alkhurma Heamorrhagic Fever Virus is present in Saudi Arabia. We are hoping that a single dose lifelong protection vaccine will be more acceptable to public and be economically feasible,” he said.Unlike Japanese encephalitis , where nearly 20-25 per cent of the survivors suffer from neurological defects, recovery from KFD is nearly 100 per cent, if clinically managed well in the beginning. “Karnataka must focus on zero death strategy and for this, early detection of cases and clinical management in PHCs or CHCs / taluk hospitals in the vicinity of epicentre of outbreak is crucial. Over the years we will see activity happening, in unexposed population. There is no specific medicine for KFD treatment, yet patients can be saved by supportive care and constant close monitoring. When compared to Karnataka , Goa manages the cases at community health centre level well and death cases recorded are minimal,” said Arunkumar.
