Pakistan Assigns Terror Tasks To Its 'top-3' Groups, Targets India

According to an exclusive document accessed by ANI, three terrorist organizations, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) and Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), with the help of the Pakistani Army and the ISI have been given the responsibility to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir, parts of India and also for political and police killings. According to the document accessed by ANI, a secret meeting at a location in Pulwama last week was held to brief the terrorist organizations about the responsibilities assigned.

Responsibilities to carry out terror attacks distributed amongst JeM, LeT and HM

The document which was accessed by ANI also said that, "there is a credible input that recently a meeting between terrorist organizations was held in Pulwama at an unspecified location where the responsibilities of the terror strikes were distributed and assigned by the leaders." As per the document, "JeM has been handed over the responsibility to carry out an attack along the national highway whereas LeT has been assigned the responsibility to damage the internal security installation. The Hizbul Mujahideen has been asked to create unrest and target the locals." As per ANI sources, the terror groups have also been asked to ensure a complete clampdown in the valley and to create unrest if there is any positive development. Security forces have also been instructed to follow the standard operating procedure and also communicate constantly with intelligence agencies, local police and Indian Army.

READ | Delhi On High Alert After Intelligence Warns Of JeM Terror Threat

READ | Ghaziabad Railway Station On High Alert As Intel Hints Terror Strike

National capital put on high alert

New Delhi has also been put on alert after an intel was received about a possible terror strike ahead of the festive season in the country. In order to counter the possible terror activities in Delhi, the Delhi Police have been carrying out raids at several places in the city. Following intelligence reports, the police have conducted nine raids across the capital. However, no arrests have been made yet in the matter. Delhi's border areas like Haryana and Punjab have also been put on high alert. Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Mandeep Singh Randhawa while speaking to the media said that the Delhi Police has been put on high alert along with the Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) on stand by.

READ | J&K Guv's Advisor Warns Masood Azhar, As Intel Of Terror Plot Emerges

READ | J&K Admin Ends House Arrest Of Leaders In Jammu Ahead Of Civic Polls

(With ANI Inputs)
