Firemen play risky as no upgrade in sight

Ludhiana: Even as the announcement of upgradation of the department, firemen continue to jump straight into ablaze structures for control fires. In absence of advanced equipment, they are putting their lives at risk. This, despite losing nine fighters in the fire and building collapse incident at Amarson Polymers on November 20, 2017.

The authorities, however, claimed that due to the paucity of funds with the state government, the upgradation is getting delayed.

Two firemen who lost balance and fell from the sheds while dousing a factory fire on Tuesday sustained injuries. Had they been given a hydraulic ladder, they would not have had to risk their lives. They had entered the unit amid intense heat and thick smoke emanating from the building.

After the Amarson fire and building collapse incident, Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh had announced to transform the fire wing completely. It was declared that they the department would be equipped with fire-proof suits, safety kits, better fire tenders with hydraulic ladder and other important gadgets. However, no such development came through.

A fireman requesting anonymity said, “We are risking our lives for the public, but nobody is bothered about our safety. Since we cannot generate profit for the government the authorities perhaps do not care for the upgradation of the brigade.”

There is no way for us to communicate with each other during rescue operations and have to shout from a distance to send minor alerts, he rued.

When contacted, assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu said, “The fire brigade will be upgraded when the government will have enough funds for the same. Recently, the state government has demanded Rs 528 crore as part of a five-year upgradation plan for the fire wing from the 15th finance commission members during a meeting.”

Meanwhile, mayor Balkar Sandhu said, “I have ordered for the free treatment of the firemen who received minor injuries in the operation,”

Regarding the upgradation plan, he said the state government will give funds for purchasing safety kits and fire-proof suits.

2019

January 10 | Close shave for eight people, including four firemen, during a fire and building collapse incident at a house in Mayapuri

January 6 | Fire broke out at an auto parts manufacturing industry in Phase 8 of Focal Point

January 3 | Narrow escape for seven firemen while dousing fire at a herbal medicine manufacturing unit in Upkar Nagar

2018

December 17 | A major fire incident was reported at Shakti Textiles in Hambran village on Hambran Road

December 16 | A showroom in Field Ganj was engulfed in fire

November 14 | Fire incident at a knitwear unit near Samrala Chowk

October 10 | Four labourers died in a fire at Kalra Knitwears in Kalyan Nagar, Daresi

September 13 | Over 20 patients had a narrow escape in a fire outbreak reported in Mediways Hospital on Ferozepur Road

June 9 | A fire incident was reported in VP Oswal hosiery at Noorwala Road

May 16 | Four persons had a narrow escape when a fire broke out at an institute in one of the complexes in Feroze Gandhi Market

April 29 | Fire reported at a plywood factory on Sua Road in Dhandhari

April 27 | A major fire engulfed JM Hosiery Mills Private Ltd on Bahadur K Road

April 26 | A cylinder blast and flash fire in a house in Samrat Colony, Giaspura left 14 dead and 20 injured



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
