Udupi registers second triple talaq case

Inter-state robbers arrested

MANGALURU: A 43-year-old woman has filed a complaint against her husband under the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, 2019. This is the second triple talaq case registered in Udupi district in a span of one month.Shabana, a resident of Indrali, in her plaint at the Women’s Police Station, Udupi, on Saturday, stated that she was married to Shakeel Ahmed, 50, as per Muslim traditions on February 1, 2000, and the couple has three children. Ever since they got married, Shakeel has been torturing her mentally and physically. The couple and their children were staying in an apartment at Indrali. The torture became unbearable from the past seven years, where accused has been demanding divorce from the complainant. He was also manhandling the children after locking them inside a room. Shabana said since she did not agree to his demand, her husband started living separately from March 2019.On September 16, when Shabana was walking near Indrali Temple, the accused came to the spot and uttered talaq thrice. He also threatened to kill her. The accused pronounced talaq as he wanted to marry another woman, said the complaint.Later, she approached police and a complaint was registered under Indian Penal Code 498(a), 323, 342, 506 and under Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, 2019.Talaq-e-biddat refers to the practice under Muslim personal laws where pronouncement of the word ‘talaq’ thrice in one sitting by a Muslim man to his wife results in an instant and irrevocable divorce. The Bill makes declaration of talaq a cognizable offence, attracting up to three years’ imprisonment with a fine.The sleuths of Central Crime Branch (CCB) from Bengaluru have arrested four inter-state robbers in Derlakatte on Saturday, said sources. Police opened fire before arresting the notorious robbers. Sources added that the CCB sleuths, who were on the look-out for the four notorious robbers involved in inter-state robberies, learnt they were holed up in Derlakatte. Acting on a tip-off, police zeroed in on the four robbers. They tried to escape, which resulted in police opening fire at them. Sources added that the accused were in a four-wheeler and police shot at the car’s tyre to stop them. Later, they were arrested and taken into custody. However, local Mangaluru police were unaware about the developments.Sources added that the robbers, in order to hide their identity and escape from police radar, had joined as labourers at a fish-meal factory in Harekala.
