Body chopped into pieces, spread over 70 kms: 8 yrs after man went missing, Delhi Police arrests wife's lover for murder

Twenty-two-year-old Ravi was kidnapped in 2011 from Delhi's Kapasheda. While police suspected his wife Shakuntala and her alleged lover Kamal for the kidnapping they did not have sufficient evidence to link them to the alleged crime.

Meanwhile, Ravi was never found, nor was his body.

Eight years after Ravi went missing, Delhi Police have successfully solved the crime and have arrested Kamal and his driver Ganesh. Shakuntala, however, is still absconding.

The Delhi Police's Crime Branch has also recovered Ravi's body which was cut into pieces and spread over 70 kilometres in Rajasthan's Alwar district.

The tragic story of Ravi started in 2010 when he was working as a construction worker in Alwar. A resident of Delhi's Samalkha, he fell in love with a girl in Alwar and asked for her hand from her parents. They immediately got married and he brought her to Delhi where he planned to drive an auto for living.

His joy was, however, short-lived as his wife left his home only a day after the wedding and went back to her parents. The reason? She already had a lover and had only married Ravi under pressure from her parents.

While Ravi, now alone, started driving an auto in Delhi, Kamal and Shakuntala hatched a plan to get rid of him.

"Main accused Kamal had a relationship with Shakuntala. In 2011, her marriage was fixed with a man called Ravi. She remained in contact with Kamal after the marriage. A month into the marriage, both hatched a conspiracy to kill Ravi," Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime Branch) Joy Tirkey revealed.

Around one and half month into the marriage, Shakuntala came to Delhi and asked Ravi to accompany her to her sister's home. He agreed and went with Kamal and Shakunatala while Ganesh drove the car.

Ganesh was paid Rs 70,000 by the accused.

Soon after dropping Shakunatala to her sister's place, Kamal strangulated Ravi in the car with a rope and took his body to the construction site in Alwar where Ravi used to work. He and Ganesh dumped the body at the construction site and left.

"As per plan, Shakuntala made a plan of visiting her sister's place along with her husband and invited her lover, Kamal to join them. They hailed the cab of the driver who was part of their plan and executed the murder during the journey", DCP Tirkey said.

Meanwhile, here in Delhi, the police registered a case of kidnapping and started probing Shakunatal's role. A police complaint was registered by the father of the victim in 2011. The police, however, had no evidence to link them to his kidnapping. The case was then handed over to the Crime Branch.

Kamal, now scared of getting caught, dug the body and cut it into pieces. He then spread the parts in Alwar as he drove in a truck across the district. He was, however, unaware that he had left some evidence in the pit at the construction site.

Police, grappling for even the slightest evidence to find the culprits, conducted polygraph test on the suspects but they escaped by cheating the test. When the cops sought permission for Narco Test, they refused. The police, however, got a major breakthrough during the brain mapping test.

"The case completely changed in 2017 when we conducted a brain mapping test of main accused Kamal and the driver. After confessing to murder in the brain mapping test, both Kamal and Shankutla absconded from home but Kamal was caught from Alwar," Tirkey stated.

While Kamal and Ganesh are now in police custody, Shakuntala, now pregnant, remains on the run, police said.

After interrogation, Kamal confessed that they initially buried the body in a pit at a construction site but later took it out and threw pieces of his body on the stretch from Alwar to Rewari.

The police have recovered 25 pieces of bones from the construction site. The remains have been sent for a DNA test.

(With ANI inputs)
