Here's How Kapil Sharma Is Preparing To Be With Pregnant Wife Ginni Chatrath In Her 3rd Trimester & Baby's Delivery In Mid-December

The mumbai daily also reports that in the coming weeks, Kapil will be shooting for the show with Akshay Kumar and the Housefull 4 gang, the Made In China team and the real as well as reel-life daadis of Saand Ki Aankh. Govinda, too, is up for an appearance this month. View this post on Instagram A post shared by Aniket Saha (@kapil_is_my_life) on Aug 23, 2019 at 4:51am PDT MORE PICS | Kapil Sharma Attends 'Angry Birds Movie 2' Screening With PREGNANT Wife Ginni, His Mom & 'The Kapil Sharma Show' Team Members! Kapil had tied the knot with childhood sweetheart Ginni Chatrath in December 2018 and their first child is due in 5 months i.e. December, 2019. Kapil recently confirmed his wife's pregnancy finally breaking silence on the news of Ginni expecting their baby that broke in May. “I just want to take care of my wife and be by her side for now. We are obviously very excited as it’s our first kid but my mother is the most excited. She has been waiting for this moment for years now. We are just praying for Ginni and the baby’s health,” Kapil told Mumbai Mirror in an interview given earlier. ALSO | Kapil Sharma On a Jeep ride In Canada With Pregnant Wife Ginni Chatrath, Makes Way For Geese Crossing The Road In Fun Video! Kapil Sharma with pregnant wife Ginni Chatrath while leaving for Canada for their Babymoon in August (Pic: Manav Manglani) Adding further Kapil said when asked "how is he prepping up for his role of a father?", “There is no prep because we don’t know if it would be a boy or girl. It’s a happy time for the family and everybody is looking forward to welcome the new member”.

'The Kapil Sharma Show' host and comedy king Kapil Sharma is soon to become father with wife Ginni Chatrath who's pregnant with their first child and currently is in her third trimester. Ginni is due in mid-December and the doting hubby is planning far in advance so he can be by her side during these last 3 months and the baby's delivery. Kapil had taken his pregnant wife Ginni for the Baby-moon to Canada recently and the two had a great time together which we saw in the viral pictures and videos two months ago in August. While the very popular comedian handles daily shoots and episodes each week, he is being careful to organize things ahead in order to find time to be with his wifey. "Ginni’s due date is in mid-December and Kapil has already started planning work on his comedy show (The Kapil Sharma Show), to make sure that the on-air scheduling isn’t interrupted. Simultaneously, he is making sure to spend time with Ginni in the last trimester" -A source shared with Mumbai Mirror.
