Rajasthan: Arms trafficking racket busted, trafficker carrying Rs 50,000 reward arrested

Two semi-automatic pistols and 105 live cartridges of .315 bore and .32 bore were also seized.

A team of Special Cell New Delhi Range arrested an inter-state, rewarded illicit arms and ammunition trafficker on Saturday from Dholpur, Rajasthan.

Two semi-automatic pistols and 105 live cartridges of .315 bore and .32 bore have been recovered from the accused. He is involved in over 18 cases of extortion, dacoity and robbery, attempt to murder, encounters with police in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi and Gujarat.

The accused is wanted by the Delhi Police since July, 2019 and was carrying a reward of Rs 50,000 on information leading to his arrest.

How Special Cell managed to arrest the accused

On July 7, a team of Special Cell busted an illicit ammunition trafficking syndicate operating in NCR, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh by apprehending two ammunition suppliers namely Praveen Kumar Verma and Prateek Kumar Verma. Both the accused are residents of Shikohabad, district Firozabad in Uttar Pradesh.

The team also apprehended an ammunition receiver namely Sonu Singh of Delhi along with 1,250 live cartridges of 7.65 mm and 0.315 bores, one car and one motorcycle.

During the interrogation, accused Sonu Singh disclosed that he is working for his syndicate leader Jitendra Singh Jeetu.

Further, on September 23, two arms traffickers namely Jitender Kumar, resident of Bhind (Madhya Pradesh), and Raj Bahadur, resident of Agra (Uttar Pradesh), were apprehended along with 26 semi-automatic pistols of .32 bore calibre from Delhi and they too disclosed the involvement of above accused Jitendra Singh Jeetu in the arms trafficking syndicate in the NCR.

However, the desperado Jitendera Singh Jeetu managed to give police a slip during both these operations.

The investigation also revealed that the NBWs against accused Jitendra Singh Jeetu were obtained from the Court of Ld CMM, Patiala House courts, New Delhi and raids were conducted to apprehend him but he remained evasive.

Keeping in view the gravity of the case, sources were deployed in NCR and other states to apprehend him.

On October 5, specific information was received by the Special Cell that Jitender Singh Jeetu was seen in Dholpur, Rajasthan.

Immediately, the team of Special Cell left for Dholpur and, along with the informer, took position in disguise at Purani Subzi Mandi, Dholpur in Rajasthan.

The team managed to finally apprehend Jitendra Singh Jeetu. Two semi-automatic pistols and 105 live cartridges of .315 bore and .32 bore were recovered from him.

What did the investigation reveal?

Jeetu is married and has three children. He has two brothers who are engaged in farming and milk business along with their father in the village.

Jeetu has studied upto 9th class in a government school. At a young age, Jeetu fell into bad company and dropped out of school.

In 2002, he got married but couldn’t settle in family life because of his criminal nature.

In 2004, he along with his associates was apprehended for stealing tractor/trolley and other articles in nearby villages. After this incident, his parents sent him to maternal uncle village in Murena (MP).

In Murena, Jeetu got involved in another case when he stole a licensed rifle of .315 bore near Baroli village and committed robbery and thefts.

During this period, he came in contact with illegal liquor syndicate of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh border and started purchasing illegal liquor at cheaper price from Faridabad (Haryana) and selling in MP and Rajasthan at a good margin.

He also continued robbery and other crimes including extortion in the area. In 2007, a reward of Rs 10,000 (Rs 5000 each from Murena and Gwalior) was declared on his arrest by the Madhya Pradesh Police.
