India’s interests in West Asia must now go beyond oil and gas to firm up its underutilised influence

Sanjaya Baru

Within hours of the September 14, 2019, droneborne bomb attacks on oil-processing facilities at Abqaiq and Khurais in Saudi Arabia, the first telephone call received by Mohammad Sanusi Barkindo, secretary-general of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec), was from India’s minister for petroleum and natural gas Dharmendra Pradhan. The attack put a daily output of 5.7 million barrels of oil out of the world market, making it the single-largest disruption to the oil market since the early 1970s. “Pradhan wanted to be assured that this disruption in oil supply would not trigger a new round of price increase,” Barkindo told me at the annual meeting of the Russian think-tank Valdai Discussion Club in Sochi last week.

Barkindo claimed that a new ‘Charter of Cooperation’ adopted jointly by both Opec and the Russia-led non-Opec group of oil-exporting countries in July 2019 would protect not just the interests of producers, but also those of consumers and investors. With competition growing from renewables and new sources of oil and gas like the US, both Opec and non-Opec suppliers led by Russia have become more sensitive to the needs of large consumers like India. There can always be price spikes caused by supply disruptions, like the one caused by the Saudi attacks, but demand for oil is on a slippery slope.

However, for an import-dependent country like India, with import-dependence at an all-time high of 90% of domestic consumption, assured supply of oil at reasonable and stable prices is a fundamental economic, political and security priority. Fully alive to this fact, both government and public sector and private oil companies, including Reliance Industries, have been on extra drive ensuring adequacy and security of energy supplies. For his part, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been energetic in his energy diplomacy.

Let’s Gas

In early September, during Modi’s visit to Russia, as President Vladimir Putin’s guest at the meeting of the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok, the Russian firm Novatek and India’s H-Energy Global Ltd signed a deal that would provide long-term supplies of liquefied natural gas (LNG) to India. Modi followed that up with a US-India LNG deal signed in his presence between India’s Petronet and the US natural gas firm Tellurian Inc at Houston. Petronet agreed to invest $2.5 billion in Tellurian to secure lifetime access to up to five million tonnes of LNG a year. It was described as the single-biggest foreign investment into the US in recent times.

Modi’s next halt will be the Saudi capital of Riyadh where, presumably apart from explaining India’s stance on the status of Jammu and Kashmir to the minders of the global Muslim ummah, he would also seek long-term oil supply assurances, especially given the pressure from the US to cease all oil purchases from Iran. Recent reports suggest Saudi oil major Aramco may take a 20% stake in Mukesh Ambani’s Reliance Industries, offering security of supply and, perhaps, of Reliance’s refining facilities. Modi’s energy diplomacy in West Asia has covered most bases including the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Qatar, Kuwait and Oman.

There is, to be sure, a larger geopolitical agenda in West Asia. But oil and gas, apart from the interests of the Indian diaspora in the region, are central to it. In Africa, too, energy has emerged as an important interest. During his first term in office, Prime Minister Modi made Mozambique the first country in Africa to visit, underscoring not just its strategic location in the Indian Ocean but also its relevance as a source of energy. India has since strengthened relations with Mozambique.

All this external supply-side management has been a response to growing domestic demand. Despite the oil and gas markets being marked by excess supply, thanks to renewables and the emergence of the US as a supplier, the threat of periodic supply disruption and price spikes remains a challenge for Indian policymakers. The changing structure of the oil and gas business, and the new geopolitics of US-Russia rivalry, created the basis for the coming together of the Opec and non-Opec producers in 2016.

Oil Wells Up

India is in the happy situation of having friendly relations with both Russia and the US, and is now cementing one with Saudi Arabia. The reduced dependence on Iran and Venezuela, under US pressure, is being balanced out by ensuring adequacy of supply from other sources, including the US. Going beyond such energy-focused diplomacy in West Asia, India should play an active role in reducing the risk of heightened conflict in the region and promote efforts to resolve differences between the Sunni and Shia States, working with the US, Russia and China. India’s interests in West Asia go beyond oil and gas and its influence remains underutilised.

The writer is distinguished fellow, Institute for Defence Studies & Analyses (IDSA)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
