Aarey forest: Can development and environment co-exist?

The tree felling in Aarey Milk Colony has ignited an environment conversation debate in India at a time when the nation is going full steam ahead with infrastructural projects. While green activists have called the Mumbai metro's move to cut trees to make way for a car shed a heinous crime against Earth and our future, the government has justified it by saying that the development is meant for a greater good.

"Should the government let a microscopic minority with a myopic view hinder the progress of a development project which will provide a greener alternative to traffic congestion and curb greenhouse emissions?" Shaina NC, a leader of the ruling BJP asked during a debate on Aarey colony during Rajdeep Sardesai's show on India Today TV.

Shaina NC argued that contrary to the allegations, the Maharashtra government was eyeing an ecologically sensitive future by working to build a metro, which is an eco-friendly mode of transport.

"Besides, we are taking only two per cent of Aarey land and planting over 20,000 trees across Maharashtra in its lieu," Shaina NC said.

She also claimed that the project will be sustainable as the CM's office will directly monitor the saplings and that the government was sure that they will have a 35 per cent survival rate.

Diffusing the government's claims, environment activist and founder of Watchdog Foundation, Godfrey Pimenta, said that an RTI filed by him has revealed that out of the 20,000 claimed saplings, the government has not even planted 5,000 in Mumbai. "If this government had any concern for the state then it is sure did not reflect in Mumbai," he said.

Reacting to BJP leader Shaina NC's remark on the need of metro as an alternate mode of transport, Godfrey Pimenta said that the activists are not against the alternative transports, but there were alternative lands that the government could have used to build the car shed instead of cutting trees in Aarey.

The green activities also alleged that the government presented an inflated figure about the cost of the other available pieces of land to get a favourable ruling for building in Aarey.

"We do not want to die"

Arguing for the need for better transport infrastructure, Siddesh Desai, VP, Mumbai Railway Pravasi Sangh, said the metro is the need of the hour.

"Nobody wants to see the trees cut but it is a necessary compromise. Aarey is not the only land going into this project, but these are important sacrifices to ensure passenger safety. We don't want to die," Siddesh Desai said.

Reacting to Siddesh Desai, Godfrey Pimenta said that if the government was worried about the commuter's safety or comfort it would have fixed the roads, "which are in shambles. If roads were fixed there would have been no need for metro."

Is builder mafia at work here?

Godfrey Pimenta claimed that the development plan in Aarey was not in the interest of the public and was builder centric.

On being asked if he thought that Aarey tree felling was done due to pressure from builder mafia, he said, "Everything in Mumbai is being done under builders' pressure."

Pimenta also claimed that the government was planning to move at least four lakh slum dwellers into 109 acres of Aarey land.

Also present in the debate, Shiv Sena spokesperson Priyanka Chaturvedi claimed that Aaditya Thackeray was ready to fight everyone, even the allies, to protect people's interest against builders.

"If land mafia is at work here then it will be the Shiv Sena which will stand for the truth and ensure that no nexus is built which may harm people's interest," Priyanka Chaturvedi said.
