Husband of a woman stabbed in park says it is 'impossible' that someone in India plotted her murder

The husband of a woman who was stabbed in a Sydney park says it is 'impossible' that someone in India plotted her murder, despite police chasing the theory for years.

IT professional Prabha Kumar, who was living in Australia temporarily for work, was stabbed in the neck as she walked home through Parramatta Park in March 2015.

The 41-year-old was on the phone to her husband, Arun Kumar, at the time of the attack and was due to return to him in India in a matter of weeks.

On March 7 2015, IT professional Prabha Kumar (pictured), who was living in Australia temporarily for work, was stabbed in the neck as she walked home through Parramatta Park

Ms Kumar wasn't sexually assaulted or robbed which has led police to believe someone from her native country organised her death.

Her husband told 9News the current line of inquiry held by police was implausible.

'That's bulls**t, that is not right… that is not right, it is highly impossible,' Mr Kumar told 9News.

'At the end of the day we need justice, that's all I can say.

'All these rumours, they are hurting us.'

NSW police confirmed to 9 News he was interviewed as one of the many persons who may be able to assist with the investigation.

The pair share daughter Meghana, who is now 11-years-old.

Ms Kumar was working abroad to send money back home to her family.

The 41-year-old was on the phone to her husband, Arun Kumar (pictured), at the time of the attack and was due to return to India in a matter of weeks

Shortly after she was killed, Mr Kumar landed in Australia with her parents to join the police appeal for public information.

He was called in by Australian police for questioning in both 2015 and 2016 and told investigators he and his wife were happy, according to the Indian Times.

Ms Kumar, who had been in the country three years prior to her death, was only sent to work for three months at Indian tech firm Mindtree, but her contract was continually extended.

Ms Kumar (pictured walking from the station on CCTV footage), who had been in the country three years prior to her death, was only sent to work for three months at Indian tech firm Mindtree, but her contract was continually extended

The senior technical analyst was only 400 metres from her Westmead home after working a late shift when she was fatally stabbed in a blackspot of the public park.

Her parents brought her home to be cremated in their home village.

Over the past four years, NSW Police have travelled to India as part of a major investigation that has seen more than 2,000 people interviewed.

The coronial inquest is due to take place early next year.
