Katrina Kaif looks gorgeous as she boomerangs into a new week; Arjun Kapoor trolls her again

It wouldn’t be wrong to say that Katrina Kaif and Arjun Kapoor share a good rapport with one another. Despite the fact that Arjun and Varun Dhawan had started a Katrina hate club a few years ago and had later started a fan club together, the two stars share a great friendship that often comes across in the hilarious banter Katrina and Arjun have on social media in the comments section. Both Katrina and Arjun try to troll each other quite often on social media.

Recently, Katrina shared a behind-the-scenes video from a photoshoot. In the boomerang video, we can see the Bharat star talking while getting her makeup done. However, her voice isn’t heard. The star can be seen explaining something and mentioned the same on her caption too. Katrina wrote, “Just some subtle explaining going on.........” Seeing the boomerang, her friend and actor Arjun got another opportunity to leave his hilarious take on it in the comments section.

(Also Read: Arjun Kapoor’s REACTION to Ranveer Singh showing off his chest hair will crack you up; Check it out)

Arjun took the comments section and commented, “Love those moments of silence u share with us,” with a heart emoticon. Once again, netizens lost their mind and loved the banter between the two popular Bollywood stars. It will be interesting to see what Katrina has to say to Arjun about his observation and the comment. This isn’t the first time Arjun has trolled Katrina on her social media uploads.

Check it out:

Meanwhile, on the work front, recently Katrina had taken off to Hyderabad to shoot for Rohit Shetty’s Sooryavanshi with Akshay Kumar. In the film, Katrina will be seen as Khiladi Kumar’s on screen wife. The two actors had shot for a remake of Tip Tip Barsa Paani in the last schedule of the film. Sooryavanshi will release on March 27, 2020. Arjun, on the other hand, will be seen in Panipat with Kriti Sanon, Sanjay Dutt, Zeenat Aman and Padmini Kolhapure. The film is based on the 3rd Battle of Panipat and is slated to release on December 6, 2019.
