Madhya Pradesh doctor kills driver, cut body into pieces and puts it in acid, caught red-handed

Mantri sedated him and slit his throat using a surgical knife. | Photo Credit: Getty

Bhopal: In a shocking case, a famous orthopedic doctor was arrested here for allegedly killing his 30-year-old driver. He further chopped the body into over a dozen pieces and immersing them in acid at his residence in a bid to destroy the evidence. The deceased was identified as Virendra Pachouri.

The accused was identified as 56-year-old, Dr Sunil Mantri. According to news agency PTI, Mantri allegedly killed the driver on Monday, as Pachouri had suspected that Mantri was having an illicit relationship with his wife. However, the police arrested him on Tuesday.

Superintendent of Police Arvind Saxena told PTI that Mantri's wife used to run a boutique at their home but after she died Pachouri's wife started running it. However, the driver suspected Mantri was in an illicit relationship with his wife and so he allowed her to run the boutique.



Meanwhile, on Tuesday, the SP said they received information about "suspicious activities" at Mantri's residence in Anand Nagar area of the city. The police officials immediately rushed to his place, the police team found the doctor very restless and spotted blood on the floor.

Also Read: Social media lauds wedding sans kanyadaan performed by female priests in Kolkata

However, Shocked to find the police at his residence the doctor confessed the crime. Meanwhile, during interrogation, Mantri, who was posted as a medical officer at Government Civil Hospital in Itarsi town, confessed that he had planned to kill the driver a long time ago and even stored a drum full of acid and hand-saws at his home.

On Monday evening, when Pachouri complained of a toothache, Mantri sedated him and slit his throat using a surgical knife. After which he took the body to the bathroom located on the first floor of his house and started cutting it into pieces.

However, the next morning, he disposed of Pachouri's clothes between Hoshangabad and Itarsi. PTI report further claimed that Mantri then began putting the body parts into the acid to destroy the evidence. However, he was caught red-handed by police.

The police official further mentioned that a dozen large pieces of the body and several small pieces were found. Further investigation in the case is underway.


