Indian Air Force Day 2019: Air warriors remember Balakot as IAF displays might on 87th anniversary - GLIMPSES

Indian Air Force Day 2019/ Twitter: IAF_MCC | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Wg Cdr Abhinandan Varthaman flew a Mig-21 aircraft Chinook and Apache choppers, the latest inductions of the IAF also participated in the grand parade

New Delhi: While handing over of the first Rafale fighter jet remains the most awaited event of the day, the 87th anniversary of the Indian Air Force (IAF) was celebrated with pomp and fervour at the Hindon Airbase on Tuesday. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who shot down the F-16 jet of Pakistan Air Force (PAF) during the post- Balakot airstrike on February 27, flew a Mig-21 Bison aircraft over the Air Force Day parade earlier today.

In a spectacular parade that witnessed participation from some of IAF's most modern aircraft such as the Chinook twin-rotor choppers and Apache AH-64E attack helicopters, the show stoppers of the event were air warriors who carried out strikes in Balakot. Two Sukhoi-30 MKI frontline fighters along with three Mirage-2000 jets were flown in an Avenger formation by pilots who took part in the Balakot airstrike. The pilots were included in the parade as a mark of respect for the air warriors who took part in the Balakot airstrike on February 26 and the dogfight that followed post that.

The Chinook formation led by Group Captain S Rawat was followed by an Apache attack chopper formation consisting of the recently inducted AH-64E attack choppers. India's home-developed Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas also made its presence felt through the breathtaking sorties and maneuvres.

INDIAN AIR FORCE CELEBRATES 87th ANNIVERSARY https://t.co/3fdlRgxUIQ — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) October 8, 2019

The parade also featured the elegant vintage fleet of the IAF which included an open cockpit Tiger Moth flown by Wg Cdr Yogesh Apte. Dakota DC-3 aircraft of the 1940s consisting of a Dakota aircraft and two Dornier aircraft flew in victory formation. The Sarang aerobatic team of the IAF flew in an India formation and performed aerobatic maneuvres in the skies.

Army Chief General Bipin Rawat, Navy Chief Admiral Karambir Singh, IAF Chief Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria were also present at the event. During his speech, Bhadauria also congratulated the air warriors who successfully carried out the Balakot strikes.

#AFDay2019 : Promo video on the occasion of 87th Anniversary of Indian Air Force.



Watch the full video on : https://t.co/WyGyVrcXZy#AFDay19 pic.twitter.com/v2vlLA5Euh — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) October 5, 2019

Earlier today, PM Narendra Modi extended wishes on the occasion of Air Force Day. "Today, on Air Force Day, a proud nation expresses gratitude to our air warriors and their families. The Indian Air Force continues to serve India with utmost dedication and excellence," he said in a tweet.

The IAF carried out the strikes days after Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) carried out a suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama. Over 40 CRPF personnel lost lives in the attack.




