Kareena Kapoor Khan wants Taimur to spend more time with his parents where they are not recognised

Kareena Kapoor Khan wants Taimur to know his parents better | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Kareena Kapoor Khan looks her stylish best in this recent magazine cover The actress also spoke about how she feels it's important for Taimur to spend quality time with his parents Read to find out what she has to say

Trust Kareena Kapoor Khan to sizzle and grab the spotlight with her stylish appearances. Her munchkin son, Taimur, has also inherited the trait from his mother. He keeps the paparazzi on their toes and even waves at them whenever spotted. Taimur is media’s favourite star kid and photos of the kiddo go viral on the internet. Kareena and Saif Ali Khan also make sure that they take time out from their respective shoot schedules to spend quality time with Taimur. They even take off on fancy vacations every now and then, photos of which take over the internet like a storm.

Bebo recently posed for a magazine cover and looked all sorts of glamorous in the pictures. While speaking to the mag about Taimur and why she feels he needs to know them as parents and not just stars, she says, “It’s important for Taimur to have time with Saif and me without us shooting or going to script readings and fittings. It’s important for him to be with his parents someplace we (and he) are not recognized.” She also adds, “Taimur has the most fun with Saif and me, and I hope that’s always going to be the case.”

Check out some of her photos from the magazine photo shoot right here.

Doesn’t she look gorgeous? The actress has quite a few films in her kitty and recently even made her debut on television as a dance reality show judge for Dance India Dance. She also made heads turn at the Elle Beauty Awards 2019. She managed to look the best effortlessly and well, it wasn’t surprising.

Bebo will begin shooting for Laal Singh Chaddha soon with Aamir Khan. The actress will also be seen in Takht and Good News that will release next year.

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
