Airstrike on Pakistan was a major shift in India’s stance against terrorism: Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: The newly appointed Air Force chief, RKS Bhadauria on Tuesday while speaking at the 87th birthday of Indian Air Force said that the suicide attack on CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama is a timely reminder that our security forces should be at alert every time.

He also said that the security environment in the neighbouring countries is a matter of serious concern and should be handled with proper care and alertness, as reported by news agency ANI.

Also Read: One terrorist killed in encounter with security forces in Kashmir's Pulwama

"The Pulwama attack is a stark reminder of the persistent threat to defence installations of our country", Air Chief Marshal Bhadauria said.

He also emphasises on the response India gave after the suicide attack in Pulwama. He said that the airstrike conducted on Pakistan was a major shift in the defence policies of the Indian government.

"Strategic relevance of this (Balakot airstrike) is the resolve of political leadership to punish perpetrators of terrorism. There is a major shift in the government's way of handling terrorist attacks," he said at Hindon Air Force Station.

Around 40 soldiers of the CRPF were martyred in a suicide attack carried away by the Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists on their convoy at Jammu-Srinagar highway in Pulwama in February this year.

Also Read: 'Ironical': India slams Pakistan for 'weaponising' women's rights issues at UNGA

Celebrating the 87th Air Force Day, the Akash Ganga started with flag-bearing skydivers then the team drops out AN-32 aircraft in their colorful canopies. The IAF also showcased its newly acquired and inducted Chinook heavy-lift twin-rotor transport helicopters from the US. They also showcased the Apache attack helicopters for the first time.

PM Modi also extended wishes to the IAF for its 87th birthday.

In his tweet, he wrote, "Today, on Air Force Day, a proud nation expresses gratitude to our air warriors and their families. The Indian Air Force continues to serve India with utmost dedication and excellence."

Posted By: Talib Khan
