In a bid to push terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan activates 20 terror camps, launch pads across LoC

According to intelligence inpurs, 20 terror camps with 50 terrorists each have been activated by Pakistan/ File photo for representational purposes | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights On Sunday, J&K Police chief Dilbag Singh had said that 200-300 terrorists are currently active in the state Last month, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat had said that Pakistan had re-activated the Balakot terror camp that was struck down by the IAF in February

New Delhi: Pakistan has activated 20 terror camps and 20 launch pads along the Line of Control (LoC) to push terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir before the onset of winters. Citing security officials, news agencies reported that the training camps, each with at least 50 terrorists were activated following a brief shutdown in light of Indian attacks at Balakot.

"Pakistani agencies were desperately looking to carry out spectacular terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and even in the hinterlands following the abrogation of the special status given to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 and its bifurcation into two Union Territories," a security official quoted an intelligence report, according to news agency PTI.

"We have intelligence inputs that Pakistan has activated at least 20 terror training camps and another 20 launch pads with about 50 terrorists in each. All these terrorists will infiltrate through LoC wherever and whenever there are opportunities," the official further said.

On Sunday, Director General of Jammu and Kashmir Police Dilbag Singh said that 200-300 terrorists are currently active in the state and Pakistan has stepped up its cross border firing to infiltrate terrorists into Jammu and Kashmir.

"The number of active terrorists (in Jammu and Kashmir) is between 200 to 300... The figure usually does not remain static and goes up and down," Singh said on Sunday.

The developments come on the backdrop of reports that terror organisations Lashkar-e-Taiba, Hizbul Mujahideen and Jaish-e-Mohammed held a meeting to decide on intensifying attacks in J&K. Last month, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat had said that Pakistan has activated Balakot terror camp that was struck down by the IAF on February 26.

On September 27, in his speech at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), Pakistan PM Imran Khan had warned of a 'reaction' after the 'curfew' in Kashmir is lifted. "You hope for the best but be prepared for the worst," he had said while issuing repeated threats of a possible nuclear war between the two countries over the issue.
