India martyrs two Kashmiris in Pulwama

Indian troops in their fresh acts of state terrorism martyred two Kashmiri youths in Pulwama district on Tuesday, the Kashmir Media Service reported.

The troops martyred Ufaid Farooq Lone and Abbas Butt during a cordon-and-search operation in Awantipora area of the district as violent military operations are going on in Ganderbal, Bandipore, Kupwara, Baramulla, Srinagar, Islamabad, Kulgam, Shopian, Ramban, Doda, Kishtwar and other areas of the territory for the last 12 days.

Life remains badly hit in the Kashmir valley and Muslim majority areas of Jammu region on the 65th consecutive day, with reports of night raids, arrests of young boys and multiple deaths amid ongoing military clampdown coupled with communications blackout. The people in the territory are facing shortage of essential commodities as main markets continue to remain shut and public transport is off the roads.

New Delhi likely to lift travel advisory on the occupied valley tomorrow

India will reportedly lift a travel advisory on the occupied valley on Thursday, Indian media said quoting authorities, two months after the government launched a security crackdown before stripping the region of its semi-autonomous status on August 5.

Thousands of Indian tourists, pilgrims and workers fled the Muslim-majority region in early August after authorities issued a security alert. Telephone and internet services were suspended and public movements restricted to prevent protests hours before India announced it had revoked the region’s special status. Mobile and internet services are largely still blocked in the Kashmir valley.

The travel advisory issued on Aug 2 will be lifted from Thursday, Indian government said in a statement. “The governor [Satya Pal Malik] directed that the Home Department’s advisory asking tourists to leave the Valley be lifted immediately. This will be done with effect from October 10,” an official spokesman was quoted as saying by India Today.
