After unrest, Mumbai's Aarey Milk Colony back to normalcy

Four days after a clash broke out between green activists and police over cutting of trees in Aarey Milk Colony paving way for Metro car shed, normalcy returned in the area on Tuesday.



The Mumbai police had invoked prohibitory orders under section 144 of Crpc on Saturday early morning after over 29 protesters were detained by the police forces.



On Tuesday the cops removed the prohibitory orders hence paving way for normalcy in the area. Though, within one kilometre radius heavy deployment of police force was still in place to avoid any untoward incident.



On Monday morning huge traffic snarl was reported in and around Goregaon suburban area after the police had cordoned off the area and had put three layers of barricades restricting free movement of traffic.



Nivedita, a resident of Aarey Milk Colony said that the barricades have been removed and the people are now roaming freely.

Traffic Snarls On Monday, jumbo traffic snarls were reported in and around Goregaon after the police cordoned off the area by putting three barricades.

On Tuesday, the cops removed the prohibitory orders hence paving way for normalcy in and around Aarey Colony.





When contacted a senior police official from Dindoshi police station, he said that the prohibitory orders had been removed. The 29 dettainees who were granted bail late on Sunday evening, on Monday had questioned the government over the highhandedness by the police.



Meanwhile, the milk producers who were not allowed to enter Aarey Milk Colony were also allowed to enter the area on Tuesday. For the past two days, the cattle owners and truck drivers were put to test when the cops had allegedly harassed them over entering the colony.



A special bench of the Supreme Court on Monday asked the Maharashtra government to ensure that no trees are further axed at Mumbai's Aarey Colony.



A Bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Ashok Bhushan directed the government to maintain the status quo and said it would further hear all the petitions in the matter on October 21.



The court passed the directive after hearing a suo moto PIL based on a letter written by a group of law students to the court against the felling of trees.



Solicitor General Tushar Mehta assured the bench that no trees will be further cut in the Aarey Colony. He told the court that the people who were arrested for protesting against Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (MMRCL) action were released. The court also asked Mehta to include the Ministry of Forest and Environment as a party in the matter.
