Bofors Chinese parts probe: Missing officer found dead

(This story originally appeared in on Feb 06, 2019)

BHOPAL/JABALPUR: A junior works manager of Gun Carriage Factory (GCF) Jabalpur, who was missing since January 17, was found dead in a deserted area of the city on Tuesday evening.Sarada Charan Khatua had vanished a week after being questioned by CBI in connection with the alleged supply and use of Chinese parts in indigenized Bofors guns. His badly decomposed body was found in a deserted region in Sector 2 near the ordnance factory.It’s strange that the body lay rotting and no one noticed despite a missing person’s complaint being active for 19 days. A local resident grew suspicious about Khatua’s abandoned car on Tuesday and called police, who then found the body. Khatua’s family members allege he was murdered as part of a conspiracy, but police believe he committed suicide.Khatua’s wife, Mousumi, is in shock and in no condition to speak. Her brother Manas Behera, a Supreme Court advocate, said: “He has been murdered by the kingpin of the syndicate . His head has been mutilated. Some people, who were threatening my sister, should be suspended. I have tweeted to PMO, seeking immediate intervention.”He accused a senior GCF officer of harassing Khatua and pushing him into severe depression. “My brother-inlaw was a very honest employee and had no direct or indirect links to the controversy,” Behera said.Supplier had connived with GCF officials, says CBI FIRJabalpur SP Amit Kumar told TOI that they have sent body for post-mortem. “We found a blade near the spot and it seems he committed suicide. Let the autopsy surgeons give their opinion and we will proceed accordingly,” he said.Khatua was last seen at 8.54am on January 17 in footage collected from traffic cams. His wife had filed a missing person’s complaint that night. She had told TOI that four CBI officers questioned him on January 10 and were “pressurising him to admit that he was linked to the company being investigated for the scam”. “My husband is an honest man. Everyone knows this. He was not getting any support from the GCF office. The CBI team took him to the section where they made him stand for more than three hours despite knowing that he has an injured leg,” Mousumi had told TOI, adding: “Please ask the GM why my husband is being forced to face a probe that he is not associated with. He was not even posted in the unit that is under investigation.”In June 2017, CBI had lodged an FIR against a Delhi based company and ‘unknown’ officers of GCF Jabalpur following a tip off that China-made parts were masked as ‘made in Germany’ and supplied to GCF for Bofors. GCF officials claim the inquiry is a result of a dispute between foreign partners of the company that got the contract from GCF. As per policy, Chinese products are not used in Indian defence products. The CBI FIR alleges that the supplier connived with GCF officials to supply duplicate spare parts (bearings) used in the manufacture of 155mm Dhanush guns — indigenized version of Bofors artillery guns that turned the tide of the 1999 Kargil conflict.Investigators suspect some GCF officials accepted Chinese manufactured ‘wire race roller bearings’ that were embossed ‘CRB-made in Germany’. GCF officials argue the German company is to blame for supplying Chinese parts to India . During investigation, it was found that the Delhi-based company had submitted ‘certificates in origin’, showing that the bearings were purchased from a German company. Those parts had ‘made in Germany’ labels, sources say. When bearings failed quality tests, company gave clarifications and assured to replace defective ones free of cost.CBI, says the German company does not manufacture these parts. Investigators suspect the Delhi-based company got six bearings manufactured by Sino United Industries (Luyang) Ltd Henan, China . The agency has seized emails between the Indian and Chinese companies.
