TDR scam probe back with ACB, charge sheet may take six months

BENGALURU: Two weeks after the Karnataka High Court disbanded the special investigation team (SIT) that was probing the multicrore transferable development rights (TDR) scam in Bengaluru , the case has now been handed back to the Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB).TDR allows its acquirer to use the additional built-up area granted to a property owner by the government in return for the space surrendered by him for a public purpose. The ACB, a government arm set up to check corruption, is hoping to close the probe and file charge sheet in 6-7 months.The SIT began investigation about six months ago after the ACB policemen raided houses and offices of a few builders and BBMP engineers. The sleuths arrested a BBMP engineer and a promoter. The Karnataka High Court which was monitoring the ACB probe into the issuance of TDR as well as the occupancy certificates, formed an SIT under IPS officer Abdul Ahad to exclusively probe the TDR scam. The team also included revenue officials as they are well versed with the technicalities of TDR.After the BJP took over the reins, the government moved a surprise petition before a division bench praying that the ACB probe the scam, and not the SIT though the latter was subordinate to ACB. The government did not want revenue officials to be part of the SIT. The government for some inexplicable reason did not seem to like the idea of a court-monitored probe by an SIT. The division bench asked the ACB to probe the case as before. ACB chief Chandra Sekhar M said there are four TDR scams and three SPs will be probing them. “We have received many complaints and petitions related to TDR. As of now, we are probing four cases but we will pursue other complaints too as and when the need arises,” he said.The Karnataka government’s TDR policy is marred by several cases of fraud. The government introduced TDR to cut on public project’s expenditure. The TDR regulations give a property owner who surrenders a portion of his plot a prescribed amount of notional land which the acquirer could use elsewhere. The property owner monetises his TDR by selling it to a needy buyer.The grant of TDR turned into a scandal after the town planners allegedly issued several certificates without the actual surrender of plot for a public cause to back those certificates. A large number of such fictitious TDRs surfaced between 2007 and 2015, the period when the BBMP issued the certificates.A few retired town planning officials believe that the government should not have protested inclusion of revenue officials in the SIT as it would have helped investigators understand complex town planning regulations, and effectively build a case against the culprits.
