[VIDEO] Sleuths recover daggers, drugs during raid at Bengaluru's Parappana Agrahara prison

Parappana Agrahara central prison (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Parappana Agrahara central prison is the largest jail in Karnataka An impromptu raid at the prison began at 5 am on Wednesday morning The raid was supervised by the Central Crime Branch (CCB)

Bengaluru: As many as 60 police officers descended on the Parappana Agrahara central prison in Karnataka's state capital this morning as part of an impromptu raid on the central jail which has been in the news for all the wrong reasons in recent months. The purpose of the raid was to weed out illegal contraband, including mobile phones, sim cards, drugs and weapons.

The raid was orchestrated and carried out by the Central Crime Branch under the supervision of CCB Joint Police Commissioner Sandeep Patil. Ground reports suggest that the raid began at 5 am on Wednesday morning. While it is unclear what prompted the sudden inspection, several reports of inmates being equipped with contraband have emerged in recent months from the central prison in Bengaluru.

Officers with the CCB seized as many as 37 knives and daggers along with pipes used to smoke marijuana. Cell phones and sim cards were also recovered from the possession of inmates, sleuths told media outlets. Marijuana and other banned substances were also seized during the raid which began the early morning.

Located in Bengaluru's Sai Sree Layout, the Parappana Agrahara central prison is the largest prison in Karnataka. Spread over 40 acres, it houses over 4,000 prisoners in its 810 barracks. Among those lodged at the jail is former All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) general secretary VK Sasikala.

A report in January of this year revealed that the central prison is overcrowded by 44 per cent beyond its capacity. It is currently operating with 46 per cent of its sanctioned staff strength, added the report. In its report to the state chief secretary, the Vinay Kumar Commission further stated that none of the 19 jammers installed in the prison was in working condition in all of 2018.

About 80 per cent of the inmates lodged at Parappana Agrahara central prison are addicted to 'ganja', the then chief superintendent of the prison had told the commission in 2017. Over the course of the past few months, several instances of laxity on the part of the prison authorities have come to light. One such incident was when a woman managed to sneak in drugs for her husband by hiding them in lunch boxes in May of this year.

Another was the mysterious death of an inmate at the prison in January of this year. Arrested under Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, the deceased complained of severe pain in his right leg allegedly after he was assaulted by fellow inmates.
