Rights & forces: CRPF woman constable's angry speech was just one part. Here is the other

"Bravery is in not in killing, but saving"; "If the common man is not safe then what is the point of national security"; "Violence is neither human nor right". These are some of the remarks delivered by jawans of the central forces at the same event where a CRPF lady constable -- Khushboo Chauhan -- said "terrorism could not be fought by maintaining human rights".

Khushboo Chauhan's speech, which was part of a debate competition at the National Human Rights Commission, went viral on social media. Some hailed her as patriotic while others criticised her for delivering a 'hate speech'.

In her speech, Khushboo Chauhan claimed that human rights activists do not come out for armed forces during terror attacks, but are always there to support those who raise "anti-national slogans in JNU".

Proclaiming herself to be the "daughter of India" and a member of the armed forces, the CRPF constable said, "I declare that we will enter houses from where people like Afzal (Guru) come and kill. We won't let wombs develop from which people like Afzal emerge." She also purportedly called upon people of the country to pierce Kanhaiya Kumar's chest with the national flag.

The disputed speech was part of the 2019 National Human Rights Commission debate competition held on September 27. The topic of the debate was 'Can terrorism in the country be tackled effectively while observing human rights?'

Watch a part of the video here:

#ViralVideo: Listen to this fiery speech by young CRPF cop warning India haters#IndiaFirst LIVE at https://t.co/4fqxBVUizL pic.twitter.com/SPtY2J9oPF India Today (@IndiaToday) October 4, 2019

The CRPF has since distanced itself from Khushboo Chauhan's speech and said that there was no need to be offended as it was made during a debate competition, but "certain parts could have been avoided".

"We in CRPF respect human rights unconditionally. She was asked to speak against the motion and has delivered a speech with brilliance, but some portion should have been avoided. She has been suitably advised. We appreciate the respect and concern for CRPF," CRPF spokesperson M Dinakaran said.

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE DEBATE

Several jawans and officers of the central forces spoke in favour of protecting human rights in lien of duty. (Screengrabs/YouTube)

Like with any debate, there was a for and an against the motion. While the against motion delivered by Khushboo Chauhan went viral, the award was lifted by the for team represented by ITBP Inspector Pawan Kumar.

Speaking for the motion, Pawan Kumar said if security forces can protect human rights during a natural disaster, they must also protect them during man-made conflict. "When separatists are able to instigate innocent youths to become stone-pelters, then why can't we make them chose the peaceful path?"

CISF Assistant Commander Mayank Bhati, who won the second prize in the English debate section on the same topic, argued that loss human lives could not be written off like banks write off bad loans.

"What my worthy opponents fail to realise is that the non-observance of human rights by the state and the security forces is one of the chief causes of militancy. Man did not enter society to have fewer rights than he had before, but to have those rights better secured," Mayank Bhati said.

"Our actions in the name of national security are neither human nor right when our own citizens have to choose between the force's pellet or a terrorist's bullet," Mayank Bhati said.

Also speaking for the motion, Rifleman Balwan Singh from Assam Rifles argued that security forces take an oath to protect humanity and human rights and must adhere to it even when dealing with terrorists.

He argued that if Ajmal Kasab had been killed during the 26/11 attack India would have never been able to unmask Pakistan's role in terror op.

He quoted the staggering numbers of deaths in fake encounters, custodial deaths, police firing and lathi charge and said that bravery was not in killing but saving lives.

"If peace could be established by the barrel of a gun, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh would already be peaceful," Rifleman Balwan Singh said.

"The real war is fought in people's heart and these can only be won by respecting human rights," Balwan Singh said.

Arguing against violation of human rights by security forces, CISF Sub-Inspector Ashutosh Kumar said that people in the conflict zone have two choices - either be killed in an encounter or be tagged as a traitor. "If the common man is not safe, what is the point of national security?" he asked in his speech.

"You have blackened the face of the sun and the moon, wrote a bloody history of humanity, stop these killings, even Shiva will be scared, if protectors become a threat, then who will save people?," Ashutosh Kumar said.
