Event seeks to fund lasting change for families in need

After months living without heat in the winter and, sometimes, running water, Kimberly Olivier had an opportunity to move into low-income housing. She turned it down.

Olivier knew, even in the midst of depression and the hard fight to stay sober, that the path to a healthy, stable home lay in the growth of her own self-reliance, not more co-dependence.

She’d have probably lost the bet on herself, she said, if not for the Dumas Wesley Community Center’s transitional housing.

During an interview in her apartment at the Sybil H. Smith Family Village, on Dumas Wesley’s Crichton campus, Olivier was a bundle of upward momentum.

She talked about the pain of Christmas and birthday mornings with only handmade presents, and then — nearly in the same breath — described the joy of her job working as a custodian at Dauphin Way United Methodist Church.

She has a budget, she has goals, and what she considers most-important: she has self-confidence.

“I’ve always been co-dependent on my mom or my family or my husband, and I needed so bad to learn stability on my own,” the 40-year-old Olivier said. “I didn’t want to be put in that position ever again.”

Olivier is the mother of five children, and the youngest two — teenage daughters — live with her in the Family Village. She was first married at age 15, and soon after began having children. Her most recent marriage lasted 11 years and ended when her husband died.

In the aftermath, she lost her home, all of the possessions in her storage room, and in many ways, hope.

But she said that she found enough light in the darkness to make her way to Dumas Wesley.

The Sybil H. Smith Family Village was founded 20 years ago for women and children facing homelessness, and provides transitional housing for up to two years. Olivier has been in the village for six months, and said she’s not quite ready to graduate to a place of her own. She said she believes that she has more to learn.

She’s been attending finance classes and parenting classes, where instructors provide hands-on lessons in nutrition and cooking. And there’s the after-school program that both her daughters attend — getting a good meal, help with homework, and the opportunity to socialize and shoot hoops.

‘Making a huge impact’

Dumas Wesley’s mission was no secret to the leaders of City Hope Church, who had spent weeks walking through Crichton neighborhoods introducing themselves as they laid the groundwork for a new campus in the Midtown area.

Jordy Davidson, now the Midtown Campus pastor, said he and his staff met many people with only positive things to say about the community center, which has been a staple for more than a century.

“When we started looking more into what they were doing, they were already making a huge impact, so we thought it was a perfect fit,” Davidson said.

In March, City Hope leased space at Dumas Wesley for its new campus, joining its main location in Daphne and satellite churches in west Mobile, Foley and Bay Minette. And the connection between Dumas Wesley and City Hope only deepened as the months passed.

Since 2016, City Hope has sponsored its Race for Hope fundraiser, which has supported everything from shoes for kids in Honduras and homes for single mothers in India, to services at The Rose Center in Mobile, benefiting victims of human trafficking. Dumas Wesley will be this year’s beneficiary of the Race for Hope 5K run set for Saturday morning.

Organizers hope to raise between $20,000 and $30,000, which would cover the cost of housing a family like Olivier’s in the Family Village for an entire year.

Dumas Wesley Executive Director Kate Carver said she was impressed with City Hope’s membership from the outset. “It was great. They really wanted to know their community,” Carver said. “And now they work hand in hand with us as a partner and see the value of our programs.

“For them to select us as the beneficiaries of this fundraiser, to see what we’re doing and to believe in it, is so meaningful to all of us.”

‘The growth I’ve seen in them’

Olivier said she hopes more families, and women like her, get the opportunity to become resilient in the Family Village, because it can be a life or death opportunity for some, and the chance to ease heartbreak for most.

Since moving into the Family Village, her daughters have both landed on the A-B Honor Roll at their schools.

“The growth I’ve seen in them since we’ve been here is remarkable,” Olivier said, overcome with emotion. “Their grades dropped having to live without lights and water, and I struggled hard.”

Even feeding her family was a challenge: Although she qualified for government assistance, she couldn’t get to her meetings or pick up food stamps because she had no transportation.

Now, there’s food in the refrigerator and more in the pantry, and on occasion the trio does what was once unthinkable: they go out for dinner.

And Olivier is budgeting to make a down payment on a car.

She said of her experience at Dumas Wesley: “It’s just being able to give my kids my time and my energy, and to let them know they are valued and they are important. ... I could not ever forgive myself if my kids didn’t know some kind of stability.”
