India-born Al-Qaeda leader killed in Afghanistan: Who was Asim Umar?

AQIS chief Asim Umar was killed last month in a joint operation by Afghan and US security agencies | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Asim Umar, better known by Indian intelligence agencies as Sanaul Haq, was born in Sambhal in Uttar Pradesh He allegedly came to the attention of Al-Qaeda chief, Al Zawahiri in 2011, and was announced as al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)’ leader in 2014 Umar was fluent in Urdu, Arabic, Pashto and Uzbek languages, and has written four books in Urdu, that are widely regarded as conspiracy literature

Afghanistan’s National Directorate of Security (NDS) has disclosed that Asim Umar, the leader of the terrorist group al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS), was killed in a joint raid by Afghan and US forces last month. Asim Umar, better known by Indian intelligence agencies as Sanaul Haq, was born in Sambhal in Uttar Pradesh and was designated as the head of AQIS in 2014, by Al-Qaeda leader, Ayman Al Zawahiri. Umar or Haq had been deemed missing from India since 1995, with security agencies suspecting that he had fled to Pakistan. The NDS confirmed that he was carrying a Pakistani passport and had been killed along with six other AQIS members on September 23.

Umar initially studied at the Darul Uloom Deoband seminary in the Saharanpur district of Uttar Pradesh before moving to Karachi in the early 1990s. There, he continued his study, first in Karachi at the Jamia Uloom-ul-Islamia and later at the Darul Uloom Haqqania in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa - two seminaries that several jihadi and Taliban personnel have historically studied in. Umar later allegedly joined the militant group Harkat-ul-Mujahideen and acted as an instructor in Peshawar.





Rose through Al-Qaeda ranks

Umar remained with Harkat-ul-Mujahideen until mid-2007, when he initiated contact with Al-Qaeda, after General Pervez Musharraf’s directive to storm the Lal Masjid in Islamabad. He worked as Al-Qaeda’s internet propagandist, and soon became a popular figure across international jihadi circles. It is also believed that Umar played a key role in setting the foundations for AQIS.

The Al-Qaeda soon recognised Umar’s skills as a jihadi propagandist and his extensive connections with a network of jihadi organisations. He was often characterised as an excellent orator and a highly knowledgeable ideologue – two traits that eventually convinced the Al-Qaeda that he would make an effective leader. He allegedly came to the attention of Al-Qaeda chief, Al Zawahiri, in 2011, and his name was announced as AQIS’ leader in 2014.

Umar was fluent in Urdu, Arabic, Pashto and Uzbek languages, and is said to have written four books in Urdu, which are widely regarded as conspiracy literature. Umar’s focus had been on the Dajjal (the Islamic equivalent of the Anti-Christ), and he was known to link concepts like the Armageddon with events like the US invasion of Afghanistan and even the Bermuda Triangle.

As the leader of AQIS, Umar released troves of propagandistic content primarily aimed at encouraging Indian Muslims to join the jihadi movement. In July 2018, he released a 26-minute audio speech warning jihadi fighters against harming innocent Muslims, cautioning that such actions were incompatible with Sharia law.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
