First move-ins at senior community designed for South Asians

The first buyers of townhomes in a Hanover Park development focused on South Asian senior citizens will move in this month, several months after the originally planned spring start.

Sixteen of the 51 townhomes at Verandah Retirement Community are sold, and closings and move-ins start Oct. 11, said Anuja Gupta, general partner of the development firm, Aman Living, based in south suburban Frankfort. The delay was related to construction, she said.

Verandah, on an Irving Park Road site that stood empty for more than a decade after a Menards home improvement store closed, combines a retirement community of for-sale homes with an assisted-living facility, for “a continuum of life stages,” said Gupta, who was a cardiologist before she moved into developing real estate beginning with a 22-unit rental community in Bourbonnais. She wanted to combine retirement and assisted-living homes so aging people who develop health problems don’t have to sell their homes and move.

Verandah is the first development in the country to both target South Asians and combine for-sale retirement homes and assisted living.

Sales target but are not limited to people of South Asian descent. Among the built-in attractions for them: Meals in the clubhouse will be Indian and vegetarian. Most staff will be bilingual, speaking English and a South Asian language. Holidays and festivals of India will be celebrated along with Christmas and other Western holidays, and the television offerings in the clubhouse include Indian channels.

When she unveiled the plan for Verandah last year, Gupta said food and language barriers were common reasons that Indian-American seniors don’t move into more conventionally Western retirement communities.

The project’s location also is good for the target audience, said Dr. Shan Kesavan, who with his wife, Geetha, will be one of the first to move in at Verandah. Two Hindu temples, in Lemont and Aurora, are within about 40 minutes’ drive, he said, and the Schaumburg location of the popular Patel Brothers chain of Indian groceries is less than 15 minutes away.

While the townhomes are traditional brick-and-siding buildings with no overt connection to South Asian countries, the interior decor of the clubhouse pays tribute to the style of Rajasthan, a state in India, Gupta said, with brightly colored wall murals and wicker chairs and palm fronds. The clubhouse, which eventually will be in a free-standing 15,000-square-foot building, is temporarily housed in a 4,200-square-foot space that will later be converted into for-sale townhouses, she said.
