Girl critical after neighbour attacks her with sickle for turning down his proposal in Hyderabad

A teenager attacked a second-year intermediate student with a sickle on Wednesday morning, at Barkatpura, injuring her seriously in the neck and abdomen, for allegedly turning down his proposal.

The condition of the victim, a 17-year-old girl, is said to be critical. Kachiguda police said the victim’s neighbour Chitkuri Bharath (19) attacked her near her residence, while she was on her way to college. The incident took place around 7.45 a.m. at Satya Nagar in Barkatpura.

The girl sustained deep injuries in the neck, abdomen and a hand. She was rushed to a private hospital, from where she was shifted to a corporate hospital in Malakpet, where her condition was said to be critical, said Deputy Commissioner of Police (East) M Ramesh.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (East) M. Ramesh addressing the media on the attack, at Osmania University police station in the city on Wednesday.G. Ramakrishna

‘Sickle attack on girl was planned’

Nearly 36 hours before attacking a minor girl for turning down his proposal, 19-year-old Chitkuri Bharath of Satya Nagar in Barkatpura stole a sickle from a tender coconut stall that was shut in his locality. He hid the lethal weapon at home and was biding his time to attack, said police, explaining that it was a planned attack.

On Wednesday around 7.45 a.m., he attacked the girl as she was on her way to visit her uncle, who would have dropped her to college in Nallakunta.

Earlier, the 17-year-old girl, noticing the boy standing by the roadside, sensed danger and starting running back home through a bylane, said Deputy Commissioner of Police (East) M. Ramesh. “After hitting a water pipe, she stumbled on the road and that gave enough time for the accused to attack her with the sharp sickle, causing grievous injuries,” he said.

‘Hid weapon at home’

When she raised an alarm for rescue, the accused ran inside his house, kept the weapon in his room and fled the area, Mr. Ramesh said.

According to the officer, the accused locked his parents inside the house before committing the offence. Asked about the involvement of Bharath’s parents in the attack, the officer clarified that they were not aware of his plan.

The accused teenager, who was arrested by Kachiguda police on Wednesday evening from the banks of river Musi, is in a state of shock, said the cop. The incident could have been averted, if the victim’s parents had lodged a complaint at Bharosa centre on January 8, when he had been counselled.

Irreversible damage

“On that day, they were not willing to lodge a complaint, stating they live in the same locality and that their daughter’s career would be ruined if people learn about the harassment,” a senior officer said.

Had they filed a complaint, the accused would have been behind bars today and the attack not taken place at all, the officer maintained.
