SAD trying to disturb Dakha: Bittu

Ludhiana: Shortly after Congress candidate for Dakha by-elections, Captain Sandeep Sandhu, took potshots at SAD’s Bikram Majithia and challenged him to fight Sandhu politically, Ludhiana MP Ravneet Singh Bittu has now launched an attack against Majithia.

Notably, a few days ago Majithia organised a press conference against Sandhu and had alleged that SHO Dakha Prem Singh was supporting and working for the Congress candidate and the party is also sending workers from other districts who are allegedly creating environment of fear amongst Dakha voters. In the press conference in which other senior SAD leaders were present, the leaders also termed Sandhu as an outsider as he belongs from Faridkot.

Speaking to TOI, Bittu said, “SAD leaders, particularly Bikram Majithia, are trying to disturb the peaceful situation of Dakha constituency and also trying to misguide voters by adopting cheap tactics. Also, Majithia who is alleging that Congress workers from other constituencies are disturbing the environment of Dakha should also answer why he comes again and again to Dakha when he is from Majitha constituency. Doesn’t that make him an outsider and isn’t he disturbing the situation here by making idiotic statements and giving false narratives.”

Bittu also added, “Majithia’s allegations that SHO Prem Singh of Dakha is siding with Congress and working to ensure victory of Captain Sandhu, clearly shows how low his state of mind has gone. Prem Singh was transferred to Dakha before election code of conduct and his transfer was well within the rules. Moreover, how can an SHO-level policeman make a candidate victorious. Majithia should answer why has he decided to ditch Prem Singh now and label him as Congress supporter when it is a proven fact that Prem Singh is blue eyed boy of both Majithia and SAD candidate from Dakha Manpreet Singh Ayali. It is no hidden fact that Prem Singh is close to both these leaders and has used their links for getting postings at stations of his choice several times. Majithia and the party is simply frustrated as after touring Dakha and other seats where by-elections are being held, they have realised the bitter reality that their party does not stand any chance to win even a single seat.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
