Masjid Parichay: Mumbai mosque launches initiative to invite non-Muslims to combat misconceptions

The Imam at the mosque also delivered a short sermon to the guests on humanity, unity and equality. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Jamat-e-Islami Hind launches 'Masjid Parichay' initiative in Mumbai Initiative is aimed at removing misconceptions about Muslims and Islam One guest Jivajirao Patil said it was a wonderful experience for him

Mumbai: Jamat-e-Islami Hind, a Muslim religious organisation, has launched an initiative in Mumbai to invite people from other faith to visit the mosque to weed out misconceptions about Muslims and Islam.

The initiative known as 'Masjid Parichay' (Introduction to the Mosque) is aimed at making non-Muslims aware of the Muslims and removing any misconception about followers of Islam.

According to a report, the Masjid Parichay was organised on Sunday (October 6) by Millet Welfare Association at the Mira Road Mosque. The 'parichay' was held in association with Students Islamic Organisation (SIO), a student wing of Jamat-e-Islami Hind.

According to Millet Welfare Association trustee, Iqbal Mahadik, they were making efforts for some time to organise such an event. "And to make this a reality, SIO helped us invite non-Muslims guests," said Mahadik.

Jivajirao Patil, who visited the mosque, said he always used to think that there was no entry for non-Muslims in the mosque.

"It's a wonderful feeling. Today, I come to know that everyone can visit the mosque. No one enjoys a special status as a poor can occupy his place in the first row if he comes early, while the richest man in the world may stand in the last line if he comes last," the report quoted Jivajirao Patil as saying.

JIH volunteer, Dr Parvez Mandviwala, has said that the unfounded fears have created a lot of misconceptions among non-Muslims.

The non-Muslims guests were asked to witness 'Wudu' (ablution rituals) before they were taken to the mosque's main prayer hall.

Explaining the importance of 'Wudu', Dr Mandviwala said that the purpose of ablution is to purify oneself before standing in front of God in submission.

The JIH has been organising such mosque visits for the last several months aimed at combating Islamophobia and misconceptions about Muslims.

Another guest named Ashish Pandey said one important thing he learnt through his mosque visit is that the place (mosque) is very peaceful and sends across a message of unity.

The Imam at the mosque also delivered a short sermon to the guests on humanity, unity and equality.

Before leaving, the guests were also handed over copies of the Quran and the Hadith (teachings of Prophet Muhammad). The guests also witnessed muezzin's (Azaan) call to prayers for the evening.


