Sensex falls 100 points, Nifty slips below 11,300 on mixed trade signals

Domestic equity markets opened lower as a cocktail of news from the US-China trade front kept traders on edge. Cautious sentiment also prevailed on D-Street ahead of the kickstart of the September quarter earnings season. IT giant TCS and private sector lender IndusInd Bank will post their Q2 results later today.Reports from Chinese quarters indicated that the meeting between US and China could be cut short. South China Morning Post (SCMP) reported that the Chinese delegation, headed by Vice Premier Liu He, was planning to leave Washington after just a day of minister-level meetings, instead of as originally planned on Friday.However, news agencies in US indicated that there could be a partial deal. Bloomberg reported the White House is looking at rolling out a previously agreed currency pact with China. Sensex opened over 100 points down but stayed above 38,000 level. NSE barometer Nifty slipped below 11,300 to trade around 11,275, down 36 points. Broader markets were trading in line with its headline peers. Nifty Midcap was down 0.3 per cent and Nifty Smallcap was trading flat, up 0.03 per cent.Indiabulls Housing Finance plunged as much as 8 per cent in early trade on BSE after the Reserve Bank of India slashed its hopes to enter the banking space by rejecting its proposal to merge with. The stock price of the lender dived 5 per cent, hitting the lower circuit. Telecom stocks surged again amid their battle over interconnect user charges. Vodafone Idea surged 16 per cent to Rs 6.77 and Bharti Airtel was up 6 per cent to Rs 381 in the opening trade. Reliance Industries also crept 1.7 per cent to Rs 1,347 on BSE. Bharti Airtel and Reliance Industries were top gainers on Sensex.TCS and IndusInd were trading flat ahead of their quarterly results.All sectoral indices on NSE were trading in the red with Nifty Bank losing the most. The index was down 1.4 percent due to over 3 per cent losses in RBL Bank and Bank of Baroda. YES Bank and SBI were down over 2 per cent each.
