Woman strangles, throws six-year-old stepdaughter down from third floor in Chennai

A post-mortem confirmed strangulation as the cause of death (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused's husband had the victim with his first wife who died of an illness in 2015 While Suryakala first feigned innocence, she later confessed before investigators She wanted to get rid of the victim to have another child with her husband

Chennai: In an appalling case that is coming to light from the state capital of Tamil Nadu, a woman has been arrested for the alleged murder of her six-year-old stepdaughter. Identified as 28-year-old Suryakala, the accused was a homemaker and held a Bachelors in Philosophy. She was arrested after she confessed in the face of intensive questioning, said police.

Suryakala lived with her husband Parthiban in Chennai's Selaiyur area. Her husband had a six-year-old stepdaughter from his first wife, who died in 2015 due to health reasons. Police officers familiar with the case revealed that Parthiban's first wife's mother lived with the couple on the pretext of taking care of her grandmother. The couple, who got married in 2016, had a son that same year.

The matter came to light on Tuesday when Parthiban left home for work. Minutes after he stepped out of the house, Suryakala strangled six-year-old Raghavi to death and threw her down from the terrace of their three-storey building. She then called the husband and told him that Raghavi was missing. The accused then pretended to look for the girl and found her lying motionless among bushes and rocks on the ground floor.

Local police were alerted and a case of unnatural death was registered in this regard. Acting on suspicion of foul play, police grilled Suryakala and she confessed to committing the heinous crime. She has been booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for murder.

While her motive is still unclear, a preliminary investigation has led investigators to believe that the accused wanted to make the victim's grandmother (mother of her husband's first wife) move away. The mother lived with the couple since she wanted to take care of her deceased daughter's only child. Suryakala planned the crime after the mother left home for a couple of days. She also thought that killing the child would allow her to convince her husband to have another child of their own. However, the same is yet to be confirmed. A post-mortem has confirmed that the child died due to strangulation and it was not the fall that killed her.

Earlier this year, a 50-year-old woman was arrested by police in Mumbai after she confessed to throwing her two-year-old granddaughter from the sixth-floor of her son's apartment. The incident took place in the Malad area when the other family members were sleeping. Police later revealed that the woman wanted to teach her daughter-in-law a lesson.
