12 Questions Sonia Gandhi Would Have Been Asked In A Serious Interview

1. Did you not realise that the 93rd Amendment and the Right to Education (RTE) would lead to a blatantly communal education ecosystem and would jeopardise the existence of thousands of schools run by the majority community?

2. You are accused of being a super-prime minister and belittling the office of the PM between 2004-14. It is said that you held power without accountability and in hindsight your “voice of conscience” comment of May 2004 rings hollow. How would you respond to that?

3. When was the first time you got to know of the 2G scam and what were your first instructions to the government then?

4. It is alleged that files from the PMO used to come to 10 Jan Path for your approval. Don’t you think this undermines the Constitution of India?

5. In the context of the 1984 pogrom, what do you think of Rajiv Gandhi's "big tree falls. . ." comment?

6. How did you know Ottavio Quattrocchi and how did he get access to then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi?

7. In hindsight, do you think that Rajiv Gandhi could have handled the Shah Bano case and the Ram Janmabhoomi case differently?

8. A recent biography of his alleges that you did not allow the body of former prime minister Narasimha Rao to even enter the Congress headquarters after his demise. Why not clear the air once and for all on that?

9. Sharad Pawar left the Congress citing your foreign origin issue. How did you manage to convince him to be a Congress ally?

10. What is your opinion on the speculations around your son-in-law, Robert Vadra’s properties?

11. What was the need to transfer the ownership of National Herald to Young Indian Ltd, a non-profit owned by your son and yourself?

12. You are the president of the Congress party, and led the UPA during its two terms in power. Don’t you think that the people of India deserve to know basic information about your health, like they did about Dr Manmohan Singh and Atal Bihari Vajpayee?
