Gruesome murders shock West Bengal; RSS worker, pregnant wife, 8-year-old son hacked to death in Murshidabad

The victims identified as Bandhu Prakash Pal (35), his wife Beauty Mondal Pal (30) and their six-year-old son Angan Bandhu Pal

Key Highlights The victims were identified as Bandhu Prakash Pal (35), his wife Beauty Mondal Pal (30) and their six-year-old son Angan Bandhu Pal In Mandsaur, Yuvraj Singh, a member of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, was shot dead in broad daylight The woman was eight-months pregnant

Kolkata: In a gruesome incident, a Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) worker’s family in West Bengal’s Murshidabad was brutally slaughtered by unknown miscreants. The victims identified as Bandhu Prakash Pal (35), his wife Beauty Mondal Pal (30) and their six-year-old son Angan Bandhu Pal were hacked to death in their house in Jiaganj area on Tuesday morning. The woman was eight-months pregnant.

Hours after the pictures from the crime scene went viral on social media, BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra slammed the liberal brigade for their “nauseating selectivism”.

Taking to his Twitter account, Patra said, “This has shaken my conscience ...a RSS worker Sh Bandhu Prakash Pal, his eight months pregnant wife & his kid were brutally slaughtered in West Bengal’s Murshidabad. Not a word by the liberals. Not a letter by 59 liberals to Mamata. Nauseating Selectivism!”

In Mandsaur, Yuvraj Singh, a member of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, was shot dead in broad daylight.

Reacting on the horrific triple-murder, BJP leader Babul Supriyo questioned West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee saying, “Does Maa, Maati, Manush mean anything to you?”

He further wrote, “Did we want this Bengal? Where we worship Durga and Kali Maa on one side, on the other side a mother along with her child is put to death.”

BJP MLA Raja Singh urged Home Minister Amit Shah to order a high-level investigation and said, “Where are the secular and liberal leaders hiding?”

Attack on BJP workers and right-wing activists in West Bengal intensified after 2019 Lok Sabha elections. While the BJP has accused the Trinamool Congress of orchestrating the attack on party cadres, the TMC has blamed the BJP for the attack on TMC workers.

Earlier, while addressing a rally in West Bengal, BJP working president JP Nadda had alleged that the state was in the grip of "jungle raj" and "state terrorism". He further slammed the Mamata government for "physical liquidation of political opponents".

Nadda gave this statement after performing the Hindu ritual of tarpan for party workers killed in political violence in the state recently.

He further alleged that people who opposed the ruling Trinamool Congress' ideology were being killed.

"There is no law and order. The government which has created a jungle raj is neither upholding the law nor ensuring judicial remedy. Even justice is not being given to the families of victims."

After his address, Nadda also met the families of the slain political activists and alleged that even police complaints were not being filed properly.

(We, at Times Now, have access to the video but are refraining from showing, given its gruesome content.)
