RSS man, pregnant wife, child hacked to death in West Bengal’s Murshidabad

The RSS worker, his wife and son were found lying in a pool of blood at their residence in Murshidabad district.

A Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) worker, his pregnant wife, and their eight-year-old son were on Wednesday found murdered in West Bengal's Murshidabad district.

The bodies of Bondhu Gopal Pal, a 35-year-old primary school teacher, his wife Beauty, and son were found lying in a pool of blood inside their residence on Tuesday in Jiaganj area of the district, police said.

West Bengal: A teacher, his wife and child were murdered by unidentified miscreants in West Bengal's Murshidabad district yesterday. As per RSS West Bengal secretary Jishnu Basu, he was also an RSS worker and was recently associated with a 'weekly milan'. ANI (@ANI) October 10, 2019

West Bengal RSS secretary Jishnu Basu told the news agency that the victim was an RSS worker who was recently associated with a 'weekly milan'.

The incident came to light after neighbours did not see the family at the Vijayadashami celebrations. Worried, some of them, went to their home but found the door bolted from inside.

They informed the police which found the bodies lying in a pool of blood. Graphic photos and videos of the West Bengal family lying in a pool of blood flooded social media. BJP leader Sambit Patra also took to Twitter and tweeted photos and videos of the crime spot.

Terming the incident as gruesome, BJP's Sambit Patra said, "Gruesome video This has shaken my conscience ...a RSS worker Sh Bandhu Prakash Pal, his eight months pregnant wife & his kid were brutally slaughtered in West Bengal’s Murshidabad Not a word by the liberals Not a letter by 59 liberals to Mamata Nauseating Selectivism!."

India Today has, meanwhile, taken a conscious decision not to share sensitive images of the incident.

Reacting to the incident, West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar said, "I am in deep pain. My heart is bleeding. What was in Murshidabad, a brutal murder took place, putting humanity to shame. A teacher, his pregnant wife and eight-year-old child were killed in a barbaric manner and there has been no response from the state machinery so far. This is a very, very serious reflection of the situation we are living in. I would urge the authority for a quick and real investigation."

Also read | NCW slams West Bengal govt over murder of RSS worker, family

Also read | BJP worker killed in West Bengal

Also watch | BJP claims 4 party workers killed by TMC, holds Mamata Banerjee responsible for unrest
