RSS Worker, Pregnant Wife And Child Brutally Murdered In West Bengal

In a tragic incident, three people, including a child, were murdered by unknown miscreants in their house on Thursday in Jiyaganj area of Murshidabad. The deceased have been identified as Bandhu Prakash Pal (35), his wife Beauty Mondal Pal (30) and son Angan Bandhu Pal (6).

Bandhu Prakash Pal was a school teacher who worked in Gosaigram Sahapara Primary school and his wife was pregnant. All the three were brutally murdered by a sharp weapon, police said.

West Bengal: A teacher, his wife and child were murdered by unidentified miscreants in West Bengal's Murshidabad district yesterday. As per RSS West Bengal secretary Jishnu Basu, he was also an RSS worker and was recently associated with a 'weekly milan'. — ANI (@ANI) October 10, 2019

"Prakash was a teacher in Gosaigram Sahapara Primary school. He was working for the last 20 years. He is originally from the Sahapur area and had shifted in Murshidabad for his son's education. We do not know if they had any problem with anyone," said Sujoy Ghosh, brother of the deceased teacher.

The brutality of the murder has shocked everyone in the vicinity. The incident came to light after the neighbours found the bodies inside their house and informed the police.

The investigation into the matter is underway.

National Commission for Women (NCW) chairperson Rekha Sharma demanded the immediate arrest of the miscreants who murdered three members of a family.

The NCW chief raised the concerns in a letter to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee a day after the trio, including an eight-year-old boy, was murdered by an unidentified person.

"The commission being concerned in the matter directs that the culprits must be arrested immediately and ensure swift and fair investigation in the matter," the letter stated.

BCCL/NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma

Speaking to ANI, Rekha Sharma said, "I have taken the cognizance. After the incident, I do not know where these culprits vanish. The police do not take any action."

(With PTI Inputs)
