MP: FIR against 150 VHP, Bajrang Dal workers for celebratory firing at Gwalior school during Shastra Puja

The incident occurred on Dusherra during a shastra puja event in Gwalior | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The incident occurred on Dusherra during a shastra puja event in Gwalior A group of VHP and Bajranj Dal workers allegedly carried out a procession and started firing in the air Around seven rounds of bullets were fired

Bhopal: An FIR has been registered against 150 workers of Vishva Hindu Parishad and Bajrang Dal for celebratory firing in school premises during 'Shastra Puja', in Gwalior on 8th October.

The incident occurred on Dusherra during a Shastra Puja event in Gwalior.

A group of VHP and Bajrang Dal workers allegedly carried out a procession and started firing in the air from their guns. The firing continued even after the cops warned the workers to stop it. Around seven rounds of bullets were fired and video of the incident went viral on social media.

Madhya Pradesh: An FIR has been registered against 150 workers of Vishva Hindu Parishad and Bajrang Dal for celebratory firing in a school premises during 'Shastra Puja', in Gwalior on 8th October. (08.10.2019) pic.twitter.com/gWVPKQby2W — ANI (@ANI) October 10, 2019

In a separate incident, a local office-bearer of the VHP was shot dead by unidentified persons in Mandsaur town on Wednesday.

The victim identified as Yuvraj Singh Chauhan (37) was shot dead near a tea shop in Geeta Bhawan area by three motorbike-borne men. District Superintendent of Police (SP) Hitesh Choudhary said that Chauhan died on the spot after being shot in the chest.

Shastra Puja also is known as Ayudha Puja is celebrated every year and begins on the ninth day of Navaratri.

Meanwhile, the Congress slammed Defence Minister Rajnath Singh for performing Shastra Puja after receiving the first Rafale aircraft.

Calling the Shastra Puja as unnecessary drama, senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge said, “There is no need to do such tamasha (drama). When we bought weapons like the Bofors gun in the past, no one showed them off like these guys are doing," he said. "Our Air Force officers judged whether they were good or not. These people go and show off by sitting inside (the aircraft).”

Reacting to Kharge’s barb, former Mumbai Congress president Sanjay Nirupam criticised the statement saying that “Shastra Puja” cannot be called tamasha.

Kharge gave this statement as he is an atheist, said Nirupam adding that not everybody in the grand old party is atheists.
