When Thanjavur turned into a performance stage

Shreshtha Bharath Sanskriti Samagam, presented by Sangeet Natak Akademi and South Zone Cultural Centre, brought together diverse art forms, artistes and scholars

“We have had many festivals dedicated to each one of the many arts that come under our umbrella, but we felt that we needed to have a festival where artistes from each of these disciplines like music, dance, theatre, folk arts and puppetry could come together and interact with each other. This gave birth to a festival called ‘Shreshtha Bharath Sanskriti Samagam’. This festival being held in the historical town of Thanjavur is the fifth in the series,” said Shekhar Sen, chairman, Sangeet Natak Akademi on the inaugural day of the festival held recently.

The festival, presented by Sangeet Natak Akademi and South Zone Cultural Centre in the Kootharangam auditorium in the sprawling SZCC campus was inaugurated by the Governor of Tamil Nadu Banwarilal Purohit. He also unveiled the foundation stone of a centre for specially-abled children. “This centre is being built to extend the reach of arts to special children,” said M. Balasubramoniam, director, SZCC.

Each day of the festival was devoted to one art, featured a seminar every morning where experts consisting of artists, writers and scholars presented a paper, highlighting the past, present and future of the art. The evening sessions showcased the diverse art forms of our country.

First day’s session had musicians N. Ravikiran, Lalgudi GJR Krishnan, Neyveli R Santhanagopalan, Neela Ramgopal, Kaivalya Kumar Gurav and Pushparaj Kosht discussing and highlighting methodologies and issues faced by artistes in the arena of classical music.

Taking us on a journey through the diverse geographical terrain of India, the Madras Youth Choir heralded the festival on a vibrant note. Though many of its members were well past their prime to fit into the youth category, they brought youthful energy to their singing.

Violin maestro M. Chandrasekaran along with his daughter Bharati on the violin, Trichur Narendran on the mridangam and Ravichandran on the ghatam enthralled the audience with the Abheri raga kriti, ‘Nagumomu’ and ‘Chinnanchiru Kiliye’ even as heavy rain lashed the pandal.

Hindustani vocaalist Venkatesh KUmar performing at Shreshtha Bharath Sanskriti Samagam in Thanjavur | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Well-known Hindustani vocalist, M. Venkatesh Kumar, with his powerful, resonant voice kept the rasikas spellbound right through the evening, beginning with raag Durga and then moving on to raag Sohni before concluding with a Bhairavi bhajan. It was an intensely meditative experience for both the artiste and the listeners. He was accompanied by Keshav Joshi on the tabla and Satish Kohli on the harmonium.

The second day’s focus was on folk and tribal art forms with Indumathi Raman’s talk on the classicism of Bhagavatha Mela, an informative presentation on the beauty of Moplah paatu with its Sufi influences by Govinda Varma Raja, ritualistic practices in local dialects by Mohan Swaroop Bhatia and Hariprasad Singh and a relatively lesser-known offshoot of Yakshagana, Doddatta, by M.V. Venkatesha.

The evening session began with a Harikatha exposition by M.V. Simhachala Shastry. His body moving in rhythm to the musical narration enhanced the visual appeal of the performance. Bodo dance of Assam, a vibrant dance of Telengana Oggu Dolu and Poikal Kuthirai attam, highlighted the diverse styles of our country.

Making a visual statement with well co-ordinated movements and clad in finely starched dhotis and turbans, Pung Cholam, Dhol Cholam and Vasantha Raas artistes from the Jawaharlal Nehru Manipuri Dance Academy left a lasting impression on the third day.

Kapila Venu’s Kodiyattam performance at Shreshtha Bharath Sanskriti Samagam in Thanjavur | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Kapila Venu, the brilliant Koodiyattam artiste presented ‘Kansa Vadham.’ The exquisite abhinaya that brought out the finer nuances of the characters, phenomenal body control as she leapt on to a stool and brilliant accompaniments on percussion made for a wholesome appeal. This was followed by Rajendra Gangani’s Kathak performance, the artiste sustaining the audience interest with his technique and movements.

Earlier in the morning, Saroja Vaidyanathan, Shama Bhate, Vyjayanthi Kashi, Janmejoy Saibabu and Smitha Shastri discussed the changing scenario of dance. The speakers on the fourth day included Murari Roychowdhury, who spoke on theatre music of Bengal, Robin Dash on stage craft, Anupama Hoskere on puppetry, Parsi theatre by Zafar Sanjari and Sreenivas G Kappanna on lighting.

On the last day, Padamshree Josalkar, Natesh Chandra Lal and R. Raju highlighted the importance of taking theatre to schools and involving local people. Deepak Karanjikar, Debashish Majumdar and K G Krishnamurthy were the other panellists.

The evening performance began with a shadow puppet show on the life of the Buddha. Directed by Belagallu Veeranna it made an impact by bringing together visual media, graphics and puppet movements. It was an impressive attempt to cultivate a young audience base for puppetry.

A simple story of a Dogri play, ‘Ghumayee’, on the topical issue of water, directed by Balwant Thakur, left a strong impact with excellent performances by the artistes.

A scene from the Sanskrit play ‘Karnabharam’ | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

The curtains came down on an exciting festival with a Sanskrit play of Bhasa, ‘Karnabharam.’ Directed by Kavalam Narayana Panicker and presented by Sopanam Institute of Performing Arts, the actors managed to communicate the essence of the story to a majority of people who could not follow the language with their acting skills.

“We also felt the need to include visual arts. So the festival featured contemporary paintings of artists who had taken part in art camps of our centre,” said Joseph Dhairia Raj, deputy director, SZCC. A philatelic display was also a part of it.

Veteran television anchor Sadhana Srivastava gave a brief, insightful introduction to the speakers and performers on all the days. Vinod was competent in his introductions in Tamil. The seminar, threw up a lot of ideas and issues, but as is often the case, there was little time to debate and deliberate. The success of this Samagam lies in the fact that it managed to introduce varied art forms to an audience mostly unfamiliar with them.
