Wife of Krushnachandra accuses lover of murdering him

Balikuda: Mystery surrounds the death of Krushnachandra Champatiray (28), whose badly burnt body was recovered from the Debagram School-cum-Cyclone Shelter Home in Adhanga under this police limits in Jagatsinghpur district, October 5. The deceased, however, belonged to Kanchanpur village under Chandapur police limits in Nayagarh district.

Police have said that Krushnachandra have committed suicide. However, Krushnachandra’s wife Rahmita has alleged that it is not suicide, but murder. Rashmita and her father and mother-in-law have lodged a complaint with the police alleging that Krushnachandra has been murdered by his lover.

According to Rashmita, her husband was working as a computer assistant in Ahmedabad. They have a five-year-old daughter also. She has said that Krushnachandra had become friends on Facebook with a woman who lived in Debagarm village. Incidentally the name of the woman was found written in blood on the wall from where the body of Krushnachandra was found.

According to Rashmita, the woman used to frequently call her husband over phone. So once she called up the woman and told her not to disturb family peace. Rashmita also has said that because of the woman, she and her husband had frequent quarrels.

Rashmita goes on to mention in her complaint that Krushnachandra left home October 4 stating that he was returning to his workplace. Thereafter she did not have any contact with Krushnachandra and only came to know about his death the next day.

The woman in question, according to the police is married for five years and lives in Cuttack. During interrogation she has told them that it was Krushnachandra who used to disturb her by calling repeatedly. She has said that at times Krushnachandra used to make WhatsApp video calls and profess his love for her stating he was ready to write her name in blood.

The woman during interrogation has also stated that she had time and again urged Krushnachandra to refrain from calling. She told the police that Krushnachandra had called her October 5 pleading her to go with him to Ahmedabad. He had threatened to end his life if she did not heed to his request. However she has admitted she was a good friend of Krushnachandra, but she knew where to draw the line because she is married.

Police at the moment are at a dead end. However, they have not closed investigation on the case.

PNN
