How were questions to PM?

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina addresses a press conference about the outcome of her recent official visits to USA and India at her official residence Gono Bhaban in Dhaka on October 9, 2019. Photo: PID

On October 9, the journalists invited by the Prime Minister’s Office got the privilege of asking Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina questions on the recent deals with India including Feni river water-sharing and on brutal killing of Buet student Abrar.

The art of questioning plays a very important role in the professional life of a journalist. The common perception is that asking proper questions has become a lost art. How did the journalists fare at Gono Bhaban?

Ali Asif Shawon, Dainik Amader Somoy:

At first, I am congratulating you for the three international awards that you have received. My question is related to your recent India tour. During the tour, you and the honourable Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi signed a joint project which is about exporting LPG gas in bulk from Bangladesh to India’s Tripura and another MoU has been signed over giving water from Feni river to the Tripura state of India.

Criticism are swirling from different quarters of Bangladesh. My question is that, how much interest of Bangladesh has been served? I want to know that from you, the head of the government. Thank you.

Farzana Rupa, Ekattor Television:

Regarding Abrar killing. We actually do not forget many things. In 2002, when Sony, a BUET student, was killed during an exchange of bullets between two groups of Chhatra Dal over tender, we had to write headlines that killers were on the loose, accused were moving freely in public. It is a matter of relief that it has been possible to arrest the accused persons within the shortest possible time (in Abrar killing). But I want to know from you that since you are keeping your words that zero tolerance will be shown against all forms of corruption and terrorism and “tenderbaji” (manipulation of tender), then why this message is not reaching at the grassroots level? Why still those, who are known as your workers, are creating situations that is causing embarrassment to the people of the country? What is your message for them?

Sohel Haider Chowdhury, special correspondent, Dainik Jai Jai Din and general secretary, Dhaka Union of Journalists:

Honourable prime minister, your emotion touches our hearts again and again. Whenever we attend any programme on August 15, we become emotional seeing your emotions.

Honourable prime minister, you are the lighthouse of Bangladesh, symbol of our hope and faith. Regarding Abrar killing, when you say that “I will ensure justice as a mother,” we feel relieved. And on behalf of the journalist community, we are congratulating you on getting these three awards from India and the United States, and at the same time, it would be great if you respond to the two topics that I would like to shed light on.

Firstly, you have signed the gazette of the ninth wage board. We are so grateful to you for that. But honourable prime minister, journalists used to get two gratuities previously but this time it’s one in the ninth wage board. Two were given because journalists are not entitled to pensions. Another issue is that income tax of journalists was paid by the owners previously. Even the court ordered owners to pay the taxes after they had lodged a case. But according to the latest wage board, journalists will have to pay that. Can you rethink over the matter? Because, you are a journalist-friendly prime minister. And in 1974, Bangabandhu enacted a law to honour journalists which overwhelmed us tremendously. The mass media workers’ act is being crafted in line to that act. Is it possible to place the proposed law in parliament soon? And does the government have any plan to introduce wage board for electronic media workers? Thank you honourable prime minister. We will march forward following your light and with the faith instilled by you. With that, I would like to wrap up.

Parvin Chowdhury, Japan Broadcasting Corporation:

Recently, a demand has been raised that student politics should be banned. And in your statement regarding student politics so far, I could hear only sorrowful things. I could not hear any matter of joy. Is there any possibility that you will ban student politics? For the time being? And my next question is that, is your government ensuring safety of the students who are agitating now? So that the Buet students remain safe. Thank you.

J E Mamum, ATN Bangla:

As far as I know, in 1978, after Ziaur Rahman came to power, he made a law to affiliate student organisations to political parties. Before that, all student bodies, even Bangabsndhu’s Chhatra League, functioned independently. Following Ziaur Rahman’s law, the student organisations turned into sycophants of political parties and started tasting power and that’s how educational institutions in Bangladesh became volatile.

To add to Parvin apa’s question, I would like to say that of the eight demands raised by the agitating Buet students, the eighth one is banning student politics. But already newspapers and different media have reported that if student organisations are made autonomous then they might be able to function freely without any influence of the political parties.

I want to know your comments on the matter.

With regret, I want to mention one thing. We all love and respect you. People call you the lighthouse, symbol of hope etc. For us, this is a matter of joy and sadness at the same time. Because whenever anything happens, you have to instruct the police, the fire brigade, Chhatra League

Why do you have to do everything? Then what are your state machineries and administration doing? We hear that prime minister gave instructions to raid Jubo League’s casino. Why all instructions have to come from the PM’s office?

Monjurul Islam

Honourable prime minister, congratulations on getting international awards and belated birthday wishes. As you said that drives would go on against offenders irrespective of their political identity. When you formed government this time, your promise was to establish good governance and we have seen that you have taken strong measures and started cleansing drive from home.

At a time, when this step is gaining praise from home and abroad, we are seeing tensions mounting in all universities parallelly. Do you see any connection between these two? We are tensed over Teesta, NRC and Rohingya issue. How much assurance did you get after meeting Narendra Modi? So that we do not panic again due to propaganda. Should we be relieved?

Uttam Chakraborty, Dainik Janakantha

Your cleansing drive has created a tremor that has reached the grassroot level. Many wonder, will it spread throughout the country? How long will this earthquake sustain? Thank you honourable prime minister.

Labonno Bhuiyan, Asian Television

Honourable prime minister, we have covered your tours to the UN and India. It’s a matter of satisfaction for us that we could cover two successful tours. We know that to every tour you go with a vision for the welfare of the country. As journalists, we feel successful when we publish that news in newspapers or air it on television.

My question is, your recent drive against corruption has earned a lot of praise at home and abroad. I want to know honourable prime minister, is the drive against corruption a message from you to the upcoming council (of Awami League) and future politics. Are you giving some kind of message to clean image politicians through this drive against corruption?

Syed Ashik Rahman, RTV

Honourable prime minister, you have started cleansing drive from your home and Chhatra League president and general secretary have resigned as you have taken actions. But despite such strong warnings, why others in the organisation are not becoming cautious? The BUET incident that we saw, you have given a strong message, but still, why aren’t they being careful?
