OU teacher held for ‘Maoist’ links

An assistant professor on contract with Osmania University PG College in Secunderabad was arrested by the Jogulamba-Gadwal police for his alleged links with the CPI (Maoist).

On Thursday afternoon, a team comprising officials from State Intelligence’s anti-Naxal Special Intelligence Bureau (SIB), Gadwal district police and Hyderabad police, conducted searches at Jagan’s residence in Tarnaka and arrested him.

The police seized incriminating material, including revolutionary literature and electronic gadgets. Jagan is the editor of ‘Students March’ magazine, which publishes revolutionary content, officials said.

Sources in the police department said Jagan, along with Telangana Vidyarthi Vedika (TVV) president Maddileti and others, was working for the Maoist party as recruiter of new cadre. Maddileti is currently at large and on Tuesday police raided his house in Nallakunta.

The arrest came nearly a week after TVV members P. Naganna alias Nagaraju from Wanaparthy and Balaram of Hyderabad were taken into custody by the Gadwal police.

“We have registered a suo motu case against a few persons for having links with Maoist and Jagan was one of the accused booked under Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) and 120-A (conspiracy) of Indian Penal Code,” said an official.

The official said the accused were the overground cadre of the party, who were actively involved in recruiting new cadre.

According to officials, the arrested persons were in contact with CPI (Maoist) Telangana Secretary Haribhushan and were taking ‘instructions’ from him.

“So far, we have arrested three persons in connection with the case and teams are formed to nab Maddileti,” said the official.

Meanwhile, members of the Civil Liberties Committee (CLC) alleged that Jagan was picked up by police while dropping his wife in Secunderabad.

“They took him to an undisclosed place and tortured him. Later, he was taken to his apartment at Tarnaka around 3 p.m.,” said CLC president Laxman.

He said that the police teams searched Jagan’s house for three hours on Thursday and seized a laptop, some books and other belongings.
