Flying machines threaten National security

By R K Arora and Vinay Kaura

Known to a handful of people about the number of drones being detected on India-Pakistan border, secu rity forces seem to be clueless about how to respond. The reason is simple: they don’t have the technology to counter this growing threat. There are intelligence reports that almost 5000 drones have been made available to various non-state actors across the border to carry out various terrorist and criminal activities.

Shocking seizure of armaments, fake currency and heavy ammunition on September 27th by the Punjab Police and apprehension of four militants of Khalistan Zindabad force have raised the eyebrows of Indian security forces and intelligence agencies as these consignments were ferried by drones. After this news, there was understandable reluctance at the initial stage among security forces and the intelligence agencies about divergent opinions regarding this emerging threat. Some agencies did not seem to agree with the Punjab police as they were in denial mode about the use of drones by the criminal syndicates. But in last 10 days detection of more than 100 drones by the security forces has sent the alarm bells ringing for all the security and intelligence agencies. Indo-Pak border has been put on high alert to counter the drone threats. But will it be sufficient?

The use of drones, especially by the drug cartels, is not a new modus operandi, and these methods are well tested and frequently used by the Mexican drug cartels on the US Mexico border for smuggling of drugs and other contrabands. What is undeniable is that criminal networks tend to adopt innovative and successful modus operandi very frequently and quickly as they are not bound by the government policy and bureaucracy.The use of the drones on the Indo-Pak border can be termed as new threat to national security, these drone s can be very dangerous in emerging circumstances. The approach followed by Pakistan’s intelligence agencies to counter the abrogation of article 370, even drone swarms’ attacks cannot be ruled out. After 27 th September, there are number of drones which have been detected, and reliable information confirmed that thou sands of drones being availabl e with the criminal networks including non-state actors which are linked with the Pakistan army. These drones are made in China, and to be used against India.

If we closely analyse the pattern of drone detection on Indo Pak borders, the frequency of their use is an alarming aspect which cannot be ignored. Keeping in mind the security situation, swarms drone attack is serious challenge for India. Our security and intelligence agencies have limited response capabilities as counter measures to address this challenge. As per reports, there are at least five to six incidents of the drone bei ng detected every day on Indo-Pak border and security forces are not able to do much despite having clear instructions to shoot these drones immediately after detection. But since shooting capability of humans in the sky are very limited, our security personnel seem to be further handicapped in this regard as they are not trained for that. Shooting the drones with the gun is not an easy task, and parti cularly if we don’t have specially trained troops for the purpose. Some of the veterans of border security are talking about the use of light machine guns against drones; this technique was used during the Second World War against aircraft.

However, the scenario has chan ged completely with unprecedented advances in technologies of artificial intelligence during the last two decades. There are few counter-drone technologies available worldwide,broadly in two categories; detectors and defenders or destroys. Drones can be detected through radars, radio wave receivers, audio sensors or by optical sensors, whereas they can be destroyed by jammers, spoofers and hackers.

Besides this, there are few other methods which are being used such as snoggers (in which net carrying shot fired from a cannon), use of eagles against the drones. In India, we hardly have any effective and viable counter-drone techno logy. In the international market,there are few solutions available like use of laser guns, use of RF-based jammers, use of radar and multi-tool solutions based on radar and RF signal jammer. But modern drones are made of plastics and their autonomous mode of operation (GPS based) cause a huge challenge as they are not detectable by the radars, and RF detection methods are also not effective.

To counter the drones, few immediate steps need to be taken by the security forces and local administration. They should launch awareness campaign for border population and introduce suitable incentives for border community , in case they bring down the drone. Border guarding troops also needs to be motivated to handle this situation by training and rewards. The Government of India introduced a new drone policy in 2018. Now there is an urgent need to enact special laws about the use of drones in the border areas. Combined with this, border guarding forces should immediately concentrate on multi-layered border security in which they should occupy all the key points at least three kilometres behind the international borders to control the drone’sarea of operation. At the same time, the government should work on a realistic anti-drones’ strategy for national security based on the study of global best practices and in consultation with border security experts. Thus, financial viability, practical effectivenesson ground, and adaptability with changing threat scenario should determine the technological intervention to tackle this problem.

(Dr. R K Arora is a Professor at the department of International Affairs and Security Studies, Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice, Rajasthan. As border security professional, he has two decades of counter insurgency experience in Kashmir.)

(Dr. Vinay Kaura, is an Assistant Professor at the Department of International Affairs and Security Studies, Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice, Rajasthan.)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
