German synagogue shooter led into court with bandaged neck suffered in gun battle with police after two shot dead

A GUNMAN who murdered two people outside a German synagogue was seen being led into court with a bandaged neck suffered in a gun battle with police.

The Neo-Nazi was escorted off a helicopter in a white prison jumpsuit, handcuffs and shackles on his legs as special forces accompanied him to court to answer charges on yesterday's killing spree.

8 Armed officers escort gunman Stephan Balliet off a police helicopter ahead of a court hearing Credit: EPA

8 The helicopter carrying Stephan Balliet arrives in Karlsruhe Credit: Reuters

8 The gunman was seen being escorted directly into a police car Credit: AFP

8 The shooter killed two people after failing to enter a synagogue in Halle on Yom Kippur Credit: Reuters

The gunman, named locally as Stephan Balliet, 27, attempted to storm a synagogue in Halle where dozens were observing Judaism's holiest day.

After failing to get in, he killed a 40-year-old German woman in the street outside and a 20-year-old man at a nearby kebab shop.

'THIS WAS TERROR'

The shooter live-streamed his atrocities to Amazon Twitch, telling viewers he wanted to "kill as many Jews as possible".

A 35 minute live-stream of the Yom Kippur rampage, which unfolded at midday on Wednesday, was uploaded to the video sharing platform where it remained for 30 minutes after the stream finished.

In the footage he was seen denying the holocaust and ranting about feminism and immigration before going on his killing spree.

Balliet was later arrested by police after trying to flee the scene in a taxi.

The attempted synagogue attack was also captured on a surveillance camera, said Max Privorotzki, leader of the local Jewish community.

Mr Privorotzki said there were 70 or 80 people inside at the time of the attack.

Peter Frank, Germany's chief federal prosecutor, said: "What we experienced yesterday was terror.

"The suspect, Stephan B., aimed to carry out a massacre in the synagogue in Halle."

'HOMEMADE' WEAPONS

Frank said the weapons were "apparently homemade" and the explosives were in "numerous devices" found in the car.

He "wanted to create a worldwide effect" by emulating attackers such as the man who killed 51 people in mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand in March and by encouraging others to imitate his own actions in Halle, the prosecutor added.

Previously unknown to German authorities, he is being held on suspicion of two counts of murder, nine of attempted murder and other offenses, Frank said.

Heiko Maas, Germany's minister for foreign affairs, led tributes last night, saying: "A shooting at Halle synagogue on Yom Kippur hits us all in the heart."

German Chancellor Angela Merkel also attended a vigil for the victims in Berlin.

8 Stephan Balliet has been named locally as the suspect in the Halle shooting Credit: Twitter

8 The shooter live streamed his attack to video sharing site Twitch Credit: Reuters

8 The doors of the synagogue were seen peppered with bullet holes after the attack Credit: AP:Associated Press

8 The streets of Halle were awash with cops yesterday Credit: Alamy Live News

Amazon Twitch has faced criticism for not removing footage of the rampage more quickly.

More than 2,000 people viewed the hateful footage and it was shared to other platforms including Telegram and 4chan.

CALLS FOR STRONGER REGULATION

Last night there were calls for social media sites to take action to stop their platforms being used for violence.

Hans-Jakob Schindler of the Counter Extremism Project told the MailOnline: “Amazon is just as much to blame as Twitch for allowing this stream online.

“Online platforms need to step up and stop their services being used and in turn, parent companies need to hold them accountable.

“This tragic incident demonstrates one more time that a self-regulatory approach is not effective enough and sadly highlights the need for stronger regulation of the tech sector.”

A Twitch spokesman said: “We are shocked and saddened by the tragedy that took place in Germany today, and our deepest condolences go out to all those affected.

“Twitch has a zero-tolerance policy against hateful conduct, and any act of violence is taken extremely seriously.

What is Twitch? TWITCH is a live streaming video platform owned by Amazon. Founded in 2011, he site is primarily used by people showing off their video game skills but has increased in popularity over recent years. More recently, other shows have also grown in popularity on the site including live music, travel and cooking shows. Viewers are able to give instant feedback and cash to performers as they are delivering thier peices to camera or afterwards when they watch it again

“We worked with urgency to remove this content and will permanently suspend any accounts found to be posting or re-posting content of this abhorrent act.

“Once the video was removed, we shared the hash with an industry consortium to help prevent the proliferation of this content.

“We take this extremely seriously and are committed to working with industry peers, law enforcement, and any relevant parties to protect our community.”

At least two dead after gunman opens fire with machine gun outside synagogue in German city of Halle
