SHO held after liquor seized from his home

PATNA/MUZAFFARPUR: The station house officer (SHO) of Minapur police station in Muzaffarpur district was arrested on Thursday for his alleged links with liquor mafia. Two bottles of Indian made foreign liquor (IMFL) were also seized from the SHO’s official residence on the police station premises.Muzaffarpur SSP Manoj Kumar confirmed the arrest of the Minapur SHO Rajnish Kumar with two liquor bottles. “The operation is still going on. The stock of the seized liquor is being matched with the register of the ‘malkhana’ of the police station concerned,” the SSP said.The SSP added that he would share the details once the operation was complete.The SSP, however, denied the report that cash was also recovered during the raid on the official residence of the SHO, Rajnish, who had assumed charge on August 20. The SSP along with City SP and other officials reached the Minapur police station around 4 pm and started the operation, which was continuing till last reports came in.The SSP was earlier tipped off about a huge consignment of IMFL stocked in the police station premises. “Those found in violating the prohibition law will not be spared,” the SHO said, adding that strict vigil is being maintained on the cops assigned to check the smuggling of liquor within the limits of the district.Meanwhile in Darbhanga, the SHO of Fekla police outpost Basudev Singh was arrested on Thursday after he was found in an inebriated condition. Darbhanga city SP Yogendra Singh took the SHO in police custody when he was creating a scene in inebriated condition in the police station premises.The action against the Fekla SHO was initiated on the directive of Darbhanga SSP Babu Ram. An FIR was lodged against the SHO and subsequently produced in the court, which remanded him to judicial custody for 14 days. The medical test confirmed that the SHO Singh had consumed alcohol.Darbhanga Sadar sub-divisional police officer (SDPO) Anoj Kumar said that the links of the arrested police officer with liquor traders were being verified. The SSP had received numerous complaints against the police officer in question, he added.In January, Amitabh Kumar, the SHO of Motipur police station in Muzaffarpur, was arrested allegedly for stocking huge quantity of liquor at his residence.In July this year, 41 police officers were punished for not implementing the law properly in their area of jurisdiction and as a punishment, an order was passed which said that they would now not be allowed to become the SHO for 10 years.The state came under prohibition in April 2016. Under the law, manufacture, consumption and sale is completely banned in the state. The violation of the law may invite imprisonment upto 10 years.
