Karnataka: About Rs 5 Crore Cash Seized In I-T Raids On Former Deputy-CM Parameshwara

New Delhi:

Income Tax Department has seized Rs 4.52 crore cash during raids against former Karnataka deputy chief minister G Parameshwara and others, officials said. The Income Tax officials raided the premises of Siddhartha Medical College, in Bengaluru, which is run by a trust related to Parameshwara.

According to sources in I-T department, the raids on Friday were conducted in relation to a case of medical seat scam. The three colleges raided were part of deemed universities, where merit seats under NEET were auctioned by the colleges through dubious means for about Rs 50 lakh per seat.

Out of some 300 odd seats in the 3 colleges, in 189 seats people who were admitted in other colleges or who were already studying were admitted. They dropped out after the mop up round of counseling. These seats were then auctioned.

IT officials had conducted raids at house and other colleges related to Parameshwara on Thursday. The I-T sleuths carried out raids across Karnataka targeting education institutions owned by political leaders, especially from Congress party. The raids were carried out in Tumakuru, Nelamangala, Bengaluru Kolar and Chikkaballapura districts.

The I-T department had also carried out raids at a medical college and hospital in Kolar owned by former Union minister RL Jalappa, according to reports.

"I am not aware of the raid. I don't know where they are doing it. Let them search I have no issue. If there is any fault from our side, we will rectify it,” G Parameshwara had told ANI.

Meanwhile, Congress had said the raids were "politically motivated".

Former Karnataka CM and leader of opposition Siddaramaiah tweeted, "The series of IT raids on @DrParameshwara, RL Jalappa & others, are politically motivated with malafide intention. They are only targeting @INCKarnataka leaders as they have failed to face us on policy & corruption issues. We won’t budge to any such tactics!!"

For all the Latest India News, South News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
