The rise of Devendra Fadnavis: Backed by RSS and Modi-Shah, the Maharashtra CM is on a strong wicket

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The second Brahmin to become CM after Manohar Joshi of the Shiv Sena, Fadnavis’s elevation created a flutter in Maharashtra’s politics Fadnavis has deep family roots in the state’s politics and a connection with the RSS going back to his school days He has attempted to buttress his anti-corruption credentials by dropping some controversial ministers from his Cabinet

The BJP-Shiv Sena alliance is confident of retaining power in Maharashtra after the October 21 Assembly elections. Though the Sena has repeatedly stressed in recent days that the next chief minister should be a Sainik, Devendra Fadnavis is best placed to get the job for the second time if the alliance wins – unless Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah decide to make him a minister at the Centre.

When he became Maharashtra chief minister in 2014 at the age of 44, Fadnavis was the youngest person to occupy the state’s top job after Sharad Pawar (who was just 38 when he became CM in 1978).

Five years on, a much more experienced and politically savvy Fadnavis has consolidated his position in the state BJP, and become only the second person to complete a full term as the state’s CM. Running a state as large and complex as Maharashtra and managing the country’s commercial capital is an enormously challenging responsibility.

A Brahmin from a political family

In a state whose politics is dominated by the Marathas, who comprise one-third of the state’s population, the CM’s post went to Fadnavis, a Brahmin, after the BJP emerged as the single largest party but fell short of the 144-majority mark in the 2014 Assembly elections (the Sena and BJP had fought the polls separately).

The second Brahmin to become CM after Manohar Joshi of the Shiv Sena, Fadnavis’s elevation created a flutter in Maharashtra’s politics.

Not surprisingly, Fadnavis plays down the importance of caste, claiming, for instance, that Maharashtra had “moved beyond” such criteria.

Fadnavis has deep family roots in the state’s politics and a connection with the RSS going back to his school days.

Born in 1970, he joined the BJP’s student wing ABVP, while in college. He has studied law and done a PG in business management. He also dabbled with modelling on the side, for a bit.

His father, Gangadhar, was a legislator. Fadnavis became a corporator in 1992 at the age of 22. There has been no looking back since then. From mayor of the Nagpur Municipal Corporation to getting elected to the Assembly in 1999, Fadnavis kept rising through the ranks of the BJP. The close links with Nagpur (where the RSS has its headquarters) and a clean image helped matters.

In 2013, he became the state unit president of the BJP. His victory in the 2014 Assembly elections made him a four-time MLA.

As Chief Minister

Devendra Fadnavis has sought to project himself as a development-oriented chief minister, but his record has been mixed on this count. He has pushed ahead with metro projects in Mumbai and other cities, even if it means that his administration has got into spats like the one with environmental activists and residents of Mumbai’s Aarey forest area.

He has also been able to dilute protest movements such as the Maratha quota agitation and the farmers’ stir before they took radical political overtones, thus not giving much opportunity to the likes of Maratha strongman and NCP leader Sharad Pawar to capitalise on the negative sentiment.

He has attempted to buttress his anti-corruption credentials by dropping some controversial ministers from his Cabinet. The fact that some of these heavyweight BJP leaders who haven’t even got a ticket this time were once contenders for chief minister shows how much clout Fadnavis has gained in five years, with both the Amit Shah-Narendra Modi duo and the RSS considering him to be trustworthy.

The chief minister has also managed to keep the alliance with a seemingly insecure Shiv Sena intact while quietly making it clear that the BJP is now the big brother in the coalition.

Fadnavis, who has not yet turned 50, looks set to play a long innings in Maharashtra’s politics – and perhaps beyond.
