Unnao rape victim accident case: CBI drops murder charge against expelled BJP MLA Sengar, his associates

Expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar (File photo) | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights CBI on Friday dropped murder charges against expelled BJP MLA Sengar in Unnao rape victim accident case Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer were seriously injured in a truck accident on July 28 while two of her aunts lost their lives CBI has charged the driver of truck under relevant sections of IPC amounting to causing death due to negligence

Lucknow/New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Friday filed a chargesheet against former Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his associates in the Unnao rape survivor’s road accident case which killed two of her relatives and seriously injured her. Adding hurt to injury, the central investigative agency charged the accused with criminal conspiracy but dropped murder charges against them.

In its FIR, the CBI had booked the expelled BJP MLA and nine others under IPC sections related to criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation. However, the chargesheet filed today before a special court in Lucknow accused Sengar and his associates with criminal conspiracy and criminal intimidation under the related IPC sections.

Ashish Kumar Pal, the driver of the truck which rammed into the vehicle carrying the Unnao rape victim and her relatives, was charged under related sections of IPC amounting to causing death by negligence.

The shocking developments come on a day when the investigative agency, in a separate case related the same Unnao gang rape, told a Delhi court that the victim was allegedly kidnapped and raped for nine days at different locations by three people few days after the sexual assault by Sengar on June 4. The victim was a minor at the time of her ordeal.

District Judge Dharmesh Sharma took cognisance of a chargesheet filed the investigative agency earlier and listed the matter for further hearing on October 15, a lawyer involved the case told the news agency PTI.

The investigative agency earlier named three persons in its charge-sheet. As per the charge-sheet, the three persons named allegedly kidnapped and gang-raped the victim a week after the June 4 incident.

The three people accused in the charge sheet were Naresh Tiwari, Brijesh Yadav Singh and Shubham Singh – all three are out on bail.

The investigative agency said the woman was allegedly raped on June 4 by expelled BJP MLA from Bangarmau, Kuldeep Singh Sengar at his house.

Sengar is currently lodged in a jail awaiting trial. The rape victim, who was critically injured in a recent car crash in which she also lost her relatives, has been released from the hospital and alleged a threat to her life.
