Murshidabad murder victim was not RSS member: West Bengal Police points towards ‘personal enmity’ as reason

The Bharatiya Janata Party and the RSS earlier claimed that the person was an RSS worker.

Key Highlights Family members of the deceased person have also denied any affiliation to any political outfit, while a diary note found on the victim suggested differences within the family

Kolkata: The horrific murder of a man in West Bengal’s Murshidabad on Wednesday has sparked a political debate across India after the person was earlier reported to belong to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). However, West Bengal Police on Friday claimed that the victim did not belong to the RSS.

The police said that the incident where the man was murdered along with his family members was not politically motivated but was a case of ‘personal enmity’.

“The murder of three members of a family of Kanaiganj, Jiaganj police station area in Murshidabad, is a sad incident. The investigation was started just after the incident and two persons have been detained and are being examined. It has so far been found that the deceased person was working as an agent of some insurance and chain company and was in a serious financial crisis,” the West Bengal Police said in a statement.

Family members of the deceased person have also denied any affiliation to any political outfit, while a diary note found on the victim suggested differences within the family. “The CID has been asked to get associated with the investigation. Prima facie it seems to be a case of personal enmity and it has nothing to do with politics,” the police said.

Murder of three members of a family of Kanaiganj, Jiaganj PS, Murshidabad is a sad incident. Investigation was started just after incident and 2 persons hv bn detained and are being examined.

It has so far bn found in investigation that the deceased person was also working.(1/3) — West Bengal Police (@WBPolice) October 11, 2019

CID has been asked to get associated with investigation. Prima facie it seems to be a case of personal enmity and it has nothing to do with politics.(3/3) — West Bengal Police (@WBPolice) October 11, 2019

“During the investigation and while examining several local witnesses, family members, friends, no one claimed his association with RSS. Even during the search of the house of the victim, no such document could be found that identified the deceased with any political party. His family members vehemently opposed and criticised media for such false propaganda,” the police said in a press release, according to a report by news agency ANI.

Earlier today, locals protested outside Jiaganj Police Station over the incident.

West Bengal: Locals hold a protest outside Jiaganj Police Station over the murder of a teacher-cum-RSS worker, his wife & child in Murshidabad yesterday. pic.twitter.com/pvZGJQaj9V — ANI (@ANI) October 11, 2019

“The mother of the deceased, Maya Pal, who stays in Sahapur police station area in Sagardighi with her elder daughter Bandhu Priya Pal, has denied any involvement with the RSS,” the police claimed.

The Bharatiya Janata Party and the RSS earlier claimed that the person was an RSS worker.
