Police discover identity of woman whose limbs were found in Chennai dumpyard

Police discover identity of woman whose limbs were found in Chennai dumpyard

When the limbs were found on January 21, the police only had one clue to identify her – a Shiva Parvathi tattoo on her right hand.

news Murder

Two weeks after the Chennai police discovered human body parts at the Pallikaranai dumpyard, the identity of the victim, a woman, has been established. The severed hand and two legs found in a gunny bag belong to 35-year-old Sandhya, a mother of two children, police said. An investigating officer who has been handling the case told TNM that Sandhya was allegedly murdered by her husband.

According to police sources, Sandhya’s husband Balakrishnan, whom she had been married to for 17 years, suspected that she was having an affair and murdered her in a fit of rage. When the limbs were found on January 21, the police only had one clue to identify her – a Shiva Parvathi tattoo on her right hand. Following this, they sent out alerts to police stations across the state to find if there was any information on such a woman. Finally, Thoothukudi police confirmed that a missing complaint was filed by Sandhya's mother.

"Sandhya was murdered on January 19. She and her husband were both staying in Chennai. He suspected her fidelity and murdered her," said the investigating official, "He admitted it when we questioned him.”

Reports suggest that the police found similar gunny bags in Balakrishnan's residence in Jafferkhanpet. The police reportedly also possess CCTV footage in connection to the case. They are now interrogating Balakrishnan in a secret location and trying to find out where he dumped other body parts of the victim.

Her hand and legs were first found by the staff of the Chennai corporation who were levelling waste at the Pallikaranai dumpyard. The police were then informed, leading to a two week investigation.

Her limbs were sent to Rajiv Gandhi government hospital for a medical examination and a team of three doctors conducted the post mortem. Primary reports confirmed that is was a woman and that her limbs were chopped off after she was murdered. A sharp machete was used by the murderer to cut off her body parts.
