Toyah Cordingley's heartbroken boyfriend reveals his anguish a year on from her mysterious death

Toyah Cordingley's heartbroken boyfriend reveals his anguish a year on from her mysterious death

Toyah Cordingley's heartbroken boyfriend has spoken of his anguish a year on from her mysterious death.

Ms Cordingley, 24, was walking her dog along Wangetti Beach, North Queensland, on October 21, 2018 when she was murdered in what police believe was a sexually-motivated attack.

Her father Troy discovered his daughter's naked body the following morning with 'visible and violent' injuries inflicted all over.

Jersey, a German Shepherd and mastiff cross, was earlier found tied up and unharmed.

Her boyfriend Marco Heidenreich said he is is struggling to come to terms with the loss of his girlfriend.

Toyah Cordingley's body was found on October 22 with 'visible and violent' injuries inflicted all over

Boyfriend Marco Heidenreich (right) is struggling to come to terms with the loss of his partner a year on, with no leads confirmed from the police

Toyah Cordingley, 24, was walking her dog along Wangetti Beach, North Queensland, on October 21 when she was murdered

'I've been through enough personally,' he told the Courier-Mail.

'It's hard enough for me to deal with it, without putting myself out there, but thank you.'

Queensland Police have obtained DNA, CCTV footage, and triangulated mobile phones to co-locate and identify any suspects that were in the area.

They are yet to find a murder weapon.

Queensland Police have obtained DNA, CCTV footage, and triangulated mobile phones to co-locate and identify any suspects that were in the area

A year on from Ms Cordingley's death, her boyfriend Marco Heidenreich has opened up over the devastating loss

Indian fugitive and father-of-three Rajwinder Singh (pictured) has been named as the only person of interest

In April, Queensland Police Commissioner Ian Stewart said Indian fugitive and father-of-three Rajwinder Singh is a person of interest.

'What I would say is that (Mr Singh) is a person of interest and obviously at an appropriate time we would hope to at least speak to that person and have conversations with him about this incident,' he told Courier Mail.

'But there is a process, it is quite an involved process when international law comes into it.

'We are very, very optimistic that we will be able to resolve this investigation over time, but people need to understand that it is a complicating factor when you have a person of interest who's not in the country.'

Mr Singh fled the country, leaving behind his wife, two young children, a baby and his full-time job at Innisfail Hospital.

He has not been heard from since.

The nurse is reported to be hiding in a Sikh temple in India and extradition treaty roadblocks could mean detectives might be unable to bring him back to Australia for questioning.

Toyah's father, mother and stepfather have come forward begging for anyone with information to come forward to help solve death of their beloved daughter.
