Murder, drugs and graft: 'Rapist' cop's murky past revealed

MUMBAI: Police inspector Anil Jadhav from Pimpri-Chinchwad who has been accused of drugging and raping a 35-year-old Uzbekistan national repeatedly over 14 years and forcing her to have an abortion twice, was earlier arrested in a 2011 drugs case and is currently behind bars on corruption charges.The woman, who filed a complaint at Chembur police station on Thursday, has also accused Jadhav of murdering a man and burying his body at his farmhouse on the outskirts of Nagpur two years ago. "We will probe into all the allegations," said senior inspector Prakash Bhosle of Chembur police.Jadhav is currently lodged in Pune jail after he was caught allegedly accepting Rs 10 lakh from a man booked in a cheating case to not arrest him. On September 29, when the ACB-led by deputy SP Hari Patil-laid a trap, Jadhav's assistant Ajay Bhapkar fled, while his driver, in a bid to escape, rammed his vehicle into Patil's leg, injuring him. Jadhav and Bapkar were caught.Jadhav first hit headlines in 2011. He was among the 300 people arrested from a rave party at Khalapur by Raig- ad police. Following an inquiry, he was suspended. Later, he was reinstated.Advocate Nitin Satpute, who appeared on behalf of the Uzbekistani, said: "She has alleged that in 2016, Jadhav had buried a woman who had of drug overdose to cover up the incident. In 2017, when the woman's brother started questioning Jadhav about her, he called him to his farmhouse, when he shot him and buried the body."The complainant met Jadhav, who was married, in 2004 for a passport-related issue. Under the pretext of getting her visa extended, he kept her passport. In her complaint, she said Jadhav spiked her drink and raped her. She claimed that he promised marriage and raped her on multiple occasions and when she complained, he assaulted her and even threatened to hire a contract killer to 'bump her off'. She said Jadhav had forced her to get an abortion twice. The two have a five-year-old son. "The Pimpri-Chinchwad commissionerate is conducting a departmental inquiry and after the report is submitted, strict action will be initiated against Jadhav," said a senior official from the DG's office.Jadhav's wife, Jyotsna, an NCP activist, wanted to contest the assembly election from Kurla, but the party nominated NCP leader Milind Kamble.(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)
