Ghaziabad: Class XII student stabbed by ‘friend’ in row over Rs 1,200

GHAZIABAD: A Class XII student was stabbed to death on Thursday allegedly by one of his classmates after an argument broke out between them over Rs 1,200. The boy who attacked the teenager has been detained, police said.Five boys, all from Saraswati Vidhya Mandir in Nehru Nagar area, had gone to a park at Sihani Gate area after writing a paper for their pre-board exam on Thursday. There, they got into an argument during which one of the boys stabbed Rahul Singh (17) in the neck and chest.When Rahul lost consciousness, the four boys took him to Ganesh hospital. Later, Rahul was shifted to Yashoda hospital where he died on Thursday night.Police said that Rahul had been staying with his aunt and uncle at Sihani Gate area for the past six years. His family stays in Delhi and his father works as a driver at a private company.Dipti Singh, Rahul’s father, told TOI that after the exam, Rahul went to the park with his friends. “He had given Rs 1,200 to one of his classmates. When he asked the boy to pay him back, an argument broke out. The four boys attacked Rahul and one of them stabbed him in the neck and chest with a knife,” said Singh.“The boys took him to Ganesha hospital after Rahul fell unconscious and started bleeding profusely. They called my nephew and informed him about the incident. When we reached Ganesha hospital, doctors had referred Rahul to Yashoda hospital where he succumbed to the injuries,” Singh added.Rahul’s father has submitted a written complaint against the four boys, all of whom are minors. Umesh Bahadur Singh, SHO, Sihani Gate police station, said an FIR has been registered against them under Section 302 (punishment for murder) of the IPC. “The main accused has been held. The others are on the run,” he added. “Initial investigation has revealed that the accused had borrowed Rs 1,200 from Rahul. He stabbed Rahul after he slapped him in front of the others. The accused has told the police that he used to keep a knife in his school bag. He had attacked Rahul with that,” said the SHO.A spokesperson of Saraswati Vidya Mandir school said members of a discipline committee are in the touch with Rahul’s family and action would be taken on the basis on police probe.
