Refugee's politics cited at admissibility hearing

Just blocks away from where tens of thousands of Winnipeg workers demonstrated for workers’ rights 100 years ago, a young man who protested inequality in his home country was trying to prove that such an act doesn’t make him a terrorist or subversive.

Hey there, time traveller!

This article was published 11/10/2019 (838 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.

Just blocks away from where tens of thousands of Winnipeg workers demonstrated for workers’ rights 100 years ago, a young man who protested inequality in his home country was trying to prove that such an act doesn’t make him a terrorist or subversive.

Mohammad Khan belonged to the youth wing of the main opposition party in Bangladesh, and is no more a subversive or terrorist than any other person who’s taken to the streets to protest in a democracy, an Immigration and Refugee Board admissibility hearing was told Friday.

The 25-year-old made a refugee claim in March 2017, crossing into Canada from the United States after fleeing persecution in Bangladesh.

He openly divulged his political affiliation with the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) when he made his refugee claim. He had no violent or criminal history.

The counsel for the federal government argued the refugee claimant’s admission of belonging to the youth wing of a party that has been involved in demonstrations that have turned violent was enough to declare him inadmissible.

Lawyer Jason Sankar said Khan joined the BNP in 2011, and knew or should have known about party activities "that could be perceived as terrorism." Sankar cited reports such as a Human Rights Watch memo about hundreds being killed and injured during the 2014 election, allegedly at the hands of BNP supporters, and a Council on Foreign Relations article estimating the economic blockades run by the BNP resulted in economic losses of $200 million a day.

However, there’s been no evidence to indicate Khan had anything to do with terrorism or subversion, countered his lawyer, Bashir Khan (no relation). "Having a political opinion and attending a rally are not the same as a desire to subvert the state."

An expert witness at the hearing who knows the history of the past 200 years in the South Asia region agreed.

"Being a member of a political party does not mean you are a terrorist," said Emma Alexander, an associate professor at the University of Winnipeg.

Bangladesh is a fairly new democracy, with two main parties that are competitive and confrontational. Both have had demonstrations become violent when they were in and out of power, board adjudicator Marc Tessler in Vancouver was told during the video conference.

"This is a very young country — it’s politics are developing," said Alexander, who earned a doctorate at Cambridge University and was a post-doctoral fellow at Nehru Memorial Museum and Library in New Delhi.

Regional politics plays a huge role, she said. The BNP was established as Bangladesh was shifting from military rule "to get away from a very difficult period."

Want to get a head start on your day? Get the day’s breaking stories, weather forecast, and more sent straight to your inbox every weekday morning. Sign Up I agree to the Terms and Conditions, Cookie and Privacy Policies, and CASL agreement.

She said the BNP youth wing was designed to get young people politically engaged and active, "not to create a cadre of young men engaging in terrorism."

The refugee claimant now awaits the adjudicator’s written decision on his fate. If Tessler rules Khan inadmissible, he will be deported and not allowed to return without written authorization.

Bangladesh, meanwhile, is still dangerous for those who oppose the ruling National Awami Party, Khan said, pointing out a recent Al Jazeera report about university student Abrar Fahad, 21, who was beaten to death for a Facebook post that criticized a water-sharing agreement with India.

The turbulence in Bangladesh is part of a struggling, emerging democracy, the young refugee claimant said. He sees parallels between those taking to the streets in Winnipeg in 1919 who demanded a living wage and what’s happening now in Bangladesh.

"Canada’s democracy is very old," he said. "Bangladesh needs more time to settle its democracy. Your experience in Canada 100 years ago is what we are experiencing now."

carol.sanders@freepress.mb.ca
