London Mayor Sadiq Khan was behind forces that carried out attack on Indian High Commission in UK: IOC alleges

An IOC delegation met Labour party leader Jeremy Corbyn | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The delegation had met Jeremy Corbyn to 'condemn' the resolution on Kashmir Home Minister Amit Shah had hit out at Congress saying it was discussing India's internal matters with foreigners

London: A day after a controversy broke out over its representatives meeting Labour party leader Jeremy Corbyn, Indian Overseas Congress, on Saturday said that they had met and condemned the Kashmir resolution passed by the Labour party annual conference.

"We expressed our concern and condemned the Kashmir resolution passed at Labour Party annual conference and also our Spokesperson Sudhakar Goud made it clear that J&K is an integral part of India, no intervention from outside will be accepted," Sudhakar Goud, Spokesperson, IOC UK said in a statement.

According to the statement, the delegation met the Labour party leaders on invitation by the party president. "IOC has also raised concerns with regards to the security situation concerning Indian communities in the UK, Eg: recent attack on Indian High Commission during the independence day celebration, we (Indian Diaspora) believe that the London Mayor Sadiq Khan was behind these forces," the statement further read.

Indian Overseas Congress (IOC):As per invitation by Labour Party's Jeremy Corbyn, a team of IOC met him on Oct8,we condemned Kashmir resolution passed at Labour Party annual conference&made it clear that J&K is integral part of India, no intervention from outside will be accepted pic.twitter.com/ocNoGTGjrK — ANI (@ANI) October 11, 2019

"We urged Mr Corbyn to put pressure on Pakistan to stop funding, providing training to terrorist groups in Pakistan immediately. Based on our discussions with Mr Corbyn, we believe that there will be an appropriate response addressing the concerns raised by IOC with regards to the Labour party Resolution on Kashmir including withdrawal of the resolution," it said.

On Thursday, the BJP hit out at the Congress party for its 'appalling' meeting and added that the country should give a befitting reply to these "shameful shenanigans."

Addressing the election rally in Maharashtra, Home Minister Amit Shah had questioned why Congress had to discuss India's internal matters with foreigners. On September 26 Britain's opposition Labour party had passed a resolution on Kashmir and called for an entry of human rights observers in the region. India had condemned the resolution and reiterated that Kashmir is New Delhi's internal matter. UK's official stance on Kashmir is that the issue is a bilateral matter between India and Pakistan.
