Big crackdown on Dawood Ibrahim’s network after ED identifies properties in India, UK; mafia-neta link probed

Dawood Ibrahim | File Picture

Key Highlights Iqbal Mirchi had purchased three properties located in Worli belonging to Sir Mohammad Yusuf Trust in September 1986 These properties have been identified as Sea View, Marium Lodge and Rabia Mansion The three properties were sold to a firm for Rs 225 crore in 2010

Mumbai: In a big crackdown on Dawood Ibrahim’s network, the Enforcement Directorate has identified properties in India and UK that belong to close associates of the mobster. The properties belong to Memon Iqbal Mohammed alias Iqbal Mirch.

On Friday, the ED had arrested two people in connection with its money laundering probe against late Mirchi, who died in London in 2013.

Identified as Haroun Aleem Yusuf and Ranjeet Singh Bindra, the accused have been arrested under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act for not cooperating with an investigation of the case.

Mirchi had purchased three properties located in Worli belonging to Sir Mohammad Yusuf Trust in September 1986 for Rs 6.5 lakh through his company Rockside Enterprise.

These properties have been identified as Sea View, Marium Lodge and Rabia Mansion.

The three properties were sold to a firm for Rs 225 crore in 2010 and the ED believes that the gangster bought a five-star hotel in Dubai from the amount received after selling the property.

Mirchi was wanted by the police in a dozen cases of murder, attempt to murder, criminal intimidation, extortion and drug trafficking in Mumbai.

However, he was not an accused in the 1993 Mumbai serial bomb blasts.

Mirchi fled to Dubai after the blasts and shifted his base to London where he passed away in 2013.

The ED has initiated investigations into Mirchi's dealings in India and abroad, including the UK, Cyprus, Spain, the UAE, Morocco and Turkey.

In April 1995, the dreaded gangster’s house was raided by Scotland Yard after which he was arrested on charges of drug trafficking and terrorism.

He was arrested in 2012 again for allegedly threatening to kill his nephew, Kadir Nadeem. However, all the charges were dropped due to insufficient evidence.

Last month, India declared Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) chief Hafiz Saeed, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief Masood Azhar, LeT's supreme commander of operations in Kashmir Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi and fugitive underworld don Dawood Ibrahim as terrorists under the amended Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.

The announcement was made after the Parliament approved a key amendment to the UAPA law.

In July, the Mumbai Polices Anti-Extortion Cell arrested Rizwan Iqbal Kaskar, nephew of Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar, as he was trying to flee the country.

Rizwan was planning to board a flight out of the country along with his wife to Dubai.
