Kashmiris no longer interested to stay with India, indicates report titled ” Kashmir Civil Disobedience”

-

MONITORING DESK: A 78-page citizens’ report titled ” Kashmir Civil Disobedience” seems to be the most authentic document that has emerged from within India since August 5, 2019.

The report indicates that the people in Kashmir (read as Indian Occupied Kashmir) are no longer interested in an interaction with the Indian state. Offering 17 recommendations, the report indicates that New Delhi has lost Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) forever and only subjugation is the only tool being used by India to keep IOK along with New Delhi.

The report is a work of human rights activists like Shabnam Hashmi, Anirudh Kala, Brinella D Souza, and Revati Laul.

Recommendations of Citizens’ Report

Immediate restoration of Articles 370 and 35A and statehood. Restore landlines, mobile, internet, broadband services with immediate effect. Release all political leaders, social activists, youth, and children, withdraw all cases. Withdraw army and paramilitary forces. Remove restrictions on the movement of people Immediate steps to restore people’s faith in democracy. Government of India must work with all stakeholders to bring about peace and normalcy in the state and ensure that decisions regarding the political future of Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) are made through a process of dialogue and consultation and after ascertaining the will of the people. Restore tourism and all other livelihood activities Provide mental health services in every district with immediate effect as mandated under the Mental Health Care Act, 2017. Digitize records – land records, hospital records, and jail records. Postpone block level elections until all political prisoners are released. Put in place confidence building and safety measures so that children and young people can go back to school and colleges without fear. Make every effort to mitigate the psycho social consequences of the conflict on children. Provide compensation to families of those who died because they weren’t able to access timely medical support due to the communication blockade and security clampdown. Undertake an assessment of the economic losses faced by orchardists, businesses, and traders due to communication and transport blockade, and provide appropriate compensation and relief. To look into allegations of excesses by the army and paramilitary forces, and undertake time-bound inquiries. Lift restrictions on movement of journalists so that there can be genuine on ground reporting. Refrain from monitoring, surveillance and intimidation of journalists. Judiciary should give an urgent patient hearing to the representations and restore the constitutional safeguards.

Other extracts from the report:
