Mamata can’t escape consequences of her acts: Amit Shah

Aligarh: BJP President Amit Shah on Wednesday warned West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee over her attempts to block the entry of BJP workers and leaders into the state and said she cannot escape the consequences of her actions.

Addressing a gathering here, the BJP leader said that a jittery Mamata ‘di’ was trying all means to prevent Bharatiya Janata Party leaders from reaching West Bengal.

“But she does not know that we are BJP workers and we will not rest until we ensure that the lotus blooms in 23 of the 42 seats in West Bengal,” Shah said amid cheers.

“Yesterday (Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister) Yogiji (Adityanath) was not allowed to enter by air, my chopper was not allowed to land. The same is happening with Shivraj Singh Chouhan who is there today. The Prime Minister was allotted a smaller ground and the permission was given late at night…

“All this shows that she understands that her time is up and the BJP was going to win handsomely in the Lok Sabha election.”

Slamming Banerjee for staging a sit-in in Kolkata, Shah demanded to know who she was trying to protect and for what.

“She is trying to protect an officer because she fears that he might spill the beans on some scams to the CBI,” the BJP leader said.

He added that so far 65 BJP workers had been killed by Trinamool “goons” in West Bengal.

“But we will not sit quiet… But we don’t subscribe to violence. We will avenge all this by ensuring that people press the lotus button when the time to vote comes.”

He also made a strong pitch for re-electing Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha battle.

The country, he said, was “safest under the BJP government at the Centre”.

Addressing a rally of party activists, Shah said that the time when terrorists would cross over from Pakistan and kill Indian military personnel and civilians were now things of past.

He also took up the issue of the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and said that while the whole country wanted the immigrants to be sent back, opposition leaders like Mamata Banerjee, Rahul Gandhi, Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati were opposing the move.

He slammed Congress President Rahul Gandhi for questioning the annual grant of Rs 6,000 to farmers.

“All good schemes being rolled out by the Modi government are for the welfare of the poor, farmers, youth, women and the marginalised,” he said.

Daring the entire opposition to come together and take on the BJP, he said that this time the party’s Lok Sabha tally in Uttar Pradesh will go up from 73 to 74.

Detailing various public welfare schemes of the Modi government, Amit Shah said the BJP was clear that a grand Ram temple should come up in Ayodhya at the earliest.

[source_without_link]IANS[/source_without_link]
