Aadhaar: No Study To Evaluate Benefits of UID Linking with MGNREGA, Govt Tells Rajya Sabha

While the government has been busy making loud claims of savings and delivery of benefits due to Aadhaar, the Rajya Sabha was told that there was no study conducted to evaluate benefits of Aadhaar linking to Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (MGNREGA) scheme and its beneficiaries.

Rajya Sabha member Ritabrata Banerjee had asked the question to know if there was any study conducted to evaluate benefits of Aadhaar linking in timelines of payments, increasing enrolment, removing corruption and identifying fakes and duplicates in the MGNREGA scheme.

In his written reply, Narendra Singh Tomar, minister of rural development, said, "No such study to evaluate benefits of Aadhaar linking in respect of MGNREGA, has been got conducted by the Ministry."

According to the minister, out of pl convert to millions MGNREGA workers, the Aadhaar number pl convert to millions (89%) active workers have been seeded into MGNREGA programme database (NREGASoft). "Use of Aadhaar under MGNREGA has brought transparency in the system and minimised leakages of fund," he claimed.

Replying to a question on whether the government is providing and promoting an Aadhaar opt-out option, Mr Tomar stated that the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has not created any general option to exit from Aadhaar. He claimed "...such an exit option has only been mandated for children who have been enrolled with consent of their parents provided that they do not intend to avail the benefits of the scheme. No general option to exit for Aadhaar was laid down by the Supreme Court as a binding direction and consequently no such option has been created."

However, what the minister had stated is not complete truth. The Supreme Court, in its judgement on 26 September 2018, had allowed anyone to exit from the scheme. The apex court had said, “Since we have held that enrolment is voluntary in nature, those who specifically refuse to give the consent, they would be allowed to exit from Aadhaar scheme.” (page 441 of 567)

"Those persons who need to avail any subsidy, benefit or service would need Aadhaar in any case...On the other hand, those who do not get any benefit of the nature prescribed under Section 7 of the Act, it would always be open for them not to make use of Aadhaar card or to make use of this card in a limited sense, namely, showing it as a proof of their identity, without undergoing any authentication process," the apex court had said.

Earlier in 2014, responding to queries filed under the Right to Information (RTI) Act, the UIDAI had admitted that there is no way to delete biometric data if a person wants to ‘opt’ out of Aadhaar—there is no exit.

Even during the marathon hearing before the five-judge constitutional bench of the Supreme Court, attorney general (AG) KK Venugopal too admitted that there were no field level studies for audit of exception registers or verification of enrolment rejections. The AG had also accepted that there was no opt-out in Aadhaar even for children who are enrolled after they attain age of consent.

This was overruled by the apex court and allowed children to opt-out of Aadhaar after attaining age of consent.

Earlier in July 2018, in a written answer, Ram Kripal Yadav, minister of state for rural development, had said "As per management information system (MIS), states and union territories have deleted 1.94 crore beneficiaries registered under the MGNREGS during FY2017-18. The reasons are fake identity, duplicate job cards, wrong allocation, deceased, and person shifted to new family."
