Jyotiraditya Scindia In BJP Poster Creates Political Ripples

Bhopal: After BJP leader Hridyesh Sharma put up a poster welcoming AICC general secretary Jyotiraditya Scindia to Bhind, speculations of the former Guna MP joining the party has started afresh.

Sharma had put up the poster to show his regards for Scindia for backing the Centre's move to scrap Article 370 of the Constitution from Kashmir.

It may be recalled that Scindia had supported the Centre’s decision to remove special status accorded to Jammu and Kashmir and to bifurcate it into two Union Territories - Jammu and Kashmir with a legislature and Ladakh without one.

“I support the move on #JammuAndKashmir & #Ladakh and its full integration into union of India,” Scindia wrote in a tweet. “Would have been better if constitutional process had been followed. No questions could have been raised then. Nevertheless, this is in our country’s interest and I support this,” the party general secretary added.

However, the Congress had opposed the Centre's decision and maintained that political parties will fight the Centre's move.

This is not the first time, the ex-MP had gone against the party. On the farm loan waiver promise, Scindia rued that it the promise was not fulfilled on ground.

“We promised to waive farm loans up to Rs 2 lakh. However, only loans up to Rs 50,000 have been waived. The state government must waive loans up to the promised Rs 2 lakh,” he was quoted saying by a news agency at a party programme.

On compensation to rain and floot-hit people in MP, Guna was quoted saying, “The situation in some areas ravaged by rain and floods is really bad. No survey is required to compensate those affected by it. Cent percent compensation needs to be made in these areas. I’ve told people that in this time of difficulty, I’m with them, but the government too will have to stand by them.”

With such comments, the opposition BJP had enough space to take pot shots at the ruling Congress in the state.

Also Read | Modi-Xi Agree To Promote Mutual Learning Among Their Civilisations
