Govt has zero tolerance on custodial deaths, police atrocities: Amit Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Saturday said the Central government has zero-tolerance on custodial deaths, extra-judicial deaths, and police atrocities.

Addressing the 26th foundation day celebrations of National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) in Delhi, Amit Shah also praised the Narendra Modi government of working extensively to protect the human rights and said it was the first time that a government, from 2014 onwards, worked on the human rights matter.

"The Modi government has worked on various fronts on human rights. After Independence, the Modi government worked on human rights matter," Amit Shah said.

"The government is providing electricity to households, free medical services, and gas connections. Providing toilets is also the human rights of people and the Modi government has done a massive work in the direction to provide these rights to the people," he said.

Speaking of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), Amit Shah said, "Forty thousand civilians have been killed since Independence in Kashmir by militants. Is that not an attack against human rights? I would like to ask, do the families of people who died due to terrorism in Kashmir have no human rights?"

"I believe that people being affected by terrorism and Naxal attacks is a human rights issue and should be looked at. We have zero-tolerance against extra-judicial deaths, police atrocities but we should also concentrate equally on terrorism because that's the biggest attack against the human rights," he said.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah at 26th National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) foundation day celebration in New Delhi: There has not been a bigger violation of human rights than against those who are victims of terrorism & naxalism. pic.twitter.com/onRJLooHtV ANI (@ANI) October 12, 2019





"The NHRC should give a platform to the people working for human rights, they need to innovate. The biggest challenge is poverty and violence. Our social structure has an inbuilt system for protecting the human rights of poor, weaker sections, the women and the children," he said.

On human rights norms made by the UNHRC, Amit Shah said that the norms of the UNHRC are different from India's and are not applicable in India.

"I believe human rights norms made by the UNHRC are not applicable in India. Their definition of human rights is different from ours. We should make our own definition of human rights," Amit Shah said.
