Within 48 hours, UP Police solve blind murder of woman whose body was found half-eaten by wild animals

Police personnel with the culprits | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights All three were arrested from Amberpur village on Saturday morning and confessed to their crime Killed the woman to rescue my sister from her misery, said the main accused The victim's body was found in a forest area in Sultanpur on Thursday

Lucknow: Police in Amroha district of Uttar Pradesh on Saturday arrested three men in connection with the murder of a 56-year-old woman whose body was found a day earlier. According to officers familiar with the matter, among those arrested is the brother of the victim's daughter-in-law. All three accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of murder and destruction of evidence.

The matter first came to light when the Amroha (rural) police station received information about the disfigured body of a woman lying in the Sultanpur forest area. A team of police personnel led by the station house officer arrived at the spot and recovered the body. At the time her body was found, wild animals had ripped off part of the victim's face and one of her legs.

Police later identified the woman as 56-year-old Vimlesh, the wife of one Balwant who is a resident of Manakjudi village. Family members of the victim told investigators that she left the home on October 8 to buy medicines and never returned. A case under sections 301 and 302 was lodged against unidentified suspects on the basis of a complaint by the victim's two sons. A team of officers was formed to investigate the matter and catch the culprits at the earliest.

The team caught an early break this morning when they arrested three men from Amberpur village on suspicion. Identified as Lalit Singh, Gyan Singh and Sonu, the men were questioned by police officers and confessed to their role in the gruesome murder of Vimlesh. In his statement, Lalit said that he hatched a plan to murder the victim in order to rescue his sister who is married to the victim's son.

Vimlesh and her son Amit reportedly troubled Lalit's sister, claimed the main accused. He further alleged that Amit was involved in an extramarital affair and sold off some land owned by his wife's mother. After he decided to save his sister from the misery, Lalit roped in his friend Sonu and Amit's uncle Gyan Singh. Singh offered to give the victim a ride to the nearest medical store on his motorcycle on the day of the incident. Instead, he took her to the forest area where all three accused stabbed her to death.

A knife used to commit the crime along with the motorcycle used by Gyan Singh was later recovered and lodged as evidence. Further investigation into the matter is underway and the three accused are likely to be tried for murder and culpable homicide.
