Karnataka: Parameshwara's PA was present during raids, wasn't questioned, says I-T Dept after aide's suicide

Former Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara's Personal Assistant (PA) Ramesh was present at the Congress leader's residence in the wee hours of Saturday, a few hours before he allegedly committed suicide, the Income Tax Department said.

Ramesh allegedly committed suicide after recently conducted raids by the I-T department at various premises linked to Parameshwara.

The department has denied any link to Ramesh's suicide with recently conducted raids at the premises of G Parameshwara.

In a statement, the I-T Department said Ramesh was present at Parameshwara's residence during searches conducted at the Congress leader's house on October 12 till 2.45 am.

However, no search was carried out at his residence and also no statement was recorded from him under Section 131 or Section 132(4)b of the Income Tax Act.

"Mr Parameshwara's residence was searched on October 10. When the teams arrived at his residence, he was not present. His wife informed that he has gone to Korategere to attend a function. Our team reached Koratagere and escorted him to his residence. Mr Ramesh, PA who had gone along with Mr Parameshwar to Korategere also accompanied him back to his residence in Bangalore," the department said.

"No search was done at the residence of Ramesh and also no statement was recorded from Ramesh under Section 131 or Section 132(4)b of the Income Tax Act. Ramesh was present in the residence of Shri Parameshwara throughout the search proceedings," the department said.

The presence of Ramesh at the residence of Parameshwara during search proceedings was recorded in Panchnama, it said.

Ramesh, Parameshwara's PA for the last 8 years, allegedly committed suicide in Gnana Bharathi area of the city this morning.

"He was found hanging from a tree in Gnana Bharathi Campus of the Bengaluru University. More details are awaited," said Deputy Commissioner of Police, Bengaluru West.

On Friday, the I-T Department claimed to have recovered Rs 4.52 crore in the raids conducted at premises linked to Parameshwara.

The I-T Department also conducted a raid at the premises of Siddhartha Medical College. The institution is run by a trust related to Parameshwara. It also raided the house of Parameshwara's nephew, Anand.

On Thursday, the Income Tax sleuths had conducted raids at around 30 premises linked to Parameshwara.

(With ANI inputs)
