Modi-Xi meet: Wuhan spirit to Chennai connect

When Xi Jinping drove out of the Chennai airport in his own Hongqi L5, he made a subtle but definitive power statement that cannot be missed. China may be battling numerous demons internally and externally, but this is a power that has arrived. Therefore, the second Narendra Modi-Xi Jinping informal summit, which began on the beaches of picturesque Mamallapuram, exhibited a different sort of power dynamic.From the Wuhan Spirit to the Chennai Connect (the Modi government loves alliterations), the distance India and China have travelled is not long. Despite the protestations of cooperation, the two countries remain far apart on strategic and tactical issues. And that is the real reason why Modi and Xi should continue to meet in these informal settings where, whatever else, the two sides can understand each other better, red lines are clearer and potential areas of cooperation, however narrow, can be identified.Leaders like Modi and Xi, who are dominant personalities in their respective systems, use summitry to move the needle, either on trade or security, beyond their sclerotic administrations. This is both a statement of confidence and a recognition that for both countries management of a complex relationship and bilateral stability is crucial in the here and now. The good news is that the summit and its format is acquiring traction- Xi just invited Modi for the third one in China next year. The two countries set up a new high-level mechanism on trade, investment and manufacturing that will have Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on the Indian side and the Chinese vice premier, Hu Chunhua, on the other. Possibly the most important understanding was on RCEP with Xi conceding that the 16-country FTA had to be "balanced" for it to make sense for India.If Pakistan expected a discussion on Kashmir between Xi and Modi, that did not happen. Instead, Xi shared with Modi his account of Imran Khan 's most recent visit to Beijing two days before Xi was supposed to travel to India. It showed, again, the gap that the Indian system perceives between dealing directly with Xi and dealing with his administration. This gap had been most persistent when the two sides were negotiating the Doklam crisis. That was, more than many other things, the trigger for Modi to propose this informal summit format.The issues that divide India & China are not going anywhere. China will continue to be obdurate on India's accession to the NSG (Nuclear Suppliers Group). It will continue to prop up Pakistan and its terror proxies to keep India bogged down. China will oppose the Indo-Pacific policy just as India will oppose China's showpiece Belt & Road Initiative (BRI).One issue that was not discussed was India's decision on 5G and Huawei. India is currently weighing whether to permit Chinese telco Huawei to set up 5G networks in the country, in light of concerns around snooping the US has raised. When India does take the decision, it will sharply redefine its relations with the major powers because it will signal India's global alignment that affects its political and security relationships across the globe.The Modi-Xi summit cannot be plucked out of the current international context both countries find themselves in. Xi and his delegation's attention this weekend was divided between Modi and Washington, where China's chief negotiator, Liu He, met his US counterparts to achieve a bare-bones trade agreement. The deal, whatever it is, eases the pressure on China (and the US). It may give Xi the room he wants to wait out the Trump administration and see what the 2020 elections bring to the White House before attempting a "reset".The MEA press statement issued at the end of the summit states that both "Leaders shared the view that the international situation is witnessing significant readjustment". As the US-China divide sharpens, and it promises to outlive Trump, powers like India will try to do two things- utilise the space to manoeuvre itself into a "pole" in what will necessarily be a multipolar world while trying to balance all sides.That is the ultimate seductive lure of India's foreign policy to its practitioners, which has always delivered sub-optimum results but never fails to find adherents within the system.In one of his speeches in Washington during what is now dubbed "the full Jaishankar", the Indian foreign minister said the almost simultaneous Japan-India-US trilateral and India-China-Russia trilateral meetings denoted some kind of equivalence. "The country that fares best is the one which has the least problems with his peer group and the broadest acceptance beyond," he said.China understands well the implications of India's tilt to the US and the West, even if many Indians don't. That will always colour China's actions vis-a-vis India because they are practitioners of realpolitik. India can use the China challenge to step on the gas to reform its economy and unshackle enterprise and agriculture, which will have the added advantage of giving it more elbow room as global politics readjusts to a new reality.China is India's most important neighbour and its most complex relationship. What we saw in Chennai this weekend was a fantastic display of spectacle summitry. Modi and Xi go back with a better understanding of each other & their priorities. Their strategic communication has gotten stronger and, perhaps, deeper. How this will transform the daily politics of two rising powers remains to be seen.
