Scanner on ‘deals’ in triple murder probe

Parallel probes indicated the administration’s eagerness to crack the mystery behind the murders

The parallel probes indicated the administration’s eagerness to crack the mystery behind the murders of Bandhuprakash 40, wife Beauty, 30, and their six-year-old son Bandhuangan at the earliest amid claims by the saffron camp that the teacher was killed because of his association with the RSS.

A CID team reached Murshidabad’s Jiaganj on Saturday and started probing the triple-murder case even as the district police continued their own investigation, detaining a friend of slain schoolteacher Bandhuprakash Pal and two others.

“Our senior officers in Calcutta have already announced that the murder was not political. The CID team came from Calcutta to help the district police arrest the culprits at the earliest,” said a senior state police officer.

Bengal police had on Friday tweeted that the triple murder seemed to have stemmed from “personal enmity” and had nothing to do with politics.

“There are already signs that the murders didn’t have anything political… Now it has to be proven beyond doubt,” said a member of the CID team led by special superintendent Indra Chakraborty. The CID sleuths went to Jiaganj and spoke to the Pals’ neighbours and a woman who had first found the bodies of the trio in their rented house.

Later in the day, Saubhik Banik, a Rampurhat-based friend and business partner of Bandhuprakash, Saubhik’s father Amitabha Banik and Swapan Behera, another partner from Barala village of Murshidabad’s Sagardighi, were detained and quizzed, the police said.

Police sources said Saubhik was a partner of Bandhuprakash for the past 15 years in chain marketing and insurance businesses, and that the duo had financial dealings.

“They were together in the chain marketing business and insurance-related ventures… We are tracking the financial dealings between the duo as we suspect something went wrong in their partnership,” said a police source.

The police sources said Beauty’s brother Sakshigopal Mandal had told them that Bandhuprakash had paid Rs 6 lakh to Saubhik by borrowing from others.

“Sakshigopal has also told us that the duo were planning to open a factory of packaged drinking water. A better understanding of the financial dealings between the duo would help us crack the case,” said a source.

On Friday, the Bengal police statement had said Bandhuprakash worked as an insurance agent in chain companies and was caught in a “serious financial crisis”.

“Investigations revealed that Bandhuprakash had multiple bank accounts and there were a series of transactions. The transactions hinted that he was under stress to return money to people,” a senior police officer had said.
