The Bhagat Singh reader

Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein

Bhagat Singh

Sukhdev and Rajguru

JNU professor Chaman Lal

Batukeshwar Dutt

Indian National Congress

Jawaharlal Nehru

Chaman Lal giving a lecture on Bhagat Singh in Mumbai last week

The obscuring of his personality and history is both by chance and design, a new book says.The world sawrefusing the customary black hood as he faced the gallows on December 30, 2006. The hood is used to cover the face of everyone who is hanged.Seventy-five years earlier,and his two comrades,, had done the same in Lahore Jail on March 23, 1931. They had then gone on to place the noose around their own necks.In contrast to the heroic death of Bhagat Singh and his comrades, was the way the British treated their bodies, says retired, regarded as the authority on Bhagat Singh. Afraid of the reaction from the enormous crowd gathered outside the jail, the British put their bodies into sacks, drove almost 60 km away to the forests outside village Ganda Singh, and started burning them there. But their actions caught the attention of villagers, and they fled.As news spread, thousands of people converged there. They retrieved what they could of the half-burnt bodies and gave them a funeral befitting their iconic status on the banks of the Ravi on March 25.These are facts we should know from childhood, from our history texts. Why don’t we?According to Lal, the obscuring of Bhagat Singh’s personality and history is both by chance and design. Lal’s latest book on Bhagat Singh, The Bhagat Singh Reader, a compilation of the writings of the 23-year-old martyr, was published six months back.“Bhagat Singh’s writings reveal him to be a thinker who had a distinct socialist vision for Indian independence,” says Lal, who was in town last week for a series of lectures on the freedom fighter.“When he was alive, all newspapers, including those published in Urdu, Punjabi and Hindi, published his statements issued from jail. They devoted entire pages to them. His message to the Punjab Students’ Conference, held on October 19, 1929, was published in The Tribune. Even The Times of Indiareported the bombing of the Delhi Central Legislative Assembly by Bhagat Singh andon April 8, 1929, with the Page 1headline: ‘Reds Storm Assembly’.”The remainder of his writings in jail, including his celebrated essay ‘Why I Am An Atheist’, were published within months of his execution. This essay was first published on September 27, 1931, to mark Bhagat Singh’s first birth anniversary after his execution, in The People, a weekly journal started by Congress leader Lala Lajpat Rai from Lahore.This was just fitting, for it was to avenge his death at the hands of the police during the Simon Commission protests that Bhagat Singh and Rajguru shot DSP JP Saunders, on December 17, 1927.So why was Bhagat Singh’s image reduced to the attractive but narrow dimension of only a brave revolutionary patriot? “It could not have just happened innocently,” says Lal.“His political rivals probably deliberately tried to suppress the other aspects of his personality, because they couldn’t just ignore him, given his popularity. While he was alive, Bhagat Singh’s popularity rivalled that of Gandhi, a fact noted by Pattabhi Sitaramayya, the historian of the, and also by. In his Autobiography, Nehru wrote that Bhagat Singh became a symbol of avenging national honour.”How does Lal, whose speciality lies in literature, explain his near-obsession with Bhagat Singh? “Like any young adult, I was attracted to the revolutionaries of our freedom movement. I started translating Bharat Ke Krantikari, a book by Manmath Nath Gupta, himself an accused in the 1925 Kakori train robbery, and found myself most drawn to Bhagat Singh.”The Bhagat Singh Reader includes a snapshot of the original printed essay ‘Why I Am An Atheist’ from The People, along with the editor’s note acknowledging copyright to Bhagat Singh’s father.It was necessary to do this, says the professor, because the RSS and, earlier, the Khalistanis, have accused leftists of having interpolated this essay into Bhagat Singh’s writings. “Had they known Bhagat Singh’s ideology, they may never have tried to appropriate him,” he says.“The RSS had nothing to do with him. Let the RSS cite a word on Bhagat Singh written by their leaders. In contrast, let them show one national leader who did not express anguish at his death, including Bose, Periyar and Ambedkar. Motilal and Jawaharlal Nehru particularly, whom the RSS has been vilifying, had very close relations with the revolutionaries.”Bhagat Singh’s essays ‘Communalism and Its Resolution’, ‘Religion and Our Freedom Struggle’ and ‘Problem of Untouchability’ are particularly relevant today, he stresses.Lal sees his mission as similar to that of Govind Pansare, the Marathi writer who was shot dead in 2015. “Pansare wanted to reveal the true Shivaji to people, and wrote ‘Shivaji Kon Hotey?’ (‘Who Was Shivaji?’). I want people to know who Bhagat Singh was. People are curious about him, but unaware of his ideas. They should know him though his words, not my or anyone else’s interpretation. As he himself said: ‘Don’t accept anything with closed eyes. The sword of revolution is sharpened on the whetstone of reason.’”
