Chandigarh: Elderly man brutally thrashed for asking to stop music at pre-wedding party

Police have booked four persons in connection with the incident. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Elderly man brutally thrashed for stopping music during pre-wedding function Police have booked four persons in connection with the incident Victim was severely injured in the incident

Chandigarh: In a shocking incident, an elderly man was brutally thrashed after he asked people at a pre-wedding party to stop playing music so that he could locate his missing grandson.

The victim was seriously injured in the incident which took place at Kartarpur village near Mullanpur Garibdas on Friday night.

According to a report, police have filed cases against four persons, though no arrests have been made yet. The victim has been identified as 50-year-old Bahadur Singh, who filed a complaint against the accused.

The victim said his 5-year-old grandson was playing outside home when he insisted to visit the place where the Jaggo, a pre-wedding function, was being held.

Later, the child went to the place where the function was taking place and Bahadur Singh followed him. He asked the drum master to stop playing music so that he could look for his grandson as the people were continuously dancing. After this, the music was stopped and Bahadur Singh located his grandson.

But this upset some people at the function who started beating the victim. The victim alleged that the people who beat him up were heavily drunk.

The accused has been identified as Puneet Singh, Amanpreet Singh, Balwinder Singh and Manpreet Singh, who all are residents of Kartarpur village.

In a similar incident last year in Karnataka, tensions gripped Channasandra area of Bengaluru after a group of 50 men reportedly barged into a home at the Isha Misty Green apartment building and thrashed revellers for playing loud music.

Officials with the Whitefield Division police said that seven people were arrested in this regard. Police said the accused were upset by the revellers playing loud music during Navratra celebrations.

Around 9 pm, a group of 50 men who live near the apartment in Channasandra barged into the flat where the party was underway and physically assaulted the revellers including young boys.

Upon reaching the scene, cops detained some of the assailants while others fled in no time. A case of trespassing was registered by the city police. However, the accused later lodged a counter-complaint alleging that the residents were playing loud music which was disturbing their peace.
