EXCLUSIVE| Director Navdeep Singh on world of Laal Kaptaan, intricate research and working with Saif Ali Khan

Navdeep Singh, Saif Ali Khan in a still from Laal Kaptaan

Director Navdeep Singh’s Laal Kaptaan, starring Saif Ali Khan as the protagonist, is making all the right noises. While the trailers have been received really well, Saif’s avatar of Naga Sadhu has garnered the maximum praise. The film, co-starring Manav Vij, Zoya Hussain and Deepak Dobriyal, is Singh’s first release in the last four years, his last being NH 10 (2015). Ahead of the film’s release on October 18, the director spoke about the long gap, working with Saif and the intricate research that he conducted for the film in an exclusive conversation with us. Excerpts:

Tell us about the world Laal Kaptaan is set in.

The story is set in the late 1700s. It’s a period when the Mughal empire is pretty much disintegrated but the British haven’t really established their rule. Various people are vying for power. There are Marathas, Sikhs, Jats and Afghans – anyone with a sword and a party of 10-20 people can hope to achieve a throne. So, it’s a very politically volatile, lawless phase in India. It’s a very exciting backdrop for a story.

Talk about Saif Ali Khan’s character. Is he out-and-out positive or negative or the one with grey shades?

He’s more or less positive but with some grey shades. I think all people have grey shades. Even my villain has grey shades leaning towards the whiter side. Har insaan mein achchaiyan aur buraiyan hoti hain.

How did Saif come on board?

I had given Saif a narration. He loved the world, the tone and his own character. The way we have treated the film, it’s like a Western. He told me he always wanted to do one ever since he thought of becoming an actor. So, we were kind of lucky that we went to him with exactly the film that he wanted to do.

What was he like on the sets?

This is the first time I have worked with him. I had casually met him before once or twice here and there. He is very easy to work with. He is very intelligent and the most surprising part was he has got a wicked sense of humour. My cameraman and I would just keep on laughing whenever he was around. With his Naga Sadhu look, the jokes would become doubly funnier.

How did the idea of Laal Kaptaan germinate?

Many years ago, I had read something on the Battle of Buxar. I read about Naga Gossains who fought that battle. Dheere dheere padhte padhte over the years, found out more and more about them and learnt that during this time period, they were a militarily significant power in North India. So, the film is a personal story against that backdrop.

It’s your first release in the last four years. What took you so long?

I was developing a few scripts. Plus, the research and logistics on this one took quite a long time. I spent nearly two and a half years on the film. If you don’t have the money, you will have to invest time to achieve the desired quality.

What was the research process like?

It started off with collecting a lot of reading material. We sent assistants to museums to research specific things such as weapons and costumes. In many museums in UK, one would find a lot of Indian stuff. They have even preserved tents from that period, something which is very difficult to find in India. We also got in touch with a few historians to extract as much information as possible. Broad strokes of history can be easily found in books but finding out how the day-to-day life was during that period is tricky. How people lit fire without match sticks or how travellers managed food during long trips - figuring out these details was very difficult.
