Illegal sand mining in Virar: Mumbai: Cops bust illegal sand mining racket in Virar mangroves, Real Estate News, ET RealEstate

MUMBAI: In a crackdown on illegal sand mining, police on Tuesday raided the Chikhaldongri Reti Bunder located in the midst of mangroves in Virar (west).The Arnala coastal police and revenue department were caught off guard when a special police team carried out the raid around 6 am. Though the exact quantity of sand extracted illegally from the riverbed by destroying mangroves is still being calculated, additional superintendent of police, Vijaykant Sagar, said so far around 400 brass (1 brass=100 square feet) has been measured.Illegal miners are known to excavate sand from Khanivade and Vaitarna creek in Virar. Sources said the miners had moved to Chikhaldongri in the past several months as vigil and raids at Khanivade and Vaitarna creek had increased.A huge stretch of mangroves at Chikhaldongri have been destroyed. Bombay high court had banned sand mining in October 2010.The ban was lifted in less than a month after the state government brought out a policy for sand excavation. Legally, sand excavation cannot exceed two metres from the surface of the floor, river or creek.A committee first surveys the area before a sand mining contract is granted. The policy on excavation also entails registration of vehicles transporting the sand.In Chikhaldongri reti bunder, only a few miners who can draw sand manually are permitted. When the police team raided the spot, largescale dredging was underway. Around 30 boats were dredging sand in the middle of the creek.Police seized the boats and arrested 13 labourers, deployed to scoop out sand from the water. The raid was carried out following a tip-off that trucks loaded with illegal sand leaving Virar had more than doubled in the last few months.Sources told TOI sand mined from creeks in Virar are preferred over the sand from Ghodbunder creek due to their granular quality which mixes well with cement.Sand from Virar, including Khanivade and Vaitarna creek currently sells for Rs 9,000-9,500 a brass. In 2016, the Palghar collector had banned sand mining in and around the Vaitarna railway bridge.Despite the ban, dredging and transporting of sand goes in the night. Arnala coastal police are in the process of registering cases under the Environmental Protection Act against those arrested. The seized sand will be auctioned.
