The magical Word

Transparency - The magical Word

This country should be made aware of the 'whys' to this turmoil in the Valley, and to those uncontrollable cries for azaadi.

Barring historians and social scientists, the rest of India or even the world has no clue about Kashmir's history. Facts have been cleverly buried and perhaps not been allowed to come out in public view. Veteran journalist Ajit Bhattacharjea remarked, 'People tend to forget that Jammu and Kashmir cannot be treated like any other state. It acceded to India on 27 October 1947 on the condition of being given internal autonomy. Though Muslims were in a majority, they supported accession and helped Indian troops resist Pakistan. But gradual erosion of the state's autonomy planted the seeds of alienation. Now, of course, the situation is messed up, so much so that what Pakistan couldn't do in the last so many years, the fascist forces of India have done.'

Kashmir's history is one that is full of twists and turns. Though it was conquered in turns by the Afghans, Sikhs, Mughals, and Dogras, none of them ever really won over Kashmir. All through the centuries, Kashmiris craved to be on their own, and not be governed by 'outsiders'. Alas, that was nothing but wishful thinking!

Professor Ram Puniyani focuses on this very basic point in an article written by him in The Milli Gazette (issue 16-31 May 2016): 'Poet Kalhan of Kashmir, in his classic Rajatarangini, writes that it is only through punya (noble deeds) and not force that Kashmir can be won over. We need to remind ourselves of this profound wisdom of Kalhan while making policies about Kashmir. The role of global politics, the historical baggage of Partition and post-Partition problems, the role of global terrorism propped up by US policy of control over oil resources; its influence on militancy in Kashmir and the role of communal forces in spreading fear also need to be kept in mind while commenting on this tragedy of mammoth proportions.'

Historian G.M.D. Sufi's two-volume set of books titled Kashir, Being A History of Kashmir: From the Earliest Times to Our Own (Capital Publishing House) carries insights from Kashmir's early history to its geographical patterns and even its art and culture.

But the second volume ends just before Partition. It's about time that these books on Kashmir are revised and updated. Sufi is long dead. Young historians should be given this charge. Let me add this forewarning-historians with political affiliations or biases should not be taken on board. Why? For then, there will be every possible chance of facts getting twisted or diluted along political dictates. After all, today, even roads are in the process of getting renamed because for some, too many of them are named after Muslim rulers. Hopefully, the names and surnames of these Muslim rulers will not be taken off books that talk of the history of J&K. Books with accurate historical facts should be published so that we know the exact history of the state of J&K. If the historical haze gets somewhat cleared, there'd be a better understanding and connect, and with that, political dialogues would take off. Today, the situation is such that anyone who chants the word 'azaadi' is looked at with suspicion, if not booked! I fail to comprehend this. 'Azaadi' can mean freedom from just about anyone or anything; be it from an oppressive government or an incompatible mate or even an erring meter reader.

Why don't we adopt the formula suggested by M.Y. Tarigami-let's take a peep into PoK. Why not? In fact, Tarigami has been talking of opening the borders for travel and visits of Kashmiris from the 'Indian side of Kashmir' to the 'Pakistan side of Kashmir'. When buses can ply from here to there, why can't human beings walk across from this side of Kashmir to that side of Kashmir (PoK) to meet their relatives?

According to Tarigami, that would not just help lessen tension in the region but also bring to the fore the ground realities on the other side, which I'm told are tougher than witnessed on our Indian side of the Valley. Those who have travelled to PoK have got back recounting many more horrifying situations and rights violations than what is witnessed in Srinagar and its surrounding areas.

Transparency is the magical word-one that can help in the process of dialogue. To quote Pakistan-based nuclear physicist and activist Pervez Hoodbhoy 'It's true that there is no real change of heart on either side, but it is still good that Pakistan and India keep talking to each other, even if nothing conies out of the talks. As someone said, better to jaw-jaw than fight-fight.'

In a book on the life and times of the late editor Ved Bhasin, Vedji & His Times-Kashmir: The Way Forward {Selected Works of Ved Bhasin), edited by Anuradha Bhasin Jamwal (Kashmir Times Publications: 2017), there's a chapter titled 'Jammu and Kashmir: Road Map for Dialogue', where the veteran journalist listed several confidence-building measures (CBMs), which could help prepare a ground for dialogue to take off. However, there's also a note of caution. 'It needs to be emphasised that there can be no "peaceful negotiated settlement" of Kashmir, without the full and active participation of all sections of the people of Jammu and Kashmir living on both sides of the divided line. No solution should be imposed on the people of J&K and it should emerge through a process of multilevel dialogue.'

OF SMALL BEGINNINGS

It's about time the establishment re-thought its policy of using military and paramilitary forces to crush the civilian outcry. Political dialogue should begin immediately because only a political solution can clean up the mess that has reached such staggering proportions. The continuing 'war crimes' on the civilian population is compounded by the impunity provided to the forces under the AFSPA.

While keying in this chapter, I'm reminded of what a former DGP of Punjab, Kirpal Dhillon, who had been posted in Punjab right after Operation Blue Star in 1984-one of the most turbulent phases in that state's history-told the audience in 2017 at the New Delhi World Book Fair: 'It is not for the military to be there... in the Valley.' His rationale was along the strain that because the military is trained to attack and kill the enemy, it should not be deployed amongst the civilian population in the Kashmir Valley. It is not fair for the jawan to be posted in civilian terrain. He is trained to target the enemy and not fire at the civilians of his own country. One must not forget to realise the sheer trauma that the jawan stationed in sensitive locales goes through. Sitting tight in bunkers in high-alert situations, he is not just tense but extremely vulnerable. Sadly, we don't even wish to dwell on the plight of a soldier posted in a civilian terrain. Technically, amidst his own, but not really. This in itself is a strange irony of the 'developed' times we are living in.

It is about time we addressed the problems in the Valley. And this would automatically include examining the situation as it exists today. To quote the Srinagar-based special correspondent of Tehelka magazine, Rjyaz Wani, from his article published in the March 2018 issue, 'According to the South Asia Terrorism Portal (SATP), around 45 people have died in Kashmir till the first week of March this year-23 of them militants, 15 security personnel and 7 civilians. As is self-evident, despite the claims to the contrary, there has been no let up in the troubled security situation in the state. Nor is there a reason to foresee a degree of stability in the near term.'

Leaving you to introspect. What are we doing in Kashmir? What are we doing to the Kashmiris? How many more will be killed? How long will the boot control emotions? How long can this to connect with the people of Kashmir, whom we claim to call our very own. Let these words not remain mere rhetoric!

It's time to ask loud and clear: what do the Kashmiris want? Isn't it pertinent to appreciate and understand their exact wants and aspirations in the midst of the severe crisis we have subjected them to?

To me, it comes across as not just bizarre but cruel that the inhabitants of the Kashmir region have been virtually sidelined and bypassed in the midst of the fake enthusiasm shown by politicians about trying to solve the crisis. In all these decades, successive governments have not really bothered to hold a genuine political dialogue with the people of Kashmir. Either we are not serious about trying to solve the crisis, or else, not serious enough.

It is sad and unfortunate that till date camouflage and chaos overrule the genuine dialoguing process. And screechy political speeches try to shut the screams of the hapless.

The political climate in the country has only helped in worsening the atmosphere in the Valley. So much so that recently, as I asked my Valley-based Kashmiri friends to comment on the latest developments, they said, 'Today our situation is probably worse than what it was in the '90s... and even your situation has worsened. What with the encounters and the encounter-killings taking place in the midst of development cries!';' Didn't as many as 1,142 encounters take place between March 2017 and January 2018 in your one state of Uttar Pradesh? Over 49 persons killed in these encounters in Uttar Pradesh!'

Death and destruction have spread their tentacles as never before. The situation probably reeks of complex political developments not just in the state of J&K but all over the country. In fact, for the last several months I have begun to see a striking similarity between the misery I've been seeing in and around Srinagar city and the gloom I'm seeing in and around the capital conflict last? How long will hospitals be able to contain the list of those lying injured? How many more fresh graves will have to be dug? How many more psyches will be bruised for times to come? How long will this disconnect last?

Have we even bothered to be there, in the Valley, to internalise the ground realities? What has changed that the same Kashmiri who welcomed the Indian Army in the 1940s now lives in feat of being searched or being illegally arrested? Why is it that the same Kashmiri-who didn't let the communal tension that resulted from the Partition affect his land-is now labelled?

Have we bothered to think along the bigger and broader format? Will the havoc in the Valley remain contained to that region or spread out to the rest of the country? Will Kashmir become another Afghanistan or Syria or for that matter any devastated land? Will that scenario drag along new patterns of violence in this subcontinent? Will an invisible super-laced and super-powered and super-armed invading force, which has already intruded into the Middle-Eastern countries, find its way here to establish a base in the subcontinent? Will the arms dealers and war experts hover around the Valley with the latest arms? Will we see the expansionist designs of the United States, under President Donald Trump, play out on our borders? Will Noam Chomsky's forewarnings about the expansionist strategies of the US and allied forces for this subcontinent hit us too late?

*((This is an excerpt from the author's latest book 'Kashmir The Unending Tragedy)
