India ready to send Army to Pakistan to fight terror: Rajnath Singh's suggestion to Imran Khan

Rajnath Singh receives a memento at an election rally ahead of Haryana Assembly elections, at Pataudi near Gurugram, Sunday, Oct. 13, 2019. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Rajnath Singh suggested that India can send its Army to Pakistan to fight terrorism there The defence minister also slammed Imran Khan for his stance on Kashmir Singh was on a visit to poll-bound Haryana ahead of Assembly elections slated to be held on October 21

Karnal, Haryana: Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh in a piece of advice for Pakistan PM Imran Khan said India is ready to assist Pakistan if it is serious about combating terrorism on its soil.

While addressing a rally in poll-bound Haryana’s Karnal district today, the defence minister cautioned Pakistan on its stance on terror, stating, "I would like to suggest Pakistan work honestly, eliminate terrorism and maintain brotherhood. We are neighbours and we want to walk together."

"I would like to make a suggestion to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan. If you are serious enough to fight against terror, we are ready to assist you. If you want our Army, then we will send them there for your help," Rajnath said while addressing a public rally here.

The defence minister also trained his guns at Imran Khan for his stance on Kashmir.

I was listening to Imran Khan's speech where he had said that till Kashmir gets freedom, we will continue our fight over it. He also said that his country will continue to raise the Kashmir issue at international forums. Forget about Kashmir, don't even think about it. Raise the matter, nothing will happen. No one can exert pressure on us," he said.

Attacking Pakistan, Rajnath Singh said, “You divided India into two pieces as part of the two-nation theory in 1947. But in 1971, your country was divided into two pieces again. And if the situation persists, no power can stop Pakistan from being broken up further."

Earlier addressing a rally at Sonipat, Singh gave a warning to Pakistan with “utter politeness” stating that Islamabad should change its stance on terror or it could end up being divided into “several parts”.

Singh was on a visit to poll-bound Haryana ahead of the Assembly elections slated to be held there on October 21.
