Tigress’ death sends ripples across wildlife circles

An educated approach to save injured tigers needed: wildlife activist Sanjeev Siva

The death of 22-month-old tigress Meera, a litter of the famed tigress Maya of Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve, that sent ripples across India in the wildlife circles, had it’s echo in the city too with many wildlife activists expressing dismay.

Hyderabad’s well-known photographer and wildlife activist Sanjeev Siva was a witness to the last days of Meera’s battle for survival in Tadoba.

“A day before she died, I saw her struggling at Tadoba lake. She was just getting up, taking two steps and then crashing down. A sad sight to see indeed for such a wonderful tigress, who could have been the future queen of the sanctuary,” says Siva, who photographed Meera since she was a three-month-old cub.

“In fact, I was told that the Forest Department officials noticed Meera seven days before the apparent fight with another male tiger resulting in serious wounds and put her under observation,” he says.

“The Tadoba and Panderpauni lake areas, the territory of Maya, are generally male-dominant. In a male-dominated territory, the female will try to save her cubs by constantly moving them, luring the male into thinking that the cubs belong to him and may also indulge in false mating,” says Siva.

On the legendary Maya, he says that over the last seven years, she has been the lone female dominating this particular landscape, with a highly skewed male-female ratio and this was proving to be dangerous for her litters. “Meera was a promising prospect as female tigers generally follow natal philopatry (living and breeding in the area where they are born),” he said.

“A blanket rule to save all injured tigers might not be the solution. But, an educated approach taking tiger dynamics such as territory, ratio of male-female and the age of the tiger/tigress into consideration can be explored, along with some prioritisation,” he argues.

“Meera was full of vigour and life. Her belly almost touched the ground with the milk she fed on earlier. Unfortunately, she passed away, succumbing to the wounds as she couldn’t walk and hunt. All that was needed during that critical phase was, perhaps, minced meat, and may be she could have recuperated,” concludes Siva.
