Dubai man’s wife, daughter murdered in India

Dubai man’s wife, daughter murdered in India

DUBAI: An Indian man in Dubai has been left devastated after his wife and teenaged daughter were strangulated to death in their hometown Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh, around 270 kilometres from the state capital Lucknow in India.

The bodies of Nooran, 40, and Ghazala, 18, were found dumped separately in waterlogged paddy fields on October 6, said Azamgarh Police which has since arrested a man for the grisly double murder.

Azamgarh Superintendent of Police Triveni Singh, right, told Gulf News over the phone from Azamgarh that the suspect, Shubham Vishwakarma, lived in the same village and has confessed to the crime.

Singh said the 24-year-old was in a “relationship” with Ghazala and was furious as she had just broken up with him.

Initial investigations revealed that Vishwakarma was known to Dubai-based worker Nisar and often facilitated video calls between Neeshan and his family. “He would frequent their house in Bhikha village where Nisar’s wife Nooran lived with her five children including Ghazala. It was during these visits that he and Ghazala got close, but in recent days she had started to distance herself away from Vishwakarma, causing him to fly into a rage,” investigating officer Ramayan Singh told Gulf News over the phone from Azamgarh.

Police said on the night of October 5, Vishwakarma tried to barge into the family’s house to meet Ghazala but was met with stiff resistance from Nooran. Anticipating backlash from Vishwakarma, Nooran had locked up her children inside the house and was sleeping outside the house. Vishwakarma then allegedly strangulated her and carried her body to a waterlogged paddy field.

He then returned and, after breaking into the house, forcibly took Ghazala to neighbouring Maluara village.

“However when his friends who were waiting for him at the village found out that he had just killed a woman, they panicked and fled. So he strangulated Ghazala as well, dumped her body in a paddy field and fled,” said the SP.

Nooran’s body was discovered by a passersby on the morning of October 6. The police had barely reached the spot when news came in of Ghazala’s body being found in a bordering village.

The double murders have send shock waves amnog the large Azamgarh diaspora in the UAE.

“This is a terrible tragedy. May Allah give brother Neesham the strength to overcome it,” said Sharjah-based laundry worker Rahmat Alam who hails from Mohiuddinpur village in Azamgarh. Jameel Asghar, also from Azamgarh, said the murders had become the talk of the town. “It’s hard to shake off such things,” he said.
