Amit Shah asks Sharad Pawar to clarify stand on abrogation of Article 370

KOLHAPUR: Union home minister Amit Shah continued attack over Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar in a rally held at Kolhapur on Sunday.Shah in his campaign speeches emphasised on abrogation of article 370 as the achievement of the central government. Shah said, "The assembly elections are first election to be held after the abrogation of article 370. People should ask Pawar where he stands on Article 370. Both Rahul Gandhi and Pawar are asking why Article 370 was abrogated. They do not know the pain of the wife and mothers of the martyred jawans. Congress has no stand on national security issues."Shah said that because of Article 370, Pakistan resorted to terrorist activities which led to loss of 40,000 lives in Kashmir. He said that abrogation of Article 370 has made Kashmir part of India in true sense. Shah said when jawans were targeted the soldiers under the guidance of Prime Minister Narendra Modi carried out the surgical strikes.Shah further stated that Congress and NCP also opposed the abolition of Triple Talaq.When Congress and NCP were in power in the state, corruption was rampant alleged Shah. "The irrigation scam of Rs 70,000 crore took place. When our government came under Devendra Fadnavis 18,000 villages were provided with water with the help of Jal Yukt Shivar and that too by spending just Rs 9,000 crore. During Congress government at the centre state received the funds much less than her right. When we came to power in the centre, over Rs 2 lakh crore have been provided to Maharashtra ," said Shah.Shah said that Kolhapur's people were freed from toll tax collection after coming to power in the state by compensating developer Rs 450 crore. He further said, "For the development of Kolhapur we will develop IT Park. Around Rs 80 crore have been sanctioned by state government for Mahalakshmi temple development. For ten years, the airport was closed, we have resumed the operations. Now, new railway line connecting Kolhapur to Vaibhavwadi has been approved. We have also granted geographical indication (GI) tag to Kolhapur' chappals," said ShahShah said that code of conduct for Lok Sabha election was in place when floods ravaged Kolhapur and Sangli districts. "Owing to the floods heavy damages have taken place in Sangli and Kolhapur. The survey of the damages are going on. I assure that the central and the state government together will help make both the districts beautiful than earlier," said Shah.
