Cops hunt for Jiagunj clues as netas spar over murders

Behrampore (Murshidabad): Bandhu Prakash Pal had gradually shut himself off from relatives over the last two years since moving into the Jiagunj home, claim investigators. The 35-year-old primary schoolteacher was murdered along with his pregnant wife and 8-year-old son last Tuesday.Pal had instead cultivated a group of friends and acquaintances — mostly agents of a multi-level marketing firm and insurance companies — with whom he would spend his spare time, they added. One such agent and close acquaintance, Souvik Banik, is being questioned by police after he was detained on Saturday night. Sources said Pal had “loaned” Souvik around Rs 6 lakh.Police were conducting raids in Bolpur and Rampurhat when reports last came in.On Sunday morning, investigators found Rs 16,000 cash, two gold chains — one belonging to a child — and two rings at Pal’s home. They said this only bolstered their suspicion that the murderers had a “personal grudge” and robbery wasn’t the motive.A team led by CID special superintendent Indra Chakraborty spoke to Pal’s mother, Maya Rani, and his maternal uncles in Sagardighi’s Barala. Pal had stayed with them till 2017 before he moved to Jiagunj, ostensibly for better education for his son, Angan. The school where Pal worked, incidentally, is close to Sagardighi.As investigators hunted for concrete leads to track down the murderers, the killings’ political reverberations continued for the fifth straight day. Bengal minister Ashish Banerjee visited Pal’s in-laws’ home in Rampurhat on Sunday. He said: “The family is shattered, having lost their daughter. The relatives are unable to speak, one is fainting repeatedly. It is pathetic that some people, to further their political agenda, will tend to do politics over a tragedy. Where will they go next — to crematoriums to latch on to the next body, claiming it to be their supporter?”State BJP president Dilip Ghosh refused to be drawn into any comment politicising the murders. “Forget politics, none is talking about it. Three persons have been killed in the most gruesome manner. Nothing has been done by police. Not a single arrest. That is why we are demanding a probe by a central agency,” he said.BJP state general secretary Sayantan Basu said: “The area has suddenly seen a surge of infiltrators from Bangladesh. The deceased was close to RSS and it was a message to intimidate those who work closely with the Sangh. We have seen such brutal murders at Sandeshkhali earlier. We have asked for an investigation by NIA, keeping the infiltration aspect in view.”
