Cong worker from Dakha arrested for various offences

Ludhiana: Congress worker from Dakha, Gursewak Singh Gora, was arrested late on Saturday night by Dakha police after being booked under various sections of the IPC, including 379-B (snatching), 341 (wrongful restraint), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation), and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of a common intention) on the complaint of Kuldeep Singh Baddowal, another Congressman.

Along with Gora, his associate Tarandeep Singh too has been booked under similar offences by the police. While Gora was arrested on Saturday, and produced in the court on Sunday, the court denied his police remand, and he has been sent to jail.

Baddowal had alleged that on Saturday, when he and Amarjot Singh (former sarpanch of Baddowal) were standing outside the office of Captain Sandeep Sandhu, then Gora and his accomplice Tarandeep abused and attacked him. Baddowal also said during the attack, both the accused had snatched a gold chain from his neck and also a mobile phone which belonged to Amarjot. After this, he alleged both of them escaped from the spot.

On the other hand, Gora too had alleged on Saturday that cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu had manhandled him and removed his turban inside the office of party’s Dakha candidate Captain Sandeep Sandhu.

Gora’s father Saudagar Singh said, “This is a totally false case moved by politics. My son is innocent and everything is being done at the behest of our opponents in the party. My son was beaten up by cabinet minister Ashu inside Sandhu’s office on Saturday. But what is really intolerable and unjustifed is that along with supressing his voice, he has been booked under a false case and sent to jail. We are staunch Congress supporters and have been supporting the party from our heart and soul, but now what is being done to us is nothing less than atrocity, and now there is no question of remaining in the party.”

Meanwhile, speaking to TOI, Dakha SHO Prem Singh said, “An FIR has been registered against Gora and Tarandeep under various sections. Gora has already been arrested by us, while Tarandeep is still at large. Gora has a criminal background, and various cases have been registered against him, including robbery, drugs, arms etc. Yesterday, he not only attacked Baddowal, but also robbed him of his gold chain and a mobile phone.”

When confronted about the videos which went viral on social media, in which Gora was seen without a turban and claiming to be being beaten up by cabinet minister Ashu inside the belection office of Captain Sandeep Sandhu, SHO Prem Singh said, “There is no evidence to suggest something like this happened, Gora is lying, and in fact, he himself removed his turban, and later on tried to give it a religious colour on social media.”

BOX

Register FIR against Ashu: SAD

Ludhiana: The Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) on Sunday lashed out at the Congress on the Dakha incident, in which Congress worker Gursewak Singh Gora had accused cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu of manhandling him and hurting religious sentiments.

In a statement here, former minister Maheshinder Singh Grewal said, “It is shocking that cabinet minister Ashu attacked the ‘kesh’ and ‘dastar’ of Sikh youth Gora in Dakha assembly constituency with the sole purpose of humiliating him. We condemn this act and demand that the law be followed and a case be registered against Ashu for hurting the religious sentiments of an Amritdhari Sikh. The case also proved the anti-Sikh nature of the Congress party and its leaders.”

Grewal added, “SAD is not concerned about the politics of the case or the factional fight in Congress, which had led to this incident. Our only concern is that a cabinet minister has intentionally launched an attack on an Amritdhari Sikh, and no action was taken against him as per law. Prompt action should be taken in the case, or SAD will be constrained to launch an agitation to secure justice in the matter. SAD will not remain silent, and will ensure those guilty of this sacrilege are punished as per the law of the land.”

Baddowal comes out with video

In another twist in the incident, a video statement was sent to mediapersons on Sunday by the complainant Kuldeep Singh Baddowal. The complainant — instead of saying anything on his Saturday’s complaint, on the basis of which Gora was arrested — said that last week, Gora had intimidated him in the presence of senior Congress leaders when they all went to Gora’s home, and the latter also used caste remarks against him. In the video, Baddowal is accompanied by several persons, including the sarpanch of Baddowal village, Amarjot Singh. These persons claimed in the video that Gora worked at the behest of the Akali Dal, and in the sarpanch election as well, he helped the Akali Dal instead of Congress.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
