Kolkata: Teenager kills father for hitting mother, walks to police station

Police have filed a case of murder against the teenager, his mother and brother. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Teenage boy murders father for hitting mother Boy walks to police station after murdering father Police file murder case against boy, his mother and brother

Kolkata: In a shocking incident, a 15-year-old boy allegedly bludgeoned his father to death for repeatedly beating his mother in Kolkata's Rajarhat area on Sunday. The boy later went to Rajarhat police station to surrender.

The teenager told the police that he had repeatedly warned his father not to harm his mother. And when he did not pay heed to his warnings, the boy killed the man using a stone block.

According to a report, the teenager was later produced in a juvenile court. Police said the boy had blood all over his clothes when he went to the police station to surrender.

The youth told the duty officer that he had killed his father for assaulting his mother. The juvenile also told the police that his father was heavily drunk when he assaulted his mother on Saturday night.

According to the teenager, he repeatedly warned his father not to hit his mother, but the latter refused to back off and continued to assault her. Angry over his father's bad behaviour, the boy picked a blunt object and hit the man on the head.

Later, he went outside to pick a heavy stone and repeatedly hit his father until he died on the spot. After this, he walked to the police station.

The police then went to the spot with the boy and found the man dead. The cops also recovered the blunt object and the stone used to commit the crime.

According to police, the boy's elder brother and mother were not present when they visited the spot and the two are still missing.

Police have filed a case of murder against the teenager, his mother, and brother. Police have sent the body for postmortem to RG Kar Hospital in the city.

In a similar incident, a man allegedly strangled his foster father in Chamarsena area of Jalaun district in Uttar Pradesh on October 3. The 87-year-old victim was identified as Nabi Baksh. The victim had adopted the accused, Shafi, around 26 years ago.

Baksh had been living with Shafi, his daughter-in-law, and their four children. The accused was jobless and financially dependent on his foster father.

Nabi Baksh owned 14 bighas of land out of which he had registered 10 bighas under the name of his grandson Arif. Shafi allegedly wanted 10 bighas of agricultural land to be registered under his name.
