The Shadow of Ayodhya | India Today Insight

Since August 6, Court Number 1 in the Supreme Court, has become the cynosure of all eyes. Hundreds of lawyers in shiny, flowing black gowns throng the august courtroom, the wide marble corridors right outside and even the verdant lawns listening in rapt attention to the senior counsels making the appeals and cross-appeals against the 2010 Allahabad High Court ruling in the landmark Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute.

The apex court's Constitution bench comprising of Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi and Justices Sharad Arvind Bobde, Dhanjaya Y Chandrachud, Ashok Bhusan and Abdul Nazeer, all seated on chairs lined up on the higher bench, have been patiently listening to daily hearings in one of the most famous cases in India's history, the Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute. The daily hearings, which had commenced on August 6 after an attempt at mediation between the two sides failed, is a spectacular sight: democracy and the rule of law in action.

The Ram Lalla argument

A battery of top lawyers are advocating the infant deity, the Bhagwan Shri Ram Virajman, which includes legal luminaries such as former Attorney General K Parasaran, former Solicitor General Harish Salve, former additional solicitor General C S Vaidayanathan, Advocates P S Narasimha, Ranjit Kumar and Shyam Diwan.

Senior Counsel Parasaran, 92, "the Bhisma Pitamah among lawyers," declined the apex court's permission to make his case sitting down, and argued for over two days about Ram Lalla Virajman's rights as a 'juristic person', with the right to sue and be sued. The Hindu law does not stop with the recognition of the deity as a juristic person.

Senior Counsel Parasaran reasoned that a deity would not be able to act on its own, hence needed a guardian. Consequently, a Hindu deity was deemed in law as a perpetual minor with a manager appointed to act on its behalf. The relationship between the deity and its manager or shebait (a person who serves the deity) is that of a minor and its guardian.

Once the deity has been established as a legal plaintiff, the main argument of the lawyers of Ram Lalla boiled down to proving that a temple - the Ram Janamashthan -- existed over which a mosque was constructed by Mir Baqi, Mughal Emperor Babar's general in 1528.

As evidence, the senior counsel C S Vaidyanathan showed the apex court, a 12th-century stone slab with a medieval-style Sanskrit inscription that was recovered from the disputed site. Combined with oral eye witness accounts and archaeological evidence, submitted as exhibits, Vaidyanathan argued that the verses on the slab mentions a Vishnu temple, built in Ayodhya, the then capital of Saketa Mandala.

"The verses speak of King Govinda Chandra, the ruler of Saketa Mandala, of which Ayodhya was the Capital city. A big Vishnu temple was built there, the verses say. It is my submission that this Vishnu temple is the structure that was excavated by the Archaeological Survey of India," argued Vaidyanathan.

"There is no challenge to the translation of the contents of the slab, the authenticity of the inscription has also not been challenged. Challenge is only to the recovery of the slab -- whether it was recovered from the debris of the disputed area after the destruction of the Babri mosque or not," said Vaidyanathan

As evidence, Vaidyanathan showed the judges photographs to prove the spot from where the slab fell off. He read out the eyewitness account of a Panchjanya magazine (RSS publication) journalist that the slab, fitted in the western wall of the southern dome, fell out from the disputed structure when the kar sevaks began demolishing the structure. The slab supports the conclusions drawn by ASI that there was a huge temple at this place, the Ram Janmasthan, Vaidyanathan argued.

"The disputed structure was put in place either on the ruins of the Ramjanamsthan temple or by pulling it down," Vaidyanathan claimed. Despite the destruction of the temple, devout Hindus continued to visit the site and offer prayers and parikrama, Vaidyanathan argued, relying on the previous judgment of Justice Agarwal of the Allahabad High Court.

The Allahabad High Court judgment of 2010 as backdrop

The September 30, 2010 judgment of the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court, which is the main basis on which the Supreme Court is hearing the title suit based on the grievances of rival parties in the Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute, is a landmark judgment.

The three-judge bench of the high court in 2010 ruled that the 2.77 acres of land at the disputed site in Ayodhya be divided into three equal parts between Ram Lalla Virajman, represented by the Hindus for the construction of the Ram temple, the Sunni Central Waqf Board, representing the Muslims and the Nirmohi Akhara, a religious denomination of sadhus, belonging to the Vaishnav Sampradaya.

The Allahabad High court had based its judgment on the oral evidence of several eyewitnesses, historical and archaeological accounts (provided by eminent historians of the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) suggesting that for centuries, Hindus and Muslims had worshipped together at the shared site before being segregated during British rule. Relying on just principles of fair distribution legacy, the court concluded that the entire property be considered jointly held by Hindus and Muslims and distributed under relevant Indian property statutes that divide contested properties on the principle of fairness.

The fact that the area of the mosque's central dome, where the statue of Ram Lalla was placed, was allotted to the representatives of Hindus (Hindu Mahasabha) has been criticised. But the truth is that either way, the judgment would have appeared favouring one party or another.

While the three-judge bench was not unanimous in ruling that the disputed structure was constructed after demolishing a temple, it agreed that a temple, or a temple structure, predated the mosque at the site. Excavations by the ASI were heavily used as evidence by the court. Negotiating sensitively between facts and faith, the judgment provided a semblance of balance between the two communities involved.

The Nirmohi Akhara argument

First a caveat: a brief historical background to show the over-a-century-old involvement of the Nirmohi Akhara in the Ramjanambhoomi controversy. As early as1850s, the Nirmohi Akhara, a religious denomination of sadhus belonging to the Vaishnava sampradaya, made its first legal claim on the disputed land. In 1885, Mahant Raghubar Das of the Nirmohi Akhara filed Suit No. 61/280 in the Faizabad court against the Secretary of State for India, seeking permission to build a Ram temple on the Ram Chabutra (a raised platform), adjacent to the Babri Masjid. The court refused, fearing public disorder.

Senior Advocate Sushil Jain is the main counsel for the Nirmohi Akhara in the Supreme Court. Jain's arguments followed two lines of reasoning: The Akhara as shebait and the fact that Muslims have not been praying at the disputed structure since 1934.

Senior Counsel Jain argued that in legal terms there was a difference between a shebait and a trustee of a temple. A 'shebait' is an "agent of the idol of a temple." In other words, a shebait means an officer to whom the service of a deity and the management of the deity's property are vested.

Jain, appearing for Nirmohi Akhara argued that the role of a shebait is not the same as that of a trustee of a temple. "In a Hindu temple the entire property is vested with the deity and the shebait is in charge of its management. Therefore shebiat-ship cannot be simply termed as 'office', argued Jain.

"The shebait enjoys some sort of rights to the property which are akin to proprietary rights. It is not just a post but proprietary rights are blended with it. That, my lords, is shebait-ship," Jain said. Therefore, Jain arguing based on Article 142, said, the Nirmohi Akhara's right of management, and not just its right of possession, has "also been curtailed" by the disputed structure.

In response to Jain's argument, Justice Chandrachud said that a shebait could be entitled to conducting worship in the temple without being in its possession. Chandrachud added that if Jain's reference to Article 142 was to be admitted, it would also mean that Nirmohi Akhara would only have 12 years from the time of dispossession.

Justice Chandrachud said, "(Article) 142 speaks of possession of the immovable property but does not talk about its management. So possession of property and management of worship (rituals) are two different things."

The other line of Jain's reasoning was that Muslims have not been allowed to enter the disputed Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid structure in Ayodhya since 1934. AS a result, advocate Jain sought the control and management of the entire 2.77-acre land which is under dispute and claimed that the structure has been in its exclusive possession.

The Akhara counsel told the apex court that their suit was basically for belongings, possession and management rights. "I am a registered body. My suit is basically for belongings, possession and management rights," said the Akhara counsel. He also told the court that the Akhara had owned the inner courtyard and Ram Janmasthan for hundreds of years.

"We were in possession of inner courtyard and Ram Janmasthan for hundreds of years. Outer courtyard having 'Sita Rasoi', 'Chabutra', 'Bhandar Grah' were in our possession and it was never a part of the dispute in any case," senior counsel Jain told the bench.

Refuting the Nirmohi Akhara's claim of possession, the counsel for Ram Lalla Virajman argued: "Nirmohi Akhara cannot claim possession of the deity since they do not represent the deity."

The Sunni Central Waqf Board argument

Senior Advocate Rajeev Dhavan is the counsel for the Sunni Central Waqf Board. Dhavan urged the Supreme Court to restore possession of the disputed site in Ayodhya to the Waqf Board, claiming that it had always been in possession of the mosque (the Babri Mosque) at the spot and idols were only placed in 1949 in the inner courtyard, not spontaneously, but as part of a "planned conspiracy".

In a point-by-point rejoinder to his rival's arguments, Dhavan debunked the swayambhu (self-manifested, created by one's own accord) theory provided by the lawyers for the Ram Lalla Virajman to explain away the presence of the idols inside the Babri Masjid which is now demolished. The conspiracy was "planned" in March and culminated in placing of the idols under the dome on the night of 22-23 December 1949, argued Dhavan.

The Muslims who tried to visit the mosque were harassed and not allowed to pray except for a few hours on Friday when the local police opened the doors of the mosque to them, argued Dhavan. Locks were placed on the doors of the mosque, Dhavan claimed.

"They did not pray because they were not allowed to. Post-1934, they could not pray because we didn't let them," Dhavan asserted. "I can't let this be a miracle. There was a planned, surreptitious attack on December 22-23. There was a trespass. Eventually, the Masjid doors were locked by the local administration," said Dhavan. The Hindus were praying in the outer courtyard and not the inner courtyard. "The inner courtyard was taken away wrongly and must be given back," Dhavan concluded.

The Shebait right controversy

Dhavan questioned the deity being a claimant in the Ayodhya title suit. He said the claim of deity as "swayambhoo" (sovereign) cannot be accepted. Instead he supported the claim of the Nirmohi Akhara to the extent it opposes the claim of the deity. Dhavan argued that the Sunni Waqf Board agreed to "shebait" right of the Nirmohi Akhara, because Shebait, literally meaning a devotee, refers to an entity - which could be a person, group or another body - entrusted with the management of affairs of the deity.

The bench questioned Dhavan. "You do not dispute their shebait rights," the bench asked Dhavan, who replied saying, "No. I do not."

The bench then told Dhavan, "If you accept the Akhara as 'shebait' then do you also accept that it was in possession of the outer courtyard." Dhavan contested saying Akhara's claim as shebait over the area known as Ram Chabutara may be fine but not as the titleholder of the land.

The apex court bench remarked that by accepting Akahara's right as shebait, "you (the Sunni Waqf Board ) are necessarily giving up your claim over Ram Chabutara and Sita Rasoi of the outer courtyard. Therefore, the outer courtyard cannot be a mosque."

Can the two communites pray together?

The bench reminded Dhavan that the Sunni Central Waqf Board in its pleadings in the lawsuit has claimed title over the entire disputed land. Dhavan replied saying, "Technically, your lordships can say that some portion may be given" to the Hindu side.

The Ram Lalla counsel claimed: "The temple and mosque cannot coexist at the same spot. Ram Janambhoomi is a deity and a juridical person, subject to law, and the spirit of the divine is indestructible," Vaidyanathan told the court. The Sunni Central Waqf Board counselhas conceded to the shebait right of the Nirmohi Akhara, but has contested the claim of deity and title claim of Akhara. In effect, Dhavan is open to Hindus and Muslims praying side by side.

While the 5-judge bench is listening every day to the lawyers of all the three parties make their arguments and counter-arguments, in one of India's historic case, that is still unresolved 27 years after the Babri Masjid was demolished, the key question is whoever wins the title suit, can the two communities pray and coexist together?
