Pakistan under biggest pressure from anti-terror watchdog FATF, says Ajit Doval at NIA meet

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval at the NIA meet in New Delhi on Monday. (Photo:ANI)

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval on Monday slammed Pakistan for providing a safe breeding ground for terrorists and using terrorism as an instrument of state policy.

"If a criminal has the support of a state, it becomes a great challenge. Some of the states have mastered this. In our case, Pakistan has made it as an instrument of its state policy," NSA Doval said at an event of the National Investigation Agency on Monday.

National Security Advisor (NSA), Ajit Doval in Delhi: One of the biggest pressures that has come on Pakistan today is because of the proceedings of Financial Action Task Force (FATF), it has created so much pressure on them that probably no other action could have done. pic.twitter.com/OMilhPzScX ANI (@ANI) October 14, 2019

'War no more an option'

The National Security Adviser added that Pakistan was under immense pressure at the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) meeting, currently underway in Paris, to rein in terror groups operating from its soil, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval said on Monday.

"One of the biggest pressures that has come on Pakistan today is because of the proceedings of Financial Action Task Force (FATF), it has created so much pressure on them that probably no other action could have done," Ajit Doval said.

Ajit Doval said in the present context, no country can afford to go for a war as the financial and human costs are huge and no one is sure about victory, he said.

Terrorism is a low-cost sustainable option which may damage enemies to a great extent, Doval said in a reference to Pakistan.

At the NIA meet, Ajit Doval also lauded NIA for cracking down on terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir. "The impact that NIA has been able to make against terrorism in Kashmir is more than any other agency," Ajit Doval said.

Fighting terrorism not enough, cut terror funds: Ajit Doval

Ajit Doval also stressed the need to fight the ideology of terrorists to defeat them.

"Terrorism is nothing new. To fight terror is an abstract idea. You don't fight terror. You do so by degrading terrorists and that is done by taking his weapon, their concept," NSA Doval said at an event of the National Investigation Agency on Monday.

National Security Advisor (NSA), Ajit Doval: If a criminal has the support of a state, it becomes a great challenge. Some of the states have mastered this, in our case Pakistan has made it as an instrument of its state policy. https://t.co/Sa1fC4JJI7 pic.twitter.com/ijrbWuuPcd ANI (@ANI) October 14, 2019

With Home Minister Amit Shah not present, National Security Adviser (NSA) Ajit Doval spoke at the national conference of chiefs of Anti-Terrorism Squad/Special Task Force in New Delhi on Monday.

At the NIA event, Ajit Doval said terrorists can be defeated by finding out answers to questions about their background, source of funds, weapons and if they are being supported by other countries.

The NIA, meanwhile, has issued an alert to states and Union Territories over terror attack. The agency said they have shared the names of 125 suspects with other agencies.

The Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) has increased its activities in Bihar, Maharashtra, Kerala and Karnataka, said NIA DG Yogesh Chander Modi.

The NIA event also claimed to have unearthed a Khalistani terror plot. "There have been continuous efforts from across the border to revive terror activities in Punjab. Sixteen arrested for targeted killings in eight cases. Khalistan Liberation Force was found to be involved. Funds from UK, Italy, France, and Australia were sent for this," NIA IG Alok Mittal said.

JMB trying to spread tentacles across India: NIA chief

The Jamaat-ul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) was trying to spread its tentacles across India and a list of 125 suspects have been shared with different states, chief of NIA YC Modi said on Monday.

Addressing a meeting of chiefs of the Anti Terrorism Squads (ATS), Modi said the JMB has spread its activities in states like Jharkhand, Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala in the guise of Bangladeshi immigrants.

"The NIA has shared with states concerned a list of 125 suspected activists who have close links with the JMB leadership," he said.

Inspector General of the NIA Alok Mittal said from 2014 to 2018, the JMB has set up 20-22 hideouts in Bangalore and tried to spread its bases in South India.

"The JMB even conducted a trial of rocket launchers in the Krishnagiri hills along the Karnataka border," he said.

Mittal said the JMB was keen to attack Buddhists temples to take revenge for the plight of Rohingiya Muslims in Myanmar.

Also read | Multi-tier security along 20 infiltration routes in J&K

Also watch | India Today impact: NIA takes note of Operation Kashmiri Almonds, promises strict action
