Mizoram becomes first state with highest HIV prevalence; sexual transmission among major cause of virus spread

NACO says an estimated over 69,000 people died of AIDS-related causes across the country in 2017. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Mizoram on top of the list of states with highest HIV cases Major cause of virus spread attributed to sexual transmission. Over 69,000 people died of AIDS-related causes across the country in 2017

Aizwal: It's become a major cause of concern for Mizoram government. Mizoram has become the first state in the country with the highest prevalence of Human Immunodeficiency Virus or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) cases.

The data collected by the Mizoram State AIDS Control Society (MSACS) reveals that the state recorded nine cases of HIV every day.

According to a report, the fast spread of the virus has put Mizoram on top of the list of states with high prevalence of HIV virus at 2.04 per cent followed by Manipur 1.43 per cent, Nagaland 1.15 per cent.

"An average of 9.2 cases are detected across Mizoram’s 44 standalone Integrated Counselling and Testing Centres on each of the 25 days a month they remain open," Project Director of MCACS, Dr. Lalthlengliani said.

According to Dr. Lalthlengliani, the analysis of HIV positive cases reveal that people in the age group between 25-34 years are the most vulnerable in the state. This is followed by those in the age group 35-49 years and 15-24 years. He also said that the HIV/AIDS prevalence rates in these three age groups are 42.38 per cent, 26.46 per cent and 23.0 per cent respectively.

The major cause of the spread of AIDS virus in the state is attributed to the sexual transmission which stands at 67.21 per cent, with over 1 per cent being blamed for transmission through homosexuality. This is followed by infected needles shared by drug users which led to 28.12% HIV positive cases.

The state, which borders Myanmar and Bangladesh, is battling drug trafficking for a long time. Reports suggest drug traffickers smuggle narcotics like methamphetamine and heroin from Myanmar.

Terming the situation alarming, Mizoram Chief Minister has called on people to fight the menace. Launching AIDS sensitisation campaign in Aizawl on October 11, Zoramthanga said there is a need to increase the awareness about the HIV virus and focus on the treatment and prevention of the disease.

According to National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO), an estimated over 69,000 people died of AIDS-related causes across the country in 2017.

NACO also said that AIDS-related deaths have dropped in all of India’s States and Union Territories (UT) with the exception of Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Haryana, Delhi, and Uttarakhand. India is estimated to have had over 22,000 HIV positive women who gave birth in 2017.
