Assets worth Rs 3,830 crore seized in PMC Bank case: Enforcement Directorate

NEW DELHI: The Enforcement Directorate , on Monday, said it has seized / frozen and identified movable and immovable assets owned by M/s Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (), its Directors/ Promoters, PMC Bank officials and other related entities in the PMC bank fraud case The agency claimed that the total value of assets identified till now is more than Rs. 3830 Crores and investigations are in progress to identify and locate more of such ‘laundered assets’.The properties seized include ten cars including Rolls Royce, Bentley and Range Rover seized from the residential premises of Rakesh Kumar Wadhawan , Director of HDIL.Other properties attached include two aircrafts namely, Bombardier Challenger – 300 VT and Falcon 2000 VT HDL owned by Privilege Airways Private Limited have been identified.The agency in a press release said that the CEO, Mumbai International Airport Limited has been informed to keep in custody and not to allow its operation/ alienation. Rakesh Kumar Wadhawan and Sarang Wadhawan are Directors of Privilege Airways Private Limited.The agency has also seized an 88 feet long Yacht ‘Ferretti 881 HT” named Samara1 Registered under Panama Flag, owned by Sapphire Land Development Private Ltd (a group company of HDIL) presently located in Maldives has also been barred from being alienated.The agency said that documents relating to purchase of 2,112 acre of land have been found. Value of land varies between Rs 1.5 Crore to Rs. 5 Crore per acre. It said that the documents of the following are being scrutinized for possible attachment under PMLA.“The present value of the said land is likely to be more than Rs. 3000 crores. Seized documents revealed that HDIL has work in progress at around 80 unencumbered properties in and around Mumbai. The valuation and ownership of the said properties is being ascertained. Three flats in Pali Hill, Khar (West) , Mumbai having value of Rs 8.2 Crore .Also, 160 Acres of land acquired in district Sindhurdurg ( Maharashta)for Vijay Durg Port Private Ltd in 2013-2014 valued at Rs 125 crores (approx). And 72 Acres at Kukatpally, Hyderabad owned by My Palace Society in which HDIL has 55% share out of which 24 acres title is clear valued at Rs. 70 crore approx..”, the agency said in a press statement.Other properties which are being scrutinized for attachment include 80 Acres of land at Greater Noida, Yamuna Express way Project jointly held valued at Rs 110 crore; one Bungalow in Mumbai valued at around Rs. 110 crore and a lavish farm house spread in 2.5 acres land along with 22 lavishly embellished rooms worth Rs. 80 crore (appox).
