Budgam Mi-17 crash: IAF takes action against 6 officers; 2 to face court-martial

An Mi17 V5 chopper was shot down at Budgam near Srinagar on February 27 | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights A Mi17 V5 chopper crashed at Budgam near Srinagar on February 27 morning, killing all six of its occupants A Court of Inquiry had confirmed lapses and mistakes by officials The inquiry found that the officers who handled SPYDER confused the helicopter with an incoming missile

Budgam: Days after IAF chief Air Chief Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauri admitted that shooting down the Indian chopper in Jammu and Kashmir earlier this year was a "big mistake", the Indian Air Force on Monday took action against the officials who had committed the “blunder”.

Two officers will face court-martial and four others will face administrative action for their respective roles in the case in which six IAF personnel and a civilian were killed on February 27.

"Two officers, including a Group Captain and a Wing Commander, would be tried by a court-martial for their lapses in the case due to which six IAF personnel were killed in friendly fire," defence sources told a news agency.

A Mi17 V5 chopper crashed at Budgam near Srinagar on February 27 morning, killing all six of its occupants. Later, it emerged that the helicopter was brought down by own air defence missile system SPYDER deployed at the Srinagar airbase.

A Court of Inquiry, which completed its probe into the case late last month, had confirmed lapses and mistakes by officials.

The inquiry found that the officers who handled SPYDER confused the helicopter with an incoming missile. Crashed 10 minutes after it took off, the chopper that belonged to the 154 Helicopter Unit broke in two parts and caught fire.

The crash took place in the backdrop of heightened tensions between India and Pakistan. On February 26, the Indian Air Force fighters had bombed a terror camp at Balakot in the Pakistani territory in response to the Pulwama attack on February 14.

On October 4, IAF chief RKS Bhadauria had admitted that the Mi-17 chopper crash was a "big mistake" on the part of the Air Force.

"It was a big mistake on our part. We accept it," the Air Chief had said while revealing that a Court of Inquiry had established lapses.

"We are extremely sorry. It was a big blunder," Bhadauria had said, adding: "Our missile hit (the helicopter). This has been established. Administrative action and disciplinary action is being taken. Necessary steps are being taken so such incidents don't repeat. Those killed will be considered battle casualties.".

Retired former IAF chief BS Dhanoa had earlier said that the IAF needed to learn lessons from this case.

The chopper was flown by squadron leader Siddharth Vashisht, squadron leader Ninad Mandvgane, Kumar Pandey, sergeant Vikrant Sehrawat, corporals Pankaj Kumar and Deepak Pandey.
