Suniel Shetty kickstarts shooting for his debut Hollywood project Call Centre; Read details

Suniel Shetty, who was last seen in Kannada movie Pailwan along with Kiccha Sudeep in September 2019, is gearing up for his maiden Hollywood venture now. Reportedly, the senior actor will be seen in Jeffery Chin’s Call Centre and will be playing the role of a Sikh police inspector in the movie. To note, Suniel will be donning the uniform after over a decade. While the fans are excited to watch Suniel making his Hollywood debut, it is reported that he has begun shooting for the movie in Hyderabad.

According to media reports, the Call Centre has been inspired by a real-life incident wherein an Indian Police Officer had busted a multi-million dollar call centre scam. “The premise revolves around four guys who worked at a call centre in India and robbed a US-based company of USD 381 million. While American agencies were involved in the investigation, it was the Indian police that cracked the case,” a source had reportedly told Mumbai Mirror.

Also Read: Suniel Shetty recalls being called ‘wooden material’; Opens up on son Ahan Shetty's Bollywood debut

Apart from the call centre scam, the movie will also highlight the struggle of Suniel’s character as he fights the American agencies to retain the custody of four Indian boys in India as the agencies intend to frame them under the US laws.

Reportedly, Suniel, who has been excited about his Hollywood debut, had begun shooting for the movie in September end and plans to wrap it by the end of this year. The media reports also suggest that the 58-year-old actor will be having several nail-biting chase sequences which will be shot in Hyderabad. Call Centre is likely to be released Telugu and Hindi as dubbed versions.

Meanwhile, Suniel is also working on Sanjay Gupta’s Mumbai Saga along with John Abraham, Emraan Hashmi, Prateik Babbar, Gulshan Grover and Rohit Roy. Besides, he will also be seen in Hera Pheri 3 with Akshay Kumar and Paresh Rawal.
