2 criminals caught in separate shootouts in Delhi

Two criminals were caught on Monday in separate shootouts in Delhi.

In one of the cases, a team of Special Cell led by Inspector Shivkumar supervised by ACP Attar Singh arrested a notorious criminal, identified as Tushar, resident of Ram Nagar Tilak Nagar, after a shootout near Bhalswa landfill at about 9 pm.

A semi-automatic pistol and live cartridges were recovered from him.

The team was tracking Tushar for a month after his video of firing in a house in Mahendra Park went viral.

After receiving information, a trap was laid in Bhalswa landfill. Tushar, who came upon a splendar bike at about 9 pm, was identified and cornered.

After disclosing identity, Tushar was asked to surrender, but he whipped out a pistol and fired many rounds towards the police team.

Head Constable Rakesh Kumar was hit by a bullet fired by accused, but was saved by the bullet-proof jacket.

Members of the team also fired in self-defence in which Tushar was injured. He has been immediately rushed to Jagjeevan Ram hospital.

Arrested accused Tushar is a notorious criminal involved in more than 25 cases of assault, robbery, snatching, theft, Arms Act etc. He has been declared PO in some of these cases.

In another case, a shootout between criminals and a team of Delhi Police took place on Monday near Rajghat in central Delhi.

One alleged robber, identified as Imran, was caught after an exchange of fire. He was also wanted in five previous cases of snatching and robberies.

At Around 8.10 pm, a suspicious white colour scooty was reported to come towards DTC bus depot near Rajghat, which was directed to halt but instead abiding to the lawful direction, rider of the bike sped up the vehicle.

Imran was immediately brought to a halt with the aid of other staff. In order to escape, the suspect three rounds from his pistol. Retaliating in self-defence, police also fired four rounds. The accused suffered a gunshot injury in his leg during exchange of fire.


