12 Trailblazers Share Their 2019 Resolutions For a Better India. Will You Join Them?

Every new year, the world is positively amok with ‘resolutions’ around personal health, travel and self-discovery. But some people form resolutions impacting more than just themselves. They are not the kind to jump into an existing wave, but see beyond it, mobilise efforts and re-create a larger wave for a better world.

And this year, these prominent personalities stand up with The Better India, to strive and create a world that initiates positive change through people’s participation.

Here’s what these individuals resolved in 2019 for positively impacting the masses.

1. Kailash Satyarthi, Founder, Kailash Satyarthi Children’s Foundation

Resolution For A Better India Every year, we promise ourselves new resolutions to craft a better personal future, just as the new year beckons. But for 2019, how about we also take a resolution to build a brighter and better future for India? Here’s Nobel Laureate & founder of Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation – Kailash Satyarthi sharing his resolution! Why not join us this endeavour? Share your 2019 resolution that will contribute towards making India better as a video or a post – use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make India’s future brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Thursday, December 20, 2018

A Nobel Peace Prize-winning child rights activist, Kailash has dedicated his life to protecting and nourishing the future of India’s population.

The result of his efforts is the Bachpan Bachao Andolan.

This year, he draws the nation’s attention to the horrors of sexual abuse endured by children on an everyday basis.

In his 2019 resolution, Kailash urges us to rise against such evils. For a better India, we need to promote more reporting of sexual abuse cases as well as strive to get the correct punishment for the predators, he says.

2. Harssh A Poddar, IPS, DCP, Nagpur, Maharashtra

Resolution For A Better India – Harssh A Poddar Here is the resolution of IPS Harssh A Poddar for making India better. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change – http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India

.

.

.

.

.

.

Indian Police Service Association Posted by TheBetterIndia on Friday, December 21, 2018

As the ASP of Malegaon, Maharashtra, IPS officer Harssh Poddar in 2018 created a unique initiative of youth participation to combat crime where 42,000 young leaders and changemakers worked against crime and terror.

In 2019, he has resolved to combat another evil–fake news.

“Fake news is taking lives across the country, contributing to riots, mob lynching, murders,” Harssh tells The Better India.

His resolution for 2019 is to kill fake news before it kills more people!

3. Anshu Gupta, Founder, Goonj

Resolution For A Better India Here's Anshu Gupta, founder of @GOONJ – sharing his 2019 resolution for a better India! Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Saturday, December 22, 2018

Social entrepreneur Anshu Gupta, who began Goonj, a non-governmental organisation, to mobilise the rural population towards sustainable change, has a larger message to share this new year.

According to him, to make India better, we don’t need thinkers anymore, but doers. “We need initiative, we need action. And, the mantra for that is lage raho (keep trying).”

4. Puja Marwaha, CEO, Child Rights and You (CRY)

Resolution For A Better India Here is Puja Marwaha, CEO of Child Rights and You (CRY)- sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India! Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India CRY – Child Rights and You Posted by TheBetterIndia on Sunday, December 23, 2018

Puja Marwaha, the CEO of CRY, a non-governmental organisation, believes that the best way to make the year ahead better, is by focusing on restoring child rights.

According to her, India can be better when all decisions are made after considering the interests of the children.

5. Sonal Goel, IAS, Deputy Commissioner, Jhajjar, Haryana

Resolution For A Better India Here is IAS Sonal Goel sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Monday, December 24, 2018

After starting Nandini, an initiative towards the empowerment of women and girls in Gomati district of Tripura, IAS Sonal Goel has now initiated another project in Jhajjar, Haryana.

In 2019, she has resolved to further this initiative, ‘Umar Ek Pahal’, which spreads awareness about menstruation and provides sanitary napkins to adolescent girls, thereby furthering the cause of girl child education.

6. Sandhya Krishnan, Director-Program, Educate Girls

Resolution For A Better India Here is Sandhya Krishnan, Director-Program, Educate Girls, sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Tuesday, December 25, 2018

Educate Girls is an organisation which aims to tackle the root of gender inequality in India’s education system, and their director, Sandhya Krishnan resolves to further the cause with more vigour this year.

According to her, one of the prominent issues that India needs to address is to ensure that no girl is out of school and that all children have equal access to quality education.

7. Pranitha Subhash, Actor

Resolution For A Better India – Pranitha Subhash Here is Pranitha, Indian film actress, sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us! Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Wednesday, December 26, 2018

A prominent actor who has worked in various Kannada, Telugu and Tamil films, Pranitha Subhash draws the attention of the masses to the establishment of a true democracy.

According to her, a democracy is sustainable through public participation and thus, has resolved to promote participative democracy in 2019.

8. Natasha Ramarathnam, Regional Director-South, Magic Bus

Resolution For A Better India – Natasha Ramarathnam – Magic Bus Here is Natasha Ramarathnam, Regional Director-South, Magic Bus, sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us. Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Thursday, December 27, 2018

Natasha Ramarathnam, a social worker who has been working with adolescents through her organisation, Magic Bus, points out the rising need for gender sensitisation.

According to her, in its 2019 resolution, the country should seek every opportunity to address the youth, and speak to them about the need for gender equality, and help them redress the much-required balance.

9. V K Madhavan, Chief Executive, Water Aid India

Resolution For A Better India – VK Madhavan, Water Aid India Here is VK Madhavan, Chief Executive of WaterAid India, sharing his 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us! Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Posted by TheBetterIndia on Friday, December 28, 2018

Water is still a luxury for many families in various parts of the country, and V K Madhavan wants the nation to focus on this issue in 2019.

His resolution is for the nation, its citizens and the government to focus on forming policies and implementing proper actions that will make pipe water supply in every household a reality.

10. Paresh Parasnis, CEO, Piramal Foundation

Resolution For A Better India Here is Paresh Parasnis, CEO of Piramal Foundation, sharing his 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us! Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Piramal Foundation Posted by TheBetterIndia on Saturday, December 29, 2018

Paresh Parasnis believes that a country like India cannot grow without a community effort. The CEO of Piramal Foundation, Paresh points out that it is through the mobilisation of the youth that the country can truly prosper. These are to be changemakers who will be ready to serve the country selflessly.

Hence, his 2019 resolution is to create thousands of good men and women who, in the spirit of Seva Bhav (selfless service), will work in communities to bring about social change.

11. Vatsala Mamgain, Director, Resource Mobilisation, CRY (Child Rights and You)

Resolution For A Better India Here is Vatsala Mamgain – Director, Resource Mobilization, CRY sharing her 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us! Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India CRY – Child Rights and You Posted by TheBetterIndia on Sunday, December 30, 2018

Vatsala Mamgain from CRY encourages the country to look at a larger future where the potential of children is utilised to the fullest, producing a socially and intellectually sound population for a prosperous future.

India needs to become a country where all her children have the opportunity to realise their potential, she says.

12. Rahul Srivastav, Additional SP, Technical Service, UP Police

Resolution For A Better India Here is Rahul Srivastav, Additional SP/ Technical Services UP Police, sharing his 2019 resolution for a better India. Have you got one too? Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute in making India better as a video or a post: use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag us! Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together! Sign up here to be a part of the change- http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India Rahul Srivastav Posted by TheBetterIndia on Monday, December 31, 2018

Additional SP of UP Police, Rahul Srivastav points out the need for a people-police initiative for substantial change. For that, he urges the country to look back in time and recognise the best practices in the last year, and implement them in a new light.

According to him, social media and other such platforms can help in implementing better policing, if done in the correct sense. Greater transparency and a maximum amount of accountability are very crucial to further a collaborative effort of citizens and police towards change, he says.

Have you resolved to make a better India too?

Join us in this endeavour by sharing your 2019 resolution that will contribute to making India better, as a video or a post. Use #ResolutionForABetterIndia and tag The Better India.

Let us make the future of India brighter and better, together!

Sign up here to be a part of the change: http://bit.ly/Resolution_For_A_Better_India

(Edited by Shruti Singhal)

Like this story? Or have something to share?

Write to us: contact@thebetterindia.com.

Connect with us on Facebook and Twitter.
