Kerala serial murders: Police conduct second round of evidence collection, complainant to give statement

Jolly was arrested only in the case relating to the death of her husband in 2011 due to the presence of cyanide mentioned in his post-mortem report. (Photo: IANS)

In the latest development in the Kerala serial murders, the special investigation team (SIT) conducted a second round of evidence gathering at Ponnamttam house of murder accused Jolly Joseph.

The surprise raid was carried out late Monday night.

Like the first round of evidence collection in the Kerala serial killings, police also brought prime accused Jolly to the house where three deaths had taken place. Police sources told India Today TV, that the investigation process was carried out for over 3 hours.

Brother-in-law to give statement

On Tuesday, the investigation team is expected to record the statement of Rojo Thomas, the deceased's relative who had filed the original complaint which eventually led to the shocking revelation of the Kozhikode serial killings.

Rojo, the brother of Roy (Jolly's first husband) lives in the US. He came to Kerala yesterday as directed by the investigation team and will be recording his statement soon.

READ | Deaths, news of death fascinated Kerala serial killer Jolly: Police

On Monday, the investigation team had questioned Jolly's second husband Shaju and his father Zachariah for over eight hours.

Police satisfied with probe

Kerala Police chief Loknath Behra on Saturday expressed satisfaction over the ongoing probe into the case relating to the mysterious deaths of six members of a family near Kozhikode.

Eight years after the death of her husband Roy Thomas following consumption of cyanide-laced food, 47-year-old Jolly and two others were arrested on October 5 and investigation began into the deaths of five others in the family.

Two other accused--M S Mathew (44), a close friend of Jolly and Prajikumar(48) had allegedly supplied cyanide to Mathew, who handed it over to Jolly.

Jolly was arrested only in the case relating to the death of her husband in 2011 due to the presence of cyanide mentioned in his post-mortem report.

The SIT is probing the case after receiving a complaint from Roy's US-based brother, Rojo, over the six deaths between 2002-20.
