Number of jawans in Army from Gujarat not even close to martyrs from Haryana: JJP leader

Jannayak Janta Party leader Dushyant Chautala | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Haryana has more martyrs than the number of jawans in the Army from Gujarat. The BJP can't teach nationalism to Haryana: JJP leader Every 10th jawan at the border, be it China border or Pakistan border, is a jawan from Haryana, said Chautala

Chandigarh: Kicking up a row, Jannayak Janata Party leader Dushyant Chautala, on Tuesday, launched a blistering attack at the BJP saying the party cannot teach nationalism to Haryana as the maximum number of martyrs are from the state.

The JJP leader said that most of the jawans, who laid their lives for the country belong to Haryana, adding the state has more martyrs than the number of jawans in the Army from Gujarat.

“The BJP can't teach nationalism to Haryana. Among those who sacrificed lives for India, the maximum jawans are probably from Haryana. Shayad jitne jawan hamare border ki suraksha mein shaheed huye itne toh shayad Gujarat ke jawan aaj tak Army mein bharti bhi nahi huye honge (The number of jawans who joined Army from Gujarat is not even close to the number of our jawans martyred at the border while protecting our country),” he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Chautala further said that there is no village in Haryana which has no martyr. “We are proud of this land that made us strong for this country. Every 10th jawan at the border, be it China border or Pakistan border is a jawan from Haryana,” he added.

Dushyant Chautala, Jannayak Janta Party: There is no village in Haryana which has no martyr. We are proud of this land that made us strong for this country. Every 10th jawan at the border, be it China border or Pakistan border is a jawan from Haryana. #HaryanaAssemblyPolls https://t.co/a7fle3BUnu — ANI (@ANI) October 15, 2019

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and other BJP leaders have been raising issues like Balakot airstrikes, abrogation of Article 370, etc. during their campaign rallies in both Haryana and Maharashtra.

Addressing a rally in Haryana's Ballabgarh yesterday, PM Modi had launched a sharp attack at the Opposition, asking them to explain its “love" for Article 370 to the families of security personnel killed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Targeting Manohar Lal Khattar government in the state, the JJP chief said that Haryana is facing several issues such as unemployment, rise in criminal cases and crimes against women.

“As far as nationalism is concerned, the biggest issue is unemployment. Haryana has an unemployment rate of 28 per cent. We rank fourth in the country as far as crimes against women are concerned. The government has given an opportunity to criminals to come here and strengthen themselves,” he said.

Dushyant, who is a former Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) leader from Hisar, floated his party JJP in December 2018 after being expelled from the INLD.

Polling for the 90-member Haryana Assembly will be held on October 21 along with 288-member Maharashtra Assembly. The counting of votes is scheduled to commence on October 24.

While Congress, Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) and JJP are eyeing to dethrone the Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar led BJP government in the Haryana elections, the BJP is seeking a second successive term.
