Murshidabad triple murder case cracked; motive was ‘insurance premium money’: West Bengal Police

File image | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The West Bengal Police have cracked the Murshidabad triple murder case and arrested the main accused in the crime. The murder of three of a family at Jiaganj in Murshidabad district on October 8 had led to a political slugfest, after it was claimed that deceased Bandhu Prakash Pal was an RSS worker.

35-year-old Pal, a teacher, was found dead at his home along with his pregnant wife Beauty and 8-year-old son Angan. The three were brutally murdered in West Bengal when Durga Puja festivities were ongoing.

The police, which had earlier denied that Pal was an RSS supporter and the case had any political links, today said Utpal Behra, a mason by profession, was nabbed for his alleged involvement in the crime. Behra was arrested from Sagardighi's Sahapur area in Murshidabad district this morning, Superintendent of Police Mukesh Kumar said.

Revealing the motive behind the brutal murders, police said Pal was given money by Behra for two life insurance policies.

"Although Pal gave money receipt for the first policy, he did not give him the receipt for the second policy. For the last few weeks, Pal and Behra used to quarrel over this matter. Pal had even insulted him, following which Behra decided to kill him," police said.

Behra has confessed to killing Pal and his family, the police said.

Denying any link between Pal and the RSS, the West Bengal Police had earlier said that it appeared to be a case of 'personal enmity'.

“The murder of three members of a family of Kanaiganj, Jiaganj police station area in Murshidabad, is a sad incident. The investigation was started just after the incident and two persons have been detained and are being examined. It has so far been found that the deceased person was working as an agent of some insurance and chain company and was in a serious financial crisis,” the West Bengal Police had said in a statement.

“The CID has been asked to get associated with the investigation. Prima facie it seems to be a case of personal enmity and it has nothing to do with politics,” the police statement had added.

“During the investigation and while examining several local witnesses, family members, friends, no one claimed his association with RSS. Even during the search of the house of the victim, no such document could be found that identified the deceased with any political party. His family members vehemently opposed and criticised media for such false propaganda,” the police had stated further.

Meanwhile, a high-level BJP delegation comprising of Kailash Vijayvargiya, SS Ahluwalia and Mukul Roy will call on President Ram Nath Kovind today over Murshidabad triple murder case.
