Experts gather to discuss developing unified fire safety codes and preventive measures in line with UAE vision 2021

According to a report by analysts 6WResearch[1], it is estimated that the Middle East market for firefighting systems, fire detection and alarm systems, and emergency exit and lighting, will be worth $3 Billion by 2024, growing at a compound annual growth rate of nearly 8%.

Abu Dhabi: In line with a growing requirement for more stringent fire safety regulations, IQPC Middle East hosted its Fire Safety Series at the Park Rotana, Abu Dhabi in partnership with Knauf UAE and India, the leading manufacturer of Plaster.

Given the importance of fire safety, Knauf Middle East, Gypsumboard and Drywall Systems came together during the event to raise awareness of the latest approaches to fire protection and emergency response in line with the country’s UAE Vision 2021 and UAE Fire and Life Safety Code of Practice.

Knauf Middle East has been a corporate brand identity for expertise in complete system solutions of modular ceilings and interior systems, with high performance product brands and portfolios. Their health and safety (OHSAS 18001) and environmentally responsible and sustainable (ISO 14001 and 50001) certifications are a testament to their vision.

Amer Bin Ahmed, managing director at Knauf Middle East, said: “Due to increased construction and infrastructure activity in the UAE, it is critical that we constantly evolve to meet and exceed international safety standards.”

“The unified safety codes and preventive measures will tackle the challenges of development in the future, and ensure that life protection and property safety in buildings and construction remain to be the priority,” he concluded.

The event saw participation from influential and leading organizations including the Abu Dhabi Civil Defense, Emaar, Abu Dhabi Police, Nawah Energy Company, Bahrain Airport Company, Abu Dhabi Quality Conformity Council, Dubai Civil Defense, Dubai Airports and TECOM Group

Ayusha Tyagi, managing director at IQPC MENA comments: “Excellence in Fire Safety regulation and compliance is vital to ensure the safety and security of UAE residents. Regional governments are keen to deliver sustainable and safe housing, thereby bringing constant innovation in codes and quality benchmarks.”

“The Fire Safety Series enables organizations to understand these changes to codes and regulation, as well as benchmark with their international peers on how to enhance fire protection further.” she added.

Saleh Al Balushi, head of HSE at TECOM Group said: “We are pleased to participate in the Fire Safety Series, being a platform to exchange best practices in Health, Safety, Environment and Sustainability Management. Such events allow us to meet with the experts and decision makers and share knowledge, best practices and exchange expertise”.

He added, “HSE standards practices are at the heart of TECOM Group culture, and we believe every member of TECOM business communities; whether business partners or employees, play a vital role in adapting the best HSE standards and practices for the good and the sustainability of our business communities and the wider UAE business sectors.”

Victaulic and Thomas Bell-Wright International Consultants are participating at the event as Gold Sponsor and Testing & Certification Partner respectively. They showcased their thought leadership and solutions in the fire safety space.

For more information visit the website: https://www.iqpc.com/events-firesafetyabudhabi

-Ends-

About IQPC

IQPC is a global business to business event company that has embraced the digital age. It is the go-to source for online and offline events, information, education, networking, and promotion for executives across an extensive range of industries and professions. IQPC creates a blend of live & digital events that drives corporate innovation.

CONTACT

Salman Chachar

T : +971 55 193 4830

E : salman.chachar@fourcommunications.com

[1] https://www.6wresearch.com/industry-report/middle-east-fire-safety-systems-and-equipment-market-2018-2024-by-types-component-saudi-arabia-uae-qatar-turkey-iran-kuwait-oman

© Press Release 2019
