Modi government committed to 'zero tolerance' approach towards terrorism: Amit Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Tuesday said that the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government has a policy of "zero-tolerance" towards terrorism which he termed as the biggest hurdle on the way of development.

He also said that India has been a victim of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism since long while speaking at the National Security Guard (NSG) 35th Raising Day celebrations here.

"Terrorism is a curse for society and is the biggest hurdle in the way of development. Our country has suffered the plight of terrorism more than any other country in the world. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, we are committed towards a zero-tolerance policy on terrorism. Today, I am assured of our security because of NSG," Shah said.

"Counter-terrorism operations, counter hijack operations, providing proximate security, bomb disposable squad, providing protective cover in national and international events and other functions. I am quite confident that our country is safe from any terrorist attack with NSG to protect us," said Shah.

He said that abrogation of Article 370 would prove to be a milestone in eradicating terrorism.

"In today's era when there is no traditional war, India is affected with terrorism sponsored by Pakistan since years. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has taken a big step by Abrogation article 370 from Kashmir to make nation terrorism free and to save Kashmir. I believe, the step will help to maintain peace in the state," said Shah.

The Union Home Minister also paid homage to martyrs on the occasion of the 35th Raising day of the NSG in Gurugram.

Home Minister @AmitShah pays homage to Martyrs on the occasion of the 35th Raising day of National Security Guard,in Gurugram pic.twitter.com/Raw5UR1Acs — All India Radio News (@airnewsalerts) October 15, 2019

Black Cat commandos of the NSG also demonstrated their skills in neutralising terror attacks during the function.

Raised with the basic philosophy of swift and speedy strike, and immediate withdrawal from the theatre of action, the NSG is mandated to handle acts of terrorism in any part India. The commando force is modelled on the pattern of the United Kingdom's SAS and GSG-9 of Germany. The NSG has two parts - Special Action Group (SAG) comprising Army personnel and the Special Ranger Groups (SRG) which has personnel from the Central Armed Police Forces / State Police Forces.

(With inputs from agencies and Zee Media newsroom)
