Insurgent Outfits Have Lost Their Popular Support In The North-East As People Look Forward

At least two banned insurgent outfits in Tripura and Manipur have jointly called for a dawn to dusk shutdown today on October 15. They are claiming that both Tripura and Manipur were merged with India in 1949 “under duress”.

India’s northeastern regions which comprises of seven states, popularly referred to as the seven sisters, have long been witness to armed separatist factions as well as political groups that call for either regional autonomy, separate statehood or complete independence but with a concerted effort by successive Union and State governments, India has largely been successful in curbing such demands while also merging the people from the Northeast in the mainstream Indian life, thereby containing the fears of divisiveness.

BCCL

The militancy problem in the North-east is not a new one. Just as the British withdrew from the Indian subcontinent in August 1947, separatist movements in the form of violent clashes began to erupt in the region on a wide scale. These included separatist insurgencies, ethnic riots and mass agitations but were met with an iron-fist sort of response from the state.

As it were, the militant groups operating in the region saw an opportunity to establish their own regimes in the respective regions after the British Raj came to an end. India, on the other hand, had already begun incorporating these regions under its boundaries. So the clash between the militant groups and the state became inevitable. At the same time, the people living in these regions had different cultural, linguistic and social backgrounds.

The location of the North-east is equally vital in the turmoil that took the shape of insurgent militant groups. The entire North-east is landlocked and is linked to mainstream India by a 22-km corridor through North Bengal town of Siliguri. This link road is often referred to as the chicken neck corridor and is the only direct ground-link between mainstream India and the North-east.

BCCL

This region is then surrounded by Bhutan, Myanmar, Bangladesh and China, because of which external forces are also at play and have often fuelled anti-India militant groups through arms supply. Ever since the 1950s, the entire region of the North-east began to see sustained rebellions against India by militant groups but many of these militant groups were also fighting among themselves to stake their individual claims over the regions they were operating in.

During the Indo-China war in 1962, militant groups were backed by the Chinese troops and were supplied with armaments on a massive scale to disturb the movements of the Indian army and to cause chaos, which the Chinese used to turn the events in their favour.

Five decades on and in the 2014 general elections, the voter turnout was a massive 80 per cent from the North-east, which exceeded the turnout in many other parts of India. This showed that the Indian state, with its concerted efforts over decades, was able to give faith to the people of the North-east and foster a sense of belongingness towards the country.

BCCL

A series of mechanisms were used by the Union government, and crushing the militant groups was their utmost priority. This was achieved through swift action by the Indian armed forces, along with tactics that either led the militants to fight each other or forced them to surrender.

Lt. Gen Zameer Uddin Shah (retd), who operated in the region, wrote in his memoir that several militant groups were absorbed by the army themselves on the local level and it helped a great deal in curbing militancy as the militants saw an opportunity to turn the course of their lives, be employed by the army and therefore many gave up arms in the process.

Along with these, rights of North-eastern people were greatly enhanced through several legislations of their respective state assemblies. No doubt, there were numerous reports of violations of human rights and atrocities by the Indian army in the region, but in due course of time action was taken and an assurance was given to the people of the North-east that their rights would be respected in the Indian union.

BCCL

Along with these, scholarships and employment were offered to the people from the region so that they could freely mingle with the rest of the Indian population. Thousands of students from the region are today beneficiaries of scholarships at premiere educational institutions in the country.

However, bias and indifference showed to them often resulted in widespread protests but in due course of time, things began to improve and although we are nowhere near to perfection, we have surely come a long way on this front.

Transportation and health care facilities in the region are also seeing rapid growth in recent years as more and more resources are being directed towards the well-being of the people from the region.

BCCL

But despite everything, insurgent groups surface every now and then in small numbers and rekindle the battles that are long done and dusted. At the heart of most such calls for shutdowns and protests are individual interests. The militant groups have no, or very little support from the people in the regions they operate and therefore most of their actions are born out of desperation to retain relevance.

India is also changing its tactics in dealing with militant elements in the recent years. Most memorably, On 9 June 2015, India had conducted a cross-border operation against insurgents. The operation took place in Myanmar and it was in response to ambush of Indian Army convoy of 6 Dogra Regiment in Chandel district of Manipur.
