Congress leaders meet CEC, lodge protest against IT raids

We have demanded these agencies should seek permission from ECI before undertaking any such raids during election season: Kapil Sibal | File photo from PTI

Senior leaders of the Congress called upon the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) to lodge an appeal against income tax raids on its accounts department employees.

"This is brazen misuse of Central Board of Direct Taxes [CBDT] against us, our accounts department lay frozen for three days during election time," former Union minister Anand Sharma said.

The Congress delegation demanded that Election Commission of India (ECI) should restrain central agencies from conducting raids during election season.

Addressing media, senior Congress leader Kapil Sibal said, "Such times have come that during election season in Maharashtra and Haryana, CBDT people raided flats of our account department employees. It went on from Friday evening till Sunday evening without any warrant or notice, from Kanpur, Kerala to Delhi."

Kapil Sibal said, "We all know they misuse CBI [Central Bureau of Investigation], ED [Enforcement Directorate] and now CBDT is also being misused, if this is not an attack on democracy then what else should be said?"

"We have demanded these agencies should seek permission from ECI before undertaking any such raids during election season," Kapil Sibal added.

Former Union minister Anand Sharma said, "They have a constitutional mandate to ensure that the elections are held in a free and fair manner. They cannot be targeting the major opposition party like this, using and abusing the official agencies."

"For three days the Congress office accounts department was totally paralysed with whatever meagre funds at its disposal. The BJP [Bharatiya Janata Party] is richest party in the world and has massive funds at its disposal, this is documented globally. The Congress is required to transfer funds to its candidates in Maharashtra and Haryana in their designated accounts by cheque, that's what election law requires and we have been prevented from doing that," Anand Sharma said.

Anand Sharma said that the party has requested the EC to intervene, "We have seen it happening in the last elections and it is happening now, India can not become a state in which democracy is under seize."

Congress Party has also lodged a complaint about Kaithal constituency in Haryana.

It's leaders alleged that thugs have been let loose on parole and they are terrorising SC\ST voters. "The EC should take cognisance and seek report from administration and increase security forces there," the leaders demanded.
