Sukhbir accuses Capt of divide & rule policy

Ludhiana: Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) President Sukhbir Singh Badal, who was in Dakha on Monday to campaign for SAD candidate Manpreet Singh Ayali, launched a series of attack against Congress party.Addressing a gathering Badal said, “Chief minister Capt Amarinder Singh was bent upon dividing the Sikh community on the pious occasion of 550th Parkash Parb of Sri Guru Nanak Dev ji in keeping with the divide and rule policy of Congress.Sikh community would not let the nefarious designs of the Congress to divide the community succeed by holding a separate function against the advisory of Sri Akal Takth. Panth would repose faith in the SGPC and the programmes being organised by the democratically elected religious body.”Badal also said that Congress candidate Sandeep Sandhu was an outsider and did not even know the names of ten villages of the constituency. During his interaction with mediapersons Badal also lashed out against cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu against whom a Congress worker levelled charges of manhandling him and tossing his turban. Referring to the incident Badal said, “For Congress party, which sent tanks inside Golden Temple, its minuscule task for its ministers to toss turban of an amritdhari sikh”Addressing the gathering in his rally, Badal asked the villagers whether Captain Amarinder had organised a religious function or even ‘kirtan darbar’ during the last two and a half years. He also said the CM had not deemed it fit to pay obeisance at Sri Darbar Sahab after taking over as chief minister. He said even now nothing was being done to improve the infrastructure in the holy city of Sultanpur Lodhi. He also recounted how the Congress party had thwarted all efforts for a joint celebration and even disregarded the “adesh” of the Sri Akal Takth Jathedar in this regard. “The SGPC even formed a Coordination Committee for this purpose and made numerous pleas to the CM all of which fell on deaf ears,” he added.Asking the chief minister to concentrate on governance instead of interfering in religious matters, Badal said Punjab was witnessing home delivery of drugs under Congress rule. He said this had happened because Congress ministers and legislators were providing shelter to the drug mafia. He also said that each and every section of society was discriminated against during Congress rule with farmer loans not being waived, youth not being given the promised jobs and social welfare schemes being discontinued.
