Relief for sector: Telcos may get 2-year holiday on spectrum payments

MUMBAI: The telecom department is working on a plan to provide a two-year holiday on payment of spectrum dues totalling over Rs 40,000 crore by the three private telcos, a senior official said. If implemented, this will be the second major step taken by the government in two years to ease the burden of the sector that has debt of over Rs 7 lakh crore, amid pressure on revenue and profitability due to price competition.“The request from one of the telcos for a two-year (payment) moratorium is being examined. However, the benefit cannot be given to only one operator. So all telcos will be offered the holiday,” said the official. Any decision will be subject to approval by the FM.Analysts estimate that, which had sought the two-year payment holiday, is yet to pay Rs 24,400 crore as spectrum dues, split over FY20 and FY21.has to pay Rs 9,400 crore while Reliance Jio Infocomm has to pay Rs 7,000 crore over the same period. Vodafone Idea’s June quarter revenue was Rs 11,269.9 crore, while Bharti Airtel’s India mobile revenue was Rs 10,866.7 crore. Jio’s operating revenue was Rs 11,679 crore in the quarter.Loss-making Bharti Airtel and Vodafone Idea have been urging the government to provide financial relief, including some way of increasing tariffs, apart from the lowering of spectrum prices, licence fees and spectrum usage charges along with the release of Rs 36,000 crore input tax credit.Jio, the only profitable telco in India, joined its peers in seeking relief for the sector at the India Mobile Congress on Tuesday.“I absolutely believe that the sector needs some reform because I think the sector is taxed anywhere between 30% to 32%, which is very high,” said Mathew Oommen, president (networks), at Jio. “GST (goods and services tax) is at 18%, AGR (adjusted gross revenue) is 8%, 5% is USO (Universal Service Obligation) Fund, which is Rs 50,000 crore. Should we not defer any more USO taxation, till capital-efficient use of that Rs 50,000 crore is done?” He added that 5G spectrum needed to be priced correctly. Vodafone Idea has been worst hit by the price battle, leading to quarterly losses of around Rs 5,000 crore.The Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) is said to be closely involved in assessing the state of the telecom industry and is holding consultations on ways of restoring its viability, ET reported on October 14.On Monday, telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had raised the possibility of relief for the sector, referring to plans that included reforms on spectrum pricing. The government has made it clear previously that it can’t intervene in tariffs, which was the telecom regulator’s domain.Bharti Airtel India CEO Gopal Vittal welcomed the minister’s announcement.“We welcome the telecom minister’s statement that the government is working on spectrum pricing reforms,” he said. “We have always maintained that price of 5G spectrum at Rs 50,000 crore for 100 MHz of spectrum is very exorbitant.” The telecom regulator has recommended Rs 492 crore per MHz as starting price for 5G airwaves, which the companies deem exorbitant.The government had increased the tenure of installments to be paid for spectrum bought in auctions to 16 years from 10 years in 2017. It had also lowered the rate of interest on delayed payment penalties.Prasad has written to the finance minister, seeking relief measures, pointing out that AGR had shrunk to Rs 1.39 lakh crore in FY19 from Rs 1.85 lakh crore in FY17, reflecting the sector’s poor health.The price war has shrunk the industry into three non-state players from eight, with some exiting the country, some merging and two — Aircel and Reliance Communications — going out of business. Experts said India’s telecom sector can ill-afford a third operator exiting the market or going bankrupt as this will hurt all stakeholders, including consumers, equipment vendors and tower companies, besides leading to more job losses.
