Martyr tag, Rs 50 lakh compensation and government job: Kin of trucker killed by terrorists in J&K demand

Representational Image | Source: Flickr

Key Highlights Sharif Khan was shot dead while he was loading boxes of apples on the truck The terrorists also burned the truck and thrashed the orchard owner In a letter to Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot and PM Narendra Modi, the family of the deceased demanded martyr tag, government job and Rs 50 lakh compensation

New Delhi: Family of Sharif khan, the apple truck driver killed in South Kashmir’s Shopian by terrorists, has refused to accept his body until he is declared a martyr. In a letter to Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot and PM Narendra Modi, the family of the deceased has also demanded a job and Rs 50 lakh compensation.

The body was being brought from Delhi airport but his family and community members blocked the road and stopped the ambulance saying that they will not accept the body till the demand is met.

Sharif Khan was shot dead while he was loading boxes of apples on the truck. The terrorists also burned the truck and thrashed the orchard owner as a warning to the apple growers not to do business outside the state. Khan is the first non-local to be killed in Kashmir after the Centre abrogated Article 370, ending Jammu and Kashmir’s special status.

Most of the truckers engaged in this business are non-locals and after hearing the news many of them have left Kashmir.

According to media reports, two terrorists -- of whom one was Pakistani --attacked the truck driver near Pulwama-Shopian Road on Monday.

Khan was a native of Mewar in Rajasthan.

The uncle of Sharif Khan said that the Centre must avenge the death of his nephew and ensure that common people are not murdered by terrorists. He further asked that the government should have provided security to truck drivers if they were aware that the situation in the Valley was not safe.

As per the sources, the terrorists who carried out the attack were from Jaish-e-Mohammed and Hizbul Mujahideen.

This attack comes after the J&K administration restored post-paid services in the region after unprecedented clampdown post-abrogation of Article 370 by the Narendra Modi-led BJP government.

The government had recently lifted travel advisory issued on August 2 which had asked tourists and Amarnath pilgrims to leave Kashmir due to ‘prevailing security concerns’.

Issuing a fresh notification, the J&K administration said that “tourists desirous of undertaking visits to the state shall be provided with all necessary assistance and logistical support”.

The Centre also detained prominent leaders like Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah, Mehbooba Mufti and Sajad Lone from the Valley and put them under house arrest before the abrogation of Article 370.

The Centre had also slapped the stringent Public Safety Act (PSA) against the National Conference (NC) leader and former CM Farooq Abdullah. Under the PSA act, any person can be detained without trial for two years.
