Sharad Malhotra and Ripci Bhatia to be flying to Kolkata to ring in their first Karva Chauth together

Sharad Malhotra, wife Ripci ring in their first Karva Chauth | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Sharad Malhotra and Ripci Bhatia will ring in their first Karva Chauth together The two will be flying to Kolkata for the festivities Read for more details on their plans

Sharad Malhotra and Ripci Bhatia are all set to ring in their first Karva Chauth together. The two tied the knot with each other in April this year and recently went on their honeymoon. The two even indulge in some PDA on social media every now and then. Both, Ripci and Sharad, are quiet excited for their first Karva Chauth. Though Ripci will be observing a fast for Sharad, the actor will not be able to do the same since he will be busy shooting for Muskaan.

Sharad told a daily, "Diwali is right around the cornerWe are flying to Kolkata to [meet] our parents and celebrate it with pomp and joy, and it’s going to be a one big family affair. Staying without a single sip of water throughout the day is extremely challenging and Ripci doing it for me makes me feel so loveable. The thought of feeding her the first morsel to break her fast is special." Ripci added, " I find it very romantic! It’ like two-three day of celebration, applying mehendi (henna), dressing up and the ceremony itself looks so fun. It’s in a way telling your husband that you mean the world to me and of course, you are doing this festival for the longevity of your husband but there is more to it. My mom and mother-in-law will be guiding me throughout and prepare sargi (morning meal for the one who’s fasting) for me. I’m looking forward to it."

When asked if the two are planning to have babies anytime soon, Ripci said, "As of now, we aren’t thinking about it. But may be in a year a two... We want to make sure that we are ready as parents, and have time to raise the child on our own without depending on a nanny."

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
