Man shot dead, police suspect role of wife’s boyfriend

Suspect had threatened to kill victim if he did not divorce his wife, claims family

A 28-year-old autorickshaw driver was shot dead by two bike-borne men in Shahdara’s Krishna Nagar on Tuesday night, the police said on Wednesday. They have registered a case and begun a probe, but no arrest has been made so far.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Shahdara) Meghna Yadav said that the victim has been identified as Rohit Sachdeva, a resident of Old Geeta Colony.

Sachdeva was on his way home around 10 p.m. after dropping passengers at Krishna Nagar, when he was shot by the two accused. In the CCTV footage of the incident, the men can be seen waiting for the victim and as he crosses the street, the pillion rider gets off and shoots him.

A passer-by called the police who reached the spot and rushed Sachdeva to a nearby hospital where he was declared brought dead.

The victim’s brother, Mohit, who is also an autorickshaw driver, said that the family was informed by the police about the incident. Mohit was in Daryaganj when he received a call from his sister who told him that Sachdeva had met with an accident. “It was when we reached the hospital that we were told that he had been shot,” the brother said.

The family said that they suspect the role of the boyfriend of the deceased’s wife. The boyfriend resides in Sagarpur and had been allegedly threatening the victim and asking him to leave his wife.

“My brother got married in 2013. About a year and a half ago, my sister-in-law met a man on the social media and got into a relationship with him. My brother had caught the two together red-handed in the house for the first time about a year and a half ago,” Mohit said.

Mohit said that his brother had a fight with the man and had asked him to back off. He had also asked his wife to stay away from the man.

In 2017, a molestation case was registered at Geeta Colony police station against the boyfriend, based on the complaint of the deceased’s wife, after which he was arrested. The family, however, said that after his release, the two were seen together a few more times in the house in Sachdeva’s absence. Fights ensued between Sachdeva and his wife a number of times and even the police had to be called.

“In fact, around Diwali, the two fought over the same issue and she [the wife] left the house. Nearly a month later, she returned home on their four-year-old son’s birthday. She was living with the child near Meerut,” Mohit said.

Sachdeva, his wife and their son had shifted from their individual houses to the family residence only about two months ago.

The family has claimed that the man had threatened Sachdeva a few days ago over the phone saying that he would kill him if he did not divorce his wife.

Ms. Yadav said that the boyfriend in the case is the prime suspect so far and teams are looking for him while the deceased’s wife is being questioned.

“A case under Section 302 [punishment for murder] of the Indian Penal Code and under the Arms Act has been registered. The suspect was not found at his Delhi residence,” she also said.
