Manish Tewari: Phase cyclic, Congress will emerge stronger

Lok Sabha MP from Anandpur Sahib in Punjab,

, is a dyed-in-the-wool

leader. Former president of NSUI and Indian Youth Congress, he was information and broadcasting minister in the Manmohan Singh-led UPA government. In an interview to TOI, the Congress national spokesperson said the party is passing through a cyclic phase and expressed confidence that it would eventually emerge stronger.

Q: How important will economy and jobs be in Maharashtra and

two assembly elections?

Q: How will the economic situation unfold in the future?

Q: Will it impact the results of the Maharashtra and Haryana assembly elections?

Q: Coming to Jammu & Kashmir, you had spoken against nullification of Articles 370 and 35A of the Constitution in the Lok Sabha on August 6. What do you have to say about the developments that have taken place since then?

Q: But this clampdown and the restrictions which you talk about was confined to just six of the 200-odd police station areas and that too on mobile services, which have now been restored. Landline phones are functioning. So, where is the clampdown?

Q: What is the state of the Congress party?

Q: Do you think making

Congress president and then his quitting the post were wrong decisions?

Q: But Rahul in his resignation letter also complained that at times he stood alone in his fight against Prime Minister

, RSS and others.

Q: Rahul Gandhi remains a reluctant politician. Do you believe so?

Q: Does his act of going away from the country to Bangkok or Cambodia, wherever it is, damage Congress?

Q: But when the Congress’s rivals mock him, doesn't the party rank and file get demoralised?

Q: BJP leaders including its president Amit Shah accuse Congress of being a dynasty party. What do you have to say?

Q: But my point is dynasty in Congress.

Q: The dynasties you are talking about are at the lower level. What about the top level -- the party president’s post?

Q: Why hasn’t Congress analysed its defeat in the 2019 Lok Sabha election as yet?

Q: Salman Khurshid also said Congress hasn't really got together to analyse why it got defeated. Our biggest problem is our leader has walked away, he said.

Q: Where does Congress stand in the October 21 Maharashtra and Haryana assembly elections?

Q: Senior Maharashtra Congress leader Sanjay Nirupam has withdrawn from the election, casting aspersions on the leadership. Besides, there is him versus Milind Deora. How much harm will these developments do to Congress’s prospects in the forthcoming assembly election.

Q: In Haryana, state Congress president Ashok Tanwar rebelled against the leadership and resigned from the party. Has it not harmed Congress’s image?

Q: Several senior leaders have quit, not just in these two poll-bound states but others as well. Has this weakened the Congress?

A: The Indian economy is in a mess. Today the fundamentals of the Indian economy are under serious stress. If you look at each of the fundamentals - savings, borrowing, investment and consumption - savings to GDP ratio is at a historic low. Investments are non-existent, whether by domestic corporates or foreign corporates. In the first six months of the current financial year, there has been an 88 per cent reduction in offtake. For the same period last year, it was Rs 7.35 lakh crore off-take from the credit market. That has come down to Rs 90,000 crore. Consumption is not taking place which is evidenced by the manner in which the automobile sector has been haemorrhaging. There is a huge real estate bubble. There is exposure of $68 billion which the banks have to the real estate sector, which is completely in shambles. And obviously it has had a spin-off effect in terms of layoffs. Therefore, economic pain is real. Small establishments have been closing down across the country.A: My sense is that this economic crisis is going to deepen and worsen. We are not even aware of the full extent of the structural problems in the Indian economy. If you look at Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank or at IL&FS (Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services), there are examples where NBFCs, scheduled banks and commercial banks are in huge difficulty. The independence of the regulator - the central bank - stands severely undermined. There is no justification for the transfer of Rs 1.76 lakh crore reserve of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to the central government.A: In my estimation, when people’s pockets start hurting, it does impact electoral choices.A: A complete clampdown on communication which is totally unprecedented and the lockdown of all opposition leaders and other social influencers -- that’s really been the story of the last two months. If the government felt that it had taken a decision which was in the interest of the people of J&K then why do you require such unprecedented and draconian security measures to really be able to bolster your decision? You need to understand that there is a whole section of people in J&K who do not believe in the democratic systems as their constitute. They prefer to remain outside the democratic system. All that Article 370 has achieved at the end of the day is that those people who were carrying the flag of India in J&K, who were part of the mainstream and who despite the depredations of Pakistani deep state and ISI continued to participate in the electoral processes, continued to uphold the unity and integrity of India, you have just completely annihilated them with one stroke.A: On the one hand there is the spiel that the BJP-led NDA government would want people to believe and on the other hand there is the reality in J&K. I have over the past two months not read a proper ground report done by an Indian journalist emanating from J&K.A: Well, Congress in the 2019 Lok Sabha election got 12 crore votes. It’s another matter that in the first-past-the-post system we got 52 seats. But more often than not every party goes through this cyclic phase. But my own estimation is that we will come out stronger. You will see a robust rebound and Congress will continue to function as an effective and articulate opposition.A: First and foremost, Rahul Gandhi was elected president of Indian National Congress unanimously by an electoral college which consists of 10,000 PCC members spread across the length and breadth of our great land. Therefore, it is not as if he was anointed as the Congress president. In May 2019, he chose to resign. In my estimation, he did the honourable thing. In Indian democracy, there is no other example of someone taking responsibility for defeat and stepping down. I think he should actually be applauded for the conviction of his courage rather than being vilified.A: Everyone is entitled to his/her point of view and and as Congress president you can’t grudge him that. He penned down his thoughts. Poossibly others had not measured up to his expectations in terms of what he expected them to deliver. The fact remains he did step down.A: Look, I am not going to get into individuals. He has been elected to the Lok Sabha for the fourth time, and, therefore, it his his right to take decisions which he thinks are in his best interests.A: He is not the president of Indian National Congress. As an MP or a party functionary who is not at the apex of the party, if he decides to take a sabbatical to introspect it should not become an instrument to demonise anybody.A: That is the opinion of Rahul Gandhi baiters -- both in the media as well as the trolls created in the social media space. Every person has his or her own way of leading his or her own life. Therefore, I think this unnecessary attention which is given to microscopically and minutely examining every facet of somebody's life, I do not think democracy should function this way. Democracy is about issues and challenges that confront the country. It’s not about individual preferences or choices of any individual who is in the public space.A: Well, I am a little disappointed with the Indian media because all that they seem to have an obsession with is what Congress or a section of its leadership is or is not doing. Unfortunately, the primary role of the media, which is to have a constructively adversarial relationship with the government of the day, has been willingly and completely abdicated. It would be trite to say that what should have been a watchdog has become a lapdog. At times I am amazed at the pusillanimity and prostration which the Indian media has subjected itself to. I do not find any section of the media, whether print or electronic, actually holding the omissions of this government to account.A: We have gone over these questions ad nauseum over the last 20 years and they have been answered in great length and great detail. What about [Union minister] Anurag Thakur (former Himachal Pradesh chief minister PK Dhumal’s son) and [BJP MP] Dushyant [Singh] (former Rajasthan CM Vasundhara Raje’s son)? Are they not dynasty? Dynasty actually means chief ministers' sons stepping into the political shoes of their parents. I can count at least 10 dozen BJP leaders whose sons have taken over the mantle.A: The way BJP is headed, that day is also not very far. You will also see that happening.A: An analysis has taken place. Various Pradesh Congress committees (PCCs) have had extensive sessions with regard to what possibly went wrong in their respective states. In so far as a larger national introspection is concerned, it does not have to be done only in the formal sense of the term that you appoint a committee that goes aroung talking to people and then prepares some documents. Introspection is done in many ways and at different forums. There have been serious, structured and focused discussions on what essentially went wrong.A: I don’t want to comment on individuals.A: Congress governed Maharashtra in coalition with NCP for 15 years. We were in government in Haryana for 10 years. Congress is fighting a spirited battle in both these states. Ultimately, it is the people who will take a final call.A: Sanjay Nirupam was possibly upset about one candidate of his not being considered for the ticket. Let me tell you, as someone who has now fought three elections, there is a discourse at the ether and there is discourse on the ground. Assembly and Parliament elections are actually fought on bread and butter issues. Therefore, you have this surreal discourse which floats in the ether which people believe is impacting electoral choices. But in my humble estimation, there are hard bread and butter issues which ultimately tilt elections one way or the other. Under those circumstances, you may have had a little storm in a teacup for half a day. But would that really impact elections? I don’t think so.A: In my opinion, my answer is no. As I explained to you, these are 90 different fights (Haryana has 90 assembly constituencies) and the issues in every assembly constituency are different.A: Several people had quit Congress in 1977 and a lot of people returned in 1980, again a lot of people quit in 1999 to return in 2004 and later. Therefore, there are some people who do not have the conviction of courage to be in it for the long haul. They are misfits wherever they go.
