Labourer From Chhattisgarh Killed By Terrorists In Kashmir's Pulwama

J&K Police are looking for the terrorists who killed a labourer from Chhattisgarh

A labourer from Chhattisgarh was killed by terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama today, less than three days after a truck driver was shot dead in Shopian. Sources said the terrorists have been targeting labourers, who have come to Jammu and Kashmir from outside the state, to create fear among them and disrupt trade.

Sethi Kumar Sagar, a resident of Besoli in of Chhattisgarh, worked at a brick kiln, news agency Press Trust of India reported. He was walking with another civilian when two terrorists shot him dead, Director General of Police Dilbagh Singh said. "We have formed teams and have fanned out in the area to catch the killers," he said.

Eyewitnesses said there were two terrorists.

"I would like to assure the farmers in Kashmir that all possible security will be provided. They will be allowed to reap the harvest. I would assure security to all farmers in Kashmir. It will be provided by the state. It is our responsibility," General Officer Commanding of 15 Corps Lieutenant General KJS Dhillon said, news agency ANI reported.

Monday's killing of the man from Rajasthan who was driving a truck from an orchard was carried out by terrorists in desperation as transportation of fruit has picked up in Kashmir valley, the police said.

Post-paid mobile communication that was blocked since August 5, when the centre announced its two big decisions - the scrapping of special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution and the state's bifurcation into two union territories - was restored.

One of the two terrorists involved on Monday's incident is a Pakistani national, the police said.

Last week, seven people were injured in Kashmir's Srinagar after a grenade attack by terrorists in a market area. The attack had come days after terrorists had thrown a grenade in south Kashmir's Anantnag, injuring 14.

With inputs from PTI and ANI
