Govt mulls 2-year holiday for spectrum dues payment for telcos

Representative image

Key Highlights The proposal if implemented will ease the burden of the debt-laden sector Vodafone Idea, which had sought the two-year payment holiday, is yet to pay spectrum dues of Rs 24,400 crore split over FY20 and FY21 Bharti Airtel has spectrum dues over Rs 9,400 crore while Reliance Jio Infocomm has to pay Rs 7,000 crore

New Delhi: The telecom department is reportedly working on a plan to provide a two-year holiday on payment of spectrum dues amounting to over Rs 40,000 crore by the three private telcos.

Worth mentioning here is that the telecom sector has debt to the tune of Rs 7 lakh crore and they are facing difficulties to repay that debt amid fierce competition in the sector that has squeezed their revenue and profitability. The proposal if implemented will ease the burden of the debt-laden sector.

“The request from one of the telcos for a two-year (payment) moratorium is being examined. However, the benefit cannot be given to only one operator. So all telcos will be offered the holiday,” a leading business daily quoted a senior government official as saying. Any decision will be subject to approval by the FM, the daily mentioned.

According to analysts, Vodafone Idea, which had sought the two-year payment holiday, is yet to pay spectrum dues of Rs 24,400 crore split over FY20 and FY21.

Meanwhile, Bharti Airtel has spectrum dues over Rs 9,400 crore while Reliance Jio Infocomm has to pay Rs 7,000 crore over the same period. Vodafone Idea’s June quarter revenue was Rs 11,269.9 crore, while Bharti Airtel’s India mobile revenue was Rs 10,866.7 crore. Jio’s operating revenue was Rs 11,679 crore in the quarter.

According to the publication, Bharti Airtel and Vodafone Idea have been urging the government to provide financial relief, including some way of increasing tariffs, apart from the lowering of spectrum prices, licence fees and spectrum usage charges along with the release of Rs 36,000 crore input tax credit. Jio, the only profitable telco in India, joined peers in seeking relief for the sector at the India Mobile Congress on Tuesday.

“I absolutely believe that the sector needs some reform because I think the sector is taxed anywhere between 30% to 32%, which is very high,” Mathew Oommen, president (networks), at Jio told the business daily. “GST (goods and services tax) is at 18%, AGR (adjusted gross revenue) is 8%, 5% is USO (Universal Service Obligation) Fund, which is Rs 50,000 crore. Should we not defer any more USO taxation, till capital-efficient use of that Rs 50,000 crore is done?”

He added that 5G spectrum needed to be priced correctly.

Vodafone Idea has been the worst hit by the price battle, leading to quarterly losses of around Rs 5,000 crore.

The Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) is reportedly assessing the state of the telecom industry and is holding consultations on ways of restoring its viability, the business daily reported on October 14.

Worth mentioning here is that on Monday, telecom minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had raised the possibility of relief for the sector, referring to plans that included reforms on spectrum pricing. The government has made it clear previously that it can’t intervene in tariffs, which was the telecom regulator’s domain.

Bharti Airtel India CEO Gopal Vittal welcomed the minister’s announcement.


