Ayodhya conflict can be resolved only by following Ram’s path of sacrifice

Ashish Tripathi is a journalist with The Times of India in Lucknow. He is a firm believer in Gandhi's talisman "Whenever you are in doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you, apply the following test. Recall the face of the poorest and the weakest man/woman whom you may have seen, and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use to him/her. Will he/she gain anything by it? Will it restore him/her to a control over his/her own life and destiny? In other words, will it lead to swaraj for the hungry and spiritually starving millions? Then you will find your doubts and your self melt away." LESS ... MORE

Lord Ram willingly gave up his right to Ayodhya’s throne for the sake of peace and brotherhood in the family and the kingdom. Let’s see who – Hindus or Muslims – will or is willing to follow the path shown by the Lord to resolve the vexed Ramjanambhoomi-Babri mosque title suit dispute.

Though the hearing of the case in the Supreme Court is in final stage, last ditch efforts are being made for an out-of-court-settlement. The apex court would do justice in the land dispute case but, I believe that the centuries old conflict between the two communities can be permanently resolved only by walking on Ram’s footsteps.

Hindutava votaries would argue that the two situations cannot be compared because Lord Ram’s sacrifice was to honour the vow given by his father to his stepmother, while the Ramjanambhoomi-Babri mosque dispute is about faith of millions of Hindus who want to reconstruct the temple – said to be destroyed by an invader – on the piece of land believed to be the birth place of Ram.

The answer – Ram had the option of ignoring the vow and fight for his right but he chose to embrace exile to avoid any possibility of a conflict in the family and for the larger good of the people. Similarly, we have to honour the pledge taken in the name of the Constitution of not indulging in any activity that fans communal passions and poses threat to national integration. Now, the choice is between violating the ‘vow’ given to the Constitution or follow Ram’s example of sacrifice for larger good.

Now let’s examine the notion of faith? Is it a belief dictated by a group of individuals or organizations/political parties who claim to be custodian of Hinduism or the life of the Lord himself who through his actions taught us to be righteous despite obstacles, sufferings, injustice and hardships?

The faith is genuine only when it is reflected in the actions of its votary. The strength of faith lies in unwavering commitment and unrelenting endeavour to adhere to the values represented by Ram and not in tit-for-tat that makes us do the same evil which we claim to be fighting against.

Bharat displayed true faith by following his elder brother Ram’s footsteps. He had the option to usurp the kingdom in his absence but preferred to rule in the name of the Lord for 14 years and gave the reins to the elder brother on his return.

Another argument Hindutavadis may put forward to justify ‘bloodshed’ is that Ram fought and killed Ravana, who had abducted Sita, for honour and prestige. Similarly, building a temple is a matter of prestige and honour for Hindus.

The answer to them is that Sita Mata cannot be compared to a piece of land because she was capable of defending herself. Ram’s victory over Ravana is about triumph of good over evil. He fought to uphold human values and protect humanity. In fact, if we compare, at stake today is the prestige and honour of Constitution which represents human values and humanity. It has to be defended from being violated by those who justify bloodshed that the dispute has caused in the country since 1989.

We must also remember that Ram gave back Lankans their land after the war, but here we have seen that the dispute was created, nurtured, blow up and politicized in a planned manner to divide people with an aim to grab power. Things can be corrected even now by following Ram’s path. Hindu parties, in case they win the court battle, must give back the land to Muslims.

Hindutava champions also argue that their effort is aimed to undo the historical injustice done to Hindus by Muslim invaders who constructed the mosque after demolishing the temple on birth place of Lord Ram. Though the charge is yet to be proved beyond doubt, but even if we presume that it happened, the question is will tit-for-tat approach help in achieving the purpose? What if victims of untouchability or women subjugated for years start demanding similar tit-for-tat justice? We can correct historical injustices by not preventing them to have again.

Many Muslims have also shown eagerness for an out-of-court settlement of the dispute. Many of them consider Lord Ram as `Imam-e-Hind’ as referred by poet Allama Iqbal. For the sake of peace and brotherhood in the country, they are willing to give the land to Hindus provided they are guaranteed that such demands will not be made for other mosques, which saffron brigade claims to have been built on ruins of temples and those guilty of demolishing Babri mosque are punished.

However, there is also a section of Muslims who oppose any kind of compromise and use the issue for communal politics by arguing that Islam does not allow to part with the land where mosque has been build. My request to these Muslim brothers is that can they show me any teaching from Quran and Prophet which forbids sacrifice of a piece of land to attain peace?

History is witness to the fact that kings (read politicians) have used religion as a tool to justify atrocities for personal gains. We shouldn’t allow it to happen now by following Ram’s path.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
