Fresh terror alert issued; IAF and other defence bases in Jammu and Punjab put on high alert

Defence bases on high alert | File image | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Defence bases in Jammu area and Punjab have been put on high alert following fresh intelligence inputs about terrorists sneaking into the country from Pakistan. As per the inputs, a group of terrorists has managed to infiltrate into India.

Government sources were quoted as saying that the defence bases in and around Punjab and Jammu area have been put on high alert. Further, the airbases of the Indian Air Force in Punjab and Jammu have also been put on high alert. The airbases at Pathankot and Jammu have been put on an orange alert, sources added.

"The inputs were received by forces today morning after which they are taking all precautions to protect the defence bases," the sources said, as per news agency ANI.

The defence bases had been put on high alert earlier as well by the alert levels were reduced a few days later.

Ever since the Central government revoked Jammu and Kashmir’s special status on August 5 and decided to bifurcate the state into two union territories, there have been inputs that Pakistan-sponsored terrorists could carry out attacks on defence bases in the region.

In September, intelligence agencies had warned that 8 to 10 Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists could carry out a suicide attack at IAF bases in and around Jammu and Kashmir.

India has said that Pakistan has reactivated the JeM terror training camp at Balakot, which was destroyed by Indian Air Force jets in air strikes conducted on February 26 this year. The airstrikes had followed the Pulwama terror attack on February 14, in which 40 CRPF jawans were martyred. JeM had claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack.

Defence sources have said that 45 to 50 terrorists are believed to be training at the Balakot camp. Further, Pakistan is believed to have restarted terror training at 20 other camps and also reactivated the same number of launch pads. There, some 500 terrorists are believed to be waiting to cross over into the Indian territory to disrupt peace in J&K and other states.

It was also reported recently that Pakistan’s Army and spy agency ISI have divided tasks among three terror groups – JeM, Lashkar-e-Taiba and Hizb-ul Mujahideen – to carry out terror activities in India.

In view of all such reports, Indian security forces and intelligence agencies have been on alert for terror activities along the border / LoC and inside the country.
