Hot spots in inaccessible areas near Glen Huon to be water bombed today

UPDATED 6.10PM: Police have released a fresh warning about the use of drones in Tasmanian fire zones after they were called to a report of a drone operating in the area of the Great Pine Tier blaze.

Don't miss out on the headlines from Tasmania. Followed categories will be added to My News.

UPDATED 6.10PM: Police have released a fresh warning about the use of drones in Tasmanian fire zones after they were called to a report of a drone operating in the area of the Great Pine Tier blaze.

The drone was allegedly seen flying near Poatina Road in the Central Highlands today but it did not hamper operations.

The report came less than a week after police were called to investigate a drone sighting in a bushfire-affected area near Arve Rd at Geeveston.

Tasmania Police also interviewed and referred a 37-year-old Howrah drone pilot to the Civil

Aviation Safety Authority after an incident on Christmas Day.

The Tasmania Fire Service was forced to suspend all aircraft operations on the South Bruny Island fire because of the unmanned aircraft flying in the Kettering area, near the oval.

“Firefighting operations rely heavily on the use of helicopters and other aircraft and any use of drones in the vicinity presents a risk to manned aviation,” Tasmania Police said in a statement today.

“Water-bombing aircraft need to fly at low altitudes, a task made more difficult with the added risk of a drone strike. Essentially, if you fly a drone they can’t fly at all.”

Tasmania Police said drone operators must be aware of the rules surrounding the use of unmanned aircraft, warning any breach could result in prosecution.

Drones cannot be operated in a way that creates a “hazard to another aircraft, person or property”.

“Unless approved, drones also must not fly within 5.5km of an aerodrome or helicopter landing site,” police said.

“During emergency operations, many landing sites are temporary and negligent drone operators run the risk of breaching this requirement. Please consider the safety of pilots who are flying at risk, protecting the Tasmanian community.”

Recreational drone pilots should consult the CASA “Can I Fly There?” app, but be aware that it may not display temporary helicopter landing sites. If a drone pilot becomes aware of aircraft operating they should stop flying immediately.

For more information on the rules and links to associated legislation visit: www.casa.gov.au

UPDATED 1.30PM: The bushfire alert for Geeveston, Castle Forbes Bay and Glendevie areas has been downgraded to an advice message.

It is the first time the towns have been at the lowest alert level since before an extreme day of fire danger was forecast almost two weeks ago.

Firefighters used favourable conditions yesterday to put in back burns and strengthen containment lines in the Huon Valley.

About 90 people remained at the evacuation centre at Huonville PCYC overnight.

MORE BUSHFIRES COVERAGE:

PRAISE FOR FIREYS WHO SAVED NBN STATION

FIREFIGHTERS TO STRENGTHEN CONTAINMENT LINES

BUSHFIRES ‘A TOTAL DISASTER’ FOR HONEY INDUSTRY

BEAUTIFUL TIMBER BOAT EMERGES FROM THE ASHES

Tasmania Fire Service station officer Darren Gye said crews patrolled from Lonnavale to Geeveston last night.

“A couple of hot spots in inaccessible areas near Glen Huon were identified and will be water bombed today,” he said.

But he warned residents not to become complacent even though weather conditions were favourable.

“These fires will continue to remain a risk to communities for some time yet,” he said.

“People living in these areas should continue to monitor the situation and stay up to date by looking at the TFS website and by listening to ABC local radio.”

EARLIER: Little fire activity was reported overnight by crews statewide as largely favourable weather conditions continued.

Nine Watch and Act alerts were this morning in place for the Riveaux Road and Great Pine Tier bushfires, while 21 other areas remained under Advice level.

Firefighting crews last night patrolled the Riveaux Road blaze from Lonnavale to Geeveston. Hot spots identified in inaccessible areas near Glen Huon will today be water bombed.

Back burning operations conducted late yesterday afternoon at the Great Pine Tier fire appear to have been successful, protecting properties around Brandum, Liawenee and Reynolds Neck.

Firefighters walking through blackened trees. Picture: CHARLIE TEAM

A sprinkler line was also put in place to protect the Thousand Lakes Lodge at Bernacchi after back burning was used.

Patrolling crews reported good conditions overnight at the Britons Swamp fire and worked on containing edges.

With the favourable forecast set to continue, firefighters will work on strengthening containment lines throughout today and into tomorrow.

The Tasmania Fire Service is urging residents not to become complacent, warning the bushfires will remain a risk to communities for “some time yet”.

People living in affected areas have been told to continue monitoring the situation and stay up to date by looking at the TFS website and listening to ABC local radio.

ON TUESDAY: TASMANIANS have been urged not to drop their guard against bushfire as the prospect of rain looms closer.

Forecasts predict rain across the state on Thursday will greatly assist the firefight — but the Tasmania Fire Service warned the crisis has not yet passed.

FOR THE LATEST FIRE UPDATES, CLICK HERE

Of particular concern, said TFS deputy state controller Mark Butters, was erratic behaviour at the edges of existing fires in the early evening.

“We’re asking that people still maintain their vigilance in and around these fires,” he said.

“We’re finding that they’re very unpredictable and, in fact, we caught the witching hour between sort of 5pm and 7pm.

“We’re seeing this really unusual fire behaviour where our crews are reporting increased fire activity — in fact that’s the time that we really want people to maintain their vigilance.

Images from NSW Rural Fire Service Facebook page of the Tasmanian deployment for the bushfires. Picture: CHARLIE TEAM

“We’ve still got around 195,000 hectares of fire that’s been burnt in Tasmania, which represents about three per cent of our of our land area.

“So that’s still a significant area of burnt vegetation in the landscape.

“We still have around 700 people on the ground at this point.”

Images from NSW Rural Fire Service of a blaze in the remote Tasmanian Wilderness. Picture: ANDREW MCDONALD

Police and Emergency Services Minister Michael Ferguson echoed the message of continued vigilance.

“We can’t afford to let our guard down but it’s very nice to have the good news and we’ll be making best advantage of it,” he said.

“We will be for some time with these current fires and it will be some time yet.

“The rain forecast that we are very pleased about that is on its way hopefully for this weekend if it does put out fires. That’s a good thing, but in all circumstances it’s not expected to put out all the fires.

Mr Butters thanked those who were supporting firefighters in the field.

MORE OF TODAY’S NEWS

LOOKING FOR A HOTEL IN HOBART? GOOD LUCK WITH THAT



NEILL-FRASER APPEAL HEARS OF UNDERWORLD DEALINGS

BUSHFIRES A DISASTER FOR THE HONEY INDUSTRY

ALDERMAN OR COUNCILLOR? CLARENCE CASTS ITS VOTE

WEATHER KEY AS BUSHFIRES CONSUME NEARLY 200,000HA

A chopper lands in the charred landscape. Picture: NSW RURAL FIRE SERVICE/CUMBERLAND RAFT

“It’s really important that we acknowledge the families that are supporting our staff particularly our volunteers.

“There are fundamental in allowing their people or their families to assist us in this firefight.

“Also with obviously … the communities, without their support and ongoing help to keep them safe it would be very difficult to achieve the things that we’ve done this far.

“And, last but not least, the employers that allow the volunteers to assist us with these fires.

“Without our volunteers and committee staff, obviously we’d find this firefight a lot more difficult — so thank you to them.”

There were 10 watch-and-act and 20 advice level alerts in place on Tuesday night, most relating to the Riveaux Rd, Southwest and Great Pine Tier fires.
