Poverty elevation: Abhijit’s Nobel reaffirms that we are ‘Rich little poor us’

Bachi Karkaria's Erratica and its cheeky sign-off character, Alec Smart, have had a growing league of followers since 1994 when the column began in the Metropolis on Saturday. It now appears on the Edit Page of the Times of India, every Thursday. It takes a sly dig at whatever has inflated political/celebrity egos, and got public knickers in a twist that week. It makes you chuckle, think and marvel at the elasticity of the English language. Bachi Karkaria also writes Giving Gyan in the Mumbai Mirror, and its fellow publications in other cities. It is a shooting-from-the-lip advice column to the lovelorn and otherwise torn, telling them to stop cribbing and start living -- all in her her branded pithy, witty style. LESS ... MORE

There’s such a rich vein of research in poverty. Abhijit Banerjee has once again proved it, gloriously. So let’s hang on to it and forget all that bleeding-heart do-gooderism/ political must-doism about its alleviation. Since India offered him (and his Nobel-winning team) so much raw material, it is now conclusively established that poverty does exist despite Garibi Hatao, Acche Din Lao, etc. In fact, if it didn’t exist, it would have to be invented. See how much quota-milkers, creamy layers, and most of all the multi-basking politician keep cashing in on it.

Over the decades, poverty’s hemline has gone up and down, depending on the prevailing fashionistas of power. But no one raised it as jaw-droppingly as the Bombay Parsi Panchayet which blithely told the high court that, for the purpose of allotting charitable housing, a ‘poor Parsi is one who earns up to Rs 90,000 pm.’

Abhijit was among the many stars at our second TOI Litfest in 2012, shortly after the publication of ‘Poor Economics’. Ah the present irony: He’s got this Nobel just when the Big Bad Economy has wolfed down our litfest.

And, of course i must flaunt the Kolkata connection. My home-town was rightly awash in celebration and shondesh over ‘Amader Obhijit’s’ glory. Ay mago, dekhechho!? Not ekta, duita or even teenta, he is our fourth of Nobel lineage – following Tagore, the sainted Teresa and Amartya Sen. Any reason why three of Kolkata’s four winners rode global fame on the ‘P’ word? Mother T made the ‘poorest of the poor’ her mission and USP; Amartya Babu’s seminal work was on the Raj-engendered Bengal Famine.

Abhijit’s ‘Ai’, Nirmala nee Patankar is Maharashtrian, so he was spared the tyranny of ‘porha-shona’, and allowed to spend time on activities that might subvert the Holy Grail of ‘First Class, First’. But with both parents acclaimed academics, or simply being Bengali, he can’t help being a topper.

One deviation. Family and friends say he stirs up Masterchef-grade meals as unobtrusively as he wears his genius. Most of the bhodro babus i know have never deigned to enter the kitchen but hold forth on the nuances of fine cooking. At random, un-controlled, and quite a trial.

***

Alec Smart said: “With such cosying, should Modi-ji be spelt ‘Modi-Xi?’”

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
