Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan NO more a couple? Here’s what we know

Often while working together, actors develop a great rapport with each other and that shows in their on screen chemistry. Speaking of this, fans of Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are dying to see the young duo on screen in Imtiaz Ali’s Aaj Kal. Even though the release is far, often Sara and Kartik were seen hanging out with each other. This led to speculations about them dating. The fuel to the fire was added by Sara’s frequent trips to Lucknow during Kartik’s shoot of Pati Patni Aur Woh.

However, now, it seems that Sara and Kartik have decided to go their separate ways due to professional reasons. As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, Sara and Kartik were struggling to find some time together amidst the work schedules. Kartik is extremely busy shooting Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 and will also be working on Dostana 2. On the other hand, Sara is working on Coolie No 1. Hence, as per the report, Kartik and Sara were finding it tough to catch up with each other.

A source told Mumbai Mirror that the two tried hard to squeeze in ‘we time’ post the wrap up of Aaj Kal. However, it wasn’t possible and hence, they decided to call it off. On her birthday this year, Kartik took an off from Pati Patni Aur Woh Shoot and headed to Bangkok to surprise Sara. The two enjoyed an evening together and Kartik also shared a selfie on Instagram with the birthday girl. However, it seems that work projects might have gotten the best of the two and now, the rumoured couple may have called it quits.

On the work front, Kartik will be seen in Pati Patni Aur Woh with Bhumi Pednekar and Ananya Panday. The film will be released on December 6, 2019. On the other hand, Sara is shooting with Varun Dhawan for Coolie No 1 remake. Sara will be stepping into the shoes of Karisma Kapoor while Varun will reprise Govinda’s role. The film is slated to release on May 1, 2020.

ALSO READ: No more Kartik Aaryan & Sara Ali Khan photos together as Love Aaj Kal 2 stars to maintain distance in public?

ALSO READ: Sara Ali Khan is a bundle of cuteness as she flaunts her style in childhood photos with her BFF; Check it out

ALSO READ: Saif Ali Khan on Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan's relationship: If she likes him, then he must be nice
