Out on walk, former vice-chancellor found hacked to death

Alliance University

vice-chancellor

murdered

CCTV footage

Bangalore

Ex-V-C offound lying in pool of blood near his house in RT NagarA 52-year-old formerof the Alliance University was hacked to death on Tuesday night when he was on a walk post-dinner. He was in RT Nagar just a few metres from his house when the culpritshim.The incident came to light only on Wednesday morning. The police are yet to ascertain the motive behind the murder. They are also going through theavailable from the crime scene. The RT Nagar police have registered a case.Ayyappa Dore, a resident of RT Nagar, used to go for walks after dinner every day. And on Tuesday too, he left home for the walk, but did not return. As his family members panicked about him not having returned home, they launched a search for him and found his body lying in a pool of blood with multiple injuries close to the house.“The incident came to light on Wednesday morning after his wife Bhavana reported the matter to the police. We have taken statements from the victim’s wife. The family has been staying in the city for the last 17 years. Dore is a native of Vijayapura. He worked as the vice chancellor for the Alliance University. There are certain disputes about the university that are being heard in the court. We are investigating from all angles,” N Shashi Kumar, DCP (North) told media.As the University has been in the news for all the wrong reasons due to the alleged disputes within the management, the police said that they are looking at that angle too.Dore was also reportedly a complainant in the Shivaram Karanth Layout illegal denotification case. He was also active in a few social movements and had formed a regional political party ‘Jana Samanya Paksha’ during the 2018 Karnataka assembly elections.He was also actively participating in various protests including the protest over the construction of the Kalasa-Banduri canal project. He was also a formerUniversity syndicate member.The RT Nagar police have registered a case of murder under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and are further investigating.
