Amit Shah amps up NRC attack on Congress: ‘Are refugees Rahul’s cousins?’

GURUGRAM: To loud cheers from BJP workers who shouted ‘Bharat Mata ki jai’ and gave him a standing ovation, home minister Amit Shah once again promised at an election rally that all illegal immigrants “would be thrown out of India by 2024”, describing them as “a burden and nuisance”.But this time, he also used the subject to launch a blistering attack on Congress and its former president Rahul Gandhi . “Why is Rahul baba opposing NRC ( National Register of Citizens )? Are these refugees his cousins? Why else are he and (Bhupinder Singh) Hooda worried about food and shelter for these refugees,” Shah thundered at the rally in Gurugram on Wednesday evening, just five days before the state goes to polls on October 21. “Let Hooda and Rahul baba oppose NRC, I promise you all that by 2024, all illegal immigrants will be thrown out from the country,” he added.Shah has linked the NRC to national security and has made it clear in earlier speeches that Hindu, Sikh, Jain and Buddhist refugees will be accorded Indian citizenship beforehand with the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.In the Gurugram rally , Shah went on to praise PM Modi for abrogating Article 370 in Kashmir, an issue the BJP has highlighted in every poll rally, across party ranks, constituencies and districts, in poll-bound Haryana.“People blessed BJP with 300-plus seats and within 70 days, PM Modi repaid the people by scrapping Article 370 that was the root cause of terrorism. Under the Congress regime, infiltrators entered Kashmir and spread terrorism. Pakistan thought India is still the same as it was during Maun (silent) PM Manmohan Singh and dared to attack India. But, during Uri surgical strike and (after the) Pulwama attack, PM Modi showed India has changed. Now, they know we’ll avenge every single drop of blood shed by our soldiers,” Shah said, again throwing Congress a challenge to make its stand on Article 370 clear and not beat around the bush for the sake of its “vote bank”.“I dare Hooda and Rahul baba to let people know about their stand on Article 370. If they oppose it, then they must add it in their manifesto that they’ll reinstate Article 370 if elected to power,” he added, echoing what Modi has said in his campaign speeches.Switching to local themes, Shah claimed BJP’s development agenda has changed the face of Haryana.“I ask Rahul Gandhi to come to any chowk of Gurugram and recount the development under their regime. Even a member of our Yuva Morcha would puncture his claims and leave him red-faced,” Shah said, adding under the Hooda government in the state and UPA at the Centre, corruption and dynastic privileges flourished. “They worked on three Ds— durbari, damad ji (a reference to Robert Vadra, Sonia Gandhi’s son-in-law) and dealers. We also work on three Ds: development, development, and development,” he said.He ended his address with a parting shot at Sonia. “On October 21, press the lotus button in such a way that Italy feels the current (a jibe at Sonia’s country of origin).”
