Fire dept asked to arrange tenders near cracker shops around Diwali

Ludhiana: Lack of staff and fire tenders has left the fire department in a dilemma regarding management of fire incidents nearing Diwali, as from this year, they are being told to provide permanent fire tenders near fire cracker shops. In new guidelines issued by the state government, the fire brigade is being asked to arrange staff and fire tender near fire cracker shops for all days round the clock. Near Diwali and on the day of Diwali, fire incidents happen frequently, and now fire officials are planning to make temporary fire stations near these cracker shops, so that there is no problem in reaching the fire spot.As per guidelines, not only fire tenders, but ambulance and PCR vehicles too will be stationed near cracker shops. In the city, fire cracker shops will be established in Dana Mandi, Pakhowal Road, Model Town Extension, Hambran Road, Glada ground in Sector 32 at Chandigarh Road, Dugri Phase 2 near police station, and the ground near Lodhi Club. A total of 37 shops will be allowed at these seven locations, and there will be a difference of at least 25 feet between these shops. The fire brigade has 18 fire tenders in working condition.Along with this, shopkeepers who become successful in the draw of lots will have to ensure 200 litres of drums, six sand buckets, and six fire extinguishers at each shop. The maximum number of shops will come in Dana Mandi, where there will be 13 shops. The draw will be conducted on October 16, but the sale of crackers will begin from October 19 until Diwali. The sale of crackers will also be allowed from 10.30am to 7.30pm.One of the fire officials informed that the draw was yet to be conducted, but interested persons have started approaching them, as this time, a fee worth Rs2,000 was fixed for providing fire tenders at the spot. He said people wanted to deposit this fee in advance, but they were being refused, as in the coming days, from November 1 to 15, there is a special programme in Sultanpur Lodhi gurdwara in connection with the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev, for which two fire tenders, along with some officers, will be deputed there on duty. He said there were chances they would be deputed there around Diwali, so that would make it more difficult to handle things in the city.However, assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu said, “This time, some new rules were added after getting recommendation from a committee formed for this purpose, in which I was also a member. We will make satisfactory arrangements, so that there is no problem for anybody.” He said to control fire incidents is the priority of the fire brigade.Notably, last year on an experimental basis, the fire brigade department had made four temporary fire stations in the city, along with five permanent ones, and it had helped fire officials respond quicker. The fire department, for the first time, had stationed one fire tender in central locations like Bharat Nagar Chowk, Samrala Chowk, Jalandhar Bypass Chowk, and Sherpur Chowk. But now, they will find space near cracker shops.Last year on Diwali, there were 32 fire incidents, in which three were major ones. The industrial town had topped the state in fire incidents, as compared to cities like Amritsar and Jalandhar, where 18 fire incidents happened. In other cities too, fewer fire incidents took place.FIRE CALLS ON DIWALI NIGHTSYear: Fire incidents2011: 402012: 432013: 402014: 282015: 352016: 252017: 352018: 32
