14 years in prison, hefty fines for chain snatching proposed in Rajasthan

JAIPUR: Chain and mobile snatchers could face imprisonment of up to 14 years and heavy fines as per a draft law of the state police. The CB-CID has proposed additions to IPC Section 379 (theft) to include snatching as a crime with provisions for stringent penalties and additional jail term to deter criminals from robbing people on streets.As per the copy of the recommended proposal, Section 379 (A) defines “snatching” as criminal offence carried out with the aim to take away any movable property of a person “suddenly”, “quickly”, or “forcefully”. The proposal seeks a prison sentence of 5 to 10 years along with a penalty of Rs 25,000 for such an action. The sub-section B of 379 provides for rigorous imprisonment of up to 14 years and Rs 25,000 as fine if an accused injures a person in the act of snatching.Additional DGP (Crime) BL Soni told TOI that the draft seeks to keep a check on snatching related crimes. “The new laws will not only give more teeth to police to combat such offences. It may also keep criminal elements in check,” he said.The proposal, known as Indian Penal Code ( Rajasthan amendment) Act 2016, is similar to the anti-snatching law introduced by Haryana. For three years the copy of the Act has been lying in limbo, but the CB-CID sent another reminder to the government to introduce two new sub-sections to 379 of the IPC.Sources said at least 11 reminders were issued to the government to introduce fresh amendments. TOI spoke to several SHOs who said the existing sections have failed to curb snatching incidents. “Under existing provisions of Section 379, an accused can get three years prison and some fine, or both. But it has failed to be a deterrent,” said an official on condition of anonymity.Till now, the police lump together snatching and theft cases due to the absence of any classification within Section 379. “A major chunk of crimes classified as theft under Section 379 are actually snatching of mobiles, purses, wallets and gold chains,” the official added.
