Savarkar sought apology from the British, named in conspiracy for Gandhi's murder: Congress' Digvijaya Singh

Digvijaya Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The BJP in its poll manifesto demanded that the BJP-led NDA government confer the Bharat Ratna on Veer Savarkar Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari said that the party should straightaway confer Nathuram Godse with the highest civilian honour PM Narendra Modi heaped praises on Hindutva ideologue VD Savarkar while addressing a rally in Akola

New Delhi: Hours after the BJP demanded Bharat Ratna for Vinayak Damodar Savarkar in its poll manifesto senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh said his name was registered in the conspiracy behind Mahatma Gandhi's murder.

“There are 2 aspects of his life, his participation in the independence struggle and when he came back after seeking an apology,” said Singh.

Ahead of Maharashtra Assembly elections, the BJP in its poll manifesto demanded that the BJP-led NDA government confer the Bharat Ratna - the nation's highest civilian honour - on Veer Savarkar.

The BJP also tried to evoke Maratha and Dalit sentiments by demanding Bharat Ratna for social reformers Jyotiba Phule and Savitri Bai Phule.

Meanwhile, the Congress has slammed the BJP for demanding Bharat Ratna for Savarkar ahead of the Maharashtra Assembly election with Congress spokesperson Manish Tiwari saying that at one hand the BJP is praising Mahatma Gandhi and on the other is demanding Bharat Ratna for Savarkar.

“In a country where Mahatma Gandhi is made to commit suicide in textbooks, then anything can be possible. On a more serious note, though Savarkar was charge-sheeted for Mahatma's murder, it is correct that he was acquitted,” he said.

Tewari further said that the party should straightaway confer Nathuram Godse with the highest civilian honour.

Earlier, Congress leader Raashid Alvi also lashed out at BJP for proposing to confer Bharat Ratna on Savarkar and had said that Nathuram Godse's name could be next in line.

"Everyone knows the history of Savarkar. Savarkar was accused of murdering Gandhi, he was released due to lack of evidence. Today, this government is saying that they will give Bharat Ratna to Savarkar, I am afraid the next in line could be Godse in this chain," ANI quoted Alvi as saying.

Addressing an election rally in Maharashtra’s Akola, PM Narendra Modi heaped praises on Hindutva ideologue VD Savarkar saying it is due to his “sanskar” (values) that the BJP put nationalism as the basis for nation-building.

Lashing out at the Congress the PM further said that people who are angry at the revocation of article 370; they are the same people who used to abuse Veer Savarkar and denied him a Bharat Ratna till today.

Savarkar was awarded two life terms of imprisonment for his connections with the revolutionary group India House and was shifted to the Cellular Jail in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. However, he served only ten years of his prison sentence after signing a plea for clemency from the British with an undertaking that he would renounce revolutionary activities.
