Gunmen shot dead non-local fruit trader in Indian-controlled Kashmir - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-10-17 17:58:12|Editor: Shi Yinglun

Video Player Close

SRINAGAR, Indian-controlled Kashmir, Oct. 17 (Xinhua) -- Unidentified gunmen shot dead a non-local fruit trader and wounded his colleague in restive Indian-controlled Kashmir, police said on Thursday.

The duo was attacked on late Wednesday night at village Trenzo in Shopian district, about 55 km south of Srinagar city, the summer capital of Indian-controlled Kashmir.

"Last evening gunmen fired upon two non-local fruit traders at village Trenzo here killing one on spot and wounding another," a police official said. "The wounded trader was immediately removed to Srinagar hospital in critical condition."

The slain fruit trader was identified as Charanjeet Singh hailing from northern Indian state of Punjab.

Hospital authorities at Srinagar's main hospital said the condition of wounded fruit trader was critical.

Police officials said they have rushed reinforcements to the area to carry out searches for the assailants involved in the attack.

Shopian district having apple orchards in abundance is known as apple bowl of the region.

On Wednesday, a non-local laborer hailing from central Indian state of Chhattisgarh was killed by unidentified gunmen in adjacent Pulwama district. The laborer was working at a brick kiln.

The killing came two days after unidentified gunmen shot dead a non-local driver and set ablaze his apple-laden truck in Shopian.

Police suspect militants were behind the killings. The attacks triggered panic across the region.

Indian-controlled Kashmir is on edge since Aug. 5 after New Delhi abrogated Article 370 of its constitution. The move bifurcated the region into two federally governed Union Territories.

Kashmir, a Himalayan territory divided between India and Pakistan, is claimed by both in its entirety. The two countries have fought three wars, two exclusively over Kashmir.

The abrogation of special status to Indian-controlled Kashmir has heightened tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad.
