Chidambaram's judicial custody extended in INX Media case, ex-FM to remain in Tihar jail

A Delhi court on Thursday extended the judicial custody of former Finance Minister and Congress leader P Chidambaram in the INX Media case lodged by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). His custody has been extended till October 24.

Chidambaram was arrested by the CBI on August 21 and is lodged in Tihar jail under judicial custody in the corruption case.

Meanwhile, the Delhi court has granted the Enforcement Directorate (ED) Chidambaram's custody. The ex-finance minister will have to spend the night in a police lock-up. Chidambaram will be kept in a police lock-up while he is in the judicial custody.

Chidambaram's questioning will take place at the ED headquarters. As of now, he can be held either at Tughlaq Road police station or Tilak Marg police station. The ED had sought 14-day custodial interrogation of the 74-year old senior Congress leader.

While arguing the matter, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta said, "Earlier, the matter was argued substantially. On September 5, we had sought the custody and had argued for custodial interrogation. The Supreme Court had also accepted the need for custodial interrogation."

"It's not a mechanical prayer. We have material to show the requirement of an interrogation," he said, adding that there is a separate investigation into the money laundering case.

"On September 5, the accused had volunteered to undergo custodial interrogation. The court had rejected the application at the time as the ED did not seek custody at the time. We had said we would be able to use the permissible 15 days of interrogation only after certain aspects of the investigation were completed," he said.

Appearing for Chidambaram, Congress leader Kapil Sibal said, "The matter argued before the SC for the anticipatory bail, the ED had told the court that they will take Chidambaram for custodial interrogation immediately. Then, they said we don't need him at this stage. Chidambaram appeared before the ED four times. The last was in January 2019."

"This is only a ruse to keep him in custody. This is been going on for two years. The ECIR complaint was filed in 2017. They have been talking about shell companies and bank accounts for two years. Whatever they have asked him, I said I do not know, but why didn't they ask me questions?" Kapil Sibal argued.

Chidambaram had on Wednesday sought bail from the Supreme Court (SC), saying the probe agency wants to keep him in jail to "humiliate him".

The CBI had on Wednesday opposed in the Supreme Court the bail plea of P Chidambaram, saying a "strong prima facie" case has been made out against him.

Additional Solicitor General KM Nataraj, appearing for the CBI, told a bench headed by Justice R Banumathi that they have "cogent materials" about how Chidambaram had tried to influence the witnesses.

The CBI had registered an FIR on May 15, 2017, alleging irregularities in a Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) clearance granted to the INX Media group for receiving overseas funds of Rs 305 crore in 2007, during Chidambaram's tenure as the finance minister.
