BSF trooper killed in firing by Border Guards Bangladesh

Kolkata, Oct 17 : A Border Security Force (BSF) trooper was killed and another injured on Thursday when Border Guards Bangladesh fired on them after a flag meeting for securing the release of a fisherman in BGB's custody at Kakmarichar along the riverine international border in West Bengal's Murshidabad district.

The incident sent an alarm bell in the security forces and intelligence agencies as the BSF and the BGB have not exchanged a single bullet for decades.

According to the BSF, head constable Vijay Bhan Singh - father of two sons and slated to celebrate his 52nd birthday next month - was killed after the team came under fire while returning from the flag meeting in the water channel near Boundary Pillar 75/7-S. Constable/crew (boatman) Rajbir Singh sustained bullet wound in his right wrist.

Following the incident, the BSF has apprised the Union Home Ministry about the incident and senior BGB officials have been contacted.

Giving details, a BSF official said: "On Thursday morning, three Indian fishermen went for fishing in River Padma in the border area. Later two fishermen returned and approached BSF outpost Kakmarichar that BGB personnel at post Charghat apprehended them and later released two of them to call the BSF post commander for a flag meeting." Around 10.30 a.m., the post Commander, along with five troopers in the BSF speed boat, went towards the place of occurrence in the water channel of River Padma near the boundary pillar to conduct flag meeting with BGB to get the Indian fisherman released.

"During the flag meeting, the BGB party commander informed that they can release the Indian fisherman only after getting orders from their higher headquarters. BSF party waited for considerable time, but the BGB patrol did not release the Indian fisherman at the flag meeting.

"While the BSF party was on its way back, there was firing from Bangladesh side, causing head injury to Vijay Bhan while constable/crew (boatman) Rajbir was also injured." Rajbir Singh has been taken to Murshidabad Medical College and Hospital, Baharampore, for treatment.

Y.B. Khurania, BSF Inspector General, South Bengal frontier, has lodged a strong protest on the incident with his counterpart Benzir Ahmed, Region Commander, North West Region, BGB, Rangpur.

Vijay Bhan Singh, who joined the BSF in 1990, hailed from Chamaroli Sadupur village in Firoazabad district of Uttar Pradesh.

Pranab Mandal, the fisherman in the custody of the BGB, is a resident of Shirochar village under Jalangi police station of Murshidabad district.
