Chenani-Nashri tunnel Current Affairs, GK & News

Chenani-Nashri tunnel Current Affairs, GK & News

On June 3, 2020, the Union Cabinet chaired by PM Modi approved renaming of Kolkata Port Trust to Shyama Prasad Mukerjee port trust. The announcement of renaming of the port was given by PM Modi on January 11, 2020. Highlights The announcement was made by PM Modi while he attended the 150th anniversary celebrations of ..

Month: Current Affairs - June, 2020

Category: Awards, Persons & Places in News

Topics: Bharatiya Jana Sangh • Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) • Chenani-Nashri tunnel • Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee • Jammu and Kashmir • National Integration • National Rurban Mission

The 9.2-kilometer-long Chenani-Nashri tunnel to be renamed after Bharatiya Jana Sangh founder Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. The renaming is homage by Central government to Dr. Shyama Prasad whose battle for Kashmir, One Nation One Flag has immensely contributed in national integration. The announcement in this regard was made by Union Minister for Road Transport and ..

Month: Current Affairs - October, 2019

Topics: Bharatiya Jana Sangh • Chenani-Nashri tunnel • Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee • Jammu and Kashmir • Patnitop tunnel

Chenani-Nashri Tunnel, also known as Patnitop Tunnel, is a road tunnel in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir on NH 44 (former name NH 1A before renumbering of all national highways). About the tunnel- The Chenani-Nashri tunnel is the longest’s tunnel in India with an average length of over 9.28 km. This is the ..

Topics: Chenani-Nashri tunnel • Jammu & Kashmir • Roads • Tunnels

Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurated Chenani-Nashri Tunnel, country’s longest road tunnel that links Kashmir Valley with Jammu by an all-weather route. The 9-km-long tunnel passes through the lower Himalayan mountain range on Jammu-Srinagar National Highway 44. It cuts the distance between Jammu and Srinagar to around 250 km from the current 350 km. Key Facts ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2017

Topics: Chenani-Nashri tunnel • Jammu and Kashmir • Narendra Modi • National • Places in News
