Bangla Guards try to gherao BSF troops at flag meet, kill 1

KOLKATA/MURSHIDABAD: A BSF head constable was killed and a constable injured in firing by Border Guard Bangladesh troops on Thursday along a riverine border stretch between Bangladesh and Berhampore in Bengal. The two were shot as they returned from a flag meeting between BSF and BGB post commanders to discuss the release of a fisherman caught by BGB fishing in the Padma river."The firing incident appears to be unprovoked and is unprecedented. The BSF is in touch with BGB at multiple levels to find out what provoked the hostility and if it was a case of some personnel getting trigger-happy," a BSF officer told TOI.The fisherman is still in BGB custody, the BSF said on Thursday. The slain BSF head constable, Vijay Bhan Singh, hails from Firozabad district of UP. He was 51 and had joined the BSF in 1990. He is survived by his parents, wife and two sons.As per the sequence of events put out by the BSF based on first-hand account of its personnel on the ground, three Indian fishermen had gone fishing in the Padma river on Thursday morning. Two of the fishermen later approached the BSF post at Kakmarichar, under whose jurisdiction the riverine border falls, complaining that BGB had caught three of them and later released two to call the BSF post commander for a flag meeting.The international border between India and Bangladesh is riverine in many parts of Murshidabad . As border pillars are not always visible in the middle of the river, territorial demarcation is largely based on perception, and fishermen from both sides regularly cross over.The post commander, along with five troopers, approached the BGB patrol in a boat. However, during the flag meeting that followed, the BGB patrol did not release the Indian fisherman and tried to throw a cordon (gherao) around the BSF troops . Sensing that the situation was getting worse, the BSF party immediately withdrew and headed back.However, BGB troops opened fire on the returning BSF party. While head constable was shot in the temple, the constable/crew (boatman) received bullet injuries on his right hand.Pranab Mandal, the fisherman from Murshidabad district, is still in custody of BGB patrol, the BSF said. Sources say that while BSF personnel carry arms for flag meetings, "it is possible that they did not return fire as they may have been outnumbered".The recurrence of hostilities comes barely days after a Kolkata conference between BSF inspectors general and BGB's regional commanders on improving ties between the two sides and better border management to curb crime.
