Bangla border guards shoot at BSF after flag meet, kill jawan

Kolkata/Murshidabad: A BSF head constable was killed and a constable injured in firing by Border Guard Bangladesh (BGB) troops on Thursday along a riverine border stretch between Bangladesh and Behrampore in Bengal.The two were shot as they returned from a flag meeting between BSF and BGB post commanders to discuss the release of a fisherman caught by BGB while trying to fish in the Padma.The fisherman is still in BGB custody, the BSF said on Thursday.The recurrence of hostilities comes barely days after a Kolkata conference between BSF inspectors-general and BGB’s regional commanders on improving ties between the two sides and better border management.“The firing incident appears to be unprovoked and is unprecedented. BSF is in touch with BGB at multiple levels to find out what provoked the hostility on the part of their troops and whether it was a case of some personnel getting trigger-happy,” a BSF officer told TOI.The slain BSF head constable, Vijay Bhan Singh, hails from Firozabad district of UP. He was 51 and had joined the force in 1990. He is survived by his parents, wife and two sons.According to the sequence of events put out by the BSF based on first-hand accounts of its personnel, three Indian fishermen had gone fishing in the Padma on Thursday morning. Two of the fishermen later approached the BSF post at Kakmarichar, under whose jurisdiction the riverine border falls, complaining that BGB had caught three of them and later released two to call the BSF post commander for a flag meeting.The international border between India and Bangladesh is riverine in many parts of Murshidabad.As border pillars are not always visible in the middle of the river, territorial demarcation is largely based on perception, and fishermen from both sides regularly cross over.The post commander, along with five troopers, approached the BGB patrol in a boat. However, during the flag meeting that followed, the BGB patrol did not release the Indian fisherman and tried to throw a cordon (gherao) around the BSF troops. Sensing that the situation was getting worse, the BSF party immediately withdrew and headed back.However, BGB troops opened fire on the returning BSF party. While Singh was shot in the temple, the constable/crew (boatman) received bullet injuries on his right hand.Both BSF personnel were evacuated to the nearest medical facility. Singh is said to have died on the boat itself, and was declared brought dead.Pranab Mandal, the fisherman from Murshidabad, is still in custody of the BGB, the BSF said. “It is not unusual for Indian fishermen to approach Padma waters for fishing. Such cases are often reported,” said a BSF officer.Sources say that while BSF personnel carry arms for flag meetings, “it is possible that they did not return fire as they may have been outnumbered”.Though BSF troopers have been targeted and even killed on certain occasions by smugglers attempting to take cattle across the border from India to Bangladesh, there hasn’t been any serious animosity between BSF and BGB of late. In 2001, the Bangladesh Rifles killed 16 BSF jawans in Pyrdiwah village in Meghalaya. Since then, there has not been any major incident save for some exchange of fire between BDR and BSF. Over the last decade and after BGB replaced BDR (which was disbanded after an attempted coup in Dhaka), relations improved further, with both sides resolving not to fire at each other.“We are carrying out a thorough investigation into the matter,” said another BSF officer. “BSF IG (South Bengal Frontier) Y B Khurania has lodged a strong protest with his counterpart, Benzir Ahmed. When meetings take place, we shall demand action against those involved in the firing.”
