35 contractors fail to repair 200 roads, issued notice

potholes

Mumbai Metropolitan Region

2016 road scam

cement concrete roads

BMC

Cooperage Road in Fort is among the 200-odd roads. It had developed large potholes following heavy rain in August. The road was repaired, but fresh potholes surfaced the very next day

34 ROADS FOUND INFERIOR IN 2016

BMC’s vigilance dept finds they are not fulfilling defect liability period clause; this monsoon has seen 11deaths owing toinIn a sharp reminder of the, 35 contractors have been issued show-cause notices for failing to repair over 200 roads covered under the warrantee period.The defect liability period (DLP) foris 10 years, three for asphalt roads and five for mastic asphalt roads. The cement concrete roads under scrutiny were built in the past seven years.Vijay Singhal, additional municipal commissioner, said the notices were issued following a report from the vigilance department stating that the contractors were not fulfilling the DLP criterion. “Stringent action will also be taken against those who cut corners while constructing the roads.”Other civic officials said errant contractors could ultimately be blacklisted. “We found that almost all roads under the DLP had developed potholes or rough patches. The contractors didn’t repair them on time and this caused problems to commuters,” said a senior official.Ravi Raja, Congress corporator and leader of the Opposition in the BMC, raised concerns over a repeat of the 2016 road scam. “Themust blacklist the contractors at once, recover the losses from them and appoint new agencies. The BMC let the entire city suffer during the monsoon,” he said.He also demanded action against engineers and officials in the BMC’s roads department. “They are equally responsible for this. If the roads were of poor quality, why didn’t the engineers raise a red flag?” he said.There have been 11 deaths owing to potholes this monsoon in Mumbai Metropolitan Region. In August, the BMC had said that it had filled 2,334 potholes and had only 314 more to attend to—a claim that had instantly drawn flak from activists and opposition parties.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The 350-crore road scam was uncovered in 2016 after the then Mayor Snehal Ambekar shot off a letter to then Municipal Commissioner Ajoy Mehta, alleging malpractices in road repair works.A civic committee inspected 34 roads and found that nearly all of them fell short of the standard of quality by 53 per cent. Of the 34 roads, 17 were repaired at a cost of Rs 5 crore and above. The committee found that one of the roads didn’t even have the mandatory sub-base, while in another case, only 10-15 per cent of the total road-laying work was completed.The panel also found that contractors influenced BMC-appointed third party auditors to submit reports in their favour, and that civic engineers in supervisory roles failed to keep a check on the malpractices. The investigation report led to the blacklisting of six contractors and two third-party auditors for seven years. Of the 169 officials held guilty, most were charged with lack of supervision or failing to do their duty efficiently.The chief engineer, the assistant engineer and four sub-engineers were ousted. The BMC demoted 12 officials. It reduced the basic pay and stopped increment for two years of 11 other officials; reduced pension of four officials, stopped increment of 123, and imposed a fine of Rs 10,000 each on 10 officials.
