Fake university case: US Congressmen write to authorities in support of 129 detained Indian students

US Congressmen in Washington have written to the US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) urging American authorities to accord the right treatment and access to legal redressal for the 129 Indian students arrested on January 31 for enrolling in a fake university in the US.

On Wednesday (February 6), a bipartisan group of four lawmakers, Thomas R Suozzi, Raja Krishnamoorthi, Brenda Lawrence and Rob Woodall, in a signed letter written to Secretary of DHS, Kirsten M Nielsen and the acting director of ICE Ronald D Vitiello, took up the concerns expressed by the Indian-American community and the Indian Consulate regarding the treatment of the "foreign nationals".

"We urge DHS and ICE to ensure the detained students are treated properly and afforded all rights provided to them under the law, including access to an attorney and release on bond, if they are eligible. We further urge DHS and ICE to share full details and regular updates regarding the Indian students with the embassy and consulates of India, and to facilitate consular access for the detainees," they wrote in the letter.

A sting operation carried out by the DHS resulted in the detention of 129 Indian students after multiple raids were conducted last month by federal authorities, who laid a net to nab those behind fraudulent universities across the US.

According to the ICE, the investigation began in 2015, and HSI agents had been operating a fake varsity--University of Farmington in Michigan's Farmington Hills--since 2017. As per the indictment unsealed last week, eight individuals served as recruiters for the school, enrolling hundreds of foreign nationals as students at the university.

These eight recruiters have been indicted for conspiracy to commit visa fraud and harboring "aliens" for profit by the US Attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan.

"The Indian-American community and the Indian Consulate have expressed concerns regarding the treatment of these detained foreign nationals," the lawmakers said in the letter.

Emphasising the importance of India as a "strategic partner" and "friend" of the US, the lawmakers asked that the students should be treated "fairly" and in accordance with due process.

"In 2017, Indian students comprised 17.3 per cent of all international students in our country, numbering over 1,86,000. These students are a vital pillar of the people-to-people exchanges between the two countries, and they come to the US on grounds of merit. In the spirit of continuing cooperation on educational exchange programs, which benefit both countries economically and culturally, we ask that you ensure the students involved in this case are treated fairly, humanely and in accordance with due process," the Congressmen said.

Meanwhile, the External Affairs Ministry in a statement said: "As on date, our embassy and consulates have obtained consular access to 117 of them, by pro-actively visiting 36 different detention sites through the length and breadth of the country."

Efforts for consular access to the remaining 12 are continuing, including through the 24/7 helpline set up by the Indian embassy and outreach to the community, the MEA said.

The MEA said the government continues to attach high priority to the well-being of the detained students and will remain constantly engaged with US authorities and other stakeholders.
