Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari shot dead in Lucknow; CCTV footage out, murder weapon recovered

Kamlesh Tiwari was immediately taken to Trauma Centre where the former member of Hindu Mahasabha succumbed to injuries | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari's supporters are protesting against his murder that took place in broad daylight Lucknow SSP Kalanidhi Naithani suggests that personal enmity seems to be the motive behind the murder As per reports, Tiwari may have known the assailants as they had reportedly called him before reaching his office

Lucknow: In a shocking incident, Hindu Samaj leader Kamlesh Tiwari was on Friday shot dead by unidentified assailants in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. The former leader of the Hindu Mahasabha was immediately taken to the trauma centre where he succumbed to the injuries.

As per reports, the attackers, wearing saffron clothes, entered Tiwari's office in Khurshid Bagh area on the pretext of giving him a Diwali gift. Soon after walking into the office, the assailants opened the box, took out the firearm, pumped bullets into Tiwari and fled the scene.

Reports suggest that Tiwari may have known the assailants as they had telephoned before reaching his office. The attackers first shot him and then reportedly slit his throat to ensure the controversial Hindu Samaj party leader does not survive the brutal attack.

Meanwhile, the CCTV footage purportedly showing the suspects has emerged. Also, police have found the weapon that was used to kill Tiwari.

As Tiwari's supporters began to protest against their leader's murder in broad daylight, Lucknow Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kalanidhi Naithani told the media that personal enmity seems to be the motive behind the attack. Police teams have been formed to arrest the assailants.

The Lucknow Police are tracing the number from which Tiwari was called.

Giving details of the attack, Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) OP Singh said: "Tiwari founded Hindu Samaj party. Accused are said to be known to him. They brought sweets and spent around half an hour with him. We've found vital clues and are investigating the matter."

Meanwhile, BJP spokesperson Anila Singh said: "I’m sure police will soon track the culprits involved in the murder of former Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari."

Who was Kamlesh Tiwari

Kamlesh Tiwari had first caught the attention in 2015 for his allegedly derogatory statements against Prophet Muhammad. His comments had created a huge uproar and led to massive protests by Muslims across the country. Following the uproar, he was arrested and the NSA was slapped on him.

The Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court had in 2016 revoked the National Security Act slapped against Tiwari. He was eventually released on bail.

Former Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari formed the Hindu Samaj party in January 2017.

This is the fourth murder of a right-wing leader in October.

BJP leader Chaudhary Yashpal Singh was killed in a similar manner in Deoband on October 8.

On October 10, BJP leader Kabir Tiwari was shot dead in Basti, following which student groups set government vehicles ablaze.

BJP corporator Dhara Singh (47) was on October 13 gunned down by unidentified assailants at Deoband in Saharanpur.
