Woman’s spurned lover calls her husband repeatedly; murdered in a fit of rage

Manikanta has been arrested and charged with murder (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Manikanta and Ramya had been together for 11 years before she eloped with Thimmegowda A few months later, she left Thimmegowda and started living with a friend without telling anyone Manikanta called Thimmegowda to Sunkadakatte where he hacked the latter to death

Bengaluru: Drunken stupor cost a 37-year-old man from Bengaluru in Karnataka his life. The man, Thimmegowda was an autorickshaw driver. He was murdered on the night of October 14 by Manikanta, the estranged husband of his former lover. Police have arrested Manikanta and he has been booked under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for murder.

Going by inputs, Manikanta is the husband of one Ramya. The two got married about 11 years ago and have a minor daughter. Their relationship soured when Thimmegowda moved into a house in their neighbourhood and Ramya fell in love with him. Soon after, Ramya moved in with Thimmegowda to a different home in Sunkadakatte.

Their relationship did not last long and Ramya soon moved in with a friend near Ullala. She never told Manikanta about her plans which led him to assume that she was still living with Thimmegowda. On the other hand, Thimmegowda always thought that Ramya must have moved back in with Manikanta. This is what led to the confusion that resulted in the gruesome murder.

Thimmegowda was at a bar on the night of October 14. After consuming excessive alcohol, he called Manikanta and asked him to return Ramya. When Manikanta disconnected the phone thinking that he was being pranked, Thimmegowda kept calling him repeatedly. Police officers probing the matter said that the victim called Manikanta as many as 25 times that night.

Enraged, Manikanta asked Thimmegowda to meet him near Sunkadakatte. When he arrived at the spot, Manikanta hacked him to death and fled the scene of the crime. A passerby spotted the victim's body and alerted the police. A case was registered in this regard and Thimmegowda's call records led the police to Manikanta who has been arrested and charged with murder. Members of Manikanta's family insisted that police also arrest Ramya, alleging that she was responsible for Thimmegowda's death. Police have recorded Ramya's statement and told media outlets that her minor daughter is currently living with Manikanta's sister.

A similar incident had come to light from Tarn Taran district of Punjab in June of this year. A woman murdered her husband by choking him in order to elope with her lover. Police revealed that she even laced his food with poison but decided to choke him instead after she thought that the poison may not kill him. After she murdered her husband, the woman dropped off her two children at her father's home and fled the city with her lover. The two had been married for 12 years, an officer had told media outlets at the time.
