Tamil Nadu: Case reminiscent of Kerala serial killer Jolly Thomas unfolds; 3 systematically murdered

Kannammal became confident of herself after no one found out about Rajamani's murder (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A woman from Tamil Nadu has been accused of murdering three members of her family Identified as Kannammal, the woman allegedly killed her brother, his wife and son-in-law's mother Kannammal was assisted by her daughter Poongodi and her son-in-law Nagendran

Tirupur: An incident that holds close resemblance to the cyanide murder case involving Jolly Thomas reported from Kerala has come to light from Tamil Nadu. A woman identified as Kannammal allegedly murdered three of her family members and buried their bodies in the backyard of her house in Utthandakumara Valasu in Senatpathipalayam panchayat.

Kannammal was arrested by the police on Friday. The first target of the 54-year-old woman was her son-in-law's mother. The woman's son-in-law Nagendran was also arrested by the police for helping Kannammal.

Kannammal and Nagendran allegedly murdered Kannammal's younger brother Selvaraj and his wife Vasanthamani. The police have also claimed that while Nagendran was involved in the murder of Selvaraj and his wife, he was not aware of his mother's death.

Poongodi and Kannammal allegedly murdered Nagendran's mother when he had been living at his sister's residence in Bengaluru where he was trying to get over his alcohol addiction. According to a report, Kannammal and her daughter Poongodi told Nagendran that his mother had an argument with them and had vowed to never visit them.

Allegedly, Poongodi and Kannammal murdered Nagendran's mother Rajamani as she had insulted Poongodi. Poongodi held Rajamani's neck following which, Kannammal strangled her to death with a cloth. When Nagendran returned from Bengaluru, Poongodi and Kannammal told him that his mother was upset with her children as they did not take proper care of her.

Kannammal became confident of herself after no one found out about Rajamani's murder. Her next target was her brother. Kannammal's brother had sold an ancestral property and had given Rs one lakh to her as her share. Kannammal, however, wanted Rs three lakh. She was upset with her brother over the same and hence, she decided to murder him. On October 10, Kannammal's brother Selvaraj visited her residence to invite her to his son's marriage. Selvaraj's wife was also accompanying him.

Allegedly, Kannammal added sedatives to Selvaraj and his wife's food. After they lost consciousness, Kannammal allegedly murdered them with the help of her son-in-law Nagendran and his friend. The son-in-law's friend has been identified as Elango.

According to the police, Nagendran agreed to help Kannammal as he had been nursing a grudge against Selvaraj. Selvaraj had opposed Nagendran's marriage to Poongodi as they belonged to different castes.
