Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari's killers hid knife in sweet box, captured on CCTV

According to CCTV camera footage, the attackers stabbed Kamlesh Tiwari more than 15 times | Photo from AajTak

In Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh, Hindu Samaj Party and Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari was attacked by miscreants in broad daylight on Friday. Kamlesh Tiwari was immediately rushed to a trauma centre, where he succumbed to his injuries.

STABBED 15 TIMES WITH KNIFE

It is learnt that saffron-clad attackers came into Kamlesh Tiwari's office in Khurshid Bagh area carrying knife and country-made pistol in a box of sweets.

The attackers took out from the box of sweets the knife and slit Kamlesh Tiwari's throat with it. The entire incident was captured by a CCTV camera.

The pistol recovered also had a bullet stuck in in the pistol.

The pistol recovered by the police | Photo courtesy: Ashish/AajTak

According to the CCTV camera footage, the attackers stabbed Kamlesh Tiwari more than 15 times and fled from the spot.

IDENTIFICATION OF BOTH SUSPECTS

After the attack, Kamlesh Tiwari was taken to a trauma centre but died of his injuries. According to the sources, there are eyewitnesses who have identified the suspects.

The police are also looking into a terrorist conspiracy angle in Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case.

TEJASVI SURYA AND PRAGYA THAKUR ON KAMLESH TIWARI'S MURDER

Tejasvi Surya took to Twitter and said, "The murder of Kamlesh Tiwari shows how deep the rot of pseudo-secularism has corroded our state and its apparatus. It is also a stark reminder that anti-blasphemy laws should have no place in a truly modern secular democracy."

The murder of #KamleshTiwari shows how deep the rot of pseudo-secularism has corroded our state and its apparatus. It is also a stark reminder that anti blasphemy laws should have no place in a a truly modern secular democracy.



We should bring the culprits to justice! NOW! Tejasvi Surya (@Tejasvi_Surya) October 18, 2019

Pragya Thakur on Twitter wrote, "The brutal killing of Shri Kamlesh ji Tiwari is a shock to the country and Hindutva. His sacrifice will not go in vain."

THREE RIGHT-WING LEADERS MURDERED IN ONE MONTH

Lucknow Senior Superintendent of Police (SP) Kalanidhi Naithani said that the police teams have been formed to arrest the attackers. This is the fourth murder of a right-wing leader this month.

Earlier, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Chaudhary Yashpal Singh was shot and killed in a similar manner on October 8 in Deoband town of Uttar Pradesh.

On October 10, another BJP leader and former student leader Kabir Tiwari was also shot dead in the township, due to which student groups vandalised some government vehicles.

Apart from this, BJP councilor Dhara Singh was shot by unknown assailants in Deoband on October 13.
