CBSE Board Exam 2019: Exams from February 15 – New Rules for candidates, important instructions on cbse.nic.in

CBSE Board Exam 2019: New rules that students must know | Photo Credit: Representative Image

New Delhi: Central Board of Secondary Education, CBSE Board Examination 2019 would commence from February 15, 2019. Approximately 28 lakh candidates are expected to appear in the CBSE 10t 12t Board Examination 2019 this year. Ahead of the examination, CBSE has released important instructions on cbse.nic.in to schools and parents, informing them about changed rules for the examination. Check the important instructions for CBSE Board Exams 2019 below.

Though nominal, the changes have been implemented to check unfair means. Apart from these changes, the board has also instituted a three tier security check to ensure no instance of paper leaks. On ethical grounds, the details of the security measures installed by CBSE are not being discussed in detail. However, information regarding the changes in the rules that have a direct impact on students are provided below.

CBSE 10th 12th Board Examination 2019: New rules that you need to know

School Uniform made mandatory for regular candidates along with school admit cards

The board has strictly advised the schools to instruct their students regarding the same. Students may be denied admission to the examination centre in case a regular student chooses not to wear the school uniform.

Parent Signature of CBSE Board Admit Card 2019

Please note that apart from student and Pricipal's signature, this year CBSE has also included a column for Parent Signature in the CBSE Board Exam 2019 Admit Cards. Students must ensure that their CBSE Board Admit Cards are properly signed by all required. A student with unsigned admit card would not be allowed to enter the examination centre. Related News | CBSE Board Exam 2019 Admit Card: Changes included in Class 10, 12 admit cards – what you need to know

No entry after 10 am

The gates of the examination centres have been instructed to close at 10 am and no students, under any circumstances, would be permitted to enter the examination centre after that time. All the students, and their parents, are hence advised to ensure that they reach the centres on time.

List of things allowed and not allowed

Students can carry their pens and basic stationary in a transparent pouch. Apart from these, students are allowed to carry only their school identity cards and CBSE Board Exam Admit Cards. Please ensure that the CBSE admit cards are duly signed and stamped. Diabetic students are allowed to carry a snack in a clean wrap. No written material, wallets, mobile phones or smart watches are allowed inside the examination hall.
