Ajith's next with Boney Kapoor titled 'Valimai', filming begins

Ajith's next with Boney Kapoor titled 'Valimai', filming begins

The film will have music by Yuvan Shankar Raja and cinematography will be done by Nirav Shah.

Flix Kollywood

Valimai will be the title of Ajith’s next film. The announcement was made on Friday, when the film was inaugurated with a puja. Valimai will bring together director H Vinoth, producer Boney Kapoor and Ajith once again after the success of Nerkonda Paarvai. This project is part of the already agreed films signed by Ajith.

The film will have music by Yuvan Shankar Raja and cinematography will be done by Nirav Shah.

The film was ideally supposed to go on the floors with a puja by the end of August. Thrilled about successfully working on Nerkonda Paarvai, Boney took to Twitter and wrote: “A big thank you to the entire unit of Nerkonda Paarvai for working towards August 8th release. Happy to announce our next AK60 with Ajith Kumar, H Vinoth and Zee Studios will start with pooja end August 2019.”

Not long ago, rumours emerged that Ajith will be seen playing a car racer in his next film which will also be directed by H Vinoth. According to the industry grapevine, this film will have a racing backdrop and will be shot in locations like South Africa, Budapest and Middle East. It is rumoured that this film will feature SJ Suryah as the antagonist.

Boney Kapoor decided to venture into producing a Tamil film mainly to honour a promise between his late wife and actor Sridevi’s and Ajith. “While working with Ajith in English Vinglish, Sridevi had expressed her desire that Ajith does a Tamil film for our home production. Nothing exciting came up till one day last year; Ajith suggested remaking Pink in Tamil. She immediately agreed as she thought it was the most appropriate and timely film to make and Ajith would bring all the elements required to make it into a great Tamil film,” Kapoor had said in a statement.

Nerkonda Paarvai that released a few months ago received great response from Ajith’s fans. More details about Valimai are awaited.
