Kriti Sanon: #MeToo is the greatest thing to happen to the industry, changed the way people look at things

Since the past few months, the Me Too movement has exploded in Bollywood, for names of a lot of prominent personalities have come under the scanner for their sexual misconduct. It all started with Former Miss India Tanushree Dutta renewing a decade-old sexual harassment case against Nana Patekar that took place on the sets of 2008-film Horn Ok Please, and post-Tanushree, the #MeToo campaign has helped a lot of women to come out in the open, naming and shaming their sexual predators. From Nana Patekar, Sajid Khan, Anu Malik, Kailash Kher, Vikas Bahl to Subhash Kapoor, Alok Nath and others, a lot of names have been called out for their sexual misconduct.

At the time when the Me Too movement had plagued Bollywood, Kriti Sanon was shooting for Housefull 4 in Rajasthan when the name of the former director of Housefull 4, Sajid Khan, was called out in the Me Too movement. Soon after, Housefull 4 actors- Akshay Kumar, Bobby Deol, and Riteish Deshmukh took to social media to support the Me Too movement and stating that they will not work with anyone who is accused in the movement. And Raabta actress Kriti Sanon, being a feminist, took to social media to support the movement. Talking about the #MeToo campaign, Kriti informed Mirror, “I’m a big feminist and #MeToo is the greatest thing to happen to the film industry in a long time. It’s changed the way people look at things. Now there’s fear that if you do something wrong, you can’t get away with it. I don’t know how much justice the survivors have got because sadly, there’s only so much you can do to prove your point because a lot of harassment is verbal, without witnesses around. Also, many fingers were pointed anonymously,” adding, “It’s understandable if a survivor doesn’t want to come out with allegations in public, but the cops and judiciary need to know their identity. Having said that, I’m glad #MeToo happened and shook things up.”

In the wake of the Me Too movement, the then director of Housefull 4, Sajid Khan, had to step down as the director of the film, and Farhad Samji replaced Sajid. On the work front, Kriti Sanon was last seen in super-hit film Bareilly Ki Barfi and next, this diva will be seen in Luka Chuppi, Arjun Patiala and Panipat. In Luka Chuppi, Kriti Sanon is playing the role of an intern journalist while in Arjun Patiala, this Raabta actress will be playing the role of a serious hard-core journalist. Talking about the story of Luka Chuppi, it revolves around a guy who wants to marry a girl, however, the girl wants to go in for a live-in relationship first and see if the two are compatible or not.

Housefull 4 is the fourth installment of the Housefull series and stars Akshay Kumar, Riteish Deshmukh, Bobby Deol, Kriti Sanon and Johnny Lever in lead roles. The film will hit the theatres on October 26, 2019.

ALSO READ: Photos: Kriti Sanon rocks casual chic look; Aditya Roy Kapur keeps it cool as he visits Mahesh Bhatt’s office
