Want to know why he was shot dead: Son of BSF man killed by Bangladesh forces

AGRA: During his 29 years of service in Border Security Force (BSF), slain head constable Vijay Bhan Singh of Firozabad district made more friends than enemies while guarding the nation in different terrains. Probably that was one of the reasons, why he was given the task to lead a team of six men to hold flag meeting with Border Guard Bangladesh to extract the Indian fisherman, who was in the custody across the border for inadvertently intruding into foreign water territory.The 51-year-old hailed from Chamrauli village of Shikohabad block. He is survived by 50-year-old wife Sunita and two sons, Corporal Vivek Kumar (28) and Sumit Kumar (21). He joined BSF in 1990. He was supposed to come home on leave in November.Speaking to TOI, his elder son, Corporal Vivek Kumar, currently serving in technical team at Yelahanka air force station , Bengaluru, said, "He was a humble man, who cared for everyone. He was a senior with enormous experience of tackling difficult situations which arose during border skirmishes. On Thursday morning, as post commandant he was leading the team of six men to hold flag meeting with BGB after an Indian fishermen crossed the international border inadvertently. It was supposed to be a peaceful task to retrieve the fisherman, but my father and his junior colleagues were surrounded by armed BGS men who took aggressive stance, instead of cooperating into the flag meeting.”"I was told by BSF officials that sensing the situation tensed, the BSF team decided to retreat into the Indian territory on their motorboat, but the BGS men suddenly rained bullets from AK-47 rifles without any provocation. Our family needs to know that why he was shot dead,” said Vivek. According to BSF, head constable Vijay Bhan Singh was shot in head. Deceased BSF man was about to get promoted as sub-inspector.Neeraj Kumar, the gram pradhan of Chamrauli village and relative of Vijay Bhan Singh said, "The family has tradition of serving the country by joining defence forces. Vijay’s elder brother Satyendra Bhan Singh is retired solider of Indian Army , while Vijay’s elder son is serving in IAF. There are over a dozen men in the village who are serving in defence forces.”“We want a martyr memorial of Vijay Bhan Singh in the village and government job for Sumit Kumar, his younger son," said the gram pradhan.Vijay’s mortal remains would be airlifted from Kolkata on Saturday and brought to his native village.Meanwhile, Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath paid homage to the slain BSF man and announced a compensation of Rs 25 lakh for his family.
