Personal enmity reason behind Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari's murder, no ISIS link: UP Home Secretary

Uttar Pradesh government has denied any link of terror groups in the murder of hardline rightwing leader Kamlesh Tiwari on Friday, saying that the killing seemed to be about personal enmity.

Tiwari, leader of the Hindu Samaj Party and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, was shot dead by unidentified assailants in the Naka area of Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh. Police have recovered a revolver from the site.

Initial reports suggested that Tiwari's death was caused by a gunshot. The doctors, however, said that his throat had been slit with a sharp weapon. He succumbed to injuries during the treatment.

Speaking to Zee News, Uttar Pradesh Home Secretary Avnish Awasthi denied that the killing was related to terror group ISIS. Tiwari's murder seemed to be about personal enmity, he said.

According to reports, the attackers entered his office on the pretext of handing over a gift. The alleged attackers, wearing saffron clothes, were seen entering Tiwari's office in Khurshid Bagh area. They opened fire on him and fled from the scene.

Lucknow Senior Superintendent of Police Kalanidhi Naithani said police have initiated a probe and the hunt to nab the culprits was on. A Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been constituted to probe the case. SK Bhagat (IG Lucknow), Dinesh Puri (SP Crime Lucknow) and PK Mishra (Deputy SP Special Task Force) are members of the SIT.

Police said prima facie it seems that killers were known to Tiwari. According to Director-General of Police (DGP) OP Singh, the killers met with the victim for 36 minutes before opening fire at him. He was then stabbed and his throat was slit.

"He founded Hindu Samaj party. Accused are said to be known to him. They brought sweets and spent around half an hour with him. We've found vital clues and are investigating the matter," Singh said.

Police said they have recovered important clues through the CCTV camera and will catch the killers soon.
