Selective Killings Post Abrogation Of Article 370

Omkar Dattatray

While there has been self-imposed lockdown and hartal in the Kashmir valley after the centre government annulled most controversial article 370 of the constitution of India which granted special position to the sensitive border state of Jammu and Kashmir. People of Jammu and ladakh have whole-heartedly welcomed the abrogation of the article 370 and the bifurcation of the state and carving of two union territories of Jammu and kashmir and ladakh. The peace loving kashmiri’s also are happy in their heart of hearts but due to the fear of the militants are forced to observe bandh for the last over seventy days. Rightly the governors administration has imposed some restrictions on the movement of people and article 144 is still there in some sensitive areas. There have been restrictions on the mobile phones and internet as well keeping in view the situation in the valley which was once a paradise on the earth but has been reduced to hell due to the mayhem and bloodshed let loose by the militants at the behest of Pakistan. It is a matter of satisfaction that post abrogation of article 370 not a single kashmiri life has been lost .It in itself is the biggest proof that the Indian government as well as the governors administration is concerned of the life and limb of the kashmiris. The government values the lives of kashmiris very much and thus the unprecedented restrictions. The terrorists and their mentors abroad are frustrated over the annulment of the article 370 and hence are continuing the dance of death and mayhem .Militants are on the run and are being neutralized by the security forces but on the directions of their masters are now indulging in the killings of the people belonging to other states of India which is most unfortunate and strongly condemnable. Terrorists have changed their strategy and are now killing outsiders which is unacceptable and should not happen again .Such dastardly killings are against kashmiri culture and sufi traditions and have no place in kashmiri society. Outsiders are our valued gusts and should be treated with all humility and their killings are the anti -thesis of kashmiri culture and hospitality. Such killings of the outsiders are anti -religious and it amounts to murder of the much valued kashmiriyat and thus should be condemned by one and all. These killings will be a death knell to the tourist industry, fruit industry and over all economy of the Jand k. It is very sad and gruesome that a truck driver belonging to Rajisthan has been murdered in south kashmiris Shopian. This is the murder of humanity. Not satisfied with the gruesome killing of the truck driver the brutes have again killed an innocent brick Killen labour in pulwama in broad day light. One does not know what his fault was as he was a poor man and was working for earning his livelihood. Again a trader from Punjab was shot dead in a shopian village and another man was critically wounded. It has no place in the civilized world . The enemies of humanity have now decided to kill outsiders so that they will not dare to come to Kashmir. It is the targeted killing and the ill motive is to kill one and scare thousands. Such unfortunate and brute killings are abominable and have no place in the civilized world and deserve strongest condemnation. These unfortunate killings should not happen again. These killings can have bad repercussions in other states of India where our boys and girls are studying and where our businessmen are doing business .The governor of the state Satya pal Malik and home minister of India have rightly time and again said that not a single life was lost in Kashmir and not a single bullet was fired by the security forces. This is simple truth and plain speaking. Government should provide fool proof security to all including the outsiders who are becoming soft targets. The government should revise its strategy and focus on the safety and security of outsiders. Every human life is precious and no one should be allowed to be a fodder for the canons of the frustrated terrorists. To be brief such killings should be stopped and the killers should be apprended and given severest punishment under law. May better sense prevail on the militants so that they shun the path of militancy and come to national mainstream .
