Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Won't cremate body till CM Yogi Adityanath pays visit, says family

The family of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari, who was murdered at his home in Lucknow, said they won't cremate his body till Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath pays them a visit.

Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed multiple times and his throat was slit at his home on Friday.

Tiwari's body, which was earlier sent for post-mortem, has been handed over to the family on the early hours of Saturday morning.

However, Kamlesh Tiwari's family have refused to cremate his body till UP CM Yogi Adityanath pays a visit to them.

His family had also urged for job assurance for two members of the family. His wife has even threatened self immolation if the demands are not met.

The mortal remains of Kamlesh Tiwari reached his native place in Sitapur's Mahmudabad on Saturday morning amid high drama.

Earlier, Kamlesh Tiwari's wife filed complaint on the basis of which an FIR was registered against two maulanas. However, no arrests have been made so far.

Tiwari's wife Kiran in a complaint to police said, "Around 12.30 pm, my husband was sitting in his office located on the first floor of the house and speaking to some unknown persons. I was in another room. Suddenly, for nearly 4-5 minutes, there was no conversation. I came out to enquire and saw my husband lying in a pool of blood. The two persons, who had come to meet him, were running out of the office."

She further alleged, "In 2016, Mohammed Mufti Naeem Kazmi and Imam Maulana Anuwarul Haq had announced a cash reward of Rs 1.5 crore on my husband's head. They have killed my husband by hatching a conspiracy."

The police said they have recovered a CCTV footage from near the crime scene in which two people can be seen approaching Kamlesh's office before the murder took place.

Meanwhile, Yogi Adityanath had sought a detailed report on the incident from the additional chief secretary of the home department Avanish Awasthi and the state police chief.

UP Deputy CM Dinesh Sharma on Friday met the family members of Kamlesh Tiwari where the deceased leader's supporters raised slogans against him.

"The demands of Kamlesh Tiwari's family would be fulfilled. Security and an ex-gratia would also be given to Tiwari's family. The authorities have been directed to arrest the accused as soon as possible," Dinesh Sharma told India Today TV.
