UP: Hindu Samaj Party chief Kamlesh Tiwari's wife threatens self-immolation, family demands security

Kamlesh Tiwari's wife further claimed that he used to get threat calls every day but the administration did not act upon it | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari used to get threat calls every day but the administration did not act upon it The founder of the Hindu Samaj Party was shot dead at Naka area of Lucknow Tiwari first came into limelight in 2015 when he allegedly made objectionable remarks against Prophet Muhammad

Sitapur: The wife of Hindu Samaj Party chief Kamlesh Tiwari, who was shot dead on Friday, has threatened to self-immolate herself demanding justice for her husband. The family members have said they will not cremate his body till Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath pays them a visit.

Demanding justice for her deceased husband Kiran told reporters, “I will commit self-immolation right at this place along with my children”.

She further claimed that Tiwari used to get threat calls every day but the administration did not act upon it.

Another family member demanded that the government should provide a government job for his two sons and also demanded security for the family.

Tiwari, the former leader of Hindu Mahasabha and founder of the Hindu Samaj Party, was shot dead at Naka area of Lucknow on Friday.

Two men wearing saffron robes entered his office with pistol and knives hidden inside a sweet box. Tiwari was stabbed 15 times and was shot. The assailants managed to flee from the spot and a revolver was also recovered from the site of the crime.

After being attacked, he was immediately taken to a hospital where he succumbed to injuries.

Another relative told ANI that some people were threatening to kill Kamlesh that’s why they were demanding security for Kamlesh and his family for the last two years. However, the government and administration did not listen to us, he said.

The police have registered the FIR based on the complaint filed by Tiwari's wife and a Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been constituted to investigate Tiwari's murder.

Issuing a statement Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh said that accused knew Tiwari as they spent around 30 minutes with him on the pretext of giving him sweets.

He further said that the shooting of Tiwari was “purely a criminal activity conducted by two people” adding that they have found vital clues and investigation in the matter is currently underway.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has sought a report from Principal Secretary (Home) and Director General of Police (DGP) in the case.

Tiwari first came into limelight in 2015 when he allegedly made objectionable remarks against Prophet Muhammad resulting in massive uproar and protests by Muslims across the country.

He also contested unsuccessfully in 2012 Assembly elections from Lucknow.

Saharanpur and Deoband, in particular, were on the boil after Tiwari's remarks and protests were seen on the streets. The national highway was blocked and the police had a tough time trying to control the outrage.
