Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: FIR against two Maulanas after Tiwari's wife complaint

The investigation is underway in the Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case, a Hindu Samaj Party leader who succumbed to injuries after being attacked in his office in Lucknow on Friday.

A day after his alleged murder, his wife had registered a complaint against Maulana Anwarul Haq from Bijnor, who had announced a reward of Rs 51 lakh on the beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari.

In 2015, Maulana Anwarul Haq had allegedly announced a reward of Rs 51 lakh on the beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari.

After Tiwari's wife's complaint, the Lucknow police has registered an FIR against two Maulanas from Bijnor.

Earlier, it was reported that Maulana Anwarul Haq has been arrested but Avinash Chandra, ADG Bareilly Zone has clarified that Maulana Anwarul Haq has not been arrested, investigation is still underway.

Avinash Chandra, ADG Bareilly Zone clarifies, "Maulana Anwarul Haq has not been arrested, investigation still underway". #KamleshTiwari https://t.co/pvGbMmAWGN — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: Police has arrested Maulana Anwarul Haq from Bijnor. In 2015, he had announced a reward on Rs 51 lakh on beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari. https://t.co/Ie4jf4U8rc — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

Also Read: Personal enmity reason behind Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari's murder, no ISIS link: UP Home Secretary

She has said in her complaint that these two had threatened to kill her husband in 2016.

Meanwhile, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been constituted to probe Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.

SK Bhagat, IG Lucknow; Dinesh Puri, SP Crime Lucknow and PK Mishra, deputy SP STF, are part of the three-member SIT, who will probe Kamlesh Tiwari's death case.

Earlier, Tiwari's mortal remains had reached his residence in UP's Mahmudabad.

Kamlesh Tiwari, leader of the Hindu Samaj Party and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, was shot dead by unidentified assailants in the Naka area of Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh.

Initial reports suggested that Tiwari's death was caused by a gunshot. The doctors, however, said that his throat had been slit with a sharp weapon. He succumbed to injuries during the treatment.

According to reports, the attackers entered his office on Friday on the pretext of handing over a gift. They opened fire on him and fled from the scene.

Tiwari was in the news recently for giving a controversial remark on Prophet Mohammad. Police have also recovered a revolver from the site.
