Al-Hind Brigade claims responsibility for killing Kamlesh Tiwari over WhatsApp, says 'war has begun'

Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Get ready to see more. The war has begun: Al-Hind Brigade Kamlesh Tiwari was the former leader of Hindu Mahasabha and had founded the Hindu Samaj Party Uttar Pradesh Police is yet to confirm whether the outfit has links to any global terror organization

Lucknow: A little known outfit called the Al-Hind Brigade has claimed responsibility for the brutal murder of Hindu Samaj Party president Kamlesh Tiwari. In a widely circulated WhatsApp message the group said that Tiwari had tried to defame Islam and Muslims, however, the veracity of the claim is yet to be verified.

"We at Al-Hind Brigade claim the responsibility for killing Kamlesh Tiwari, who tried to defame Islam and Muslims. More to come," the outfit said.

The message also carried a photograph of Tiwari calling him a nuisance saying that anyone who points fingers towards Islam and Muslims will meet the same end.

“Get ready to see more. The war has begun,” the message read. The Uttar Pradesh Police is yet to confirm whether the outfit is linked to any global terror organization.

Tiwari was the former leader of Hindu Mahasabha and had founded the Hindu Samaj Party.

The Hindu Samaj Party president was brutally murdered in Lucknow’s Naka area by unidentified men. He was stabbed 15 times on face and throat after which he was shot. The cops have recovered the pistol from the crime scene and further investigation is underway.

After being shot at, he was immediately taken to a hospital where he succumbed to injuries.

Tiwari’s wife has threatened to self-immolate herself demanding justice for her husband while the family members have said they will not cremate his body till Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath pays them a visit.

Talking to reporters Director General of Police OP Singh said they are investigating the matter and prima facie it appears that the killers knew the victim.

Meanwhile, Lucknow Police registered an FIR against two Maulanas from Bijnor for threatening Tiwari in 2016. Maulana Anwarul Haq from Bijnor in 2015 had announced a reward of Rs 51 lakh on the beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari after he allegedly made objectionable remarks against Prophet Muhammad sparking outrage and protests by Muslim groups in India.

The alleged killers had spent around 30 minutes with Tiwari on the pretext of gifting him sweets.

Lucknow MP and Defence Minister Rajnath Singh also spoke to the Director-General of Police and the District Magistrate to take cognisance of the development in the case ordering the police to take appropriate action against the accused without any delay.

The UP government has formed a Special Investigating Team (SIT) to investigate the case and Lucknow Inspector General SK Bhagat and Superintendent of Police PK Mishra of Special Task Force have been included in it.
