Bengaluru: Letters to RSS chief, BJP President Amit Shah constitute ‘sedition’

BJP President

RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat

Dattatreya Hosabole

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Central Crime Branch

Karnataka

Amit Shah

.

It is shocking how the police are trying to prove sedition charges which is an archaic law infringing on personal rights. All that the police found were acknowledgment receipts of some letters I had sent to Amit Shah, Mohan Bhagwat and Hosabole – V Shashidar, President of the Akhila Karnataka Police Mahasangha

Letters addressed toAmit Shah,and, another Sangh veteran and a close aide offigure among the ‘crucial’ piece of evidence lined up by the police to prove the seditious intent of the Sepoy Mutiny. We are not referring to the one that involved Mangal Pandey in 1857 but the recent one in 2016 when the state police constabulary came to the brink of an open mutiny against the Siddaramaiah government. These feature as evidence in the charge sheet filed by the(CCB) against V Shashidar, President of the AkhilaPolice Mahasangha, named as the first accused, followed by his five accomplices including three serving police constables. The chargesheet also interestingly mentions 347 copies of minutes or transfer recommendations of police officials from various politicians obtained through Right to Information (RTI) act as vital proof to prove treason under the IPC section of 124 A (sedition) to revolt against the state and deliberately incite resentment among the police force.“It is shocking how the police are trying to prove sedition charges which itself is an archaic law infringing on personal rights. All that the cops found were acknowledgment receipts of some letter I had sent to, Mohan Bhagwat and Hosabole. They are public figures and might be getting thousands of letters from people across the country. It is not a crime at all,” said Shashidhar.Shashidhar added the contents of these letters included in the charge sheet were completely fabricated according to the narrative handed down by the previous government. The charge sheet literally tries to promote Shashidhar’s call to police constabulary to go on mass leave on June 4, 2016 demanding better wages and dignified treatment from senior police officials, as a part of a design to organise and overthrow the then ruling Congress government.“The police community in Karnataka under my leadership is ready to take on the government … Our acts for sure will help BJP to power in the next assembly elections in Karnataka... Best wishes to RSS,” are some of the contents of these letters mentioned in the charge sheet.The inclusion of 347 ‘minutes’ documents issued by ministers and elected representatives to the DGP and ADGP offices ‘recommending’ their choice of inspectors and Deputy Superintendent of Police rank officials in their political fiefdom as another evidence of sedition is also being strongly contested. “ I had obtained these documents by applying through RTI. So when has that become an act of sedition? ” asks Shashidhar.Apart from this evidence, the rest of the charge sheet mainly consists of messages posted on social media, WhatsApp screen shots and numerous pamphlets and letterheads of Akhila Karnataka Police Mahasangha and Rakshaka Sena, a political offshoot that was floated by Shashidar with the alleged support of families of working police personnel. The state home department under its former minister G Parameshwara and the police department were pushed into a state of panic after more than 12,000 personnel from the constabulary rank threatened to take mass leave and abstain from work on June 4 2016 . The state government also officially brought police under essential services and threatened any constable going on leave would be charged under the provisions of Essential Services Maintenance Act ( ESMA) 1981 by passing an order and bringing police as an essential service under its purview on May 31, 2015.“Apart from sedition charges, the police have also invoked ESMA against me but I am neither a government employee nor connected with any police family. I am an ex-cop and I cannot be booked under it. A 2831 page charge sheet was filed in April 2018 but we were refused a copy and I finally got access to a copy last week on January 24,” Shashidhar added.With the archaic sedition laws being invoked by the government and police for settling scores and carrying out witch hunt against those who do not conform with their ideologies, legal experts point out that the laws of sedition are archaic, since they were formulated during the British rule but were being used out of context these days. The 1857 Sepoy Mutiny served as an eye opener for the British law makers when they formulated the Indian Penal Code sections in 1860 including those pertaining to sedition and trying to oppose their government. “It is a serious charge and has to be invoked only if the situation warrants it. One of the apt examples is the case of Shashidhar where he has been charged with sedition for reportedly trying to instigate the police personnel to go on mass leave. But that cannot be legally seen as an act to topple the government. Most of the sedition cases fail to pass legal scrutiny,” said Shyam Sundar, a leading High Court lawyer.A legal petition has been filed at the High Court in February by Shashidhar seeking to quash the charges against him, including that of sedition under section 124 A of the IPC. The case against Shashidhar and five others including three serving police constables were framed on the basis of a suo moto complaint filed by a sub inspector of Yelahanka new town police station on June 2, 2016 which was later taken over by the Central Crime Branch (CCB). The state government had also constituted a committee to review salary structure of its constabulary in June 2016 which had submitted its report in September 2016 recommending a pay hike of around 35 percent to constables and sub inspectors after analysing the payscales adopted in rest of the states across the country.
