Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Hindu Samaj Party leader 'killed over offensive comment' he made in 2015; 3 held

Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: PTI

Lucknow: Three people were detained in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case after a joint operation carried out by Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat Police on Saturday. The three detained persons have been identified as Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Khurshid Ahmed Pathan and Faizan. Two more people were detained in the matter and are currently being interrogated, confirmed UP Police. It is being reported that it was a revenge killing over Tiwari's controversial remarks on Prophet Mohammed back in 2015.

According to police reports, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh (24), Faizan (21) works in a shop and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23) works as a tailor and has some knowledge of computers. All three were detained from Surat.

While briefing the media about the latest developments, UP Police DGP, OP Singh said, "In the initial interrogation, no criminal background of the three people, who have been detained, has been established yet. If needed, we will take them into remand, bring them to UP and question them."

"In the FIR, two people were named as conspirators - Maulana Anwarul Haq and Mufti Naeem Kazmi. These two have also been detained and they're being questioned. We'll monitor Gujarat, Bijnor, Lucknow and other places which will come up during the investigation," added the UP DGP.

He also confirmed that Khurshid Pathan came up with the idea of eliminating Kamlesh Tiwari and Mohsin had encouraged him while Faizan was involved in buying sweet box. "Other leads including a person called Gaurav who called Kamlesh from Surat and wanted to join his party is also being probed," added OP Singh.

He went on to confirm that the UP Police is working in collaboration with the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) and till now, no link with any terrorist organisation has been established.

"Prima Facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals," said OP Singh.

Earlier on Friday, Hindu Mahasabha's former leader Kamlesh Tiwari was killed after being shot at in Lucknow. The 45-year-old Tiwari was immediately rushed to a hospital where he succumbed to his injuries.
