Kamlesh Tiwari murder: UP Police says case solved, remarks on Prophet Muhammad behind killing

Uttar Pradesh Police has claimed to solve the sensational Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police(DGP), OP Singh addressed a press conference in Lucknow in connection with Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.



OP Singh said, "A joint team of UP and Gujarat Police has detained 3 persons and interrogating them. Their names are Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan, & Khurshid Ahmed Pathan. Two other accused were also detained but released later, they are being monitored."



UP DGP confirmed the murder of the Hindu leader Kamlesh Tiwari to be a radical killing and held the Hindu Samaj Party leader's objectionable 2015 comments on Prophet Muhammad as the reason behind the killing.

#WATCH Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh on Hindu Samaj Party leader #KamleshTiwari's murder: The inciting speech that the victim had given in 2015 was a reason behind this. As per the information that we have received, it seems it was done in a planned manner. pic.twitter.com/lWV4DTI0t6 ANI (@ANI) October 19, 2019



"Prima facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalized by the speech that he [Kamlesh Tiwari] gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals," he added.



In the FIR, two people were named as conspirators, Maulana Anwarul Haq and Mufti Naeem Qazmi. These 2 have also been detained and they're being questioned.

No terror link found



The Uttar Pradesh Police has found that the accused have no link with any terrorist organisation. The clarification comes after reports had found that the Islamic State (IS) had previously issued a threat against Kamlesh Tiwari.



OP Singh further said, "In the initial interrogation no criminal background of the three people, who have been detained, has been established yet. If needed, we will take them into remand, bring them to UP and question them.

UP DGP OP Singh said the police are working on the case in collaboration with Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS).



The gruesome murder of the president of a little-known Hindu Samaj Party at his home in Khurshed Bagh in Lucknow has created outrage with demands for swift justice and allegations of police inaction.



Kamlesh Tiwari was brutally murdered at his home at Khursheda Bagh in Lucknow on Friday afternoon.

Also read: Kamlesh Tiwari murder: 3 men including cleric arrested from Gujarat

ALSO WATCH| Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari was on IS hit list: Gujarat ATS
