Moothon Movie Review: The beauty of this haunting Nivin Pauly film lies in its subtleties

Moothon Movie Review

Key Highlights The review of Geetu Mohandas' latest film Moothon is out now Moothon, which translates to The Elder One, stars Nivin Pauly, Sobhita Dhulipala and Shashank Arora, among others

As I attended the special screening of Geetu Mohandas' Moothon at MAMI 2019, I was told that it is for the first time in 20 years that a film primarily from Malayalam cinema was selected to be the opening film at the Mumbai Film Festival. And after watching 1 hour and 50 minutes of pure cinematic brilliance, I got why it was selected. Moothon, which translates to The Elder One, is about a 10-year-old kid named Mulla, who runs away from Lakshadweep in search of the elder brother Akbar, who is believed to be living in Mumbai.

Before I start, let me make it clear, this review is going to be more or less spoiler-free and if in case there is a need for me to mention something spoiler-filled, a warning will be issued. Actress and filmmaker Geetu Mohandas, who had last helmed Nawzuddin Siddiqui and Geetanjali Thapa's National Award-winning film Liar's Dice has delivered an engaging, gripping and a brave film with Moothon. At first, the movie will grab your attention by how beautifully it has been shot (Cinematography by Ravi Rai) and from there onwards it takes you on a ride you least expect. The two major twists change the narrative upside down. The goes back and forth in time.

While the portions that authentically portray Mumbai underbelly are edgy and keep you at the edge of your seat, those shot in the beautiful locales of Lakshadweep Island is pure and subtle. It is the beauty of those portions that stay with you long after the movie ends. The depiction of a life far away from the chaotic civilisation we all live in, tug at your heartstrings.

The movie deals with various taboos and subjects that might make you uncomfortable but Geetu portrays everything with the utmost ease. From the gender confusion to sexual orientation, Moothon gets everything on point. In fact, the one thing I loved the most was the (mild spoilers here) depiction of a romance between Akbar and his love interest. The chemistry they share is one of the best I have seen on screen in recent times. And the way Geetu has shot it with perfect lighting and backdrop amps it up by manifolds.

On the outset, the story of the film is about a kid in search of Moothon, it is the subtle aspect of it that hits you hard. Spoiler Alert That scene when Akbar knocks on the door of a Eunuch and upon realising it is Akbar, the Eunuch changes his attire into that of a man with a smile that evokes happiness and excitement is fantastic. Spoiler Ends

The background score, the smart use of VFX, the texture, technically Moothon is a sound film. Special mention to the action sequences. All the hits and slaps in the film feel as real as it gets. Watch out for that brilliant chase sequence between Akbar and Salim. Coming to the performances, Nivin Pauly has outperformed himself with this fun. Hats off to him for playing such a distinct and complex character on the big screen. This is a brave choice of role for a popular star like him to take on and sinks his teeth in it. From a ruthless mobster to a guy in love, Nivin shows his range as an actor with effortless ease. Sanjana as Mulla delivers a performance worthy of all the accolades. The more I say about her is less. That final shot of her smiling face will haunt you.

Roshan Matthew as Aamir is outstanding. His is a mute character but his eyes, expressions and gestures do all the talking and pierce through your heart. Shashank Arora as Salim, Akbar's side-kick plays a brash and over the top character. You'll hate him and but will surely be bowled over by his performance. Sobhita Dhulipala as Rosy, the top prostitute of Kamathipura is good. Though I wish she had more to do considering the kind of performer she is.

All the other supporting characters are good. Specifically those roadside kids in Kamathipura. On the downside though, I felt the movie slows down a bit in the middle portion before it picks up the pace again. Overall, Moothon is a must-watch for the fans of Nivin Pauly, all the cinema lovers and the movie-going audience in general. It is edgy, beautiful and haunting.

P.S. - After the screening, in a Q & A session Geetu Mohandas informed that the version we saw at the festival is slightly different then what the general audience is going to see in theatres.

Rating: 4 stars

Review by: Gaurang Chauhan
