Cops crack dacoity case, 4 accused held

Ludhiana: Eleven days after unidentified miscreants injured a trader by firing gun shots at him in Jagraon and snatched his bag full of cash, Ludhiana rural police have arrested four accused in the case.

The arrested accused have been identified as Veerpal Singh of Sidhwan Bet, Sukhjinder Singh Kaka of Bhundri, Gursimrat Singh of Sidhwan Bet, Manpreet Singh of Gorsiyan Kadar Baksh, Gurwinder Singh Kalu of Bhaini Arayian, Raj Kumar of Khurshedpura and an unidentified accused managed to flee from the spot.

On 25 January evening, pulse merchant Rajesh Gupta was going to his house on his Activa scooter when two unidentified men pushed him near his house from his vehicle and tried to take away his bag from his scooter. When Rajesh tried to stop them, the miscreants fired gun shots at him. The bag contained Rs 1 lakh.

SSP Ludhiana rural Varinder Singh Brar said considering the serious nature of the crime they had constituted five teams to trace the accused persons.

He said when the police parties were present at the Tehsil Chowk in Jagraon for a joint operation, they were informed that accused were involved in various incidents of theft and robberies in the city.

He said the on Tuesday, the accused were found with weapons while they were found sitting in an isolated place near the Chungi number 5 to Aligarh bridge. He said the accused were arrested from the spot.

The police have recovered 2 country-made .315 bore pistols, 2 country-made .32 bore pistols, eleven cartridges, a car (which was used in the crime), Rs 1 lakh, two gold rings and a voter card from them. The police said the other members of the gang Raj Kumar, Gurwinder Singh and an unidentified person fled from the scene.

The SSP said during investigation the accused confessed that on January 25 they had shot at Rajesh Gupta and snatched Rs 1 lkah from him. He said further investigation was going on in the matter.

On January 25, Rajesh Gupta was going to his house on his Activa scooter at 7.30pm when two unidentified men pushed him near his house from his scooter following which he fell from his vehicle. Rajesh tried to stop the miscreants from taking his bag, but they fired at him and the accused ran from the spot with the bag containing Rs 1 lakh.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
