Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: All three detained confessed crime, says DIG Gujarat ATS

As the investigation is underway in the Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case, Himanshu Shukla, DIG Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) on Saturday said that the three persons who have been detained have confessed to the crime.

Earlier, in a presser, UP DGP OP Singh had said that a joint team of UP and Gujarat Police have detained three persons who are being questioned in the Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case.

The three persons who have been detained are Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan, and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan. "Two other accused were also detained but released later, they are being monitored," the DGP added.

During the initial interrogation, they (accused detained by Gujarat ATS) have accepted that they were involved and that all three are linked to the case in some manner.

#WATCH Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh on Hindu Samaj Party leader #KamleshTiwari's murder: During the initial interrogation they (accused detained by Gujarat ATS) have accepted that they were involved, and that all three are linked to the case in some manner. pic.twitter.com/KdcX2FzmDZ — ANI (@ANI) October 19, 2019

Speaking to media a while ago, UP DGP OP Singh said, "Prima facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals."

#WATCH OP Singh, UP DGP on #KamleshTiwariMurder: Prima facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalized by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals. pic.twitter.com/kJ19yoBLh5 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

"The inciting speech that the victim had given in 2015 was a reason behind this. As per the information that we have received, it seems it was done in a planned manner," OP Singh further added.

UP Police has also constituted an SIT to probe Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case.

SK Bhagat, IG Lucknow; Dinesh Puri, SP Crime Lucknow and PK Mishra, deputy SP STF, are part of the three-member SIT, who are probing Kamlesh Tiwari's death case.

Kamlesh Tiwari, a Hindu Samaj Party leader and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, succumbed to injuries after being attacked in his office in Lucknow on Friday.

A day after his alleged murder, his wife had registered a complaint against Maulana Anwarul Haq from Bijnor, who had announced a reward of Rs 51 lakh on the beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari.

In 2015, Maulana Anwarul Haq had allegedly announced a reward of Rs 51 lakh on the beheading of Kamlesh Tiwari.

After Tiwari's wife's complaint, the Lucknow police has registered an FIR against two Maulanas from Bijnor.
