Killing of outside traders, truck drivers, labourer; Security operations intensified in parts of south Kashmir

Killing of outside traders, truck drivers, labourer; Security operations intensified in parts of south Kashmir

SRINAGAR, Oct 18: Security forces have intensified their operations in parts of south Kashmir to nab those behind the killing of two non-local truck drivers, a trader and a labourer at three different places during the past few days.

A number of persons have been detained and they are being questioned. Director General of police Dilbag Singh had yesterday said that the militants behind the killings have been identified and governor Satya Pal Malik said the militants will be neutralized shortly.

A trader and a truck driver were killed at Trenz village in Shopian on the evening of October 16, while a labourer was killed in Pulwama the same day. Earlier, a truck driver was killed and his truck torched at Sindo-Shirmal in Shopian.

The killings had created panic among the truck drivers and traders hailing from outside the state and apple growers. This affected to some extent the supply of the apple produce to markets outside J&K. Truckers from outside mostly take out the fruit to outside markets. Kashmiri truck drivers also carry the apple to outside markets.

Reports from south Kashmir said the apple traders from Delhi and other places from outside who had come to Valley for business have been taken to safer places. A number of them have already invested money in Kashmir. They were monitoring the process of apple transportation to Delhi, while others were in the process of striking business deals.

“We had not come to Kashmir with any political agenda. We were here for the business. We have been visiting Valley every year during apple harvesting season. We never faced any problem in past. But now we are in deep trouble,” said a trader from outside J&K, on the condition of anonymity.

Abdul Majid, a fruit grower, said killing innocent traders and truck drivers will not serve any purpose. “They are here for trade. Such actions would affect the apple trade badly and hit the livelihood of lakhs of people,” he added.

Mohammad Rafiq, a fruit grower, said the government and media should not politicize the issue while providing security to the traders and truckers. “Better sense should prevail and the apple business must continue like past,” he said.

Rayees Ahmad, another grower, nothing can be said as to who exactly is behind these killings. “Such incidents need to be probed fairly to expose the conspiracy behind such incidents. Vested interests try to damage the apple economy of Kashmir,” he said.

Reports said over 40 percent apple produce has been transported to outside markets, while the rest is in the process of being packed in apple boxes.

Director General of police had asked transporters not to go into interior areas of south Kashmir after the killings of three civilians this week.

Singh said traders in Shopian were advised to use smaller vehicles for apple transportation from interiors of the district. They were also asked to bring the produce to six pick-up points that had been “secured and identified” on the main roads.

“We have increased security presence at these six points and urged transporters not to take trucks from outside (the state) into the interiors,” the police chief said.
