Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: Job, licenced gun among others for family; Yogi Adityanath assures strict action

Lucknow divisional commissioner Mukesh Meshram. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Adityanath has come down heavily on the horrific murder and said that whoever is responsible for the incident, they won’t be spared In a joint operation carried out by the Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat Police, three suspects were detained from Surat on Saturday in connection with the murder, while two others have been detained in UP

Lucknow: The brutal daylight murder of Kamlesh Tiwari, the founder of Hindu Samaj Party and former Hindu Mahasabha leader, on Friday has sent the Uttar Pradesh law enforcement agencies in a frenzy. In a joint operation carried out by the Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat Police, three suspects were detained from Surat on Saturday in connection with the murder, while two others have been detained in UP.

According to reports, the family of the deceased is likely to meet Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday. The state government has assured monetary compensation, a residential accommodation, job for a family member and security.

“The demands of the relatives have been take into consideration. They will be provided security and their meeting with the CM is being fixed. We are also recommending a government residence for them,” Lucknow divisional commissioner Mukesh Meshram told media persons after meeting Tiwari’s family in Sitapur on Saturday.

While the administration has assured a job for the leader’s eldest son, officials are also considering providing the family a licenced gun for security.

“A licensed weapon will be provided to the eldest son for self defence. He will also be recommended for job. They will be provided appropriate financial help. An investigation is being done by a committee,” Meshram said.

Adityanath has come down heavily on the horrific murder and said that whoever is responsible for the incident, they won’t be spared.

“This is an attempt to create a situation of terror. Some people have been taken into custody, three in Gujarat and two Uttar Pradesh. An investigation is on to probe the involvement of other people. No one will be spared,” news agency ANI quoted Adityanath as saying.

#WATCH UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: He was the President of Hindu Samaj Party. The assailants came to his house in Lucknow yesterday, sat&had tea with him, and later killed him after sending all security guards out to buy something from market. pic.twitter.com/kkbFnms17T — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

The three detained from Gujarat have been identified as Maulana Mohsin Sheikh (24), Faizan (21) works in a shop and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23). The two from UP, who are believed to be the alleged conspirators, were identified as Maulana Anwarul Haq and Mufti Naeem Kazmi.

“Prima facie, this appears to be a case of radical killing...these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals,” OP Singh, Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police, said.
