Slain gangster Lakhan bhaiya's brother wants enquiry against encounter specialist Pradeep Sharma

Advocate Ramprasad Gupta has asked the Maharashtra government to hold an enquiry against the encounter specialist Pradeep Sharma.



Mumbai police official Pradeep Sharma had opted for voluntary retirement and is contesting the Maharashtra Assembly elections as a Shiv Sena candidate from Nallasopara. In an affidavit before the election commission, Sharma had declared that his assets were worth Rs 36.21 crores.



Ramprasad Gupta has demanded that an enquiry should be conducted by the government to see how Pradeep Sharma amassed wealth worth Rs 36.21 crores.



Reportedly, Sharma has said that his wife and he used to run a business for almost a decade which helped them increase their assets. He has also said that the income tax department has already looked into these issues.



Ramprasad Gupta has also objected to a statement made by Sharma during a recent rally in the constituency from where he is contesting.



While addressing a rally in Nallasopara last week Sharma had said, "During the tough period of my life, Shinde saheb helped me a lot...during the jail term of three-and-a-half years, I spent two-and-a-half years in hospital, it was only because of his help."



The video of his speech had viral on social media. Sharma, however, said that he has reportedly been quoted out of context in the video.



However, Gupta said that this aspect needs to be investigated. "My question is what was he suffering from? He was hospitalised for two and a half years. A normal petty criminal is not even provided proper medicine or hospitalised for a single day. But he was in the hospital for two and a half years that too with the help of local Shiv Sena MLA. This shows that some corrupt practice has taken place. Also, around this same time that Sharma was in the hospital, a very important witness in the Anil Bheda case was found dead and till date, no one knows who killed him. That is why I demand that an enquiry in this matter."



Pradeep Sharma was the lone person to be acquitted by the court in the Lakhan Bhaiya encounter case of 2006. Ramnarayan Gupta alias Lakhan bhaiya was said to have been associated with the Chota Rajan gang.



Twenty-one people were convicted by a Mumbai session court including 13 policemen who had taken part in the fake encounter.



Advocate Gupta had filed an appeal against Sharma's acquittal in Bombay High Court. Along with Gupta, Maharashtra government too had filed an appeal. However, since 2014, this case is yet to be heard.



Ramprasad Gupta says that he cannot file a petition seeking fresh enquiry in all these issues himself as he does not have a locus to do so. However, he wants the Maharashtra government to look into these issues.



Maharashtra is going to polls on October 21.

Also read: Lakhan Bhaiya encounter: Bombay HC stays Maharashtra govt order granting pre-mature release to 11 cops

ALSO WATCH| India Today investigation exposes Uttar Pradesh's cash-for-encounter raj
