Kamlesh Tiwari murder: How Gujarat’s saree shop worker, tailor, shoe store worker conspired to kill UP leader

Hindu Samaj Party president Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari was shot dead in broad daylight in Lucknow on Friday Initially, five persons were detained from Surat in the case. However, two were released later Uttar Pradesh’s Director General of Police OP Singh has ruled out any terror angle

Lucknow: A day after the shocking daylight murder of Hindu Samaj Party president Kamlesh Tiwari in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh’s Director General of Police OP Singh on Saturday said that three persons have been detained from Gujarat’s Surat in connection with the case.

The trio were detained by a joint team of Uttar Pradesh Police, Uttar Pradesh Anti-Terror Squad and Gujarat Police.

45-year-old Kamlesh Tiwari, earlier associated with a faction of the Hindu Mahasabha, was on Friday killed in his office located on the first floor of his house in Khurshed Bagh under the Naka Hindola police station area in Lucknow.

The assailants entered his house, sat and had tea with Tiwari. They later sprayed the leader with bullets. The attackers, wearing saffron clothes, had entered Tiwari's office on the pretext of giving him a box of sweets in which the firearm was hidden.

While addressing the media, OP Singh announced, "A joint team of UP and Gujarat Police has detained Maulana Mohsin Sheikh Salim (24), Faizan (21) and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23) and is interrogating them in Gujarat."

Singh added that initially, five persons were detained from Surat. However, two were released later. "Their activities are being monitored," added the UP DGP. He further said that a search is on for two other conspirators.

Notably, the two men who were released were Khurshid Ahmed Pathan’s brother and Gaurav Tiwari, who is a resident of Surat. As per the UP DGP, Tiwari had telephoned Kamlesh Tiwari a few days ago, and had expressed his desire to join Hindu Samaj Party and expand its activities in Surat and other places.

Giving details, Singh said Maulana Mohsin Sheikh Salim hails from Surat and works at a saree shop. “Faizan is employed at a footwear shop and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan is a tailor by profession and also has knowledge of computers.”

As per the initial information received during the questioning, Khurshid Ahmed Pathan made the initial plan of killing Kamlesh Tiwari. However, what incited him was a 2015 video showed to him by Maulana Mohsin Sheikh Salim. “In the video, which had also gone viral, Kamlesh Tiwari is seen making an objectionable comment.”

Faizan, who is in the police custody and is being interrogated, was involved in “buying sweets from a shop”.

"In the initial interrogation, no criminal background has been established of the three detained. If needed, we will take them into remand, and bring them to UP for grilling," said the DGP.

"Prima facie, it seems that Tiwari was murdered due to his controversial statement made in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals," the DGP added while dismissing any terror angle as yet.

"So far, no link with any terrorist organisation has been established. We are looking into all the angles," said the UP DGP.

#WATCH Surat: CCTV footage of the three accused in #KamleshTiwari murder case being picked up by the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS). pic.twitter.com/mEyxFNk2zQ — ANI (@ANI) October 19, 2019

He added that the FIR which has been filed names two Bijnor residents -- Mohammed Mufti Naeem Kazmi and Imam Maulana Anwarul Haq -- as conspirators. “These two have also been detained and they are being questioned."

The Bijnor residents were booked after Tiwari's wife took their names in her complaint. "They have killed my husband by hatching a conspiracy," Tiwari's wife, Kiran, had claimed.

The UP DGP, meanwhile, denied any laxity on the part of the administration in providing security to Tiwari.

"The victim was given a gunner and a policeman and both were there with him,” he said.

Kamlesh Tiwari had formed the Hindu Samaj Party in January 2017.
