Licensed weapon to son, job to kin: UP govt promises 'all possible help' to Kamlesh Tiwari's family

The Uttar Pradesh government on Saturday assured Kamlesh Tiwari's family to provide all possible help including government job to a family member and a licensed weapon to his eldest son.

Kamlesh Tiwari, a Hindu Samaj Party leader and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, was killed in an attack at his office in Lucknow on Friday.

Lucknow divisional commissioner, Mukesh Meshram met the family in Sitapur and said that the probe is being done by a Special Investigation Team (SIT)

He also said that a licensed weapon will be provided to Kamlesh's eldest son for self-defence and he'll be recommended for a job as well. The commissioner also assured to provide 'appropriate financial help' to the family.

Mr Meshram informed that the demands of the family have been taken into account and they will be provided security, adding that their meeting with Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath is being fixed. We are recommending a government residence for him, he said.

Satyam Tiwari, son of Kamlesh Tiwari, however, questioned the government on the investigation. "We want the National Investigation Agency (NIA) to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?", he said.

Meanwhile, the Chief Minister has said that five people have been arrested so far in the case including three from Gujrat and two from Uttar Pradesh.

#WATCH UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: He was the President of Hindu Samaj Party. The assailants came to his house in Lucknow yesterday, sat&had tea with him, and later killed him after sending all security guards out to buy something from market. pic.twitter.com/kkbFnms17T — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: All three detained confessed crime, says DIG Gujarat ATS

Himanshu Shukla, DIG Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) on Saturday said that the three persons who have been detained have confessed to the crime.

The three persons who have been detained are Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan, and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan. "Two other accused were also detained but released later, they are being monitored," the DIG added.

Speaking to media a while ago, UP police chief OP Singh said, "Prima facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals."
