Exclusive: Yogi govt betrayed us, my son's murder was planned, says Kamlesh Tiwari's mother

Rejecting the claims made by the Uttar Pradesh Police that it has "solved" the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, his mother, Kusum Tiwari, today said it was the state administration that "betrayed" their family by not providing adequate security cover, despite repeated requests.

Speaking to India Today TV for an exclusive interview, Kusum Tiwari said the administration cannot do anything now. "The police will parade some innocent persons and say these are the ones who killed my son, while give protection to the mafia. What will the administration do when they are the ones who betrayed us," she said.

Kamlesh Tiwari, founder of the right-wing Hindu Samaj party, was shot dead at his home at Khursheda Baghin, Lucknow, on Friday.

In the interview, Kusum Tiwari said, "Agar prashashan ne dhyan dekar unko surakhsha di hoti to jo aaj ghatana hui hai, wo nahi hoti. Hamara beta bach jata (Had the government provided adequate security to my son, this tragedy would not have taken place and he would have been alive today)."

"What can we expect from this government? Nothing," she said.

Security reduced under CM Yogi's rule: Kusum Tiwari

Blaming Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, Kusum Tiwari alleged that it was after he became the state's chief minister that Kamlesh Tiwari's security was "drastically reduced".

"Under the previous government, my son had a security cover of around 17 cops. When Yogi Adityanath became CM, it was first reduced to eight-nine and then to four. Two of them followed my son wherever he went while two would be stationed at his office. But on the day my son was murdered, surprisingly none of the four security guards was with him," she said.

Kusum Tiwari claimed that instead of the four guards, an old homeguard was with Kamlesh. "He was armed only with a stick. The assailants slapped him and he couldn't do anything in response," she said.

When asked if she thinks there was a larger conspiracy at play, Kusum Tiwari said the circumstances sugggest it is obvious. "You are an educated person. You understand it. I don't have to go into specifics."

'UP Police harassing us, beat up my daughter-in-law'

Kamlesh Tiwari's mother has also accused the Uttar Pradesh Police of "harassing" her family after her son's death. She said the police refused to hand over Kamlesh's body for nearly 12 hours saying "there would be riots".

"Kal din bhar humko gumrah karte rahe...dead body dene se mana karte rahe...bole dange ho jayene. Din main 1 baje se body maang rahe the...raat ko 2 baje mili. Hum wahin pe rote aur chillate rahe (They tried to fool us for the entire day. They refused to give us my son's body. We asked for it around 1'o clock in the day and got it around 2 in the night)."

Speaking to India Today TV, Kusum Tiwari also alleged that the police and state administration did not allow them to take Kamlesh's body to their party office. When they insisted, Kusum Tiwari said, she was locked inside a car and her grandson and daughter-in-law (Kamlesh's wife) were beaten up by the police.

Asked if she wants any security cover, Kusum Tiwari said she doesn't want anything for herself. "We are old and will die soon. If they (govt) want, they should protect his (Kamlesh's) wife and three children."

No hopes from UP govt: Kusum Tiwari

Responding to news reports that the family may meet Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, Kusum Tiwari said they had placed only one condition that CM Yogi should meet them before her son is cremated. "The demand was not met," she said.

"Why should we go and visit him now? Yogi hamse milain ya na milain...humko insaaf chahiye. Nahi milega to hum sangharsh karte rahenge (It doesn't matter if CM Yogi meets us or not, we want justice. If we are denied justice, we will continue our struggle)."

'My son was getting repeated threats, govt ignored them'

Kusum Tiwari told India Today TV that her son was repeatedly getting death threats. "We submitted several applications before the state government seeking adequate security cover, we even approached the court, but no one took us seriously."

"Can anyone return my son today? We don't want anything from CM Yogi or PM Modi or security forces. Everyday cops would escort him, why was the security removed on the day when he was murdered," Kusum Tiwari asked.

ALSO READ | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: UP Police says case solved, remarks on Prophet Muhammad behind killing

ALSO READ | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Culprits will not be spared, says Yogi Adityanath

ALSO WATCH | Kamlesh Tiwari murdered in Lucknow, first visual of suspects out
