My father was killed despite security, can't trust UP govt: Kamlesh Tiwari's son

Kamlesh Tiwari's son on Saturday questioned the commitment of the Uttar Pradesh government to provide security to his father, saying his father was killed despite having security guards. His son, Satyam Tiwari also demanded a National Investigation Agency (NIA) probe into the killing of Kamlesh Tiwari, president of Hindu Samaj Party.

Kamlesh Tiwari was murdered at his home in Khurshed Bagh under the Naka Hindola police station area in Lucknow on Friday. Two persons had come to meet him on Friday. Both were speaking to Tiwari when the latter sent one of his aides to get 'paan' for them. When his aide returned from the market, he found Tiwari in a pool of blood.

Speaking to news agency ANI, Satyam Tiwari said his father was killed despite having security guards. "We want the National Investigation Agency to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?" Kamlesh Tiwari's son said.

Kamlesh Tiwari's mother, while speaking to AajTak, slammed the Uttar Pradesh government for the murder and said four security guards were provided to the Hindu Samaj Party leader but only one was present with him when the incident took place.

THREE DETAINED IN KAMLESH TIWARI MURDER CASE

Meanwhile, five people, including three in Surat, have been detained in connection with the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari. Three accused, who were detained in Surat, have been identified as Faizan Yunus Bhai, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan.

Mohsin (left), Rashid (centre) and Faizan (right) have been detained in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. (Photo: India Today)

Elaborating on the arrest of the three persons in Surat, Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh said, "On the basis of a packet of sweets obtained from the crime spot, the Gujarat Police was contacted and a team was sent there. CCTV footage of a Surat-based sweets shop was examined and Faizan Yunus Bhai was identified."

Earlier in the day, Uttar Pradesh Police claimed it has solved the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. In a press conference, the DGP said the Hindu Samaj Party leader was murdered over his remarks on Prophet Muhammad way back in 2016.

NO TERROR LINK

The Uttar Pradesh Police has found that the accused have no link with any terrorist organisation. The clarification comes after reports had found that the Islamic State (IS) had previously issued a threat against Kamlesh Tiwari.

(With inputs from Gopi Maniar)
