Unfazed by rain, Sharad Pawar launches blistering attack on BJP-Shiv Sena alliance in Maharashtra [Watch]

NCP chief Sharad Pawar delivered a speech in rain on Friday winning accolades | Photo Credit: ANI

Satara: From lambasting their opponents from loudspeakers with ‘mirchi’ references to addressing rallies in rain, politicians in Maharashtra are pulling all stops to win the hearts and minds of voters ahead of Assembly elections in the state. Staying true to the campaign spirit, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar on Friday continued to address a rally in Satara amid heavy rain winning accolades.

The NCP chief dubbed the downpour a blessing from God and said his party will do a miracle in Satara district.

Pawar said he made a mistake in picking candidates for the Lok Sabha elections a day after PM Narendra Modi mocked the former for not contesting the parliamentary elections from the constituency.

PM Modi while held thee rallies in Parli, Satara and Pune on Thursday. Accusing Congress and the NCP, PM Modi said, “Whenever Article 370 will be discussed in history, then the people who opposed and ridiculed it, their comments will be remembered. They don't even have the courage to contest even the national polls from Satara,” he added.

Pawar on Friday said, "I picked the wrong candidate during the Lok Sabha elections. I openly accept it. But I am happy that people of Satara are waiting for October 21 to rectify that mistake”.

The NCP fielded Shivaji Maharaj’s descendent Udayanraje Bhosale from Satara Lok Sabha constituency earlier this year. After winning the elections he quit the party and joined the BJP ahead of Assembly elections.

The NCP rally in Satara had barely started when it began raining heavily. Undismayed by the weather, the 78-year-old politician took on the dais and launched a blistering attack on

"This is Varun Raja (Rain God Varun)'s blessings for the party... It will lead to a 'miracle' in the state, and that wonder will start from October 21... I am confident," said Pawar said amid roaring applause.

Polling for 288-seater Assembly in Maharashtra will be held on October 21 and votes will be counted on October 24.

As per Maharashtra elections opinion poll conducted by IANS-CVoter between September 16 and October 16 says, "48.8 per cent of those surveyed feel that the BJP would win the elections to the 288-member Assembly, while only 10.6 per cent think the Congress could be the winner. Congress ally NCP was favoured by 11.3 per cent and BJP ally Shiv Sena was favoured by 9 per cent".

Interestingly, 8.1 per cent think the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance would win the elections and only 1.1 per cent believe the Congress-NCP coalition can win.
