Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: ‘We don’t trust anyone… want NIA to probe,’ demands Hindu Samaj Party leader's son

Satyam Tiwari, the son of Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari was shot dead at his Khurshed Bagh residence in Lucknow on Friday afternoon A Special Investigation Team (SIT) has been set up to probe Kamlesh Tiwari’s murder Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath has vowed to bring Tiwari's killers to book

Sitapur: Hours after Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) OP Singh announced the detention of three persons in connection with the killing of Kamlesh Tiwari, the son of Hindu Samaj Party leader on Saturday sought a National Investigation Agency-led probe into the case.

While talking to reporters, Satyam Tiwari said: “We want the National Investigation Agency to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?”

Kamlesh Tiwari was shot dead at his Khurshed Bagh residence in the state capital on Friday afternoon.

Earlier today, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath vowed to bring the killers of former Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari to book.

"Whosoever will create an atmosphere of fear will be dealt with severely. No such incident will be tolerated. Anyone found involved in Kamlesh Tiwari's death case will not be spared," said Adityanath.

The assailants had fled the spot after attacking Tiwari. A revolver was also found from the crime scene.

"He (Kamlesh Tiwari) was the president of the Hindu Samaj Party. The assailants came to his house in Lucknow yesterday, sat and had tea with him, and later killed him after sending all security guards out to buy something from the market," added the UP CM.

A Special Investigation Team has been set up to probe 45-year-old Tiwari’s murder.

In total, five persons, including three in Gujarat's Surat, have been detained in connection with the Tiwari’s murder. Two were detained from Bijnor last night.

The three persons detained in Surat have been identified as Faizan Yunus Bhai, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan.

"So far, there is no terror angle associated with this incident," clarified DGP OP Singh while addressing a press conference earlier today.

The DGP, while speaking about the arrest of the three persons, said, "On the basis of a packet of sweets obtained from the crime spot, the Gujarat Police was contacted and a team was sent there. A CCTV footage of a Surat-based sweets shop was examined and Faizan Yunus Bhai was identified."

"Prima facie, it seems that Tiwari was murdered due to a controversial statement he made in 2015. There is a possibility," the DGP said while dismissing any terror angle.

Singh had also denied any security lapses on part of the UP Police.

"He (Tiwari) was given a gunner and a policeman, both were there with him. There was no laxity on the part of the police administration," he said.
