Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: Don't Trust Anyone, Says Son, Demands NIA Investigation

New Delhi:

The son of Kamlesh Tiwari, the president of a little-known Hindu Samaj Party who was murdered by unknown men at his house in Lucknow on Friday, has demanded the National Investigation Agency (NIA) investigation into the case.

"We want the National Investigation Agency to probe the case. We do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards. How can we possibly trust the administration then?" Satyam Tiwari told news agency ANI on Saturday.

Satyam Tiwari, son of #KamleshTiwari, in Sitapur: We want National Investigation Agency to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then? pic.twitter.com/a3xq8KV2hk — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 19, 2019

Five people, including three in Surat, have been detained in connection with the murder Tiwari, the police said on Saturday.

Two of them, identified as Bijnor residents Mohammed Mufti Naeem Kazmi and Imam Maulana Anwarul Haq, were booked on the murder charge on Friday after Tiwari's wife named them in her complaint to police.

Tiwari's wife Kiran had alleged that both had announced a cash reward of Rs 1.5 crore on her husband's head in 2016.

"They have killed my husband by hatching a conspiracy," she had alleged.

The other three people detained in Gujarat's Surat are Faizan Yunus Bhai, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan. DGP OP Singh said the Uttar Pradesh Police and their Gujarat counterparts were interrogating them.

"So far, there is no terror angle associated with this incident," DGP OP Singh said in a press conference.

Elaborating on the arrest of the three persons in Surat, the DGP said, "On the basis of a packet of sweets obtained from the crime spot, the Gujarat Police was contacted and a team was sent there. A CCTV footage of a Surat-based sweets shop was examined and Faizan Yunus Bhai was identified."

He said later Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan were detained.

"Going by investigation and joint interrogation, it was clear that these three persons were part of the conspiracy to murder Kamlesh Tiwari," Singh said, adding that their interrogation revealed that they had no links with any terror organisation.

The DGP said two more people-- Rashid's brother and Gaurav Tiwari--were also questioned but were let off after investigation.

"Gaurav had called Kamlesh a few days ago, expressing his desire to work for the Hindu Samaj Party in Surat and other places," he said.

"Prime facie it seems that Tiwari was murdered due to a controversial statement he made in 2015. There is a possibility," the DGP said ruling out any terror angle.

On Friday, the police had booked the Bijnor residents and an unidentified person in connection with the murder.

Also Read | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: 3 Arrested From Surat, UP Govt Gives Job, House To Family – 10 Updates

Late on Friday night, UP's Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Awanish Awasthi had informed that a special investigation team had been constituted to probe the incident. "The team comprises Lucknow IG S K Bhagat, SP (Crime) Dinesh Puri and DSP (STF) PK Mishra," Awasthi said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
