Kamlesh Tiwari Killing: UP Police Claims To Have Solved Murder Mystery

Lucknow:

Uttar Pradesh Police on Saturday claimed that it has solved the sensational murder case of former Hindu Mahasabha chief Kamlesh Tiwari. According to Director General of Police (DGP), OP Singh, three people have been arrested in connection with the incident.

"A joint team of UP and Gujarat Police has detained Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan, and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan and is interrogating them," Singh said while addressing a press conference in Lucknow. He said the police initially detained five persons, but two were released later.

Cops have also ruled any terror angle in the incident. "So far, there is no terror angle associated with this incident," he said.

When asked about the reason behind Tiwari’s murder, the DGP said, "Prima facie, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals."

Elaborating on the arrest of the three persons in Surat, the DGP said, "On the basis of a packet of sweets obtained from the crime spot, the Gujarat Police was contacted and a team was sent there. A CCTV footage of a Surat-based sweets shop was examined and Faizan Yunus Bhai was identified."

"Prima facie it seems that Tiwari was murdered due to a controversial statement he made in 2015. There is a possibility," the DGP said ruling out any terror angle.

However, Tiwari's mother Kusuma alleged that he was killed by a "local BJP leader" due to a temple dispute in a village.

Earlier, Tiwari's cremation was also delayed as family members were adamant on meeting Chief Minister Adityanath to put forth their nine demands, including a probe by NIA, government job for victim's son and security to family members.

ALSO READ | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: Don't Trust Anyone, Says Son, Demands NIA Investigation

The chief minister has now assured the family members that he will meet them. He said such incidents will not be tolerated, and those involved will not be spared.

Tiwari was later cremated at his native place in Mahmoodabad after the district administration succeeded in convincing his family members that their demands will be fulfilled.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
