Canada elections 2019: What is at stake?

Mrutyuanjai Mishra is a commentator with Politiken, Denmark's largest newspaper. He also comments on Asia on Danish TV and radio channels. He has authored many analytical articles on Asia and India in several Danish newspapers. He has studied anthropology at Copenhagen University and has specialized in human rights and democratization. Mrutyuanjai Mishra has spent half of his life in India and the other half in the Scandinavian countries Denmark and Sweden. Mrutyuanjai Mishra is also a consultant lecturer on issues related to India and Asia at institutions of higher education. He is currently working on a book on India to be used for higher educational purposes in Scandinavian countries. LESS ... MORE

Canada has meticulously maintained its image as the first country in the world to successfully adopt multiculturalism as an official policy. In Europe, multiculturalism is despised, derogated and denoted as a reason for failing to integrate immigrants.

Geographically, Canada is the second largest country in the world. It has the world’s third largest crude oil reserves, after Venezuela and Saudi Arabia. According to the World Happiness Report of 2019 for the United Nations, Canada was ranked 9th in the world, based on six variables: income, freedom, trust, healthy life expectancy, social support, and generosity.

Canada is now the tenth largest economy of the world and hence, when it comes to being among top ten in the world, it has broken many records. The present Canadian government is planning to raise its legal immigrant intake to 350,000 in 2021. This means taking 40,000 more immigrants than in the year 2018. It is known for its hard-headed and soft-hearted immigration policy, which makes its newcomers feel welcome. The vast majority of those newcomers will be arriving under schemes designed to address the shortage of highly skilled labour. Few countries enjoy the privilege of selecting immigrants before they arrive as Canada does, and this is partially because the geographical possibility of sailing to Canada on a rubber boat is non-existent.

Europe is panicking every single time a war breaks out in the Middle East, as that causes hundreds of thousands to head to EU countries to seek spontaneous asylum at the border. Most immigrants dream of moving to Canada as it has a generous welfare system, which resembles that of many Scandinavian countries, and its economy is booming, as well, making it easier to get a job.

Opinion polls for the upcoming general election to be held on Monday, October 21, are indicating a neck and neck competition between two main political parties, the Conservatives and the Liberals, making the left-wing New Democratic Party the kingmaker, as none of the two main parties is predicted to gain a majority.

The leader of the New Democratic Party, Jagmeet Singh, a Sikh, wears a turban and has a vision of making Canada a carbon copy of Norway. ‘Tax the rich’ is his short slogan and he wants to expand the universal health care, child care and dental care to all citizens, including those who cannot afford it now. Affordable housing, a responsible climate policy, and higher taxes for billionaires are hallmarks of his political vision for Canada.

Jagmeet Singh wielding colorful turbans is becoming a symbol of Canadian tolerance. He deserves praise for handling tough situations mildly when people mistake him for being a Muslim. But the leading nationwide party leader debate, extensively watched by most of the voters, was devoid of any tough questions asked to Jagmeet Singh.

Undoubtedly, Canadians are tolerant because they are ready to accept the possibility of a leader with a turban becoming their future prime minister. But why is no journalist asking Jagmeet Singh a direct question on separatist movements? Here they could ask him why he has attended meetings where people allegedly willing to resort to violence to seek a separate state, have been present in the same room.

If the present prime minister, Justin Trudeau, is grilled for over-dressing as an Indian to please Punjabi voters in Toronto and Vancouver, then similar questions could have been asked to him, as well. Jagmeet Singh cannot support multiculturalism at home, which was designed as an ideological tool to accommodate and annihilate separatism in Quebec. But at the same time, he vociferously supported the cause of separatism in Punjab and Catalonia.

It’s like saying that I can eat meat but others should become vegetarians. Jagmeet Singh has shown no signs of constraint while condemning the Indian government for revoking article 370 in Kashmir, but stays silent on Turkish atrocities committed on Kurds in the Middle East. Turkey is violating several international and human-rights laws. Here was a chance to come out in the open and distance himself from such gross violations of human rights committed by Turkish troops, as these are clearly amounting to war crimes. But Jagmeet Singh and his party are utterly silent on this issue. Why?

It is well documented that in India, a faction of Sikh separatists had metamorphosed into a violent protest movement in the 1980s, with some resorting to bombings, assassinations, and even killings of fellow Sikhs who did not want to join the Khalistan separatist movement.

It is assumed that when Russia warned India of an overt support of arms supplied from Pakistan, Indira Gandhi, India’s prime minister at that moment, had to order the army into the Gurudwara temple of the Sikhs. It is a known fact for the Canadians that a Sikh militant group, Babbar Khalsa, was responsible for one of the worst terrorist attacks in modern Canadian history, the bombing of Air India Flight 182, which killed 329 people.

It has to be mentioned that not all separatists are extremists and resort to violence. But when there is more than anecdotal evidence to prove that there are still groups and persons advocating the use of violence to gain independence, then Jagmeet Singh ought to stay away from such people. Instead, he openly says that he is willing to participate in such meetings again.

Sikhism is a tolerant faith and Sikhs have unequivocally played a major role in opposing the forceful conversions of Hindus by Mogul rulers in the past. Their contribution to maintaining the integral unity of India deserves praise. Pakistan and its ISI agents are secretly exploiting young members of the Sikh diaspora to destabilize the Punjab province in India. Luckily, the tolerant Sikh community in European cities is distancing itself from the separatist Khalistan movement, and is building new Gurudwaras, where such activities are not accepted.

Canada needs to exemplify that it has come a long way from a whites-only immigration policy allowed till the 1960s, and the acceptance of Jagmeet Singh, the son of an immigrant, is a superb gesture. Therefore it is incumbent for Jagmeet Singh to act as a true role model, willing to unequivocally distance himself from violent movements.

Much is at stake when such a powerful country elects its new political leadership on Monday.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
