UP CM assured us justice will be done: Kamlesh Tiwari's wife after meeting Yogi Adityanath

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday met family members of murdered Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari.

Tiwari, a Hindu Samaj Party leader and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, was killed in an attack at his office in Naka Hindola area in Lucknow on Friday.

Adityanath met Tiwari's family at his official residence in Lucknow. The Chief Minister could not meet the family on Saturday as he was in Maharashtra for the assembly election campaign and returned to the state in the evening.

Speaking after meeting Yogi Adityanath, Kamlesh Tiwari's wife said, "He (UP CM) assured us that justice will be done. We demanded capital punishment for the murderers. He assured us that they will be punished."

Kiran Tiwari, wife of Kamlesh Tiwari, after meeting UP CM Yogi Adityanath, in Lucknow: He (UP CM) assured us that justice will be done. We demanded capital punishment for the murderers. He assured us that they will be punished. #KamleshTiwariMurder pic.twitter.com/cxJHdpXiie — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 20, 2019

This comes even as the family of Kamlesh Tiwari has demanded a probe by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) into the killing, saying that "they do not trust anyone."

Earlier in the day, Maharashtra ATS detained an individual from Nagpur who was called by Rashid, one of the three persons arrested and confessed to the crime.

Speaking to Zee News, Kamlesh Tiwari's son Satyam said, "We want the National Investigation Agency to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone."

Satyam said his father was killed although he had security guards.

"How can we possibly trust the administration then?" he said adding that they are not satisfied with the investigation done so far by the UP Police.

He added that his family is getting threats and efforts are being made to suppress their voice.

Yogi had earlier called Tiwari's murder a conspiracy and an attempt to create terror in the state.

"He was the President of the Hindu Samaj Party. The assailants came to his house in Lucknow yesterday, Saturday and had tea with him, and later killed him after sending all security guards out to buy something from the market."

CM also assured strict action and said agencies are probing the matter. While expressing grief over his killing, CM Adityanath also warned that those involved in his murder will not be spared.

"Whosoever will create an atmosphere of fear will be dealt with severely. Any such incident will not be tolerated. Anyone found involved in Kamlesh Tiwari will not be spared," CM Adityanath said. After being attacked, the leader was rushed to a hospital where he succumbed to injuries.

Police have said three people have been arrested from Gujarat in the case.

Earlier, Himanshu Shukla, DIG Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS), on Saturday said that the three persons who have been detained have confessed to the crime.

The three persons who have been detained are Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan, and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan. "Two other accused were also detained but released later, they are being monitored," the DIG added.

Speaking to media, UP police chief OP Singh said, "Prima facie this was a radical killing, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals."
