Assembly polls campaigning ends in Maharashtra, Haryana amid political parties' final pitch to woo voters

Rahul Gandhi (left) and PM Narendra Modi (right) have attacked each other on a range of issues ahead of the Maharashtra and Haryana assembly polls. (Photos: PTI)

Campaigning in Maharashtra and Haryana for the Assembly elections 2019 concluded on Saturday with political leaders making all-out efforts to woo voters through rallies and roadshows. On the last day of campaigning for Maharashtra and Haryana Assembly elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a rally at Rewari and Sirsa in Haryana, while Union Home Minister Amit Shah held rallies in Maharashtra.

State Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis held a roadshow in Nagpur while NCP chief Sharad Pawar addressed an election rally in Satara. Polling in the two states will be held on October 21 and the results will be announced on October 24. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is ruling in Haryana and in alliance with Shiv Sena in Maharashtra.

MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTION

The BJP is contesting 150 seats in 288-member Maharashtra Assembly while its ally Shiv Sena has fielded candidates in 124 candidates. The remaining seats have been left for other allies. Congress is contesting the Maharashtra Assembly election in alliance with the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) in Maharashtra.

Power-packed roadshows and whirlwind rallies by the political heavyweights in Maharashtra marked the last day of campaigning. The most notable among the roadshows was the one by Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis who is contesting from Nagpur South-West assembly constituency.

In a massive show of strength, Devendra Fadnavis along with his wife Amruta Fadnavis and others took out a roadshow on a "rath (chariot)" from Mate Square to Deen Dayal Nagar in Nagpur. Nagpur South-West is a crucial constituency from the prestige as well as the contesting candidate point of view. Devendra Fadnavis claimed that he would return with a thumping majority. He also addressed rallies in Bhandara and Chandrapur.

Devendra Fadnavis during a road show in Nagpur. (Photo: PTI)

Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray, contesting his maiden election, too, campaigned aggressively in Mumbai. Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray addressed several rallies across the state and spoke of Article 370 and Ram Mandir in Ayodhya.

Another notable last day tour was that of Amit Shah who addressed election rallies in Navapur in Nandurbar, and Akole and Karjat Jamkhed in Ahmednagar. BJP working president JP Nadda, Union Ministers Nitin Gadkari, Smriti Irani and Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath, too, addressed rallies in Maharashtra. Yogi Adityanath addressed rallies in Malad and Kalyan.

While much of the Congress's campaign has been touted as "dull" by many, NCP supremo Sharad Pawar's rally in Satara wherein he braved heavy rains and addressed the people remained a talking point among political circles. Sharad Pawar addressed four rallies in Bhor, Karjat Jamkhed, Indapur and Baramati, his hometown.

Experts have pointed out that barring a few rallies by Congress leader Rahul Gandhi wherein he highlighted issues like economic slowdown, ill-effects of demonetisation and GST rollout and unemployment, the Congress campaign didn't see much impact on the ground. On the other hand, BJP not only had its top brass on the ground, PM Modi himself aggressively campaigned for the assembly polls, targeting the Congress and the NCP on the issues of their opposition to abrogation of provisions under Article 370 and alleged corruption during the Congress-NCP regime in the state.

PM Modi at Sirsa rally. (Photo: PTI)

Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi leader Prakash Ambedkar also addressed rallies in Bhandara and Gondia. The main contest in Maharashtra is between the Shiv Sena-BJP alliance and the Congress-NCP alliance.

The bypoll for Satara Lok Sabha constituency will also be held on October 21. Former NCP leader and sitting MP Udayanraje Bhosale is in the fray from the seat on a BJP ticket against Shriniwas Patil of the Congress-NCP combine.

HARYANA ASSEMBLY ELECTION

The elections to 90-member Haryana assembly will witness a multi-cornered contest on several seats between the BJP, the Congress, the Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) and the Jannayak Janta Party (JJP).

The political parties campaigned aggressively in Haryana on the last day of campaigning for the assembly election 2019. The election campaigning, which lasted for nearly a month, witnessed a war of words between the rival parties.

Contrary to the popular belief that the assembly elections are dominated by the local issues, PM Narendra Modi tried to colour the elections with national and international issues. PM Modi addressed two rallied in Haryana and sought votes for the party candidates. While campaigning, PM Modi attacked the Opposition on issues like the abrogation of provisions under Article 370 and surgical strikes.

Supporters gather for public meeting by JJP leader Dushyant Chautala. (Photo: PTI)

On an attempt to woo voters ahead of the assembly election voting, the prime minister promised that the water currently flowing into Pakistan will be brought to Haryana. In one of his rallies, PM Modi said the Centre will spend Rs 3.5 lakh crore on water.

On the other hand, the Congress hit out at the BJP on the issues of economy, demonetisation, GST - which Rahul Gandhi often terms as Gabbar Singh Tax, and unemployment.

Senior Congress leader Anand Sharma slammed the Manohar Lal Khattar government for "failing to create adequate employment opportunities" as, he said, the unemployment rate in Haryana is "28 per cent higher than the national average".

The BJP leaders retorted the Congress on issues of corruption during the Bhupender Singh Hooda's government. The Congress launched a counter-attack by citing roadways scams.

In his rallies, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi accused PM Modi and the BJP government of "benefitting their rich confidants - Vijay Mallya, Nirav Modi and Mehul Choksi - by writing off their loans". Rahul Gandhi also attacked the BJP government on issues of BSNL and MTNL.

The Congress also tried to woo the voters by reminding them of the promises made by it in its poll manifesto which includes loan waiver, increased social security pension besides other promises.

In 2014, the BJP had bagged 47 seats and has now fixed a target of winning 75 seats. The Congress and the INLD, which won 15 and 19 seats, respectively, are leaving no stone unturned as well. Both the parties have made attractive promises in their respective poll manifestos.
