Officials order probe as ragging rocks AU

Allahabad: After inmates of Shatabdi boys’ hostel at Allahabad University accused their seniors of ragging, a team of officials raided the hostel on Friday night and identified 17 students who had been harassing freshers.

The accused students will be issued show cause notice after which action will be taken against them.

Junior inmates of the hostel, who are enrolled in BA-LLB (five-year) had registered a complaint on the portal of ministry of human resource development (MHRD) wherein they mentioned that senior students were harassing them on the pretext of introduction.

Parents of some inmates had also lodged a complaint with university authorities.

A team of university officials, led by chief proctor Prof RS Dubey and dean student welfare Prof Harsh Kumar, conducted surprise inspection at Shatabdi boys hostel on Friday night.

They found the complaints to be true and identified 17 senior students who used to trouble juniors. In the name of introduction, they were abused and asked to follow certain instructions without their consent. “We have identified 17 inmates and all of them will be served show cause notice on Monday. We have sought a report from the superintendent,” said Prof Dubey.

He said the exact number of culprits would be known only after the superintendent submits his report. “We will take action accordingly. As of now, we have asked all 17 inmates to be present at the proctor’s office on Monday,” Prof Dubey added.

This is not for the first time that this hostel has been in news for ragging. Although a similar complaint was found to be false last year, in 2008, five inmates were found indulging in ragging. The then vice chancellor Prof Rajen Harshe had asked the students to serve the central library part-time for a period of three months as punitive action.

In August this year, seven students were booked for harassing freshers and faced year-long expulsion and lifelong ban on hostel allotment.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
