Gujarat ATS cracks Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, detains three from Surat

AHMEDABAD/SURAT: The Gujarat anti-terrorism squad (ATS) cracked the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari, the right-wing leader from Lucknow , and detained three persons from Surat on Saturday.Armed with concrete leads through a phone call from Lucknow and a CCTV footage of a Surat sweet shop, ATS team detained Rashid Pathan (23), Maulana Mohsin (24) and Faizan (21). ATS has identified the suspected killers as Rashid’s brother Moin Khan and another person named Ashfaq, who are absconding after the murder. Two other suspects are also being questioned.Tiwari, the national president of Hindu Samaj Party, was brutally murdered by two assailants in Lucknow on Friday evening. ATS and Surat police got the vital clue from UP police about the box of sweets, which had an address of a sweet shop located in Udhna area. The assailants, who had hid a pistol and a knife in the box, had first offered sweets to Tiwari and then stabbed him multiple times at his house.CCTV footages of the sweet shop were scanned, which led to the agency narrowing down on the suspected killers.“Moin and Ashfak had gone to Udhna in Surat and purchased “ghari” (a local sweet of Surat) from Dharti Sweet Mart at about 9pm on October 16. The duo then boarded Udhyognagari Express from Udhna railway station and went to Lucknow,” an ATS officer said.Moin and Ashfaq hid the pistol and a knife in the sweet box. The knife was purchased from Udhna railway station.“Upon reaching Lucknow on October 17 morning, Moin called up Tiwari requesting for a informal meeting saying that they were impressed with his work,” the official said.“Tiwari agreed to meet them. Moin and Ashfaq went to his house. Just as Tiwari came out, one of the two pulled out the pistol and tried to fire at him,” an investigator said. However, the pistol misfired. They immediately took out the knife from the box and stabbed Tiwari 13 times on neck, killing him on the spot. They again tried to shoot Tiwari while leaving, officials said.Earlier, Moin had also called up Rashid on reaching Lucknow. When ATS scanned Tiwari’s call detail records, they found this number, which ultimately led them to Rashid, Mohsin and Faizan.Rashid originally hails from Pilibhit in Uttar Pradesh, but has been working as a computer operator with a private firm in Surat. Faizan works in a footwear showroom while Mohsin works in a sari shop.
