Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Family to meet Yogi Adityanath today | What we know so far

The family of Kamlesh Tiwari, the president of Hindu Samaj Party who was brutally murdered at his home in Lucknow, will meet Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday.

Yogi Adityanath will be meeting the family members at his official residence on Sunday in Lucknow at 11 am, sources said.

Yogi Adityanath on Saturday condemned the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari and said that such incidents are "unacceptable" and people involved in the case will not be spared.

Earlier, the family members refused to cremate Kamlesh Tiwari's body till Yogi Adityanath meets them in Sitapur. They also demanded that the UP CM should assure strictest possible action against the accused besides the state government.

However, Yogi Adityanath confirmed that he will meet Kamlesh Tiwari's family. "If his family will come to meet me I will meet them," Yogi Adityanath.

Kamlesh Tiwari's family later performed his last rites after they were assured of a meeting with Yogi Adityanath on Sunday.

Kamlesh Tiwari was murdered by two people, who came to his Lucknow office in Khurshid Bagh area on Friday afternoon wearing saffron kurtas and with a box of sweets which had an address of a Surat shop on it. The assailants had hidden the pistol and the knife in the sweet box.

WHAT DOES KAMLESH TIWARI'S FAMILY SAY

'Yogi government betrayed us'

Kusum Tiwari, the mother of Kamlesh Tiwari, said the state administration "betrayed" her family by not providing adequate security cover, despite repeated requests.

In an exclusive interview to India Today TV, Kusum Tiwari on Saturday rejected the claims made by the Uttar Pradesh Police that it has solved her son's murder case. "The police will parade some innocent persons and say these are the ones who killed my son, while give protection to the mafia. What will the administration do when they are the ones who betrayed us," Kusum Tiwari told India Today TV.

Kusum Tiwari also said her son repeatedly received death threats but no one took them seriously. "We submitted several applications before the state government seeking adequate security cover, we even approached the court, but no one took us seriously," Kusum Tiwari said

"Can anyone return my son today? We don't want anything from CM Yogi or PM Modi or security forces. Everyday cops would escort him, why was the security removed on the day when he was murdered," Kusum Tiwari asked.

'Why was security removed on day of murder'

Kusum Tiwari also alleged that Kamlesh Tiwari's security was "drastically reduced" after Yogi Adityanath became the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh.

"Under the previous government, my son had a security cover of around 17 cops. When Yogi Adityanath became CM, it was first reduced to eight-nine and then to four. Two of them followed my son wherever he went while two would be stationed at his office. But on the day my son was murdered, surprisingly none of the four security guards was with him," she said.

Indicating a bigger conspiracy in her son's murder, Kusum Tiwari's mother asked why was the security removed on the day when he was murdered.

"Can anyone return my son today? We don't want anything from CM Yogi or PM Modi or security forces. Everyday cops would escort him, why was the security removed on the day when he was murdered," Kusum Tiwari asked.

Kamlesh Tiwari's mother also accused the Uttar Pradesh Police of "harassing" her family after her son's death. She also said that the UP Police refused to hand over the body of her son for nearly 12 hours saying "there would be riots".

'We want NIA probe'

The son of Kamlesh Tiwari demanded NIA probe in his father's murder case. "We want NIA probe into the case as we do not trust anyone," Satyam, the son of Kamlesh Tiwari, said.

"My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?," Satyam asked.

WHAT DOES THE POLICE SAY

The plan to execute Kamlesh Tiwari was made about two months ago by the detained accused over the hate speech given by him, official said on Saturday.

"The three people, whom we detained on Saturday morning have confessed to their crime of killing Tiwari," Gujarat Anti-Terror Squad (ATS) DIG Himanshu Shukla said.

Shukla said that the plan to execute Kamlesh Tiwari was made about "two months" ago as these people were offended over the provocative statements of Kamlesh Tiwari.

The three people detained by the joint team of Gujarat Police, Gujarat ATS and the UP Police have been identified as Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan.

The ATS officer also said that the three people who have been detained by the police have no previous crime records against them.

The UP Police said the motive behind the killing of Kamlesh Tiwari is the hate speech given by the Hindu Samaj Party chief in 2015. However, the police said more details on the reason behind Kamlesh Tiwari's murder will be ascertained once the remaining criminals are arrested.

"Prima facie, these people were radicalised by the speech that he (Kamlesh Tiwari) gave in 2015, but much more can come out when we catch hold of the remaining criminals," Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh said.

The police has also denied any links with terrorist organisation in Kamlesh Tiwari's murder case. "So far no link with any terrorist organisation has been established. We are looking into all the angles," Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh said.

(With inputs from Nelanshu Shukla, Kumar Abhishek and Arvind Ojha)
