Into the woods

Aarey Colony

Biodiversity of Aarey Milk Colony and Film City

non-profit Vanashakti

An aerial view of Aarey

The police try to move a protester as other activists look on

Activists grieve for one of the trees that was recently cut down

A lack of parameters to identify a forest in Maharashtra has led to the current crisis around Aarey, with little to deter authorities from destroying Mumbai’s green lung.It feels like you’re in a forest,” says a 13-year-old green activist, fondly talking about her experience of walking through parts of the 1,280-hectareon weekends. She smiles, then, at the irony: We’re standing outside Bombay High Court in the last week of September, where the state government and activists are battling over the issue of whether Aarey can be being declared a forest or not.“A forest is not just trees. It’s an ecosystem that includes both flora and fauna,” says environmentalist Debi Goenka. Aarey, despite having 530 species of flowering plants, 76 species of birds, 86 species of butterflies and 16 different kinds of mammals — according to a 2009 report titled— is still not identified as a forest by the government. This ‘oversight’ was felt acutely by activists on October 7 when, in the dead of the night, Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRCL) officials cut down some 2,000 trees to make room for the proposed Metro car shed. Activists, who have been trying to save Aarey from the Metro since 2015, appeared to have been served a fait accompli by the state. But the fight isn’t over. Although the Bombay High Court has dismissed the petition to declare Aarey a forest, its status will now be determined by the Supreme Court and the National Green Tribunal (NGT). Indeed, activists want it to be recognised as such; at the very least, it will stop the authorities from felling trees with impunity. Stalin D, director of the, says the biggest hurdles so far, have been the state’s lack of will in identifying Aarey as a forest, and the absence of parameters by the state government to define what constitutes a forest here.Does Aarey qualify as a forest? The term is not defined by the two most important statutes that relate to forests — the Indian Forest Act of 1927, which lays down rules for an area to be declared a forest, and the Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980, which was specifically instituted to bar the use of forest land for non-forest purposes. In the absence of this, it is the secretary of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MoEF and CC), who is responsible for identifying, preserving and protecting the forests of the country, along with the state governments — and also for notifying the ecologically-sensitive zones around national parks and sanctuaries. In a landmark judgment in 1995, the Supreme Court had even introduced the concept of ‘deemed forests’ — referring to areas not only recorded as forests, but also those that can be identified as such as per the dictionary meaning. While there are approximately 800 interpretations of the word, the most common one is ‘a large tract of land having trees’. Says Goenka: “The Supreme Court was gunning for the widest definition to be used, but the governments have misused this ambiguity.”In 1997, an expert state committee compiled data to show that forests in Maharashtra are spread over 66,852 sq km of the state, out of which 19,283 sq km have been identified as ‘deemed forests’. The state forest department, following a re-assessment in 2006, said that the amount of deemed forest land is actually 6,650 sq km; and a lot of private and agricultural land had been erroneously included in the previous deemed figure. In other words, this means the state wants to protect only the area it considers to be a forest, and not the area specified by the 1997 data. Ten years on, the Supreme Court has still not accepted this number.According to the 1997 data, Mumbai has only 0.45 sq km of notified forest, and all other green cover has been degraded. In suburban Mumbai, out of the 53.04 sq km of green cover, only 15.34 sq km had been identified as a forest, as per the dictionary meaning; some 22.65 sq km had already been degraded. While the Forest Survey of India (FSI), an autonomous body under the MoEF, showed an increase in the Maharashtra’s dense forest cover by nearly 16 per cent (from 43,843 sq km in 1995 to 50,692 sq km in 2017), almost half of this has not been included in the state’s forest department records. Meanwhile, data provided by the MoEF minister of state to the Lok Sabha in 2018, says Maharashtra lost 63 sq km to mining and other non-forest purposes between 2014 and 2017 — an area equivalent in size to Mumbai city.Several states like Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Meghalaya and others have already decided to define the parameters of a forest in their state as per the dictionary meaning. Worryingly for activists, Maharashtra still hasn’t done that. In fact in October 2018, Justice SC Dharmadhikari of the Bombay High Court held the absence of government recognition as a reason to discount Aarey as a forest. According to the FSI, a forest — defined in another way — must have a tree cover of at least 10 per cent, calculated as the number of trees per hectare. Aarey, by that definition, has an estimated 380 tress per hectare — or between 10 and 40 per cent tree cover.Since 1996, several orders passed by various courts across the country — including the Supreme Court — have relied on the dictionary meaning of a forest. But in subsequent years, the Supreme Court as well as the National Green Tribunal (in 2014) asked the MoEF to formulate pan-India parameters to identify forests. In 2014, the MoEF wrote to all the state governments, including Maharashtra, saying that any area with a tree density of over 40 per cent, and with a minimum patchsize of five hectares, should be treated as a forest. The Maharashtra government responded to this with some reservation. Subsequently, the MoEF seems to have laid to rest its attempts to chalk out the parameters for identifying forests. Siddhant Das, director general of forests with the MoEF, told Mirror: “An attempt was made to come up with parameters to define forests, but no matter what we did, some areas would get left out. So now, in a theoretical exercise, we have asked the states to come up with their own criteria to define forests, which will be in addition to all that has been recorded or identified as forests [already].”Virendra Tiwari, additional principal chief conservator of forests in Maharashtra says that in the past five years, his department has managed to bring approximately 1,470 sq km of government land within the ambit of reserved forests. “Some of these were earlier protected forests,” he says. “The committee appointed by the state to identify forests in Maharashtra in 1997, following Supreme Court orders, did not come up with any parameters to do so.” Tiwari says there are a lot of practical problems around identifying a forest in general. Some of this relates to encroachment and the inability to then recalculate what has been lost.Where does Aarey stand in all this? During the Bombay High Court proceedings last month, the state claimed that between 1949 and 1951, some 3,356 hectares were acquired by the revenue department from eight different villages under the Aarey Milk Plan. Later, 2,076 hectares were transferred from the revenue department to the forest department for the Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP), which now spreads over an area of more than 10,000 hectares. About 1,280 hectares remained with the Aarey Milk Colony. According to activists like Zoru Bhathena and Vanashakti, who are currently leading the charge to protect Aarey, the area that remained with the milk colony, because of its contiguity with SGNP, should be declared a forest as well. The state claims the two were separate, but activists say they were carved out of the same tract of land so should be accorded protection similar to that SGNP receives. There is no clarity on this, however, since files pertaining to the transfer have gone missing, activists say.After Vanashakti approached the green tribunal to declare Aarey a forest in 2015, a notification was issued by MoEF on December 6, 2016, including Aarey Milk Colony in the notified eco-sensitive (buffer) zone of SGNP. However, 165 hectares — which includes the 33 hectares earmarked for the Metro car shed — were left out. With a Metro Bhavan, a labour camp, construction of the Borivali RTO office and a petrol pump all in various stages of production in this area — besides the rehabilitation of approximately 14,000 hutment dwellers from the adjoining SGNP — the petition filed by Vanashakti points to the fact that the state has no intention to save what remains of Aarey, let alone declare it a forest.The MMRCL claims it has planted some 20,900 saplings in lieu of the trees cut down, and has pledged to manage them for seven years. Claude Alvares - who heads the Goa Foundation, however, says that’s not the way to make a forest grow. “Afforestation doesn’t happen because of human effort; it happens on its own. When you take one plant and sow 100 of the same kind, what you’re creating is a plantation, not a forest. Forests grow on its own, when there is no interference from anybody. In 10 or 14 years, you can have a natural forest even on barren land if you let nature takes it course. The whole exercise of cutting the trees is malafide because the people who are felling trees want projects to come up by all means, and the last thing they are interested in, is in planting trees.” Adds Stalin: “Every act is directed towards ‘clearing’ forests rather than conserving them. Despite protests, the government brazenly continues to destroy the last remaining green lung of Mumbai. If 4.84 lakh trees, two rivers, three lakes, grasslands and marshlands teeming with wildlife doesn’t make Aarey a forest, then it is a clear comment on the intent and ecological illiteracy of the government.”
