Noida hospital didn't have fire licence from over five months: Chief fire officer

New Delhi:

The Metro Hospitals and Heart Institute in Noida Sector-12, where a fire broke out on Thursday, was functioning without a fire licence that expired over five months ago, officials said. "The hospital authorities had got a license from the fire department in March 2017, but they did not get it renewed from over five months," Gautam Budh Nagar Chief Fire Officer (CFO) Arun Kumar Singh told to PTI.

Gautam Buddh Nagar District Magistrate B N Singh Thursday ordered a magisterial inquiry into the fire incident at Metro Hospitals and Heart Institute in Noida. "I have ordered a magisterial probe into the incident. The city magistrate has been asked to submit his report within 15 days," Singh told PTI. According to authorities, more than 60 people were inside the hospital when the incident occurred. He said all were safe. "More than 40 patients have been shifted to Metro's another hospital," Singh said. Around 10 fire tenders were rushed to spot and the situation was brought under control, fire department officials said.

According to the latest report, the rescuers have evacuated 60 patents. News Nation has learnt that the blaze broke out on the third and fourth floor of the hospital. There are reports that some patients saved their lives by jumping out from the building. The rescuers are searching each and every room to look for trapped patients or medical staff. According to its website, Metro multi-specialty hospital has over 2,500 beds. The hospital is said to be among 12 top hospitals in Delhi, NCR, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh. The chief fire officer fainted because of the smoke. A magisterial enquiry has been ordered by the district magistrate.

WATCH VIDEO HERE

According to an eyewitness, the fire was noticed at around 12:30 pm. According to fire officials, the priority is right now to save the patients from the operation theatres undergoing surgeries. The blaze comes on a day when the Yogi Adityanath government announced staggering Rs 1,298 crore allocation for the Ayushman Bharat National Health Protection Mission.

Exclusive visuals of the fire that has engulfed Noida's Metro Hospital. Several patients are feared trapped. Rescue operations underway



Follow LIVE updates: https://t.co/wXzITujZ0N pic.twitter.com/GE4QlPXYfZ — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) February 7, 2019

The senior officials of fire department and Gautam Buddha Nagar have also reached the spot. The hospital fire is a stark reminder of the blaze at Kolkata’s Calcutta Medical College last year. The fire had broken out in the dispensary of the state-run Medical College and Hospital on October 3 last year. As many as 250 patients were evacuated from the premises, fire officials had said.

#NoidaFire | People post videos of Noida's Metro Hospital Fire on social media. @ravish_nn has more details. Listen in



Watch LIVE: https://t.co/EdP4XDUtTF

Follow LIVE updates: https://t.co/wXzITujZ0N pic.twitter.com/dth6adtMuS — News Nation (@NewsNationTV) February 7, 2019

Meanwhile, hospital officials said that the fire has been brought under control and there were no immediate reports of any casualties.

Luckily, no one was injured in the blaze that broke out at 8 am in the dispensary located on the ground floor. Ten fire tenders were rushed to the site, the officials said. The Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata, commonly referred to as Calcutta Medical College, was established in 1835 and is the second oldest medical college in India after Ecole de Medicine of Puducherry.
