Indian Army destroys 4 terror camps in PoK with artillery guns, kills 5 Pak soldiers

Kupwara | Jagran News Desk: In a major retaliation to Pakistan's unprovoked firing, the Indian Army on Sunday launched heavy artillery attacks targeting at least four terror camps and several Pakistani military positions opposite the Tangadhar sector along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir, killing at least five Pakistani soldiers.

“Indian Forces caused heavy damages and casualty to Pakistan after two Indian soldiers and one civilian were killed in ceasefire violation by Pakistan Army in Tangdhar sector,” news agency ANI quoted an Indian army official as saying.

The Indian Army said that the army used artillery guns to target the terrorist camps in Jura, Athmuqam and Kundalsahi which have been actively trying to push terrorists into Indian territory.

This comes after two Indian soldiers and one civilian were killed by the in a ceasefire violation from Pakistan along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir's Kupwara.

“Unprovoked Ceasefire Violation by Pakistan in Tangdhar sector. Own troops retaliated strongly causing heavy damage and casualties to the enemy. Two own soldiers martyred. Pakistan also targeted civilian areas killing one and injuring three civilians. Indian Army salutes their supreme sacrifice,” said an army official.

According to officials, Pakistan has violated the ceasefire along the LoC over 2,000 times this year, leaving 21 Indians dead and scores injured. India has repeatedly called upon Pakistan to ask its forces to adhere to the 2003 ceasefire agreement between the two countries to maintain peace along the LoC and the International Border.

"India has raised the issue of targeting civilians during ceasefire violations along the Line of Control with Pakistan, which has seen a spike since special status to Jammu and Kashmir was scrapped in August," news agency PTI quoted army sources as saying.

(With agency inputs)

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
