Family of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari meets CM Yogi Adityanath, demands capital punishment

Family of Kamlesh Tiwari meets UP CM Yogi Adityanath | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Three persons from Surat have been detained for murdering Kamlesh Tiwari The son of the murdered right-wing leader had demanded NIA probe The UP CM had on Saturday condemned the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari

Lucknow: The family of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari met Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath at his residence today. Kamlesh Tiwari was brutally murdered on October 18. Kiran Tiwari, the wife of the right-wing leader, said that the UP CM assured them that justice will be done.

“We demanded capital punishment for the murderers. He assured us that they will be punished,” she said.

The family had earlier demanded a National Investigation Agency (NIA)-led investigation in the matter saying they don't trust the state administration.

“We want the NIA to investigate the case, we do not trust anyone. My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?,” Satyam Tiwari had said.

Meanwhile, three persons from Surat have been detained for murdering Tiwari in broad daylight at his office in Lucknow’s Naka area.

Addressing a press conference here, Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) OP Singh said that a joint team of UP and Gujarat Police detained Maulana Mohsin Sheikh, Faizan and Khurshid Ahmed Pathan.

Tiwari, a former Hindu Mahasabha chief, formed the Hindu Samaj Party in January 2017. In 2015, he was arrested for making a controversial statement about Prophet Muhammad and the National Security Act (NSA) was slapped on him. However, the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court revoked the NSA against him.

This is the fourth murder of a right-wing leader this month in UP. On October 8, BJP leader Chaudhary Yashpal Singh was gunned down in Deoband, while on October 10, BJP leader Kabir Tiwari was shot dead in Basti. After Tiwari’s death, student groups went on a rampage after his killing, burning down government vehicles.

Meanwhile, Bahujan Samaj Party national spokesperson today slammed the Yogi government for the failure of law and order situation in UP, saying that the government failed to provide adequate security to Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari.

“The murder of Kamlesh Tiwari is a serious blow to the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh. His mother has levelled serious allegations on the state government. They failed to provide law and order and security to her son,” news agency ANI quoted Sudhindra Bhadoria as saying.

He further said that there is a complete ‘jungleraj’ and ‘gundaraj’ in Uttar Pradesh and no rule of law exists today in the state.

Earlier, the son of the murdered right-wing leader demanded NIA probe saying the family has no trust in anyone.

"My father was killed although he had security guards, how can we possibly trust the administration then?" Kamlesh Tiwari's son added.

The UP CM had on Saturday condemned the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari, saying that such incidents are “unacceptable” and people involved in the case will not be spared.
