Rohit nears double ton as India pile on the misery

SOUTH AFRICA TOUR OF INDIA, 2019

Rohit nears double ton as India pile on the misery

by Cricbuzz Staff • Published on

It was Rahane's first Test ton at home in three years. © AFP

A one slip-and-wide gully field and an inch-perfect cover drive from Ajinkya Rahane off a Nortje ball in the second over of the morning summed up what was to follow in the first session on Day 2 in Ranchi. As South Africa grappled with a ball gone soft, Rahane backfoot-punched his way to his first Test century at home since October 2016, while Rohit Sharma went a step further to finish unbeaten on one short of his maiden Test double hundred.

There was a reason early in the session for South Africa to get excited when Nortje got the ball to viciously jag away from an unsuspecting Rahane as he looked to meet a length ball with a forward push. He was no where close to the ball as it took off unpredictably after hitting one of the cracks that have already started to open up. Unfortunately for South Africa, the pacers couldn't quite hit those parts of the pitch too many times.

When the ball wasn't misbehaving off the crack, it was coming packaged as a hit-me ball four out of five times, and the batting duo from Mumbai took full advantage of it. Rahane, who began Day 1 on a fluent note, kept it going in the early stages of Day 2 as Faf du Plessis rotated around his three quicks with no real luck. Nortje kept his pace in the high 140ks, but without being as effective as he should've been with such pace. Lungi Ngidi, playing his game of the series, bowled all over the place, including way down Rohit Sharma's pads on the leg side and paid a hefty price for it - a 14-run over that forced du Plessis to turn to spin. Rohit got to his 150 and Rahane reached a much-needed century as South Africa continued to appear listless with the ball.

By the time drinks were on the field for the first time, India had added 60 runs to their overnight score of 224 for 3 in just 13 overs. Du Plessis went with spin from both ends after the intermission, looking to get through about eight overs before he could bring back his quicks to bowl with the new ball. Though Dane Piedt created a big stumping chance - against Rahane - which Heinrich Klaasen fluffed, the off-spinner was continued to be treated with disdain. Rohit Sharma stood his ground and hit him through the line while Rahane, now free of the burden of getting a long-awaited home century, began to show a lot of feet movement. India picked 14 runs off an over from Piedt that saw them go past the 300-run mark, but George Linde brought the visitors a moment of relief. Rahane's eagerness to take on the South African bowler brought about the end of his excellent innings - on 115 - when he tried to run a ball down to third man and the extra bounce did him in. An edge went Klaasen's way, and the keeper didn't mess up this time.

South Africa opted to take the new ball with just three overs remaining in the session, and started rather poorly. Nortje particularly bowled all over the place, allowing Rohit to easily waltz into his 190s. There was a hint of restlessness for the Mumbai batsman, as he nearly chopped the ball onto the stumps in his quest to get to the big double ton before the 45-minute Lunch break. He survived those, ran quick twos with Ravindra Jadeja, but could only go as far as 199* when the players walked off. Eventually, India scored 133 runs in the session at nearly 5-an-over in 27 overs.

How South Africa resume with the new ball will be play a big role in ensuring they aren't pushed into the corner very early, a la Pune.

Brief Scores: India 357/4 (Rohit Sharma 199*, Ajinkya Rahane 115; Kagiso Rabada 2-82, George Linde 1-58) vs South Africa

© Cricbuzz

TAGS

RELATED STORIES
