Only 516 out of 9,000 buses plied on bandh called by Telangana RTC workers

Only 516 out of 9,000 buses plied on bandh called by Telangana RTC workers

Khammam district was the worst affected, as only five buses were operational.

news TSRTC

The Telangana bandh called by the TSRTC JAC on Saturday remained largely peaceful, barring stray incidents of violence. While the bandh hampered daily life in the districts, the city remained unaffected by the strike.

The Times of India reported that the police registered 124 cases against protesters, and hundreds of them, including leaders from BJP, Congress, TJS, TDP, CPI, CPM among others, were taken into preventive custody. According to the report, as many as 3,294 protesters were detained in Hyderabad alone.

Khammam district was the worst affected, as only five buses were operational. The bandh call was supported by the autorickshaw and cab unions.

Traffic was also halted for five kilometres on the Vijayawada highway when protestors blocked the road in front of Hayathnagar bus depot. There were minor incidents of attacks on auto-rickshaws and temporary bus drivers who defied the bandh. Incidents of stone-pelting and deflating tyres of vehicles were reported.

Protesters also damaged two buses in Nizamabad, and a minor clash erupted between police and protestors in Parakala when the latter blocked the buses from leaving the depot. Mild tension prevailed in Karimnagar and Warangal during the protest.

In a few parts, police escorted a few buses, but stopped after a while.

According to The New Indian Express, only 516 of the total 9,000 TSRTC buses were operational on Saturday. 101 buses plied in Hyderabad, and 102 buses plied in Siddipet.

Calling the bandh a success, TSRTC JAC convenor Ashwathama Reddy, who is spearheading the strike, said that the bandh was successful due to the support of several unions. Reddy said that they will continue the protest until the government holds discussions with them.

Despite the High Court’s direction for the government to hold talks with TSRTC employees, the Telangana government did not initiate any dialogue to end the protest. TSRTC employees have been on strike 16 days over 26 demands.
