PICS: Ranveer Singh rocks a suit with a pop of neon; Deepika Padukone wants to know where he's going?

When it comes to naming on superstar in Bollywood whose fashion sense leaves everyone in awe, each time he steps out, only one name comes to mind and it is Ranveer Singh. The King of quirky fashion looks, Ranveer can nail any look like a boss and leave his fans gasping for breath. Once again, Ranveer managed to steal the limelight with his latest look. The Gully Boy star was all set to head out and before that, shared a series of photos on Instagram. His wifey, Deepika Padukone was quick to comment too.

In the photos, Ranveer can be seen slaying a classic grey suit like a boss. But, since he is the king of quirk for a reason, Ranveer added a touch of neon to brighten up the classy look. Along with it, Ranveer’s hair was styled perfectly with gel and he added a pair of sunglasses. With a matching tie and formal shoes, the Gully Boy star was all set to hit the red carpet. However, it seemed his wife, Deepika was unaware of where he was off it. The Chhapaak star teased Ranveer and asked, “Going Where?”

(Also Read: Ranveer Singh goes the extra mile to support his childhood buddy & redefines friendship; Read details)

While netizens were left awestruck by Ranveer’s latest fashion outing, they too wanted to know where the star was off to. Earlier, during the day, reports were in that Ranveer would be gracing an event for his close friend, Simone Khambatta, who is a designer. The star returned to Mumbai this morning from Hyderabad after wrapping up the climax shoot of Rohit Shetty’s Sooryavanshi with Akshay Kumar and Ajay Devgn.

Check out the photos and Deepika’s comment:

On the work front, Ranveer will be seen in Kabir Khan’s ‘83 with Deepika Padukone. In the film, Ranveer will be seen playing the Haryana hurricane, Kapil Dev and Deepika will be playing his on screen wife, Romi Dev. The film has been shot in the UK. For the same, Ranveer spent time with Kapil Dev in New Delhi to pick up nuances for his character. ‘83 is slated to release on April 10, 2020.
