Nine Indian soldiers killed, several injured in LoC exchange: ISPR

Indian unprovoked CFVs in Jura, shahkot & Nousehri Sectors deliberately targeting civilians. Effectively responded. 9 Indian soldiers killed several injured. 2 Indian bunkers destroyed.

During exchange of fire 1 soldier & 3 civilians shaheed, 2 soldiers & 5 civilians injured. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Targeting innocent civilians by Indian Army is an attempt to justify their false claims of targeting alleged camps. Injured civilians evacuated to District hospitals. UNMOGIP as well as domestic & foreign media have open access to AJK, a liberty not available in IOJ&K. pic.twitter.com/mTyxCteYti — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Indian Army shall always get befitting response to CFVs. Pakistan Army shall protect innocent civilians along LOC & inflict unbearable cost to Indian Army. Indian lies to justify their false claims & preparations for a false flag operation will continue to be exposed with truth. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Indian Army struggling to pick dead bodies and evacuate injured soldiers. Indian Army raising white flag. This they should think before initiating unprovoked CFVs and respect military norms by avoiding to target innocent civilians. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Typical of Indian media falsely claiming targeting of alleged camps. Get access to IOJ&K & have moral courage to cover damages caused by Pak Army. All your previous claims met their fate so shall this one. Follow journalistic ethos of Pak Media for reporting with responsibility. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Indian COAS’ statement claiming destruction of 3 alleged camps in AJK is disappointing as he holds a very responsible appointment. There are no camps let alone targeting those. Indian Embassy in Pakistan is welcome to take any foreign diplomat / media to ‘prove’ it on ground.1/2. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

The propensity of false claims by senior Indian military leadership especially since Pulwama incident is detrimental to peace in the region. Such false claims by Indian Army are being made to suit vested domestic interests. This is against professional military ethos.2/2. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) October 20, 2019

Nine soldiers of the Indian Army were killed and several others injured as the Pakistan Army "effectively responded" to New Delhi's unprovoked ceasefire violations along the Line of Control, the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) said on Sunday.In a series of tweets, DG ISPR Major General Asif Ghafoor said Pakistan destroyed two Indian bunkers after Indian forces deliberately targeted civilians in Jura, Shahkot and Nousheri sectors.He said one Pakistani soldier and three civilians were martyred in the exchange of fire, while two soldiers and five civilians suffered injuries.Two of the five injured civilians succumbed to their injuries later, raising the number of civilian deaths to five.Maj Gen Ghafoor said the Indian army was targeting innocent civilians in "an attempt to justify their false claims of targeting alleged camps."He asserted that India's ceasefire violations would always garner a befitting response from Pakistan. "Pakistan Army shall protect innocent civilians along LOC & inflict unbearable cost to Indian Army," he said.Maj Gen Ghafoor said India's attempts to lay the ground for a false flag operation and would "continue to be exposed with truth."He added that the Indian military was now "raising white flag" as it faced difficulties in retrieving the dead and evacuating the injured.The ISPR chief warned the Indians to "think before initiating unprovoked CFVs" and urged them to "respect military norms" that call for protecting innocent civilians.He denounced the Indian media for "falsely claiming targeting of alleged camps" in Pakistan. He challenged the Indians to "get access to IOJ&K & have moral courage to cover damages caused by Pak Army."Maj Gen Ghafoor advised Indian journalists to learn from their Pakistani counterparts as he urged them to follow journalistic ethics and report with responsibility.Prime Minister Imran Khan strongly condemned the unprovoked firing by Indian security forces on civilian population along the Line of Control in a statement issued by the PM Office.He prayed for the departed souls and early recovery of the injured.The premier saluted the Pakistan Army for their bravery, valiance, and giving a befitting response to Indian security forces.
