Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: UP police recovers blood-soaked clothes, bags of suspects from Lucknow hotel

As the investigation is underway in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, the Uttar Pradesh Police in a major breakthrough has identified two suspected killers and recovered some clothes that are believed to be used by them on the day of the crime when Hindu Samaj Party leader was attacked at his office.

Cops have also recovered a bag from a hotel where the two suspects were staying in Lucknow. Both things have been recovered from Lucknow's Khalsa Inn hotel.

After receiving information about some saffron clothes and a bag from Lucknow's Khalsa Inn hotel, police reached the spot and seized all these items. Further investigation in the case is underway.

Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh has said that they have seized saffron kurtas which were worn by suspects — Moinuddin Pathan and Ashfaq Hussain — who were staying in Hotel Khalsa Inn in Lucknow.

The police has also informed that Pathan and Hussain used orginal ids when they booked a room in the Khalsa Inn hotel on Friday (October 18). Police believe that the attackers didn't want to hide thier indentities, therefore, they used original ids.

Also Read: UP CM assured us justice will be done: Kamlesh Tiwari's wife after meeting Yogi Adityanath

Moreover, the hotel staff has said both the suspects checked out from the hotel without informing the hotel staff.

The DGP has also informed that they have sent clothes and towel seized from the hotel for forensic examination to investigate whether the blood on the clothes matches with Kamlesh's blood.

As per sources, Kamlesh Tiwari's killers had come in a train to Lucknow. They arrived at Lucknow's Charbagh station from where they inquired about Kamlesh's residence and reached the Ganeshganj area in Lucknow.

The attackers had used the internet to gather information about Kamlesh Tiwari. Using navigation services, his killers identified Kamlesh's location and reached the Khurshid Bagh area.

The investigating agencies have identified three mobile numbers out of which one was activated on October 17. A day before Kamlesh was murdered, a call was made to him at around 12:30 am.

Earlier, the Maharashtra ATS which is also investigating the case detained an individual from Nagpur who is being interrogated in this murder case.

Also Read: Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: Gujarat ATS probing Pakistan link in killing of Hindu Samaj Party leader

Meanwhile, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday (today) met family members of Kamlesh Tiwari at his official residence in Lucknow and assured them that justice will be done.

Kamlesh's wife, who also met CM Adityanath, demanded capital punishment for the attackers and also demanded that her son should be provided with a government job.

The probing agencies are also investigating Pakistani link in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The investigation in the case is being done by UP police, Gujarat ATS. Also, an SIT has been formed to investigate the case.

On Saturday, the Gujarat ATS had detained three people in the case who later confessed to the crime.

Kamlesh Tiwari, a Hindu Samaj Party leader and former member of the Hindu Mahasabha, succumbed to injuries after he was attacked at his office in Lucknow on Friday.
