Pattern of surgical strike is formed whenever there is election: Congress on Army's artillery attack

Congress leader Akhilesh Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights BJP-led government would do politics on the artillery attack to divert the attention from key issues: Congress Earlier today, Army launched heavy artillery attacks, targeting at least four terror camps in PoK Congress leader linked Army's artillery attack in PoK to elections

New Delhi: The Congress party, on Sunday, downplayed the Indian Army’s artillery attack on terror camps in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and said that the Narendra Modi government tries to form a pattern of surgical strike whenever elections are around the corner.

Congress leader Akhilesh Singh went on to say that the BJP-led government would do politics on the artillery attack to divert the attention of the public from key issues.

“Under Modi ji’s government, whenever there's an election in a big state, the pattern of surgical strike is formed. Now, politics will be done on surgical strike to divert attention from real issues,” he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Congress' Akhilesh Singh on Indian Army used artillery guns to target terrorist camps in PoK: Under Modi ji’s govt, whenever there's election in a big state,pattern of surgical strike is formed. Now,politics will be done on surgical strike to divert attention from real issues pic.twitter.com/5pH1oK0lX4 — ANI (@ANI) October 20, 2019

Earlier in the day, the Indian Army launched heavy artillery attacks, targeting at least four terror camps and several Pakistani military positions opposite the Tangadhar sector along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir, killing six to ten Pakistani soldiers. The Indian Army resorted to artillery firing in retaliation to Pakistan’s unprovoked ceasefire violations and repeated infiltration attempts by terrorists.

The shelling by the Indian Army inflicted heavy damages on the Pakistan side and also killed six to ten terrorists, Army chief General Bipin Rawat said.

“Last evening an attempt was made in Tangdhar to infiltrate terrorists, we retaliated. Pakistan carried out the attack, firing at our post in which we did suffer, but before they could make the infiltration attempt, it was decided that we target that terror camps across. We had the coordinates of these camps. Terrorist camps opposite Tangdhar sector have been destroyed,” the Army chief said while speaking to reporters.

“On the basis of reports that we have been getting, 6-10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed, three to four camps have been destroyed. A similar number of terrorists have also been killed,” he added.

In a statement, the Indian Army said Pakistani Army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violations to assist infiltration by terrorists into Indian territories in the Tangadhar sector last evening.

"As a result, calibrated escalation of area weapons was undertaken by the Indian side in which terrorist launch pads and several Pakistan Army posts, giving incidental protection to these launch pads and certain gun positions were hit," it said.

Meanwhile, Union defence minister Rajnath Singh earlier today spoke to General Rawat over the ongoing situation. According to reports, the defence minister is personally monitoring the situation and has asked the Army chief to keep updating him.
