UP CM Adityanath meets Kamlesh Tiwari's family, assures them that guilty ‘will not be spared’

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday met the family of Kamlesh Tiwari, chief of a little-known Hindu outfit who was murdered two days ago. Tiwari's mother, his wife, and three sons spent some 30 minutes with the chief minister at his official residence here.

Hindu Samaj Party chief Tiwari (45), earlier associated with a faction of the Hindu Mahasabha, was killed at his home in Khurshed Bagh here on Friday. His cremation was delayed as his family members were adamant on meeting the chief minister to put forth their nine demands, including a probe by the National Investigation Agency, government job for one of the victim's sons and security for them.

Terming the murder "an act of mischief to create terror", Adityanath had on Saturday said the guilty will not be spared.

"In this case, five people have been taken into custody. Of these, three have been taken into custody in Gujarat and two in Uttar Pradesh. A Special Investigation Team has been constituted to probe it," he said.

"The elements who create an atmosphere of fear and terror in the state will be strongly dealt with and their plans crushed. This type of incident will not be tolerated, and those involved will not be spared," he said.

Adityanath said the assailants were allowed to meet Tiwari by the security personnel posted at his residence only after he gave the nod. The killers sat with Tiwari, sipped tea, ate food and then Hindu Samaj Party chief's personal aide and his son were sent to the market to purchase something. It was during this period that Tiwari was murdered, he said.

Tiwari's mother, Kusuma, had on Saturday alleged that he was killed by a local BJP leader over a temple dispute.

"My son was killed by a local BJP leader Shiv Kumar Gupta due to a temple land dispute in village. But I am alive and I will kill him," she told reporters in Sitapur.

Director General of Uttar Pradesh Police O P Singh told TV channels on Sunday that the police are examining CCTV footage, quizzing suspects and exploring all angles of the crime.

(To receive our E-paper on whatsapp daily, please click here. We permit sharing of the paper's PDF on WhatsApp and other social media platforms.)

Published on: Sunday, October 20, 2019, 04:22 PM IST
