Next five years to be ‘hottest EVER’ with soaring temperatures bringing droughts, floods and hurricanes, experts warn

A GLOBAL heatwave in the next five years is set to see rising temperatures bringing more extreme weather disasters, experts have warned.

The last four years have been among the hottest on record - with 2018 experiencing hurricanes, floods, droughts and extreme heat.

11 Countries around the world experienced drought, hurricanes, wildfires and floods in 2018 - and experts have said an increase in temperatures could mean an increase in the frequency of extreme weather events

11 Two people are pictured in a canoe paddling through a street that was flooded by Hurricane Florence that hit North Carolina US last September Credit: EPA

11 Wind-blasted palm trees caught on camera during a Hurricane Michael in Panama City, Florida in October 2018. Due to a global heatwave, experts have said the next five years could be the hottest on record Credit: Reuters

Average global surface temperatures for 2019 to 2023 are forecast to be between 1.03C and 1.57C above the levels seen before the Industrial Revolution, the experts said.

If temperatures over the next five years are in line with the predictions, it will make the decade between 2014 and 2023 the hottest run of years in records reaching back to 1850.

Professor Adam Scaife, head of long-range prediction at the Met Office, said: "2015 was the first year that global annual average surface temperatures reached 1C above pre-industrial levels, and the following three years have all remained close to this level.

"The global average temperature between now and 2023 is predicted to remain high, potentially making the decade from 2014 the warmest in more than 150 years of records."

And the World Meteorological Organisation has warned that the impact of soaring temperatures can be felt in the severity and frequency of extreme global weather events.

In 2018, the US had 14 climate disasters including hurricanes and devastating wildfires, which cost more than $1billion each, the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration said.

And according to NOAA, large parts of Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah and Oregon experienced drought throughout the vast majority of the year while smaller parts of northern North Dakota, West Texas and Southern California did as well.

In Europe, the UK experienced drought conditions during a record heatwave last Summer while Greece and Portugal suffered extensive wildfires.

The trend is going relentlessly up, and it will continue to do so Potsdam Institute climate scientist Stefan Rahmstorf

From September through to November, parts of France, Spain and Italy had storms and flash floods which resulted in some fatalities.

Elsewhere in 2018, South Africa and Australia experienced drought while Kerala in India had devastating floods.

WMO secretary-general Petteri Taalas said the long-term trend is an upward one, adding: "The 20 warmest years on record have been in the past 22 years. The degree of warming during the past four years has been exceptional, both on land and in the ocean.

"Temperatures are only part of the story. Extreme and high-impact weather affected many countries and millions of people, with devastating repercussions for economies and ecosystems in 2018."

Potsdam Institute climate scientist Stefan Rahmstorf added: "The trend is going relentlessly up, and it will continue to do so... Those who live in denial of this fact are in denial of physics."

Countries have pledged to pursue efforts to curb global temperature rises to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels under the Paris Agreement on climate change.

The 2015 Paris Agreement was the first pact to commit all nations to limiting global warming caused by emissions from burning coal, oil and gas.

But with a trend predicted of the world being near or more than 1C above pre-Industrial Revolution levels over the next few years, average global temperatures could temporarily exceed the 1.5C level, the experts said.

Dr Doug Smith, Met Office research fellow, said: "A run of temperatures of 1C or above would increase the risk of a temporary excursion above the threshold of 1.5C above pre-industrial levels."

Dr Smith continued: "Predictions now suggest around a 10 per cent chance of at least one year between 2019 and 2023 temporarily exceeding 1.5C."

Prof Sir Brian Hoskins, chair of the Grantham Institute, Imperial College London, said: "Our lack of decisive action over climate change makes us like a climber ascending a mountain, knowing that there will not be enough oxygen at some height, yet still we go on.

"Not every individual step takes us nearer disaster, but as confirmed by the Met Office, our general direction is clear."

11 An aerial view taken in October 2018 shows flooded city of Trèbes, near Carcassone, southern France Credit: AFP or licensors

11 Verona, Italy pictured on October 30, 2018 as torrential rain filled the river Adige Credit: Alamy Live News

11 A firefighter battles wildfire near a freeway in Simi Valley, California in November 2018 Credit: Alamy Live News

11 The United Utilities owned Wayoh Reservoir, which together with the nearby Entwistle Reservoir supplies more than 200;000 people in nearby Bolton is still looking parched despite a washout bank holiday weekend of torrential rain Credit: Alamy Live News

11 Sand blows across a normally submerged area at Theewaterskloof dam near Cape Town, South Africa, January 2018. Credit: Reuters

11 A house is partially submerged in flood waters in Chengannur in the southern state of Kerala Credit: AP:Associated Press

11 This satellite image from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) shows Hurricane Chris swirling off the US East coast on July 10, 2018 Credit: AFP or licensors

11 Flash floods are seen in the village of Sant Llorenc des Cardasar in Majorca in October 2018 Credit: EPA

Police rescue around 60 people, including tourists, after Majorca is hit by devastating flash floods

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
