Delhi: St Stephen's professor killed mother, then committed suicide over depression: Police

Stanley hailed from Pampady town in Kottayam district, Kerala. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights St Stephen's College professor forced his mother to commit suicide Later Allen Stanley also committed suicide by throwing himself before an oncoming train The two were disturbed over a police case against them

New Delhi: A St Stephen's College professor, who was found dead on railway tracks at the Sarai Rohilla railway station on Saturday, had forced his mother to kill herself and later committed suicide, said police.

According to police, the teacher identified as 27-year-old Allen Stanley and his mother 55-year-old mother Lissy - both were depressed over a police case against them in their home state of Kerala.

Abetment to suicide case was filed against the two by the family of Lissy's second husband, who died last year. The mother-son duo was out on anticipatory bail, said a report.

Before committing suicide, Stanely left a 4-page suicide note where he discussed the case and how the two were disturbed over it. The suicide note was written in Malayalam.

Stanley was teaching at St Stephen's College on an ad-hoc basis and at the same time was also pursuing a PhD from IIT-Delhi.

The police recovered the bodies after receiving a call from a relative of Lissy telling the cops that she was not picking the call and her door was locked. According to cops, Lissy also had a property dispute with the first wife of her second husband.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outer) A Koan said, "As the police reached Lissy's apartment in Pitampura and opened the door, she was found hanging from the ceiling fan and her mouth was stuffed with a cloth. The police later tried to contact his son but he could not be reached."

Police have now registered a case of murder at Rani Bagh Police station.

When Allen's friend, who is an associate professor, called his phone, it was answered by a Government Railway Police (GRP) officer informing him that the teacher had committed suicide by jumping in front of the train. Allen's body was found lying 100 meters away from platform number 3, Dayabasti Side of the Sarai Rohilla Railway Station.

Stanley hailed from Pampady town in Kottayam district, Kerala.

Cops said Stanley stuffed cloth in her mother's mouth to ensure she does not scream. Some of Stanley's relatives had also visited the duo in the past assuring them that all would be fine.

The DCP also said that Stanley had told his friend about suicidal tendencies a few days back. He also tried to force his mother to commit suicide but said his mother disagreed with him.
