Ram Madhav: 'India Wants Good Relationship With All Its Neighbours'

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) national secretary Ram Madhav while speaking at the US-India Strategic Partnership Forum on Monday stated that India wants a good relationship with all its neighbours, however, not at gunpoint. Madhav called out Pakistan for inciting terrorism in India. He stated that "Yesterday evening I just returned from Srinagar, for the last 48 hours, relentless shelling from Pakistan is on, in an effort to push terrorists into Kashmir. Our forces had to go and destroy terror launch pads once again."

Shri Ram Madhav Ji (@rammadhavbjp ) participated in a Conversation with Amb Frank Wisner, International Affairs Advisor, Squire Patton Boggs on “Next Steps for the U.S.-India Strategic Relationship” at the 2nd Annual India Leadership Summit hosted by @USISPForum pic.twitter.com/OT0JbhGboo — Deeksha Goel (@GoelDeeksha) October 21, 2019

'Terror infrastructure has become a global problem'

Speaking at the Forum, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) National Secretary, Ram Madhav urged the entire international community to act against terrorism. According to him, the terror infrastructure in Pakistan is not only an issue for India, but an issue globally as well. Speaking about the international community advising India, Madhav said, "There was a time when many would come to India to advise us. But today nobody is doing that because it has become a global problem." He further added that "`Terror infrastructure by Pakistan has become the epicentre of global terror today. On a certain issue like terrorism the entire democratic world has to come together to persuade Pakistani leadership to act."

Read: Those harming peace process in J&K will be jailed: Ram Madhav

Read: Ram Madhav says 'Army will handle Pakistan's ceasefire violations'

India-Pakistan encounter (artillery firing)

The Pakistani Army on Saturday carried out artillery firing on Indian positions to facilitate the infiltration of terrorists in India. In retaliation, the Indian Army launched artillery attacks on terrorist camps situated inside PoK opposite the Tangdhar sector on Saturday night. According to reports, around four to five Pakistani Army soldiers were killed during the encounter.

Read: Uddhav Thackeray pushes for Ram Temple again, demands special law

Read: Leaders under house arrest in J&K will be released soon: Ram Madhav

(WITH ANI INPUTS)
