J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik: 'We Will Dismantle Terror Camps In PoK'

Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik on Monday said that India will dismantle the terrorist infrastructures inside Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) if terrorism doesn't stop emanating from the neighbouring country. The Governor was speaking to the media when he was asked about the Indian Army's action against the terrorist camps inside PoK on Sunday.

'We will dismantle terror camps in PoK'

"We will dismantle terror camps and if they still don't mend their ways, we will go inside (PoK)," he said. "War is bad and Pakistan should behave. If they don't mend their ways, what will happen in the future will be worse than what happened yesterday," he added.

Indian Forces retaliate

The Governor also spoke about the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and said, there will be a 'new' Kashmir and urged people to participate in it. His remarks come after two Indian Army soldiers and one civilian were killed in firing on Saturday in Jammu and Kashmir's Kupwara district according to Army. In retaliation, the Indian Army on Sunday inflicted heavy damages on the Pakistani side.

"Indian Forces caused heavy damages and casualty to Pakistan after two Indian soldiers and one civilian were killed in ceasefire violation by Pakistan Army in Tangdhar sector," an Indian Army spokesperson said.

Earlier, the Governor said that the matter of three civilians' deaths in Jammu and Kashmir was of grave concern and he claimed Pakistan's hand in the killings. Included in the list was the incident where a migrant worker from Chhattisgarh was shot by terrorists and lost his life. In another incident, an orchard owner and a truck driver were killed by the terrorists in the Shopian district of Jammu and Kashmir; the police also suspect one of the attackers to be a Pakistan National.

"This is a matter of grave concern, poor people who are migrating to the State to earn a living are being killed like this," Satya Pal sounded alarm bells. This is happening on Pakistan's directions to create disturbance in the State. We will not allow this to happen. We will not spare such people," the Governor said.

READ | Indian Army attacks terrorist camps inside PoK,4 launch pads destroyed

READ | Kashmiri youth send clear message: 'I am as Indian as you are'

(With ANI inputs)
