'A tectonic shift': Green Party makes historic gains in Swiss vote

AP reports that Switzerland’s Green Party has “made historic gains” in national elections. However, the anti-immigrant rightwing remains the largest party in parliament despite a slip in its support. It adds: “Definitive results confirmed a pre-vote forecast that rising concerns about climate change would trigger an electoral ‘green wave’. The results mark ‘a tectonic shift’, said Green Party president Regula Rytz, and the leftwing party called for the ‘urgent convening of a national climate summit’”. The Greens garnered 13.2% support, says AP, exceeding their pre-election projection and marking a six-point bump on their 2015 performance. The Green Liberals – an environmentalist party with libertarian socio-economic policies – also gained ground, AP adds, taking 7.8% of the vote compared with less than 5% in 2015. Before the vote, Reuters reported that the Green Liberal’s Juerg Grossen had told the SonntagsZeitung paper: “If the elections turn out as the current state of affairs suggests, we’ll have to discuss the ‘magic formula’…He was suggesting a shake-up of the cabinet whose seats have been divvied up among the SVP, SP, FDP and Christian People’s Party in nearly the same way since 1959.“ The Independent quotes Lukas Golder, co-director of the Gfs Bern research institute: “The spectacular gains for the Greens are a real surprise, particularly in the French-speaking part of the country…Swiss voters were concerned about climate issues and want parliament to act accordingly.”

Meanwhile, Canadians head to the polls today in a general election where climate policies have been a key talking point. AFP says Conservatives and Liberals are “neck-in-neck” in the polls. CNN says the race has been “toxic”: “Polls and Google search rates indicate healthcare is the top election issue for many Canadians although the climate crisis is not far behind…The two top contenders are Liberal leader and incumbent prime minister Justin Trudeau, and Conservative leader Andrew Scheer. Through it all, they’ve been tangled in a virtual tie for the popular vote. Neither has a clear path to governing in Canada’s parliamentary system.” Climate Home News has published a “cheat sheet” on why this is Canada’s “climate election”. Also see Carbon Brief’s recent in-depth profile of Canada.
