Maharashtra ATS arrests another suspect in Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, was in touch with other accused

Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Sayyed Asim Ali was in constant touch with other accused and had played a very important role in the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari Tiwari was stabbed and shot dead at his residence in Lucknow’s Naka area on Friday The UP Police has has announced a reward of Rs 2.5 lakh each for facilitating arrest of two suspects

New Delhi: In another breakthrough in Hindu Samaj Party president Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, the Maharashtra ATS has arrested one suspect Sayyed Asim Ali. It was revealed that the suspect was in constant touch with other accused in this case and had played a very important role in the murder of Tiwari.

Director-General of Police (DGP) Uttar Pradesh OP Singh has announced a reward of Rs 2.5 lakh each for facilitating the arrest of two suspects.

The UP Police also brought three other accused in the case to Lucknow from Gujarat after a court in Ahmedabad granted 72-hour transit remand to the police.

Maulana Mohsin Sheikh (24), Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23) and Faizan (21) were arrested from Surat by a joint team of the Gujarat Police and the Uttar Pradesh Police for allegedly murdering Tiwari.

The leader was stabbed and shot dead at his residence in Lucknow’s Naka area on Friday.

In Lucknow, the accused will be presented in the court or at the house of a duty magistrate or judge.

Local leader Jaimin Bapu informed Gujarat ATS that a man named Ashfaq had created an account on Facebook with the fake name of Rohit Solanki in June this year to connect with the Hindu Samaj Party leader.

Meanwhile, Satyam Tiwari wants the NIA to probe his father’s killing as he does not trust police investigations. The family of the Hindu Samaj Party leader met Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday at his residence in Lucknow.

“My father was killed even though he had security guards. How can we trust the police that did nothing to avert the killing?” Satyam questioned while addressing the media in Sitapur after his father’s cremation.

Kamlesh Tiwari's mother, Kusum Tiwari, made a sensational claim accusing BJP leader Shiv Kumar Gupta of her son's murder. She further demanded action against the Lucknow Police for thrashing sons and wife of the deceased when they tried to stop the cops from taking the body to Sitapur on Friday night after the post-mortem.

As per the police investigation, the plan to murder Tiwari was hatched two months ago for his alleged statements on Prophet Muhammad in 2015. Tiwari was arrested for his statement in 2015 and the National Security Act (NSA) was slapped on him and he spent a year in jail after massive protests erupted in Saharanpur and Deoband.

However, the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court later revoked the NSA against him.
