Kamlesh Tiwari murder accused took anti-anxiety pills before committing crime

Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed repeatedly, shot in the face (the bullet was found stuck in the throat) and had his throat slit. In the manner the murder was committed by the three accused, the police believe the perpetrators wanted to send across a message.

Ashfaq Hussain and Moinuddin Pathan, who are suspected to have actually committed the murder, are still absconding. Special Task Force (STF) sources say Ashfaq was initially hesitant to carry out the murder alone. This was revealed after the interrogation of the three suspects arrested from Surat, Gujarat.

In such a situation, the responsibility of slitting Kamlesh Tiwari's throat fell on Moinuddin Pathan. Police sources say both of them - Ashfaq and Moinuddin - consumed anti-anxiety and energy pills before making their way to Kamlesh Tiwari's house in Lucknow.

Police have recovered the knife which was used to slit Kamlesh Tiwari's throat and pills from the room in Lucknow's Khalsa Inn hotel where the two accused were staying. Bloodstains were also found on the knife.

Police say Moinuddin suffered injuries on his hand when he was trying to slit Kamlesh Tiwari's throat. He then put his hand inside the pocket of his kurta he was wearing and returned to the hotel, something which was corroborated by the CCTV footage from the area.

The investigating agencies suspect that the duo fled to Bareilly after committing the murder and Moinuddin went to a hospital with a friend for treatment. The treatment was reportedly carried out in an Islamic hospital.

While probing how the two left Lucknow, police stumbled upon the evidence of their presence in Shahjahanpur. The CCTV footage showed the two coming out of an Innova car in front of Hotel Paradise in Shahjahanpur.

Police have unearthed more details in the sensational Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. While travelling from Surat to Lucknow, the accused took a local SIM card with the help of a man they befriended during their train journey.

The accused reportedly told a co-passenger named Vijay that they lost their mobile phone and they had not been able to contact their families. Vijay then arranged a SIM card from a shop in Kanpur, where accused Ashfaq provided his original documents.

There are many theories regarding the escape route the suspects have taken. Many police officials believe that the duo is on its way to Pakistan via Kashmir. Others believe they might be heading to Nepal.

Accused befriended Kamlesh Tiwari by creating fake Facebook ID

One of the accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case had created a fake Facebook ID to befriend the Hindu Samaj Party leader who was killed on Friday.

Special Task Force (ATS) sources have told India Today TV that as part of the conspiracy to murder Kamlesh Tiwari, the accused, Ashfaq created a Facebook profile with the name 'Rohit Solanki' and befriended the deceased leader.

Through the fake Facebook ID, Ashfaq used to have conversations with Kamlesh Tiwari. During one such conversation just before the murder, Ashfaq had expressed his desire to join the organisation. The meeting between Kamlesh Tiwari and Ashfaq was fixed after the conversation.

(With inputs from Arvind Ojha, Shivendra Srivastava, Kumar Abhishek)
