Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: Maharashtra ATS arrests 4th accused from Nagpur

The fourth accused, Sayyed Asim Ali was in constant touch with the three accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. (Photo: India Today)

A fourth accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case was arrested on Monday. The fourth accused, identified as Sayyed Asim Ali, was arrested by Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) from Nagpur.

The development has come two days after a joint team of Uttar Pradesh Police, Uttar Pradesh Anti-Terror Squad and Gujarat Police detained the three accused - Rashid, Mohsin and Faizan - from Surat in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.

Sayyed Asim Ali, a hardware shop owner, was arrested after the ATS of the Nagpur unit received a tip-off regarding the involvement of another suspect in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.

Based on the information, the Maharashtra ATS conducted an operation while the ATS Nagpur arrested him. He was also interrogated by the Nagpur ATS in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case.

Further investigation in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case has revealed that Sayyed Asim Ali was in constant touch with the three accused who were arrested a day after the Hindu Samaj Party leader was murdered at his office in Lucknow.

It has also been revealed that Sayyed Asim Ali played a key role in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The mastermind of the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, Rashid had also spoken with Sayyed Asim Ali after committing the crime. In fact, Sayyed had also uploaded a video on YouTube, speaking against Kamlesh Tiwari.

In the video, Sayyed Ali spoke was heard saying that Kamlesh Tiwari had insulted his religion, the prophet and he "deserved to die". The fourth accused had spoken about the alleged victimisation of people from his community and said he was ready to kill Kamlesh Tiwari if he wanted to die.

Sayyed Asim Ali was produced before a court in Nagpur on Monday. The Uttar Pradesh Police, investigating the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari, has taken the custody of the fourth accused.

On Sunday, a court in Ahmedabad has granted transit remand to the three accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The transit remand to the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case accused has been granted for 72 hours.

Hindu Samaj Party chief Kamlesh Tiwari (45), who was earlier associated with a faction of the Hindu Mahasabha, was killed at his office in Khurshed Bagh in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh on Friday.

Kamlesh Tiwari's mother, Kusum who met Yogi Adityanath on Sunday has said that her family was forcibly brought to meet the Uttar Pradesh chief minister. She also said the meeting with Yogi Adityanath was not satisfying and they would pick up swords if justice is not done in the murder case.
