Compared to Kerala cyanide killer, DU prof, mother kill self

Kerala serial murder case has claimed two more lives. A Delhi University professor and his mother have committed suicide, allegedly after a news report compared them with cyanide killer Jolly Thomas.

Friends and colleagues of Delhi University professor Alan Stanley on Monday blamed a "malicious" news report published against Stanley and his mother for the tragedy.

The decapitated body of Stanley, who was an ad-hoc professor in Delhi University's (DU) St Stephen's College, was found on the railway tracks at Sarai Rohilla in Delhi on Saturday and his mother Lissy was found hanging from a ceiling fan, with her mouth stuffed with a piece of cloth, in their Pitampura flat.

According to a friend of Stanley, who requested anonymity, "He had faced a lot of hardship. He lost his father when he was in the final year of college. Later, he ensured that his mother remarry, despite facing opposition from his elder brother, who drifted away from them."

The mother-son duo was in depression because of an abetment-to-suicide case pending against them in Kerala and both were on anticipatory bail.

Stanley's friends accused the regional media in Kerala for a news report published on October 15, portraying his mother in bad light by apparently comparing her to the prime suspect in the Kerala serial murder case.

The crime branch of Kerala Police is probing the abetment-to-suicide case registered against Stanley and his mother in Idukki district of the southern state. The case was registered on September 17, TA Antony, Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP), District Crime Branch, Idukki, said.

The case was lodged by the son of Stanley's stepfather.

"He had alleged that Lissy forced her husband to transfer some of his cash to her account. Most of his liquid funds were transferred to her account. The stepfather became depressed and even consulted a psychiatrist," the DSP said.

The psychiatrist advised treatment and care for Lissy's husband Wilson, but she allegedly demanded a flat from him, forcing him to take his life, the officer added.

Wilson committed suicide by hanging himself.

"At that time, the police had investigated the case as one of unnatural death. Later, Wilson's family levelled allegations against Lissy, saying she had driven him to commit suicide. There are allegations that a total amount of Rs 70 lakh was transferred to her account and that she is a nominee to her husband's deposits of Rs 2.25 crore," the DSP said.

A case was registered under sections 305 (abetment of suicide of child or insane person) and 380 (theft in dwelling house, etc.) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against the mother-son duo, he added.

(With inputs from PTI)
