After shelling along LoC, US urges India, Pakistan to maintain peace; calls for dialogue on Kashmir

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights We call on all parties to maintain peace and stability along LoC: US State Department US State Department called for dialogue between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues of concern On Sunday, Indian Army launched heavy artillery attacks, targeting at least four terror camps

New Delhi: The US Department of State, on Monday, took note of the recent shelling along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir and called for dialogue between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues of concern. It also urged all parties to maintain peace and stability along the LoC and prevent cross-border terrorism.

“We are aware of media reports of recent shelling at Line of Control. We call on all parties to maintain peace and stability along LoC and to prevent cross-border terrorism. We continue to support direct dialogue between India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues of concern,” the US State Department told news agency ANI.

On Sunday, the Indian Army launched heavy artillery attacks, targeting at least four terror camps and several Pakistani military positions opposite the Tangadhar sector along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir, killing six to ten Pakistani soldiers.

The Indian Army resorted to artillery firing in retaliation to Pakistan’s unprovoked ceasefire violations, shelling and repeated infiltration attempts by terrorists.

The shelling by the Indian Army inflicted heavy damages on the Pakistan side and also killed six to ten terrorists, Army chief General Bipin Rawat said.

“Last evening an attempt was made in Tangdhar to infiltrate terrorists, we retaliated. Pakistan carried out the attack, firing at our post in which we did suffer, but before they could make the infiltration attempt, it was decided that we target the terror camps across. We had the coordinates of these camps. Terrorist camps opposite Tangdhar sector have been destroyed,” the Army chief said while speaking to reporters.

“On the basis of reports that we have been getting, 6-10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed, three to four camps have been destroyed. A similar number of terrorists have also been killed,” he added.

In a statement, the Indian Army said Pakistani Army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violations to assist infiltration by terrorists into Indian territories in the Tangadhar sector.
