Salman Khan to be joined by Ram Charan, Jr NTR during Da-Bangg tour?

Ram Charan and Jr NTR to dance with Salman Khan?

Key Highlights Salman Khan will soon go to Hyderabad as part of his Da-Bangg tour soon Ram Charan and Jr NTR will reportedly shake a leg with the Bollywood superstar on stage

Fans all across the country stay glued to their phones every second in order to receive updates about their favourite stars. And what could be better than the news of three megastars from different regions coming together under one roof. If reports are anything to go by, Bollywood actor Salman Khan will soon be seen sharing the stage with Telugu superstars Ram Charan and Jr. NTR during his Da-Bangg dance tour.

Salman will be coming to Hyderabad as a part of his Da-Bangg dance tour that will be happening in the USA soon. The actor will make an appearance in the city on November 2 with a host of other celebrities including Prabhu Deva, Sonakshi Sinha, Jacqueline Fernandez, and Daisy Shah amongst others.

The same report also claims that Ram Charan and Jr NTR will not only be attending the same event, but they will also perform along with the Bollywood superstar on stage.

Meanwhile, Ram Charan and Jr. NTR are currently working on SS Rajamouli's magnum opus RRR and recently the duo flew to Bulgaria to shoot for the second schedule of the same. The Bulgaria shoot schedule will last for a month and major scenes involving Jr NTR will be filmed during this time.

Reportedly, RRR will be a fictional story set in 1920s pre-independent era and will be based on the lives of two real heroes, Alluri Sitarama Raju and Komaram Bheem. While Jr NTR will be seen as Komaram Bheem, Ram Charan will be playing Alluri Sitharama Raju. The film also stars Ajay Devgn, Alia Bhatt, and Samuthirakani in pivotal roles.

On the other hand, Salman Khan is currently gearing up for the release of his next film Dabangg 3 alongside Sonakshi Sinha, debutant Saiee Manjrekar, Kiccha Sudeep, and Pankaj Tripathi. The movie is slated for a December 2019 release.

Stay tuned for further updates.
