Tribal man killed by Maoists was baited into a trap

Ranga Rao spurned his ex-comrades’ offer to rejoin the group

The tribal who was gunned down by the CPI (Maoist) on Sunday was baited into a trap by left wing extremists.

Korra Ranga Rao (26) a native of Landula village in Ginnelakota panchayat in Pedabayalu mandal, was shot dead by the Maoists at point blank range on Sunday near Chitrakayaputtu village in Bongaram panchayat under Pedabayalu police station limits in the Visakhapatnam Agency.

A well-laid net

Initial investigation by the police has ravealed that he was trapped by the Maoists under the pretext of settling an old financial dispute. According to Rural SP Attada Babujee, the Maoists sent him a message a few days ago that the lingering financial dispute which he had with another person would be settled if he comes to the designated place. “Believing that it would be settled, he had gone to the rendezvous and they killed him,” said the SP.

Mr. Raga Rao earlier was a militia commander in the CPI (Maoist) party in the Pedabayalu region and was among the most wanted list. In 2017, he had surrendered before the police. He was let off to join the mainstream under the government’s reform programme. But the Maoists had been urging him to join back as he was a very resourceful person for them in the region.

Since he declined, the Maoists believed he was responsible for many surrenders, including his brother who was also a militia member and nursed a grudge against him. “To get rid of him they also branded him as a police informer,” said a senior police officer.

Hounded to return

Unable to bear their pressure, Mr. Ranga Rao, shifted from his native village and settled down in another village in G. Madugula mandal. “As they were unable to lay their hands on him directly, they baited him into the trap,” said Mr. Babujee.

This year, the Maoists have killed four tribals after branding them as police informers. While two were killed in Pedabayalu region, the rest were killed in Korukonda area of Visakha agency. Senior police officers feel that since the Maoists are losing their grip over the tribals, and the latter are getting closer to the police due to various welfare measures initiated by the government and police, the Maoists are striking fear among the tribals through such violent methods. In fact, police upped their offensive in the last few years resulting in an increase in the number of arrests and surrenders, a police officer engaged in anti-Maoist operations said. “They (Maoists) feel that the police are harbouring the surrendered Maoists as informers,” he added.
