Kamlesh Tewari murder case: ‘Killers failed to enter Nepal, hiding near border’

BAREILLY: The alleged killers of former Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tewari were spotted in Shahjahanpur district a little after midnight on Sunday. Police believe the suspects booked a car from Palia town in Lakhimpur Kheri district to reach Shahjahanpur after they failed to cross the Indo-Nepal border. The special task force (STF) has recovered the CCTV footage from a hotel near Shahjahanpur railway station and are looking for them in the district.In the CCTV footage, the two suspects are seen smoking and walking towards the bus stand. The driver later detained by the STF told them that the car was booked by a relative of the owner who lives in Gujarat, for Rs 5,000. Security has been stepped up in Shahjahanpur as police believe suspects may still be hiding in the district.According to police sources, a team of UP STF arrived in Shahjahanpur at 1 am and checked almost all the hotels and lodges on the Station Road throughout the night. The search operation continued throughout the day too, and almost all the hotels, hospitals and a few madrassas were searched and their managers and staff questioned.According to sources, both the suspects arrived at Shahjahanpur railway station around 12 am in an Innova and approached the enquiry counter to know about the next trains. Thereafter, they bought a pack of cigarettes and walked towards the bus stand. A CCTV footage showed them walking in front of a police outpost and then moving towards the roadways bus stand.Rajendra Kumar, manager of the hotel where police recovered the CCTV footage, said, “The UP STF squad arrived at 1 am and remained here for three hours. They were after a few suspected killers and found their CCTV footage here. We didn’t ask them any questions as they thoroughly checked all the hotels, including ours.”An STF official, on the condition of anonymity, told TOI, “We had information that the suspects of Kamlesh Tewari murder case are in Shahjahanpur but they had moved out of the hotel before we arrived. We have recovered the CCTV footage of the suspects. But we are not aware if they have moved out of Shahjahanpur or hiding somewhere in the district. We will stay in Shahjahanpur till further update.”Meanwhile, a team of UP Police interrogated 28-year-old Firoz, a resident of Sherpur village in neighbouring Pilibhit, for his alleged links with Rashid, one of the four accused in the Tewari murder case.A joint team of UP Police, UP Anti-Terror Squad and Gujarat Police had detained the three accused – Rashid, Mohsin and Faizan – from Surat on Saturday. The fourth accused, identified as Sayyed Asim Ali, was arrested by Maharashtra ATS from Nagpur on Monday.
