Mend ways or be ready for stern action, cautions Guv

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, October 21

A day after India hit the terror pads, J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik warned Pakistan of more deadly strikes and threatened to go inside the Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), if they don’t behave.

A 50-year-old civilian and two soldiers were killed, whereas six civilians were injured in the Pakistani shelling, which happened in Tangdhar bowl in frontier Kupwara district on Saturday.

India retaliated to the ceasefire violation and targeted terror pads across the Line of Control using artillery guns. While India claimed to have killed six to ten Pakistan soldiers and many militants, Pakistan rejected the claim saying five civilians and a soldier were killed in the shelling.

A day after border skirmishes, Malik today asked Pakistan to “mend ways or be ready for a strong reaction, which would be more severe to what was done yesterday.”

“Pakistan ko behave karna chahiye. Agar woh baaz nahin aaya toh kal jo hua hai, usse zayada hoga. (Pakistan should behave. If they don’t mend their ways then there would be a strong reaction as compared to what was done yesterday),” Malik told reporters on the sidelines of a police function at Zewan in the outskirts of Srinagar.

“We will destroy the terrorist camps...if Pakistan doesn’t mend its behaviour then India may be forced to go inside their territory (PoK) to hit them,” he said.

He asked the youth who are joining militant ranks to join the peace process and start their new journey in “naya Kashmir.”

He also asked people of Kashmir to participate in “Naya Kashmir’, which he said would come into existence from November 1, when the J&K state would get bifurcated into two union territories.

“Those boys (referring to militants) which are roaming, I want to ask them what have they gained till date. If they want to achieve something, they should own their state. If they don’t stop their activities then they would be met with a stern action,” he said.
