The Shillong Times

Maharashtra accident kills 3, leaves around 14 injured

Pune: Three people were killed and nearly 14 others injured when a bus hit a stationary truck on the Mumbai-Pune highway here in Maharashtra on Monday early morning, a police official said. The mishap took place in Kamshet area around 4 am when the private bus, carrying around 35 passengers, was on way to Kolhapur from Mumbai, he said. The bus driver, apparently, lost control over the wheels following which the vehicle hit a truck, which was parked on a roadside after it broke down, deputy superintendent of police, Lonavla division, Navneet Kanwat said. “Three people were killed in the mishap. Around 12 to 14 others were injured. They were rushed to a hospital in Talegaon where they were undergoing treatment,” he said. (PTI)



Blast in K’taka railway station

Bengaluru: A man was injured in an explosion at Hubballi Railway Station in north Karnataka on Monday, police said. The blast occurred when he picked an unclaimed parcel at the station, a major junction where headquarters of the South Western Railway Zone is located. “Due to the explosion, one person was injured and a glass nearby was broken,” said a police officer. He added saying it was not a major explosion. Soon after the incident, Railway Police and the officials rushed to the spot. The entire platform was cordoned off and an extensive search operation was being carried out, police sources said, adding that the injured had been hospitalised. (PTI)



3 mowed down by running train

Ranchi: Three members of a family, including a five-month pregnant woman, were killed by a running train in Jharkhand’s Palamau district on Monday morning. According to the police, five-month pregnant Sarita Devi (22) Radhika Devi (32) and her daughter Richa Kumar (13) had gone to answer nature’s call near Lalgarh railway station on Monday morning when they were mowed down by a running Garib Rath Express. All three died on the spot. The dead bodies have been sent for post-mortem. The incident has put a question mark on the government’s claim of Jharkhand being an open-defecation-free state. Sarpanch Aneeta Devi however, insisted that the village was open-defecation-free. She said the victims’ house had a toilet, but they still continued to defecate in the open. (IANS)



Arms supplying racket busted

New Delhi: A 42-year-old man and his two associates were arrested for allegedly supplying arms, police said on Sunday. “The accused, Beer Pal Yadav (42), was arrested from Ghazipur area in Delhi,” police said, adding that his associates Kuldeep Kumar and Manoj Kumar were also arrested. With their arrest, police claimed to have busted an arms manufacturing unit in Sambhal area of Uttar Pradesh, the police said. Following a tip-off, a trap was laid and Beer Pal was nabbed. Twenty country-made pistols with 50 cartridges were recovered from his possession, a senior officer said. He was taken to Sambhal, where Kuldeep was arrested and 15 live cartridges were recovered from his possession. “His accomplice, Manoj, was nabbed from Aligarh, and a country-made pistol and five live cartridges were recovered,” the police said. (PTI)



History-sheeter arrested in UP

Muzaffarnagar: A history-sheeter, who was wanted in 18 cases of looting, and his accomplice were arrested after an exchange of fire with police in Uttar Pradesh’s Muzaffarnagar district, an official said on Monday. During routine checking, a police team spotted the duo in Gandhi Colony area under New Mandi police station limits on Sunday evening, Station House Officer (SHO) Sanjiv Kumar said. He said police then surrounded the two men and after an exchange of fire, the history-sheeter viz. “Karam Chand was nabbed but his associate Baburam fled. Chand sustained bullet injuries in the firing and was rushed to a hospital,” Kumar said, adding that the accused has 18 cases of looting registered against him. The incidents of chain-snatching are on the rise here with three such cases reported over the last few days. PTI
