Kamlesh Tiwari murder probe: Car used by killers seized; assailants had bought SIM card from Kanpur shop

File picture: Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari was brutally murdered in broad daylight at his office on October 18 in Lucknow Uttar Pradesh DGP has announced a reward of Rs 2.50 lakh on each of the two suspects The UP Police have also released the sketches of the suspects

New Delhi: Four days after Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari was found dead at his Lucknow residence, the Special Task Force has confiscated the car that was booked by the assailants to travel from Palia in Lakhimpur to Shahjahanpur.

Moreover, the driver of the Innova car has been detained for grilling. Sources reveal that the driver has told the interrogators that the car was booked by a relative of the owner from Gujarat for Rs 5,000.

The two accused - Ashfaq Hussain and Moinuddin Pathan - reportedly travelled in this car from Lakhimpur to Shahjahanpur where they were captured in a CCTV camera walking towards the bus stand early on Monday.

The Uttar Pradesh Special Investigation Team (SIT) had yesterday conducted raids at several lodges, hotels, and madrasas in search of the two suspects but of no avail.

Searches have been extended to the adjoining districts. Meanwhile, personnel at all entry and exit points have been directed to stay alert.

In the meantime, Uttar Pradesh Deputy General of Police OP Singh has announced a reward of Rs 2.50 lakh on each of the two suspects.

The UP Police have also released their sketches.

"It is believed that the assailants may try to go to Nepal and we are taking all steps to prevent them from moving out. They may be still hiding in Shahjahanpur," an STF official said.

In another development in the case, it has come to light that the assailants had purchased a SIM card from a telecom shop at Harris Ganj, Rail Bazar in Kanpur, a day before the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari. As per a report, the SIM card was purchased on the ID of Gujarat-resident Ashfaq Hussain. It was activated an hour after it was purchased.

Later, the assailants boarded a bus to reach Lucknow.

Ashfaq Husain and Moinuddin Pathan had checked into a hotel in Lucknow on Thursday, a day before purportedly killing Tiwari.

The duo had checked out of the hotel around an hour after the former Hindu Mahasabha leader’s brutal murder. Police have recovered a blood-stained knife and blood-soaked saffron kurtas in the hotel room.

The CCTV camera installed at the hotel reception had captured the attackers, wearing saffron kurtas, leaving the hotel with what looked like a box of sweets in their hand. Notably, it is this 'box of sweets', apparently purchased from Surat, in which the murder weapon was hidden.

Incidentally, the recovery of the sweet box from the crime spot helped police to crack the entire case.

Kamlesh Tiwari was brutally murdered in broad daylight at his office on October 18 in Lucknow. The attackers walked into Tiwari's office in Khurshid Bagh area on the pretext of gifting him a box of sweets. Afterwards, the assailants opened the box, took out the firearm, sprayed Tiwari with bullets and fled after slitting his throat.
