Delhi continues to breathe poor air as stubble burning smoke comes in from Haryana, Punjab

Westerly and northwesterly winds bring dust from western regions and smoke caused by burning of crop residue in neighbouring Punjab and Haryana to Delhi-NCR. (PTI Photo)

The air quality of Delhi and its nearby areas remained poor on Tuesday -- a result of a significant increase in stubble burning in neighbouring states with favourable wind speed helping disperse pollutants.

The PM2.5 -- particles in the air with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometres -- level was recorded below 210 around 9 am on the Lodhi road.

Pollution levels in Delhi had dipped on Monday by around 10 points after the air quality of Delhi-NCR fluctuated between poor and very poor for over a week -- mainly due to a squall in Delhi that dispersed pollutants and rainfall in neighbouring areas that subdued the effect of stubble burning.

While Delhi's AQI stood at 249 on Monday, on Sunday evening, it stood at 258.

Westerly and northwesterly winds bring dust from western regions and smoke caused by burning of crop residue in the neighbouring Punjab and Haryana to Delhi-NCR.

The Ministry of Earth Sciences' air quality forecast and research service, SAFAR, had said, "The overall air quality of Delhi is back in the poor category. The surface and boundary layer wind direction is northwesterly now."

"An increase in stubble burning in the northern part of India has been observed. The circulation pattern is supportive for efficient biomass plume transport to Delhi," it had said in a report.

About AQI

An AQI between 0 and 50 is considered 'good', 51 and 100 'satisfactory', 101 and 200 'moderate', 201 and 300 'poor', 301 and 400 'very poor', and 401 and 500 'severe'.

More than 3,000 cases of stubble burning

According to CPCB data, more than 3,000 stubble burning incidents have occurred in Punjab and Haryana since the harvesting of paddy crop started around September 25. During the corresponding period last year, the count was around 2,600.

The period between October 15 and November 15 is considered critical as maximum number of stubble burning incidents take place in this span in Punjab and adjoining states and is one of the main reasons for the alarming spike in pollution in Delhi-NCR.

Despite a ban on stubble burning in Punjab and Haryana, farmers continue to defy it amid lack of financial incentives. State governments are providing 50 to 80 per cent subsidy to farmers and cooperative societies to buy modern farm equipment for in-situ management of paddy straw and running a massive awareness campaign against stubble burning.

The Delhi government has on several occasions attributed the dip in the air quality to rampant stubble burning in neighbouring states.

People of Delhi bearing the brunt: AAP's Raghav Chadha slams Punjab, Haryana

Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) leader Raghav Chadha slammed the neighbouring states and said the people of Delhi have to bear the brunt because of negligence on part of these states.

In a statement on Tuesday, the AAP leader said, Even as the AAP government in Delhi has taken multiple measures to combat the deteriorating air quality in the months preceding and around November due to stubble burning in neighbouring states, but the concerned state governments have shown lack of commitment.

Despite tireless efforts of the Delhi Government, it is extremely unfortunate that the people of a landlocked Delhi must face the brunt of complete apathy on the part of neighbouring state governments. No agency, Central or state, has had the courage or the willingness to take action against stubble burning in neighbouring states of Delhi, he added.

Also read | Delhi govt to organise 4-day laser show from Oct 26 to celebrate pollution-free Diwali

Also watch | Smog blankets Delhi as AQI drops to 'very poor' in several areas
