Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: ATS arrests Muslim cleric in Bareilly

File picture: Hindu Samaj Party founder Kamlesh Tiwari

Key Highlights The cleric is being brought to Lucknow for interrogation As per reports, the cleric was in touch with Kamlesh Tiwari's killers Kamlesh Tiwari was killed in broad daylight at his Lucknow office on October 18

Lucknow: The Uttar Pradesh Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) on Tuesday arrested a cleric from Bareilly in connection with the brutal murder of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari on Friday last week.

The cleric is now being brought to Lucknow for interrogation.

As per reports, he was in touch with the killers of the former Hindu Mahasabha leader.

Kamlesh Tiwari was killed in broad daylight at his Lucknow office on October 18. Clad in saffron clothes, two attackers had walked into Tiwari's office located in Khurshid Bagh area, sprayed him with bullets and fled.

The ATS and Special Task Force (STF) had tracked the location of the assailants, identified as Ashfaq Husain and Moinuddin Pathan - to Bareilly, Moradabad and Shahjahanpur.

As per sources, the two assailants had met the cleric in Bareilly after Tiwari's murder. The cleric had reportedly provided logistical support to the attackers.

With the arrest of the cleric, the investigating agencies have taken seven persons into custody in connection with the case so far.

As per investigating officials, the assailants had reached Lucknow from Kanpur by road on Thursday. The duo left the Uttar Pradesh capital on Friday, almost an hour after killing Tiwari.

Meanwhile, Uttar Pradesh Law minister Brajesh Pathak came out in support of Tiwari's family and said that the state government will demand death sentence from the fast-track court for the killers of the Hindu Samaj Party chief.

"The victim's family wants justice. We stand in support with Kamlesh Tiwari's family and the culprits will be caught soon. We will take the case to a fast-track court. And we will demand the death sentence for the killers from the court," said Pathak.

When asked about the Opposition's criticism over the law and order situation in the state, the UP minister said, "Akhilesh Yadav, Mayawati and Congress -- all three of them have lost their base in the state. Do take a look at the situation of law and order in their regime but I will request that the serious issue should not be politicised."

According to the UP DGP OP Singh, the assailants left clues all along, making it clear that they did not wish to hide their identities.

"They brought sweets from Surat and left the bill with it which helped us trace them through the CCTV footage of the sweet shop," he said.

He further vowed to leave no stone unturned in arresting the accused at the earliest.
