After 'Star Wars: Rise Of Skywalker' Trailer, Fans Get Emotional As 9-Part Saga Reaches Epic Finale

A staggering 41 years after the original Star Wars hit theatres, we're finally going to see the sun set on the Skywalkers - a story arc that fans have waited entire lifetimes to see. Here's the latest trailer, which reached the Internet a few hours ago.

The Rise of Skywalker is the ninth and final episode in the Skywalker story. It is a direct sequel to 2017's The Last Jedi and will complete Disney's new Star Wars trilogy, which started in 2015 with The Force Awakens. As one of the most popular and profitable franchises in the history of cinema, fans naturally reacted with massive excitement and of course, speculation.

Check out the new poster for @StarWars: #TheRiseOfSkywalker. In theaters December 20. Get your tickets now: https://t.co/MLbzRXrCJb pic.twitter.com/4jwGJOaFZi — Star Wars (@starwars) October 22, 2019

Several users were lost for words - many of them fondly remembering the late Carrie Fisher, who will reprise her role as General Leia Organa by means of unreleased footage previously shot for The Force Awakens. Disney also chose to release the trailer on her birthday, in tribute.

How I feel seeing and hearing Carrie Fisher in the trailer. #TheRiseOfSkywalker pic.twitter.com/1sLlbTPaPn — AR1 (@AlcadeCade) October 22, 2019

Others gave a nod towards Mark Hamill's iconic line-drop during the trailer. While his character Luke Skywalker is dead (as far as we know), he played a crucial role in The Last Jedi and several speculate that there may be a secret reveal during the film revolving around him.

Only vaguely saw Palpatine towards the end. But that last bit with Leia finishing '"The Force will be with you... always."



That got me. — Max Kline (@StrickenCross88) October 22, 2019

Others were heavily invested in 'Reylo' - the fictional pairing between force users Rey and Kylo Ren. It's actually hard to spot any part of the film that's been subjected to more theorycrafting than the complex relationship between both characters - something that's been on the wishlist of fans ever since The Force Awakens.

4 Reylo related:

1. @0.38- Rey "People keep telling me that know me, no one does." Ben: But I do.

3. @1:49- Rey & Ben met again inside ruin ship, gazing each other. "THE STORY LIVES FOREVER" over them.

3.@1:51 - Ben&Rey fought together.

4.@1:58-2:06 Is Rey lookin touched at Ben? — Galatians4:6- But I do. (@galatians_4_6) October 22, 2019

I FEEL ALIVE IN THE REYLO FANDOM TONIGHT — hikikomori povich (@SarahSahim) October 22, 2019

And finally, there are memes, almost all of which are dedicated to the implied puppet master behind the strings of our beloved characters - the nefarious Darth Sidious, who I'm personally the most excited to see again.

Ever since Disney took the reins of the Star Wars cinematic universe with their $4 billion takeover of Lucasfilm in 2012, they've been seeing nothing but success - all their subsequent films have grossed a total of around $4.5 billion, and the company itself set records this July for the highest-grossing year of any film studio in history… in the wake of a divided fanbase and titanic expectations.

It still amazes me how people can like TLJ and the new Disney Star Wars. I really don't get it. But hey they don't have to hate it like me. — David Kolar (@DavidLeeKolar1) October 22, 2019

The sequel trilogy has faced flak from fans for its treatment of the plot and 'Disney-fication' - toning down the story and narrative to better appeal to younger fans.

via GIPHY

That said, we're super-hyped for the December 20 release. 'A long time ago,' a plucky filmmaker with a penchant for adventurous storytelling dazzled the world with Star Wars.

Epic in scale and full of characters who have stood the test of time, George Lucas' universe of lightsabers and cantinas has finally come full-circle. Keep your eyes peeled, and may the force be with you.
