Jury selection delays testimony in Kalamazoo Uber shooter trial

KALAMAZOO, MI — Jury selection in the murder trial of Jason Dalton is taking longer than expected and will delay testimony in the trial.

Jury selection in the case started Thursday, Jan. 3. Just over 200 prospective jurors were summoned in two waves, with about 20 excused Thursday morning and other 20 expected to be excused Thursday afternoon due to hardships, Kalamazoo County Chief Assistant Prosecutor Scott Brower said Thursday afternoon.

Due to the large amount of prospective jurors left, Kalamazoo County Assistant Prosecutor Jeff Williams and defense attorney Eusebio Solis expect to do another round of questioning in a closed courtroom Friday. Voir dire, where the prosecutor and defense attorney question potential jurors, is expected to happen Monday, Brower said.

“It appears jury selection is taking longer than anticipated in that jury selection and voir dire may continue into Monday,” Brower said.

Opening statements and testimony could now start Tuesday instead of Monday as originally planned, Brower said.

Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Deputy Administrator Chad Kewish confirmed in an email that voir dire was moved to Monday with opening statements and testimony to start Tuesday, Jan. 8.

Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Judge Alexander C. Lipsey has issued a decorum order stating the courtroom will be closed to media and the public during the first stage of jury selection and would have access to a remote-operated pool video feed to observe voir dire. After MLive filed a motion requesting access to cover jury selection in the courtroom, Lipsey ruled a pool reporter would be allowed in the courtroom to cover voir dire but not hardship questioning.

Dalton, 48, faces six counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and several felony firearms charges for a shooting rampage that crossed Kalamazoo County Feb. 20, 2016.

Police say Dalton shot Tiana Carruthers, 25, in the parking lot of the Meadows town home complex, 5066 Meadows Blvd,, just before 6 p.m. on Feb. 20, 2016. Dalton allegedly shot and killed father and son Rich, 53, and Tyler Smith, 17, in the parking lot of Seelye Kia on Stadium Drive just after 10 p.m. that same evening. Police say he then shot four women and a 14-year-old girl in the parking lot of Cracker Barrel, 5581 S. 9th St. in Texas Township.

Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda; Mary Jo Nye, 60, Dorothy “Judy” Brown, 74, and Barbara Hawthorne, 68, all of Battle Creek, were killed and the 14-year-old girl, Abigail Kopf, survived but was critically injured.

Dalton allegedly drove erratically that afternoon, picking up Uber fares between the shootings.
