Andhra history-sheeter murdered, police suspect gang rivalry

Andhra history-sheeter murdered, police suspect gang rivalry

The 30-year-old man, identified as Karri Rajesh from Gavarapalem, was attacked by unidentified assailants near Park Centre in Anakapalle.

news Crime

In what is being seen as an incident of gang rivalry by the police, a man accused in a murder case was found dead in a pool of blood in Anakapalle in suburban Visakhapatnam. The 30-year-old man, identified as Karri Rajesh from Gavarapalem, was attacked by unidentified assailants near Park Centre in Anakapalle, The Hindu reported.

Anakapalle Town Inspector Bhaskara Rao told The Hindu that unidentified culprits had attacked Rajesh with sharp-edged weapons in the early hours of Monday, killing him immediately. Police also said that Rajesh had been injured all over his body, including his face. Rajesh’s body has been sent for post-mortem.

Rajesh was allegedly involved in a murder case reported at the Kasimkota police station back in 2013. Kasimkota is a locality close to Anakapalle. He is also said to be involved in multiple other cases reported at the Anakapalle Town police station. Rajesh was also reportedly booked under the PD (Preventive Detention) Act in the past.

According to ToI, Rajesh’ father told the police that the murder could be a result of rivalry between two groups. Police are reportedly looking at suspects who were known to have regular clashes with Rajesh. A case has been registered based on a complaint by Rajesh’s father.

This is not the first such incident reported from Visakhapatnam. In April 2018, in another case of suspected gang rivalry, a 32-year-old history-sheeter was murdered in the coastal city. The deceased history-sheeter, identified as Suvvada Mahesh, was allegedly involved in the murder cases of a few other rowdy-sheeters in Visakhapatnam

In January 2018, a 29-year-old rowdy-sheeter was hacked to death near Terracota layout, two days after being released on bail. The deceased was reported to have gone for a party in the night and was found dead in the morning.
