Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Accused forged colleague’s Aadhaar to join Hindu outfit

One of the suspected killers of Hindutva leader Kamlesh Tiwari allegedly forged Aadhaar card of his colleague to assume a new identity as part of his efforts to join Hindu Samaj Party.

The president of a little known Hindu Samaj Party, Kamlesh Tewari (45), was found murdered at his home in Naka Hindola area of Lucknow on Friday.

Probe into the killing has revealed that one of the main accused, identified as Ashfaq Shaikh had made a detailed plan to carry out the murder. Ashfaq, who worked at a pharmaceutical company, allegedly forged his colleague Rohit Solanki's Aadhar to join Tiwari's outfit.

WHY DID THE ACCUSED FORGE AADHAAR

Ashfaq Shaikh used Solanki's Aadhaar card and placed his photo above Rohit's, the probe revealed. Ashfaq allegedly forged the Aadhar to prove his Hindu identity in order to join the Hindu outfit.

Shaikh had also opened a Facebook account as Rohit Solanki, but used his own photograph as the profile picture. He then added Gujarat president of Hindu Samaj Party Jaimin Dave on Facebook who inducted him into the party.

In its report, the Times of India stated that after he joined the outfit, Ashfaq was appointed as the pracharak of an IT cell in Surat in June. "I suspect that he copied my card and used his photo on it. But I am not sure exactly what and how he did this. Since my details were used, I have approached police," said Solanki, a Varachha resident and native of Amreli district," Rohit Solanki was quoted as saying by the daily.

Dave told The Indian Express that as per procedure, Aadhaar cards and photographs of all members is collected. He said when he learnt that the Aadhaar was forged, he handed over the forged document to the Gujarat unit of ATS, the daily added.

WHAT IS THE KAMLESH TIWARI MURDER CASE?

Hindutva leader Kamlesh Tewari, 45, was found murdered at his home in Lucknow.

Police subsequently recovered a knife and saffron kurta with bloodstains lying on the bed in the room of the hotel booked by the suspected killers. A blood-stained towel too was recovered along with a box of a new mobile phone from the room.

On a tip-off that the two men, who are suspected of actually carried out Tiwari's killing in Lucknow on Friday and have been identified as Sheikh Ashfaqul Hussain and Muinuddin Pathan, were present at Palia in Lakhimpur, an SIT team of the UP Police rushed to the place.

But by the time, the police reached there, they came to know that the duo had left for Sahjahanpur in a rented vehicle.

SIX ARRESTED TILL NOW

At least six persons have been arrested in the case till now. On Friday night, three men were arrested at Surat by the Gujarat Anti-Terror Squad for their alleged involvement in Tiwari's murder.

The trio arrested in Surat were identified as Faizan Yunus Bhai, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan. They were handed over to Uttar Pradesh Police on 72-hour transit remand by a Surat court on Friday.

Two others were arrested in the case from Bijnor. The duo, identified as local residents Mohammed Mufti Naeem Kazmi and Imam Maulana Anwarul Haq, were booked on murder charge on Friday after Tiwari's wife Kiran named them in her complaint alleging that the duo had announced a bounty of Rs 1.5 crore in 2016 for killing her husband.

A sixth person was arrested by the Anti-Terrorism Squad of Maharashtra police earlier on Saturday from Nagpur and was identified as Sayed Asim Ali, 29. Ali ran hardware business in Nagpur.

(With inputs from Gopi Maniar)

Also read | Kamlesh Tiwari murder accused took anti-anxiety pills before committing crime

Also read | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Police recover bags, blood-stained clothes of killers from hotel

Also watch | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Son demands death sentence for accused
