Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Bareilly cleric detained on suspicion of helping accused

Hindutva leader Kamlesh Tewari, 45, was found murdered at his home in Lucknow. (File Photo)

The Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) on Tuesday detained another cleric in connection with the killing of right wing leader Kamlesh Tiwari in Lucknow.

The cleric, identified as Sayyed Kaifi Ali of Bareilly, was detained on suspicion of helping the killers. The ATS officials claimed that the accused visited the cleric in Bareilly after they killed Kamlesh Tiwari in Lucknow.

Sheikh Ashfaqul Hussain and Muinuddin Pathan have been accused of carrying out Tiwari's killing in Lucknow on Friday.

The police had earlier recovered a blood-stained saffron kurta and a towel from a Lucknow hotel in which the duo, Hussain and Pathan had checked in on October 17 and had left the hotel next day -- on October 18, the day Tiwari was killed.

The Uttar Pradesh Police, meanwhile, are also questioning the driver of a private vehicle allegedly hired by the two suspected killers to escape from Lakhimpur to Shahjahanpur.

On a tip off that the two men, an SIT team of the UP Police rushed to Palia in Lakhimpur, but by the time they reached, the duo had left for Sahjahanpur in a rented vehicle, said sources. On this, another SIT team rushed to Shahjahanpur.

The police, however, managed to trace the driver of the vehicle.

Six arrested for Kamlesh Tiwari's murder

The suspects were "radicalised" and appeared to have targeted Tiwari for his inflammatory remarks made in 2015, the police had earlier said.

Till now, six people have been arrested in the case.

Among the arrested are Bijnor residents Mohammed Mufti Naeem Kazmi and Imam Maulana Anwarul Haq, who were booked on murder charge on Friday after Tiwari's wife named them in her police complaint alleging that the duo had announced a bounty of Rs 1.5 crore on his head in 2016.

However, Tiwari's mother Kusuma alleged that he was killed by a "local BJP leader" due to a temple dispute in a village.

Three persons detained in Surat by Gujarat Anti-Terrorist Squad were identified as Faizan Yunus Bhai, Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Rashid Ahmed Khursheed Ahmed Pathan.

Also read | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Cleric who placed bounty on Hindu Samaj leader detained from Bijnor

Also read | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Accused forged colleague’s Aadhaar to join Hindu outfit

Also watch | Kamlesh Tiwari murder: Son demands death sentence for accused
