Cyanide Mohan convicted in 17th case for killing anganwadi worker

MANGALURU: Serial killer Cyanide Mohan, 56, has been convicted for the murder of an anganwadi assistant from Dakshina Kannada district, who was killed at Kempegowda Bus Station (KBS) in Bengaluru.The sixth additional district and sessions judge Sayeedunnisa convicted Mohan on Tuesday and the quantum of punishment will be pronounced after the hearing on sentence on October 24.With this, Mohan has been convicted in 17 cases and trial in three more cases is in progress.Public Prosecutor Judith OM Crasta said Mohan met the victim at Balepuni in Bantwal taluk in October 2005. Mohan introduced himself to the victim as Anand and befriended saying that he also belonged to the same caste of her. On October 21, 2005, Mohan took the victim to Bengaluru promising to marry her. She had left home informing the family that she was going to Sringeri on a tour with friends. Both of them checked into Hotel Shabari Gate near the bus stand. Mohan had sex with the victim and the next day took her to Kempegowda Bus Station leaving her gold ornaments in the hotel room. Upon reaching the bus stand, Mohan asked her to take a tablet, which was laced with cyanide, making her believe that it was a contraceptive pill. She went to the toilet on the platform number 1 of the bus stand and died after consuming the tablet. In the meantime, Mohan went to the hotel room and fled with the gold ornaments of victim, Crasta said.An unnatural death report (UDR) was registered at the Upparpet police station in Bengaluru. Meanwhile, a missing complaint was filed by her family members at Konaje police station in Mangaluru city. Statements of a witness, who was the president of anganwadi monitoring and support committee, and the UDR by the police helped the prosecution to proving the charges against Mohan. The witness also had succeeded in identifying Mohan in an identification parade conducted in the presence of a tahsildar in jail. The UDR had made mention of cyanide as the cause of death. The court also took statements from Dr C M Sumangala from Victoria Hospital in Bengaluru. Further, the ornaments of the victims were also recovered. Though the case was initially taken up by Konaje police, later it was handed over to the CID. On March 2010, CID Inspector Waseer Sahib filed a chargesheet against Mohan.“The court examined 41 witnesses and 67 documents during the trial and found Mohan guilty of offences committed under IPC Sections 366 (abduction), 417 (cheating), 376 (rape), 328 (Causing hurt by means of poison , etc), 392 (robbery), 394 (Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery), 302 (murder) and 201 (destroying evidence),” Crasta said.Mohan was arrested by Bantwal rural police in a rape and murder case on September 21, 2009. Though he was awarded death penalty in three cases, verdict in one case was commuted to life and another for five years’ imprisonment.
