Kamlesh Tiwari killers arrested near Gujarat-Rajasthan border

Follow us on Image Source : FILE Kamlesh Tiwari (Pictured above) was murdered on October 18

Ashfaq and Moinuddin, the two men accused of killing Kamlesh Tiwari have been arrested by the police. They were arrested near Gujarat and Rajasthan border. The arrest of Ashfaq-Moinuddin has taken the total number of accused in custody to 5.

Hindu Samaj Party chief Kamlesh Tiwari was shot dead by unknown assailants in Lucknow on Friday. The incident was reported at Tiwari's office in the city, where two people barged in holding a box of sweets. According to media reports, the miscreants hid a pistol and a knife inside the box, with which they attacked Tiwari.

Both the miscreants fled the spot soon after the incident.

The Hindu Mahasabha leader was rushed to Trauma Centre where he succumbed to his injuries.

Tiwari had served as the president of the right-wing group.

Moinuddin and Ashfaq were arrested by Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) of Gujarat Police.

"They were arrested from near Shamlaji on the Gujarat-Rajasthan border when they were about to enter Gujarat on Tuesday evening," said Himanshu Shukla, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS).

Their location was traced through technical surveillance as they contacted their family members and friends after the duo ran out ofcash, he said.

The duo will be handed over to the Uttar Pradesh police probing the sensational killing of Tiwari, who headed a little known outfit, Hindu Samaj Party (HSP).

Tiwari (45), who was earlier associated with a faction of the Hindu Mahasabha, was killed at his home in Naka Hindola area in Lucknow.

Six persons, including three from Surat and one from Nagpur in Maharashtra, have already been taken into custody in connection with the murder case.

(With PTI inputs)

Also Read | Kamlesh Tiwari's killing an act of mischief to create terror: UP CM

Also Read | Key accused in Kamlesh Tiwari murder was a computer operator in Dubai

Watch | No one will be spared in Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: CM Adityanath
