NCRB report leaves out lynching, honour killing data for being 'vague'

The report also left out data on crimes against journalists, whistleblowers, RTI activists and those committed by khap panchayats, religious leaders and illegal migrants for the same reason.

The National Crime Records Bureau's 2017 Crime in India report that was published after a year's delay left out hate crime and lynchings because it found the available data on it “unreliable” and “vague”.

While the government found data provided by its own agencies unreliable, a report published by Reporters Without Borders labelled India as fifth most dangerous for journalists, citing killing of six scribes in 2018.

“Journalists also live in fear in India. Six were murdered this year (2018) and many others were the targets of murder attempts, physical attacks, and threats. Hate campaigns against journalists, including incitement to murder, are common on social networks and are fed by troll armies linked to the Hindu nationalist right,” the report published last year had said.

The NCRB report, which was released on Monday, also gave no data on honour killings, rapes committed during communal/sectarian violence and murders that can be called hate crimes or instigated by fake/false news or rumours.



“It was observed that data received for certain newly created additional parameters/crime heads are unreliable and their definitions are also prone to misinterpretation. Accordingly, data related to certain parameter/crime heads have not been published,” a source in the Union home ministry that oversees the NCRB told this website.

The need for lynching to be listed as a separate head was felt after the cases Mohammad Akhlaq in Uttar Pradesh and Pehlu Khan in Alwar, Rajasthan.

Akhlaq was beaten to death by a mob in 2015 on the suspicion that he had slaughtered a cow and had stored its meat for eating.

In 2017, Pehlu Khan was beaten to death by cow vigilantes, who intercepted his truck when he was returning to his village in Haryana after buying cows in Jaipur. Many such mob-driven murders, either linked to cow slaughter or trading in cattle, were reported throughout the Narendra Modi-led government's first tenure from 2014-19.

The NCRB also chose to call “vague” the category of “crime committed with firearms”. Another category that figured in the list of 'vague' or on which data was unreliable was that of 'human violation committed by defence personnel and Central Armed Police Forces'.
