India’s anti-Pakistan propaganda and diplomacy has not achieved its objectives

In the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the US in 2001 and the resultant war on terror being fought in Afghanistan, India found an opportunity to exploit the western countries’ sensitivities regarding terrorism by declaring the legitimate, peaceful freedom struggle of the people of the Indian occupied State of Jammu and Kashmir as terrorism. It further propagated that the struggle was being supported by Pakistan. India’s objective was to get the world’s major powers’ support to crush the freedom struggle by the use of force without caring for human rights violations.

India’s disinformation campaign and diplomacy against Pakistan was also aimed at getting it declared a terrorist state by the US and other western powers by blaming it for supporting the so-called terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir as well as the violence in Afghanistan. This was mainly meant to undermine Pakistan’s nuclear power status and remove it as an obstacle to India becoming an undisputed hegemonic regional power.

Its vicious propaganda and diplomacy against Pakistan were being done in many ways. Some of the measures included using its Pakistan-biased media, think tank community and diaspora abroad to lobby for it along with using Indian diplomats to mislead foreign diplomats by blaming Pakistan for supporting terrorism; distorting facts on Jammu and Kashmir situation, and Pakistan’s sincerity to fight the war on terror in Afghanistan. With the BJP and Modi coming into power, Modi himself took the charge of carrying out anti-Pakistan diplomacy with the international leaders and at international forums.

For conducting propaganda against Pakistan, apart from using its state machinery, India also motivated or hired the US and other western writers, think tanks and columnists to write motivated articles and reports against Pakistan and blame it for supporting the so-called terrorism in Kashmir. It made sure to spread the word about how Pakistan was not sincere in fighting the war on terror-related to Afghanistan as a Non-NATO ally of the US. By doing so, these writers were projecting India’s stance. Among such writers, notable ones included Declan Walsh, Seymour Hersh, Christian Fair, Steve Cole, Brian Stelter, Christina Lamb and many others.

Very frequently, these writers kept on saying, without any logic, that Pakistan’s nuclear weapons were in the danger of falling into the hands of terrorists. The pro-India and anti-Pakistan bias of these writers was quite evident because they never wrote anything about India-sponsored terrorism in Balochistan, its use of Afghan soil, its state terrorism in Kashmir since 1987 and even the current situation in the Kashmir valley with the curfew and telephone/internet blockade entering into 76th day. Not a word was said against India jailing Kashmiri leaders and over 1300 young men or even against the genocide being carried out by the Indian security forces. Apart from being misguided by India, these columnists were also being provided negative inputs about Pakistan by some so-called Pakistanis like Hussain Haqqani.

Lately, Lawrence Sellin, a US Army’s retired Colonel, has also started writing against Pakistan. In his articles, he has blamed Pakistan for duplicity in fighting the war on terror-related to Afghanistan, due to which the US lost that war. By saying so, even though Pakistan has sacrificed above 70,000 human lives and suffered above 100 billion US dollars in economic losses in fighting the war on terror, he is also speaking India’s language. In December 2018, Sellin, in his article, titled, “China-Pakistan Alliance a Threat” published in the Indian Defence News, openly said that Pakistan was not a friend of the US, but a staunch ally of China.

However, Sellin’s comments in the article that a successful implementation of the Chinese-Pakistani plan would mean isolation of India indicated that he had written the article on India’s behest. In this context, it is also encouraging to note that Sellin’s credibility is widely doubted, even by his countrymen. Among his colleague journalists, he is called “Disinformation Campaigner” and the general readers are usually warned not to take him seriously.

Despite an intense propaganda and diplomacy campaign against Pakistan, India has failed in achieving its anti-Pakistan objectives of isolating Pakistan internationally; getting it declared a terrorist state and undermining its nuclear status. Rather, now, Pakistan-US relations have greatly improved as President Trump and the US administration have experienced that while India does not act in line with its interests as its close defence partner when needed, Pakistan’s sincerity in establishing peace in Afghanistan by facilitating the US-Taliban negotiations goes beyond any doubt. Moreover, the US has come to believe that Pakistan is strategically equally important for keeping the peace in Afghanistan, the Middle East and Central Asia.

Therefore, in view of the above evolving scenario, India should stop its propaganda campaign against Pakistan and resolve the Kashmir dispute through a dialogue, as per the UNSC resolutions, or by accepting President Trump’s mediation offers, so that both the nuclear powers could live together like friends and focus on developing their economies to address poverty and work for the welfare of their people.

The writer is a former Research Fellow of Islamabad Policy Research Institute (IPRI), Islamabad
