Army JCO killed in ‘encounter’ with militants Nowshera

Army JCO killed in ‘encounter’ with militants Nowshera

2 civilians injured in Pak shelling on LoC

RAJOURI, Oct 22: A Junior Commissioned Officer (JCO) of the Indian Army succumbed to injuries, which he sustained in the exchange of fire with terrorists at a post 500m inside the Line of Control (LoC) in Nowshera sector of Jammu and Kashmir, news agency reports said quoting official sources.

The area has been cordoned off. The exchange of fire is underway.

The encounter in Nowshera is the first after the Indian army claimed it had destroyed 2 terror camps opposite the Tanghdar sector in Pakistan occupied Kashmir. The Chief of the Army Staff, General Bipin Rawat, had confirmed that 6-10 Pakistani soldiers had also been killed in the artillery firing by the Indian army.

On October 20, two India soldiers were also killed in shelling by the Pakistan army which prompted retaliation from the Indian side inflicting heavy damages on terror camps across the LoC.

At least two civilians were injured on today as Pakistan Army resorted to heavy shelling along the Line of Control in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir, official source said.

The mortar shelling from across the border started in Balakote area of Mendhar sector around 1.20 PM, prompting strong retaliation by Indian Army, the officials said.

They said two civilians were injured in the Pakistani shelling and are being evacuated to hospital.

People in the shelling hit villages rushed to the safety of their homes and underground bunkers, while the children in some schools falling within the range are being taken to safety, the officials said.

Meanwhile, the army has defused three live mortar shells fired by Pakistan troops along Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district, officials said.

With the safe defusal of the mortar shells by Army engineers, a tragedy has been averted in Karmara village of Poonch district, they said.

Pakistan has been resorting to heavy mortar shelling along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir for the past over one month.

A civilian was injured after Pakistani forces attacked the Indian army’s posts and civilian areas in Balakote sector of Poonch district this afternoon.

Army sources said that Pakistani army firstly opened fire and used mortar shells on Indian army’s posts in balakote sector. The soldiers manning the fence responded strongly with equal calibre.

Army sources said, “this morning Pakistan army violated ceasefire and used mortars shelling and small arms in the Balakote sector. Army sources said Pakistani army used heavy weapons and used mortar shelling along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district in which a Civilian was seriously injured.

BMO Mendhar Dr Parvaiz said a woman identified as Phul Jan wife of Kala Khan, resident of Gohlad, Mendhar was injured and under treatment at Sub-District Hospital Mendhar and her condition was stated to be out of danger.
