Woman loses husband, lover in murder plot: Both men drowned in lake during fisticuffs

SURAT: A sinister plan hatched by a school teacher to murder her husband with the help of her boyfriend went horribly wrong after both men drowned during a scuffle to push each other into a lake.Police booked the teacher Khushbu Patel whose husband Kamal, 35 and boyfriend Tushar Patel, 28, fell into the lake near Kosam Kantara village on Variav Road on Monday night.As per the plan, Tushar tried to push Kamal into the lake but the latter dragged him inside, resulting in the death of both men. Their bodies were fished out on Tuesday. Khushbu was arrested for her involvement in murder plan and helping by bringing Kamal to the spot.According to her plot, Khushbu, a teacher in public school, had asked her husband Kamal, an electrical goods repairer, to come to the lake and bring their daughter from Variav village along. As per plan, she asked Kamal to stop near the lake saying she wanted to answer nature’s call. When Kamal stopped his bike, her boyfriend Tushar, a peon in a private bank, arrived at the spot and attacked Kamal. Tushar tried to push Kamal into the lake water, but the latter tightly gripped his collar and pulled him along. They both tried to kill each other by pushing into water but drowned together, said Jahangirpura police station sources.A shocked Khushbu scream for help and called some locals and known people for help. Bodies of both men were fished out later.Police investigation so far revealed that Khusbhu and Tushar met each other at a seminar for government job aspirants in Adajan around one-and-a-half years ago. They developed friendship while exchanging learning material and fell in love. Kamal came to know about the affair nearly four months ago when Khushbu demanded divorce but he refused.“Khushbu wanted to live with Tushar and hence they planned to kill Kamal. They had tried to kill him in similar way at the lake around a month ago. Khushbu had even taken him near the lake on some pretext, but Tushar came late and the plan was unsuccessful. In the second attempt, both Kamal and Tushar got killed,” said a police officer at Jahangirpura police station.
