Kamlesh Tewari murder case: Gujarat ATS nabs Kamlesh Tewari’s alleged killers from Shamlaji

Tewari case accused took lift in a truck till MP border

AHMEDABAD: Four days after the brutal murder of Hindu Samaj Party founder Kamlesh Tewari at his office-cum-residence in Lucknow, the anti-terrorism squad (ATS) of Gujarat police on Tuesday nabbed the two key suspects from Shamlaji town on the Gujarat-Rajasthan border.DIG-ATS Himanshu Shukla said they arrested Ashfaqhussain Jakirhussain Shaikh, 34, and Moinuddin alias Moin Khurshid Pathan, 27, from Shamlaji while trying to enter Gujarat in a commercial vehicle. “They have confessed to killing Tewari. They will be handed over to UP police,” he said.Shaikh and Pathan are residents of Surat. ATS officials said Shaikh worked as a medical representative in a pharmaceutical company, while Pathan was a delivery boy with a food delivery chain.Officials said the two had fled to Nepal after killing Tewari on October 18. From there, they came to Shahjahanpur in UP before taking a lift in a truck to the Madhya Pradesh border. Pleading that they were broke, the two took lifts to reach Gujarat, the last one from Udaipur.“They were nabbed at Shamlaji on the basis of technical surveillance and human intelligence,” an ATS official said.Prima facie investigation has revealed that the two, who had plans to slip away to Pakistan, were forced to return to Surat as they had run out of money. “The two were fast running out of money and had contacted family members and acquaintances seeking urgent financial support,” said a Gujarat ATS official. This helped the ATS to track them.Pathan and Shaikh had allegedly stabbed Tewari to death at his house in Khurshedbaugh locality of Lucknow on October 18. ATS officials stated they had hidden a pistol and knife in the box of ‘ghari’ (a famous Surati sweet) that they offered Tewari as a Diwali gift.Preliminary investigation revealed that Pathan and Shaikh travelled by train to Kanpur on October16. In Lucknow, they stayed at Khalsa Inn hotel. Cops later recovered from their hotel room the saffron clothes they had donned to meet Tewari.With the duo’s arrest, Gujarat ATS has till now nabbed five people in the murder case which is strongly suspected to be a blasphemy killing. Earlier, ATS had nabbed Pathan’s brother Rashid and two others — Maulana Mohsin Shaikh and Faizan Member — from Surat on Saturday
