Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed 15 times, shot once | Post-mortem report

Gruesome details have emerged from the post-mortem report in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari was murdered in Lucknow on October 18 when the assailants came to meet him on the pretext of working for his outfit.

Now, post-mortem report has revealed that Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed 15 times. All the stabbing was centred on the upper part of body from jaws to chest. All wounds were inflicted within 10 cm of one another. Two deep cut marks on the neck points to attempt to slit his throat, says the post-mortem report.

The assailants also shot him once to make sure that he dies in the attack. The bullet was fired in his face. The doctors conducting post-mortem on Kamlesh Tiwari's body found a point32 bullet on the backside of the skull.

He was murdered at his home in Naka Hindola area in Lucknow.

Meanwhile, two more accused were arrested in connection with the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The arrests were made by the Gujarat anti-terrorism squad (ATS). The accused were identified as Ashfaq Shaikh,34, and Moinuddin Pathan, 27. Both are residents of Surat district of Gujarat. They were absconding since Kamlesh Tiwari's murder.

The two absconding accused were arrested from Shamlaji on the Gujarat-Rajasthan border. They were trying to enter Gujarat on when the Gujarat police nabbed them.

The technical team of police was keeping surveillance on the accused and when they tried to contact their family members and friends, their location was traced. The police said the accused contacted their families after they ran out of cash. Both the accused will be handed over to the Uttar Pradesh police who are probing the sensational murder case.

In all, six persons have been arrested in connection with the murder of Kamlesh Tiwari. Three of the arrested accused were arrested from Surat while the other one was nabbed from Nagpur in Maharashtra.

Kamlesh Tiwari's own outfit, the Hindu Samaj Party was little known organisation but he was an active functionary of the Hindu Mahasabha earlier. He floated his own Hindu outfit after he developed serious differences with the leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha.



In 2015, when Kamlesh Tiwari was with the Hindu Mahasabha, he had courted controversy with an objectionable comment on Prophet Mohammad. He was booked under the National Security Act (NSA) and jailed on the charge of stoking communal frenzy. He was later granted bail by the Allahabad High Court, which also quashed the NSA slapped on Kamlesh Tiwari. He was out of bail when he was murdered.

Images of the relevant portions of the post-mortem report can be seen below:

Post-mortem report in Kamlesh Tiwari murder case
