Telangana, Hyderabad lead India when it comes to food adulteration

Aerial view of Hyderabad

HYDERABAD: Telangana tops the charts in the country in the number of civilians accidentally killed in police operations, cases of sexual harassment at workplaces, adulteration of food and drugs, human trafficking and criminal trespass cases, according to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data for 2017.

Not just the state, among 19 metropolitan cities, Hyderabad tops in food and drug adulteration and cases of promoting enmity between groups and atrocities cases against STs and comes a close second after Delhi in workplace harassment cases.

As per the data, 10 civilians were accidentally killed in police operations, encounters in Telangana in 2017, which was the highest in the country. With seven civilian deaths, Jammu and Kashmir came second and Assam was third with four civilian deaths. In Kashmir, however, 26 civilians suffered injuries in police operations whereas no civilians had suffered injuries in Telangana.

Telangana also achieved the dubious distinction in the number of cases related to sexual harassment at workplaces. Though the number of sexual harassment cases booked in Telangana under section 354-A of the IPC were 658 (10th in the country), out of these cases, 117 were booked for sexual harassment at workplace/office, which is the highest in the country with Maharashtra at a distant second with 82 cases.

Among the metropolitan cities, Hyderabad stands second with 24 cases pertaining to workplace harassment followed by Delhi with 25 cases.

As per the data, the maximum number of cases (2,009) on food and drug adulteration were registered in Telangana, while neighbouring Andhra Pradesh came second with 456 cases registered under sections 272 and 276 of the IPC. Hyderabad police have registered the maximum number of cases (45) among the 19 cities on food and drug adulteration.

The maximum number of human trafficking cases (184) were registered in Telangana, out of which 77 cases related to trafficking of women and girls. Telangana had also registered the maximum number of criminal trespass cases (4,225) in the country.

The state has also seen its share of sectarian violence and police have registered the second maximum number (126) of cases under section 153A and B of the IPC pertaining to promoting enmity between groups. Among 19 cities, the Hyderabad city police have registered the maximum number (21) of cases against the offenders for promoting enmity between groups.

The cops have also registered the maximum number of cases (11) under the SC&ST (Prevention) of Atrocities Act.

With six cases of death due to medical negligence, Hyderabad stood second after Lucknow where seven such deaths were reported. In Telangana, 20 medical negligence death cases were registered. Only Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Bihar had registered more medical cases than Telangana in 2017.


