Shot In Face, Kamlesh Tiwari Was Stabbed 15 Times, Reveals Post-Mortem Report

New Delhi:

A day after the Gujarat ATS arrested two men for their alleged involvement in the sensational murder of former Hindu Mahasabha leader Kamlesh Tiwari, the post-mortem report revealed brutal details of the crime. News Nation has learnt that Tiwari was shot in the face. He was stabbed 15 times by the assailants. There were reports that the attackers met Tiwari in Lucknow, spoke to him for around half-an-hour and later killed him. From CCTV footages to the slip in the mithai box used to carry the weapon, the UP Police joined the dots to unveil the conspiracy. Apart from the arrests in Gujarat, one person has been arrested form Karnataka’s Hubbali. Two Maulanas, one more Bijnor and one from Bareilly, have also been arrested in connection with the case.

Lauding his team for its swift action, Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh said that all accused were arrested within five days. He said that the way in which the probe conducted, it proves that the UP Police is better force than others. Kamlesh Tiwari was a former leader of Hindu Mahasabha. He later founded the Hindu Samaj Party in 2017. UP Police SIT is investigating the murder case. During the probe, it was revealed that the sweet box in which the suspects carroed the weapons was from a shop in Gujarat's Surat. A joint team of Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh police arrested Maulana Mohsin Sheikh (24), Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23) and Faizan (21) in connection with Tiwari's murder. According to sources, the suspects had reached Lucknow by road after reaching Kanpur from Gujarat via train. They accused are reported to have fled via Hardoi, Pilibhit and Bareli.

The Gujarat ATS on Tuesday arrested two men wanted in connection with the murder of Hindutva leader Kamlesh Tiwari, said officials. The accused, Surat residents Ashfaq Shaikh (34) and Moinuddin Pathan (27), were absconding since Tiwari’s brutal killing in Lucknow on October 18, they said.

They were arrested from near Shamlaji on the Gujarat-Rajasthan border when they were about to enter Gujarat on Tuesday evening, said Himanshu Shukla, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS).

Also Read: ‘Cops Forced Us’: Mother Of Kamlesh Tiwari Says Not Satisfied With Meeting UP CM Yogi Adityanath

Their location was traced through technical surveillance as they contacted their family members and friends after the duo ran out of cash, he said. The duo will be handed over to the Uttar Pradesh police probing the sensational killing of Tiwari, who headed a little known outfit, Hindu Samaj Party (HSP).

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
