Cong’s Bhola booked day after SAD worker shot at

Ludhiana: Dakha police on Tuesday booked Congress leader Daljit Grewal Bhola, his brother, Kulwinder Singh, and 21 others for attacking and firing at Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) workers a day before.

The attack had taken place outside a polling booth in Jangpur, where voting for Dakha by-elections was on. According to SAD leaders, Bhola and other Congressmen tried to force their way into the polling booth to cast bogus votes, and when they were stopped, Bhola opened fire and SAD worker, Gurpreet Singh Gopi, got injured as a bullet pierced through his left thigh.

Talking to the TOI on Monday, Bhola had claimed that he was not present at the spot at the time of the incident. But a video did the rounds on social media, showing him moving with supporters near the Jangpur polling booth.

Others who have been booked include Daljit Singh alias Happy, Jagtar Singh, Simranjit Singh, Amarjit Singh (all from Jangpur), Ashwani Kumar, Karan Sapra (residents of Ludhiana) and about 15 unidentified persons.

A case has been registered against them under sections 307 (attempt to murder), 336 (endangering life or personal safety of others), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation), 148 (rioting), 149 (unlawful assembly), and 188 (disobedience to order promulgated by public servant) of the IPC and sections 25, 27, 54, 59 of the Arms Act.

The FIR was filed on the complaint of Shamsher Singh of Jangpur, another SAD supporter who claimed that the Congressmen attacked him with rods when he tried to save Gopi.

Shamsher said, “Ever since Monday morning, Daljit, Jagtar, Simranjit and Amarjit of our village were looking to cast bogus votes, but we resisted their attempts. In the evening, when the voting was about to conclude, Bhola and about 20 others gathered outside the booth to cast bogus votes. When we tried to stop them, Bhola fired five to six bullets, one of which hit Gopi on his left thigh. Kulwinder Singh Grewal, Ashwani Kumar and Karan Sapra, too, fired shots from their weapons. When I moved towards Gopi to help him, Happy hit me with a rod and Jagtar Singh attacked me with a sharp-edged weapon and fled the spot.”

Meanwhile, Congress candidate Captain Sandeep Sandhu, cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu, MLA Sanjay Talwar and other Congress leaders on Tuesday visited Gopi at DMC Hospital where he is undergoing treatment.

SAD orchestrated shootout: Bhola

Bhola said on Tuesday, “This is a conspiracy by Manpreet Ayali and SAD, as I had been campaigning in this area from the past 20 days. I again want to make it clear that I was not at the spot at the time of the incident. Another proof to show it’s a false complaint is that my brother’s and my licenced weapons are deposited with the police. My friends Ashwani Kumar and Karan Sapra don’t have a weapon and unfortunately they, too, have become victims of SAD’s politics. The entire shootout episode was probably orchestrated by Ayali and his men to take revenge from me and campaign against me in Dakha. I, however, have full faith in law. I will seek re-inquiry into the case to prove our innocence. It is sad that an innocent sportsperson, Gopi, who had gone there to cast his vote got injured due to the SAD’s conspiracy.”

Dakha DSP GS Bains said, “On the complaint of Shamsher Singh, we have registered a case against 23 persons, eight of whom have been identified. We are on the look out for those on the run.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
