‘We Can’t Trust Anymore, Not Even A Box Of Sweets. Imagine The Fear We Are Living In’: Kamlesh Tiwari’s Close Aides

Guddan Shukla introduces himself as an advocate who holds the position of UP secretary in Hindu Samaj Party (HSP), a political party helmed by Tiwari. The party fielded a couple of candidates in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, who all fought as independents. Tiwari fought from Faizabad, also as an independent, but lost his deposit. He got around 1,700 votes.

Tiwari’s key agenda, as per his aides and his social media profile, was making India free of radical Islam. A population control Bill to retain India’s Hindu majority status, abolition of Section 370 from Jammu and Kashmir and construction of a Ram temple at the disputed Ram Janmabhoomi site in Ayodhya were some of his pet projects.

In his younger days, he is said to have been actively involved in the temple movement. Born in Para Kothba village of UP’s Sitapur district (near Lucknow) in the 70s, Tiwari shifted with family to nearby Mahmudabad town in 1980 when his father got a job as a temple priest, as per a report.

Tiwari advocated that all Muslims of India should go to Pakistan. He was an open and staunch critic of “incomplete partition” as well as Mahatma Gandhi who, he said, appeased Muslims in India at the cost of Hindus.

His Facebook posts suggest that he wanted a temple to be built in the name of Gandhi’s killer Nathuram Godse. A key argument Tiwari made in favour of his agenda was that India is the only homeland for Hindus in the world.

In a video last month, Tiwari claimed that Muslims routinely kill non-Muslims wearing “bhagwa” (saffron) clothes because it is written in the Quran that saffron will decimate Islamism (a false claim).

Ironically, Tiwari’s killers too were clothed in saffron attire at the time of the crime.

“We can’t even trust saffron anymore,” says Shukla. “Imagine the fear we are living in.”

Another HSP member, 24-year-old Mohit Mishra, says that recently, a man on the street requested him to lend him his phone for making an ‘urgent’ call to his family, but he declined to help. “We have become suspicious of everyone and everything,” says Mishra.

He echoes Shukla’s sentiments, “We can’t trust a Facebook request. We can’t trust visitors. We can’t trust any new member of our outfit.”

“I wish the killers didn’t trick us. It’s ugly,” Mishra says.

As per investigators, this is how the crime unfolded: On the night of 16 October, the two killers, both residents of Surat in Gujarat, bought a box of sweets from Dharti Farsan shop in Surat's Udhna area around 9 pm. They then boarded a train from Udhna at 9.55 pm that reached Kanpur the next day around 8 pm. They took a bus and reached Lucknow around 11 pm. They checked into Khalsa Inn Hotel in Lalbagh, which is around two kilometres from Tiwari’s residence.

The hotel’s manager, Anis Ansari, told The Times of India that around 11.08 pm on 17 October, two men came in an autorickshaw wearing T-shirts and shorts and booked a room. They showed their Aadhaar cards as proof which mentioned their names as Ashfaq Hussain and Moinuddin Ahmad, both residents of Jeelani Apartments in Surat.

“Around midnight, they ordered a ‘simple-thali’ for dinner and then ask for extra chapatis. When the housekeeper knocked, they did not allow him to enter. Instead, Ashfaq came out to collect the food. After dinner, they again refused entry to the housekeeper and instead went down to deliver the plates at the reception. Well past midnight, they went out for a smoke and returned 45 minutes later,” Ansari told TOI.

Shukla says the two men called up Tiwari at midnight of 17 October itself seeking an appointment right then, but Tiwari asked them to come the next day. “They had told Tiwari a few days ago that they would be coming to meet him from Surat on Thursday. They, perhaps, wanted to kill Tiwari on that day itself, which incidentally was Karwa Chauth,” Shukla says.

Ansari further told TOI that the two went out of the hotel room at 11.38 am on Friday, wearing saffron kurtas and carrying a box of sweets. They returned around 1.21 pm (the report is silent on whether they returned wearing bloodied saffron kurtas), changed into a trouser and T-shirt and went out, saying they would be back after lunch. When they did not return, the hotel staff broke open the door late evening and found “objectionable” objects.

Ansari told TOI they promptly informed the police.

The police say they have recovered blood-soaked kurtas, a knife, cover of a mobile handset and a blood-soaked towel from the room.

At Tiwari’s office, the two are said to have spent half-an-hour talking to him, sipping tea and discussing an interfaith marriage, before slitting his throat and pumping bullets into his body.

Mohit Mishra says, “Guruji learnt about Solanki through our Gujarat office. Our Gujarat head took in Solanki [Ashfaq] trusting him through his Facebook account and a forged Aadhaar card. Solanki was made part of an IT cell in Surat. He later expressed a wish to meet Tiwari, which was granted.”

“Tell us, how can we trust anyone anymore? Even something as mundane as a sweet box now makes us suspicious,” says Mishra.

The killers used the box of sweets to carry a country-made pistol and knife.

“Wo bhagwa pehenkar aaye. Chhal kapat kiya. Hamko mauka hi nahi diya. Beizzati mehsoos ho rahi hai [They came wearing saffron. They cheated us. They did not give us a chance. It’s insulting],” says Shukla.
