Convicts to operate petrol bunk soon

The outlet is being constructed a little away from Pudukottai District Jail

Convicts lodged at Tiruchi Central Prison who have been engaged in a slew of prison industrial units as a rehabilitation measure would now be involved in a new venture of operating a petrol bunk.

The Prison Department will soon start running a petrol bunk that is coming up on a piece of land belonging to it along a main thoroughfare in neighbouring Pudukottai. Construction of the fuel outlet which is located a little away from Pudukottai District Jail is in full swing.

Prison authorities told The Hindu on Thursday that a select group of 24 convicts serving lengthy sentences in Tiruchi Central Prison have been chosen to operate the fuel outlet since the District Jail at Pudukottai Town does not accommodate convicts.

A committee in the Central Prison has hand-picked the convicts after examining their physical condition as well as their conduct inside the prison.

The willingness of the convicts have been obtained and their good behaviour has been taken into account to engage them at the upcoming petrol bunk, a senior Prison officer said.

Necessary training had been imparted to the chosen convicts to operate the fuel outlet of the Indian Oil Corporation.

“The construction of the outlet is in an advanced stage of completion and is expected to be commissioned soon”, said the officer. The new activity would be on similar lines as that of the Prison Bazaar situated at the entrance of the Tiruchi Central Prison where a group of convicts have been engaged in the manufacture and sale of eateries, the officer added.

The convicts chosen for working at the fuel outlet would be under the direct supervision of a team of jail personnel who would be deployed there, the authorities said. The plan is to run the outlet in two shifts to begin with and the convicts would be accommodated in the erstwhile sub jail functioning within the premises of the District Jail at Pudukottai. Wages for the convicts would be deposited in the prisoners bank account and the money would be given to them, said the officer.

The selected convicts were lodged in the Central Prison for committing murders and serving lengthy incarceration.

The twin objective behind this move was to engage convicts in a productive vocation which would fetch them wages besides helping them in getting over a feeling of isolation and depression by mingling with the public, the officer added.

The Prison Department has also decided to run petrol bunks at Coimbatore, Chennai, Palayamkottai and Vellore where construction works of the outlets were under way, the officer said.
