Kamlesh Tiwari was shot in face, stabbed multiple times by attackers, reveals post-mortem report

Kamlesh Tiwari was first shot in the face and then stabbed multiple times before he succumbed to injuries on October 18 (Friday), deceased's post-mortem report has revealed.

According to the post-mortem report of the Hindu Samaj Party leader, who was attacked at his office in Lucknow on Friday, after being shot in the face, he was stabbed with a sharp knife at least seven times.

The attackers tried to slit his neck.

It is further mentioned in the post-mortem report that after being repeatedly stabbed, it caused a 12 cm long and 3 cm deep wound in his neck.

Also Read: Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: UP Police releases photographs of two suspects

Doctors have also found a point 32 bullet on the backside of his skull.

Four days after the murder of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari, the two main suspects were on Tuesday arrested from Shamlaji in Aravalli district near Gujarat-Rajasthan border by state police, later handed over to UP police.

Gujarat ATS DIG Himanshu Shukla said the two accused - Ashfaq and Moinuddin Pathan - were arrested after the sleuths received information that they were going to enter Gujarat

"The two wanted accused Ashfaq and Moinuddin Pathan have been arrested from the Gujarat-Rajasthan border near Shamlaji. Gujarat ATS had info that they are going to enter Gujarat, on that basis we moved our team to the border and apprehended them," Shukla said.

Earlier on Monday, the Uttar Pradesh police had released photos of two suspected killers of the Hindu Samaj Party leader.

A reward of Rs 2.50 lakh each for information on two suspected killers was also announced.

Both Ashfaq and Moinuddin have accepted their involvement in the murder of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari, Gujarat ATS said in a press release.

According to Gujarat ATS, the two accused had reached Shahjahanpur in Uttar Pradesh on Sunday from Nepal before they decided to proceed towards Gujarat.

Tiwari was allegedly killed by Ashfaq and Moinuddin on October 18 in Lucknow's Naka Hindola area. They were identified on the basis if footage in a CCTV camera near the crime scene.

They had also left the clothes at the hotel where they had stayed.

Earlier, Gujarat ATS had arrested three persons in connection with the case. They have been brought to Lucknow for further probe.
