TMC vs BJP in West Bengal's Cooch Behar: Bombs hurdled during clashes; cops resort to lathi-charge

Clashes were reported from Cooch Behar's Chilakhana area | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights As per initial reports, the TMC offices in Chilakhana area have been vandalised and set ablaze Several people have received injuries in the incident Several people have been taken into preventive custody

Kolkata: Huge tension erupted in West Bengal's Cooch Behar district on Wednesday when Trinamool Congress and Bharatiya Janata Party supporters clashed in Chilakhana area.

Both the sides reportedly hurled bombs at each other. As per initial reports, the TMC offices in the area have been vandalised and set ablaze.

In order to control the law and order situation, the police had to resort to lathi-charge. Several people have received injuries in the incident.

The Rapid Action Force (RAF), a specialised wing of the Indian CRPF (Central Reserve Police Force), has also been called in.

West Bengal: Clash broke out between Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Trinamool Congress (TMC) workers in Coochbehar, earlier today. Offices of both the parties were vandalised. pic.twitter.com/fIqBy2K57h — ANI (@ANI) October 23, 2019

Earlier today, the BJP alleged that the TMC workers gheraoed its offices in the area and ransacked them. Following the incident, the BJP workers retaliated and allegedly vandalised the TMC offices and set them ablaze.

Several people have been taken into preventive custody. However, in the wake of the incident, tension is prevailing in the area.

On Tuesday, Darjeeling MP Raju Bista had claimed that a group of around 100 TMC members attacked him, and BJP and Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJM) workers while they were en route to Sinji.

"On reaching Mandir Khola, Char Pul, Sinji, a group of around 80-100 TMC goons among whom the majority of the men were drunk, stopped our way. Initially, they were shouting slogans, which quickly turned into a physical attack with khukuri, knife, other sharp weapons," he stated, adding stones were also pelted on them.

"Many of our BJP party workers and our alliance partner GJM members have been injured in the attack ... My private security officer was attacked on the chest and upper body following his attempt to save me from "the barrage of blows and stones thrown at me. My personal security officer was also injured," added Bista.

He further alleged that the attack was "pre-planned" and added that his security arrangements were not adequate.

"There was an attempt on my life in which my security officers, GJM and BJP workers have been injured...This is the second time in less than a month that an ambush has been organised against me, while the West Bengal Police (dept) has remained a mute spectator," added Bista.
