Morning News Headlines (January 24, 2019)

ONI Bureau: Good Morning Readers! Here are the Morning News Bulletin on Odisha, India and World by Odisha News Insight.

— 6 Indian sailors killed, 6 missing in ship accident off Russia; a youth from Sambalpur, Siddharth Meher among six persons who are missing.

— Deputy Director of Agriculture Department, Boudh, Manoranjan Mallick killed after a SUV carrying him hits roadside tree near Radhanagar.

— A man allegedly set his wife and six-year-old daughter on fire and attempted self-immolation in Baragarh.

— Congress President Rahul Gandhi to visit Odisha every month till elections.

— Kendrapara district administration declares closure of all educational institutions in view of 12-hour bandh call given by Rashtriya Surakhya Samiti today.

— Property worth lakhs of rupees turns into ashes in fire mishap at Chintalguda village in Gunupur area of Rayagada district.

— Darshan of deities at Puri Srimandir to be restricted from 4.30 pm to 8.30 pm today due to ‘Banakalagi’ ritual of Lord Jagannath.

— MLA Naba Das likely to join BJD in presence of CM Naveen Patnaik during his Jharsuguda visit today.

— Kashmiri militant-turned-soldier Lance Naik Nazir Wani, who got martyred while killing 6 terrorists in operation in valley, has been chosen for this year’s Ashok Chakra, highest peace time gallantry award.

— Arun Jaitley will be designated as Minister without portfolio during the period of his indisposition or till such time he is able to resume his work as Minister of Finance and Minister of Corporate Affairs.

— ISRO will launch its 46th flight of Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV-C44) today.

— Haryana: More than five people trapped after a four-storey building collapsed in Ullawas, Gurugram.

— During the period of the indisposition of Arun Jaitley, the portfolios of Minister of Finance and Minister of Corporate Affairs will be temporarily held by Piyush Goyal in addition to his existing portfolios.

— Snatch voting rights, govt jobs of people with more than two kids: Ramdev.

— 11 trains to Delhi running late due to fog and low visibility.

— 13 dead in two days of Venezuela unrest.
