LeT, JuD planning terror attacks against R&AW, Indian Army, warns intelligence note

Representational image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Militant wings of LeT, JuD are plan to attacks on R&AW and Indian Army installations during late October, an intel note warned input also warned that attacks might be carried out at residences of police officers and paramilitary personnel.

New Delhi: Terrorist organisations Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Jamaat-ud-Dawah (JuD) are planning to carry out terror strikes on offices of Research and Analysis (R&AW) and the Indian Army installations in Delhi, an intelligence input warned Wednesday.

"Militant wing of LeT and JuD has planned to conduct unspecified attacks against R&AW and Indian Army during late October-2019," read a recent intelligence input.

Security agencies have been briefed about the alert and security has been increased at key installations. Authorities said all appropriate measures have been taken to secure locations suspected to on terror radar. The input also warned that attacks might be carried out at residences of police officers and paramilitary personnel.

The input comes shortly after Pakistan was put on notice by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The Asia Pacific Group (APG) of the FATF said that Pakistan has to take major steps to fully implement UNSCR 1267 obligations against LeT chief Hafiz Saeed and other persons associated with JuD, FIF, and LeT among other terror outfits.

The development comes on a day when security forces eliminated the successor of Zakir Musa in an encounter at Jammu & Kashmir’s Avantipora.

"Three terrorists killed in Awantipora encounter yesterday have been identified as Naveed Tak, Hamid Lone aka Hamid Lelhari and Junaid Bhat. Arms & ammunition recovered," Kashmir Zone Police told news agencies here.

The encounter began in the outskirts of Awantipora and a cordon and search operation was launched by the forces following inputs about the possible presence of terrorists in the area.


