Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: ‘Accused Defend Killing’, Says Gujarat ATS

After the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) arrested the two main accused in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case, Gujarat ATS Deputy addressed the media and said that the two accused were interrogated and further revealed that Maulavi made them believe that the killing was justified. He also said that the accused have named the Maulavi as 'Mohsin' and that they also believe what they did was right. Earlier today, two main accused, who were the ones seen wearing saffron clothes in the CCTV footage following the killing of Kamlesh Tiwari, were nabbed by Gujarat ATS. A team led by DIG Himanshu Shukla, ACP BP Rojiya, ACP BH Chavda of Gujarat ATS has arrested the main accused of the Hindu Samaj Party leader. Names of the accused are Ashfaqhussain Jakirhussain Shaikh (34) and Moinuddin Khurshid Pathan (27).

Gujarat ATS Deputy while speaking to the media said, "We arrested the two accused and interrogated them after which they told us that, Mohsin Maulavi was also a part of the killing and he had told them it is a 'justified killing' according to the Sharia (Islamic law). They still believe that whatever they did was right since it has been justified by the Sharia."

READ | Main Accused In Kamlesh Tiwari's Murder Nabbed From Gujarat Border

READ | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder Case; Suspect Allegedly Involved In Planning

Arrested near Gujarat-Rajasthan border

The duo was arrested near Shamlaji which falls near the Gujarat-Rajasthan border. Sources have also said that they had once also fled to Nepal to cover their tracks. However, they always had a plan to return to Surat from Nepal. Just till Sunday, they had reached Shahjahanpur and then were apprehended on Tuesday from Shamlaji. Officials continue to maintain that these accused have no links to organisations and that this was, in fact, a very localised conspiracy which is why they expected a slip up from the accused. "These are not professional killers and they don't have much experience as well. We expected them to return to Gujarat and that is why we had been aggressively trying to locate them. As soon as we found out that they are near Gujarat border, all our teams focussed on apprehending them," said Himanshu Shukla, DIG Gujarat ATS.

Now the accused will be handed over to the UP police who will then carry out further interrogation for determining what the exact conspiracy had been. In the primary investigation and interrogation of Ashfaq and Moinuddin, it was found out that they were planning on killing Tiwari ever since his communal remarks had come to light in 2015. They had been aggressively planning for the past few months since Rashid (another accused arrested from Surat), who is considered the mastermind of the operation returned from Dubai, where he used to work.

READ | Shiv Sena Protests Against Kamlesh Tiwari's Murder In Lucknow

READ | Kamlesh Tiwari Murder: Maharashtra ATS Details Fourth Suspect's Arrest
