India urges Bangladesh to take action against BGB soldier who caused death of BSF jawan on Indo-Bangla border

BSF Constable Vijay Bhan Singh, 51, was killed in firing at Indo-Bangla border | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights BSF jawan Vijay Bhan Singh, 51, was killed in unprovoked firing by Bangladesh border security personnel The incident occurred in Kakmari Chaarghat area along Indo Bangladesh Border when BSF personnel to retrieve a detained fisherman

New Delhi: A few days after Border Guards Bangladesh (BGB) personnel opened fire on a boat carrying Border Security Force (BSF) personnel killing one jawan, the Indian paramilitary force has written a letter to its Bangladeshi counterpart organisation protesting the incident. The BSF contended that its personnel did not open fire first and were fired upon unprovoked. Bangladesh had accused BSF personnel of opening first and that it retaliated in “self-defence”.

In its letter, the BSF said the boat had an orange flag for a friendly meeting to retrieve one Indian fisherman who was detained by Bangladeshi border security personnel. The BSF said that five BSF jawans in the boat were not carrying any weapons on them when they were ambushed by Bangladeshi side.

In its letter of protest, the BSF urged BGB to take action against BGB constable who ordered the unprovoked firing but BGB has not responded so far. BSF said that post commander of BGB first opened fire on BSF boat without any provocation. Close to 15 rounds of bullets were fired by BGB from AK-47 rifle which killed BSF head constable and injured one other jawan.

The incident sparked tensions along the Indo-Bangla border and BSF chief VK Johri called up BGP head Major General Shafeenul Islam to discuss the incident.

The BSF jawan who was killed in the BGB firing was identified as 51-year-old head constable Vijay Bhan Singh, a native of Chamaroli village in Firozabad district of Uttar Pradesh. He is survived by his wife and two young sons.

The Indian fisherman continues to be lodged in a Bangladeshi jail despite the whole incident. The firing incident occurred in Kakmari Chaarghat area along Indo Bangladesh Border.
