Punjab police gun down gangster Ankit Bhadu during deadly encounter with Lawrence Bishnoi gang

Gang leader and dreaded criminal Lawrence Bishnoi who is currently lodged at the Jodhpur central prison in Rajasthan (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Chandigarh: A massive encounter is underway in Punjab's Zirakpur in Mohali district where teams of police officials from Shri Ganganagar are currently embroiled in a fight with members of the Lawrence Bishnoi gang. Latest reports suggest that one gangster by the name of Ankit Bhadu has been killed in the encounter which is taking place in Zirakpur's Peer Muchalla area. Zirakpur is a little over 20 minutes from state capital Chandigarh.

Teams of law enforcement personnel surrounded the Peer Muchalla area and sealed all exit roads leading in and out of the locality. An Assistant Station Inspector (ASI) has reportedly incurred gunshot wounds and has been rushed to the Civil Hospital for medical treatment. More details are awaited as police officials remain tight-lipped about any developments in the encounter.

According to a report by news agency ANI, heavy police deployment has been spotted in and around Zirakpur. Ankit Bhadu, the gangster who has been shot dead by Punjab police was aged 23 years and carried a cash reward of Rs 1 lakh on his head which was announced by Rajasthan police. A resident of Sherawala village in Abohar district of Punjab, Bhadu was a prominent member of the Lawrence Bishnoi gang.

Punjab: Encounter underway between Punjab police and Lawrence Bishnoi's gang in Peer Muchalla area in Zirakpur. Police personnel deployed in the area. More details awaited — ANI (@ANI) February 7, 2019

Currently lodged at the Jodhpur Central Jail in Rajasthan, Bishnoi heads an inter-state gang which operates in Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and Rajasthan among other states. Bishnoi shot to fame last year when he threatened Bollywood actor Salman Khan during the latter's court hearing in Jodhpur concerning the blackbuck poaching case where Khan was one of the accused.

Must Read: Over 1,000 youngsters launch protest march from Jantar Mantar against looming unemployment
