UP govt hands over Rs 15 lakh to Kamlesh Tiwari's wife, Yogi announces house for family

District Magistrate of Sitapur, Akhilesh Tiwari handed over a cheque of Rs 15 lakh to Kamlesh Tiwari's wife on Wednesday after Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had announced immediate financial assistance and a house for the family in Mahmudabad earlier in the day.

District Magistrate of Sitapur, Akhilesh Tiwari hands over a cheque of Rs 15 lakhs to #KamleshTiwari's wife. CM Yogi Adityanath had announced immediate financial assistance of Rs 15 lakhs for #KamleshTiwari's wife and a house for the family in Mahmudabad (Sitapur). pic.twitter.com/AFr4RgDXVc — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 23, 2019

The Chief Minister also called upon the authorities to take the Hindu Samaj Party leader's murder case to a fast track court so that the accused can get a speedy trial.

Four days after the murder of Hindu Samaj Party leader, Kamlesh Tiwari, the two main suspects were on Tuesday arrested from Shamlaji in Aravalli district near Gujarat-Rajasthan border.

"The two wanted accused Ashfaq and Moinuddin Pathan have been arrested from the Gujarat-Rajasthan border near Shamlaji. Gujarat ATS had info that they are going to enter Gujarat, on that basis we moved our team to the border and apprehended them," Shukla said.

Earlier on Monday, the Uttar Pradesh police had released photos of two suspected killers of the Hindu Samaj Party leader.

A reward of Rs 2.50 lakh each for information on two suspected killers was also announced.

Both Ashfaq and Moinuddin have accepted their involvement in the murder of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari, Gujarat ATS said in a press release.

According to Gujarat ATS, the two accused had reached Shahjahanpur in Uttar Pradesh on Sunday from Nepal before they decided to proceed towards Gujarat.

Tiwari was allegedly killed by Ashfaq and Moinuddin on October 18 at his residence in Lucknow's Naka Hindola area. They were identified on the basis of footage in a CCTV camera near the crime scene.

Gujarat ATS had also arrested three other persons in connection with the case. They have been brought to Lucknow for further probe.

Kamlesh Tiwari's post mortem report revealed that he was first shot in the face and then stabbed multiple times before he succumbed to injuries.

It is further mentioned in the post-mortem report that after being repeatedly stabbed, it caused a 12 cm long and 3 cm deep wound in his neck.
