Pawar factor may hurt Shiv Sena the most

assembly election

NCP supremo Sharad Pawar

BJP-Shiv Sena

This speech of Sharad Pawar from Satara's rally is going viral 01:19

Supriya Sule

Untitled Carousel Maharashtra Election Results: BJP-Sena is all set to form government for another five years Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis, state BJP president Chandrakant Patil and Shiv Sena leader Aaditya Thackeray are among the prominent winners of the 2019 Maharashtra Assembly Poll Results. The BJP-Sena government is all set to form the government for another five years. As per the trends, the BJP seems set to win 102 seats, Sena 56, NCP 54, Congress 45 and other candidates have won 31 seats.

Untitled Carousel We don't wrestle with kids: Sharad Pawar's scathing attack on Devendra Fadnavis over weak Opposition remark The NCP was not opposed to the scrapping of the provisions of the article which gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir, but people's concerns needed to be addressed, said Sharad Pawar.

political career

Of Pawars and power: The Battle for Baramati 01:09

NCP MLA Jitendra Awhad

Mumbai Photos: From first-time voters to senior citizens and politicians, highlights of polling day 1 21 What's your excuse? Abdul Latif Choudhary from Dharavi casts his vote. Only 6.5 per cent voter turnout recorded till 10 am in Mumbai. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ BCCL Responsibility first Aruna Rayar, a 70-year-old, Ghatkopar resident, was one of the first residents to step out on Monday morning to practice her right to vote. Senior citizens across the city have shown the importance of voting by coming out in huge numbers. No excuse Visually impaired Dr Pramod Trivedi, and his wife Anuradha Trivedi cast their votes at Shivaji Park polling booth. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/BCCL

Leprosy patients from Anandwan, Chandrapur exercise their rights Leprosy patients, who had been denied of their voting right for years, stepped out and celebrated the festival of democracy by voting. Out of 973 eligible voters in Anandwan, 535 voters voted within 5 hours. They also urged citizens to step out and vote. Beach Warrior Afroz Shah cast vote Afroz Shah, best known for beach-up initiative at Versova, shows his inked finger. Lawyer Shah's weekend clean-up drives made what was considered virtually impossible - possible. Versova beach saw a transformation after months of a sustained effort from volunteers across age groups. Mumbai policemen cast their vote On duty police officers from Samta Nagar police station at a polling station in Kandivali East show their inked fingers. Mumbai's auto to the rescue Mumbai's auto rickshaw driver come to the rescue of senior citizens in Borivali. Auto driver provided assistance to senior citizens and those unable to walk at Mary Immaculate School in Borivali, where voters have to climb a number of steps to the polling booth. He made 25 trips, so far, ferrying senior citizens to the polling station. Mumbai's former top cop votes Former Mumbai Police Commissioner Julio Ribeiro after casting his vote for the Worli Assembly constituency. Shiv Sena's Aaditya Thackeray and NCP's Suresh Mane are contesting in battle for Worli seat. Voters in Kurla Women voters in Kurla show their inked fingers after voting. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL My Vote Matters Padma Shri awardee and sand artist from Odisha created a beautiful sand art to urge voters to step out and practice their right. Early birds Senior citizen Shobha Natre, Dahisar resident, 70, was among the first ones to step out and cast her vote at Shailendra High School despite having knee problems.

We have voted, Have you? Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, Yuva Sena chief and Worli seat candidate along with many other leaders show their finger marked with indelible ink after casting voteshow their finger marked with indelible ink after casting vote. Taking to Twitter, Aaditya wrote, "We have voted. Have you? Do step out and vote today! This is the most powerful voice we have. This is that moment that defines governance and the future of the State." NCP turned Shiv Sena leader Sachin Ahir casts vote Shiv Sena leader Sachin Ahir and his family members show their finger marked with indelible ink after casting vote. Photo: PTI Cancer patient casts his vote Cancer patient Mangesh Mhatre casts his vote with wife Shubhangi. Photo by Shruti Ganpatye/ BCCL Senior Citizen voting in Thane Thane police help a senior citizen to the polling booth through uneven roads in Thane. Vinod Tawde votes with wife Varsha BJP leader Vinod Tawde cast his vote at a school in Vile Parle along with his wife, Varsha. Tawde, who is a cabinet minister, was not given a ticket by the BJP. He won his last election from Borivali in 2014 but was not re-nominated. Sunil Rane is the BJP's candidate from Borivali in the 2019 Maharashtra Assembly Elections. BJP's Prasda Lad votes with his family BJP leader Prasad Lad cast his vote along with his family members on Monday. Lad is also the Vice President for BJP Maharashtra state unit. He is a member of Maharashtra Legislative Council. Sakhi Matdan Kendra in Chembur Sakhi Matdan Kendras, the polling booths entirely managed by women, have been set up the authorities. These centres are exclusively taken care of by women, including police personnel, electoral officers and other employees. Scouts and guides help voters Young scouts and guides help voters at Hansraj Morarji School in Andheri. Family time BJP MLA Parag Alavani and his family cast their votes at M.L. Dahanukar College in Vile Parle East. The sitting MLA is seeking re-election and is pitted against Congress' Jayanti Siroya and MNS' Juilee Shende. Somaiya family cast their vote Kirit Somaiya and family cast their votes at Tarun Utkarsh School, Mulund. Somaiya's mother, Gunawanti Somaiya is an 87-year-old senior citizen.

Sena is locked in a straight fight with NCP on 57 seats.Nationalist Congress Party’s gain could be Shiv Sena’s loss thishit the campaign ground hard and pitched his party as an alternative to the. The ruling alliance could face the maximum damage if the Pawar factor indeed strikes a chord with voters, according to political observers . The results of the assembly elections will be out today.The Sena fought 124 seats out of 288, while the rest went to the BJP and smaller allies. Out of these 124 seats, the Sena is locked in a straight fight with the NCP on 57 seats.Last week, Pawar addressed a rally at Satara in western Maharashtra amid heavy rain. Pawar was offered an umbrella by party workers but he refused it as the crowd was braving the downpour.The 79-year-old politician continued his speech and stood in the rain for full 10 minutes, amid sloganeering by the enthused crowd.Pawar’s Satara rally went viral on the social media, and many party leaders such as Jayant Patil,, Jitendra Awhad and Dilip Walse-Patil showered praises on him.NCP workers believe that Satara rally energised the party machinery two days ahead of polling. Overall, Pawar undertook a hectic electioneering and addressed a minimum of three to four rallies every day in various parts of the state.Political analysts believe the Sena would face the maximum brunt if Pawar’s rallies and spirited campaign had swayed the voters. “In most seats, the Sena is facing the NCP. So if the NCP wins, the Sena loses. If the NCP crosses 50-60 seats, then it naturally means that the Sena will be reduced to less than 60 seats. Even apart from the 57 seats, it is the Sena that is facing a tough fight with the SP and the PWP. So in these seats too, the Sena might end up on the losing side. But if the NCP does badly, the Sena will manage to cross the 70 seats mark,” a political observer said.According to an NCP functionary, in all, Pawar addressed 60 public meetings in 21 districts, more than twice compared to his 24 rallies in the 2014 assembly polls.The run-up to the 2019 polls was the toughest in his. Several of his lieutenants had switched loyalties to BJP or Shiv Sena, Besides, Pawar and his nephew Ajit were named in a money laundering case by the ED in the state cooperative bank loan scam; and during election meetings, the opposition’s onslaught was targeted at him.The Sena is fighting the Congress in 52 seats and is facing the MNS and other opposition parties in 15 seats.The NCP is known to still have presence in Pune, Nashik, Ahmednagar, Solapur, Satara, Kolhapur and Marathwada.“Pawar saheb has not just gained sympathy and support in the sugar belt of western Maharashtra, but also in north Maharashtra and other regions. His rallies received a huge response from all sections of the society and people have decided that they will vote for change. We are expecting a sea change in voting in favour of the NCP,” said
