American woman 'desperate' after being held in jail for months in India over visa violation

"We are aware of the arrest of a US citizen in Uttarakhand, India," said a State Department official who spoke on the condition of anonymity in adherence with internal policy. "We take seriously our responsibility to assist US citizens abroad, and are monitoring the situation."

US embassy officials have visited Ms Malik three times, according to her brother, to check on her welfare.

India's Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs declined to respond to questions about Ms Malik's situation, including whether her birth in Pakistan was a factor in her case.

Ms Malik's detention appears highly unusual. The State Department declined to say whether there were previous cases where Americans had been jailed after arriving at the Indian border without a passport or visa.

All Americans must apply for a visa before arriving in India. On its website, the State Department says Americans travelling to India without a valid passport and visa "may be denied admission" to the country.

Mr Chandra Shekhar Kargeti, one of Ms Malik's lawyers in India, said he could not recall a similar case.

His previous clients charged with violations of India's visa and passport laws were Pakistani citizens - most of them shepherds - who had unwittingly crossed the border into India.

Senior Uttarakhand police official Ashok Kumar said that he, too, was unaware of a case comparable to Ms Malik's but that the authorities had acted properly.

"If you do not have a valid travel document you will be arrested under the Passports Act and the Foreigners Act," he said. "The court of law will now decide."

A Bollywood aficionado who hoped to launch a singing career, Ms Malik had spent time in India in the past.

She completed a three-month course at the Asian Academy of Film and Television outside Delhi, an official at the school confirmed.

On her latest trip abroad, Ms Malik travelled to Indonesia and Nepal before attempting to visit India. On her Facebook page, she posted photos of a sunset in Bali and waterfalls near the Nepali city of Pokhara.

Ms Malik's brother Nauman Malik said his sister suffers from a herniated disk and has complained of the cold in the jail, which is located high in the foothills of the Himalayas.

He recently took a leave of absence from his job as a software product manager to work full time on securing her release.

He has started an online petition and contacted numerous senior government officials in the US and India seeking their help, so far to no avail, he said.

Courts have rejected Ms Malik's application for bail, and her lawyer said the trial could continue until the end of November. If convicted, she faces a maximum of five years in prison.

For Mr Malik, the thought of his sister spending more time in jail is unbearable.

"She made a mistake," he said. "She's not a criminal."
