PM Modi’s Parliament speech ‘jumlo ka dukaan’: Congress

New Delhi: The Congress on Thursday dubbed Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s address in the Parliament as a collection of “false claims” and “empty slogans.”

“The Prime Minister spoke in length in the Parliament. It was nothing but full of false claims, fake stories and ‘jumlo ka dukaan’ (collection of empty slogans). He is a ‘banawati pracharmantri’ and not a ‘pradhan mantri’,” Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala told reporters here.

Continuing his attack, Surjewala claimed that the Prime Minister did not focus on major issues like manufacturing, economy and unemployment.

Accusing Prime Minister Modi of destroying institutions, the Congress spokesperson said: “Four Supreme Court judges came and gave a press conference on their grievances under the Modi government. Two RBI governors and two chief economic advisors resigned due to your disastrous economic reforms. RBI reserves have been attacked. And you say we have attacked institutions?”

Surjewala said that under the NDA government, ceasefire violations by Pakistan increased by 1000 percent and hundreds of civilians and soldiers were killed in security operations.

Further taking a jibe at the Prime Minister over unemployment, Surjewala continued: “Due to your ‘pakodanomics’, 6.1 percent of unemployment has been reported under the Modi government. Youth are being fooled while getting jobs and are losing jobs due to Modi ji’s so-called economic reforms.”

Furthermore, the Congress spokesperson said that with just 60 days left for the general elections, Prime Minister Modi’s defeat is certain, adding that the country does not want to live in a period of “empty promises.”

Earlier today, Prime Minister Modi, while replying to the debate on the motion of thanks to the President’s address in the Lok Sabha, took a jibe at Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s “chowkidar chor hai” (watchman is thief), saying “Ulta chor, chowkidar ko daante” (One who robs himself blames the watchman).

Breaking his silence over the Rafale deal, Prime Minister Modi accused the Congress of trying to obstruct the strengthening of armed forces and demanded an answer from the opposition as to ‘for whose favour they want the scrapping of Rafale deal.’

“I want to ask what was the reason that not a single new generation fighter plane was provided to our Air Force in the last 30 years,” he said at the Lok Sabha.

“All accusations on Rafale deal have been answered by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman. The Supreme Court has already studied all aspects of it. The Congress doesn’t want that our armed forces and Air Force are strengthened,” Prime Minister Modi added.

He hit out at the opposition parties which are making efforts to forge an anti-BJP”>BJP coalition for Lok Sabha elections, terming it as “maha milawat (grand impurity)” which will “never ” come to power.

While targeting Congress, the Prime Minister said that his slogan of “Congress-mukt bharat” (Congress-free India) was inspired by Mahatma Gandhi who had desired that the Congress should be disbanded after independence.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
