From the Archives, 1990: Conviction in Hilton bombing case

As Anderson was led down to the police cells, almost the whole of the public gallery stood up and burst into applause, raising their right fists. Anderson, once the Australian public relations officer of the Ananda Marga sect, turned in the dock with his back to the judge, faced his supporters and bowed his head.

Justice Grove ordered the public gallery of the Supreme Court at Darlinghurst cleared of about 70 of Anderson's supporters as they burst into shouts of derision when the jury returned its verdict that Anderson was guilty of three counts of murder. There were cries of "shame, shame" and "how can you live with yourselves?" One of Anderson 's supporters was led from the court by police after shouting: "What about an impartial judge?" Others broke down and sobbed loudly.

After 12 years, the mystery of who masterminded the Hilton bombing was finally solved when a jury convicted last night the once public face of the Ananda Marga sect, Timothy Edward Anderson.

In the midst of Anderson's cheer squad, there were two sombre figures. Mrs Jean Carter, the widow of Mr Alec Carter, one of the three men killed when the bomb exploded, had sat in the back of the court unrecognised as she listened to almost every day of evidence. Yesterday she was comforted by her daughter, Susan. The jury had believed the evidence of Evan Pederick, also a former member of Ananda Marga who had come forward the day after Anderson was arrested last year to give himself up to police. He had told the trial how he had planted the bomb on Anderson's instructions and could no longer live with his conscience.

The bomb, in a rubbish bin outside Sydney's Hilton Hotel, exploded at 12.40 am on February 13, 1978 as Sydney City Council worker. William Favell, emptied the bin into a rubbish truck. It killed Mr Favell, his workmate Mr Carter, and seriously injured nine people. One of them, Police Constable Paul Burmistrew, died nine days later.

Aftermath ... The clean-up at the site of the blast in February 1978. Credit:Staff

The victims had been a mistake. The bomb was meant for India's then Prime Minister, Mr Morarji Desai. who was at the Hilton for a Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting. Pederick said that Anderson had masterminded the assassination to deliver a sharp message to the Indian Government in a bid to force them to release the leader of the Ananda Marga sect, Baba, from an Indian jail. Ironically, Baba, who was born plain Prabhat Sarkar. died last Monday. Anderson spent seven years in jail after he was convicted along with two other Ananda Marga members, Ross Dunn and Paul Alister, with conspiring to bomb the Yagoona home of Robert Cameron, the leader of the National Alliance Party and a former member of the Nazi Party.

After a concerted campaign to secure their release, the three were pardoned on May 15, 1985, and awarded S100,000 each after a judicial inquiry.
