Delhi: CISF seizes Rs 1 crore in cash from two passengers at Jangpura metro station

The two accused along with the cash were handed over to I-T officials for further necessary action. (Photo credit: CISF)

Key Highlights Rs 1 crore seized from two passengers at Jangpura metro station Accused failed to produce valid documents for carrying cash Both acccused handed over to I-T Department

New Delhi: The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has seized Rs 1 crore from two passengers at Delhi's Jangpura Metro Station on Thursday morning.

The CISF guards detected two passengers, a male and a female, at the security point and detained them after their movements were found to be suspicious.

When their bags were X-rayed by CISF personnel, the officials noticed suspicious images inside the luggage of the accused. Upon checking their bags manually, cash amounting to Rs 1,00,01,000 was recovered.

Later, senior officers of the CISF were informed about the seizure who in turn gave the information to Income Tax Department officials.

The accused were identified as 20-year-old Vikas Chauhan and Arti, aged about 20 years. Chauhan is a resident of Shukurpur in Rajasthan, while the woman is a resident of Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh.

When the accused were questioned about the high volume of unaccounted cash in their possession, the two could not give satisfactory answers. The accused also failed to produce any valid documents for carrying the cash.

Later, senior police and CISF officials also reached the spot and took stock of the situation.

Thereafter, Income Tax officials were also informed about the seizure. After the arrival of Income Tax officials, the two accused along with the cash were handed over for further necessary action.

CISF finds gold worth Rs 3 crore abandoned inside toilet at IGI airport

In a similar incident in May this year, CISF officials at the Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGI) in Delhi found nine gold bars worth Rs 3 crore lying abandoned inside the toilet. The CISF personnel discovered the bars lying around inside a bathroom in Terminal 3 of the IGI Airport.

The gold bars which had a market value of about Rs 3 crore were handed over to customs authorities by the Central Industrial Security Force. The CISF personnel were reportedly warned of the presence of an unclaimed laptop bag inside the toilet by suspicious passengers. Once the security men on duty opened the bag, they were surprised by the gold bars lying in the bag.

Security agencies later scanned CCTV footage in order to identify the passenger.
