Police solve Vellakoil triple murder, exhume third body

The Vellakoil police in Tiruppur on Thursday exhumed the skeletal remains of a 60-year-old woman from the backyard of a house, unwrapping the mystery over a shocking triple murder.

The skeletal remains of Rajamani, who has been residing with her relative at Palladam in Tiruppur after the demise of her husband, was exhumed from the house of her son Satheesh aka Nagendran’s mother-in-law C. Kannammal (54) at Uthandakumaravalasu near Vellakoil. Rajamani had gone missing in May this year.

The skeletal remains were taken out in the presence of a Tahsildar and forensic surgeons of the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital (CMCH). The remains were shifted to the CMCH mortuary for autopsy.

Kannammal, her daughter N. Poongodi and son-in-law Nagendran were arrested by the Vellakoil police after they murdered Kannamal’s brother K. Selvaraj (50) and his wife Vasanthamani (42) of Dindigul district and buried their bodies on the premises of her house. The bodies of the couple were exhumed on October 14 based on the complaint filed by their son Basakar. The police found that Kannammal had a dispute with Selvaraj over an ancestral property and she, along with Poongodi and Nagendran, murdered the couple when they had come to her house for inviting the marriage of Baskar on October 10.

After coming to know the arrest of the trio, Nagendran’s sister K. Nageswari, a resident of Yeshwanthpur in Bengaluru, lodged a complaint with Vellakoil police stating that she had suspicion in the missing of their mother Rajamani. Though Rajamani had lived with Nagendran and Poongodi at their house at Moolapalayam in Erode, she later moved to the house of a relative Baby Ammal at Palladam as she could not cop up with daughter-in-law.

Nageswari complained to the police that Kannammal and Poongodi had invited Rajamani to Kannammal’s house for a function at Nagendran’s house on May 5. On the next day, Poongodi called Nageswari’s husband and told that that Rajamani fought with her and left for Palladam early in the morning without attending the ceremony. There was no trace of Rajamani thereafter.

Based on the complaint, the police registered a case of woman missing and sought the court for the custody of Kannammal and Poongodi. During custodial interrogation, they admitted to murdering Rajamani and burying her body on the premises of the house. The police said that Nagendran was not aware of the murder of his mother. They added that Kannammal and Poongodi will be booked for the murder of Rajamani.
