Jeweller shot at in loot bid on Dhanteras eve in Varanasi

VARANASI: On the eve of Dhanteras , a jeweller Sanjay Seth was shot at by miscreants, who fled after looting his bag containing gold and silver ornaments of his shop near Kachhwa Road crossing under Mirzamurad police station on Thursday evening.Before fleeing the scene the looters also thrashed 13-year-old son of trader Navin and opened indiscriminate fire in air to create panic in the market. SP (Rural) MP Singh had to face the ire of local traders when he reached the incident site. Seth was admitted to a local hospital.Seth, a native of Maharajganj village of Aurai area in Bhadohi, runs his jewellery shop in the market on Kacchwa Road-Kapsethi route. He had constructed his house on Kachhwa road few years back.On Thursday evening he packed gold and silver ornaments in his bag before closing the shop to leave for home with his son. In the meantime 4 miscreants raided the place on two motorcycles. Initially two of them reached near Seth and tried to snatch his bag after opening a fire in air.When Seth opposed their bid the miscreants opened fire targeting his chest and stomach. When Navin tried to save his father the miscreants thrashed him and opened indiscriminate fire in air. Later, they fled the scene.The incident led to chaos in the market. Later, local traders rushed injured Seth to a hospital in Bhullanpur area. On getting information SP Rural, CO Badagaon Arjun Singh and heavy police force reached the incident site. Police recovered empty shells of .32 bore cartridges from the spot. Police officials faced ire of trader as they alleged that policemen deployed at picket never stay there. Later, local MLA Neelratan Patel of Apna Dal also reached there and talked to traders to pacify the situation.SP Rural said that massive checking drive was launched especially on the routes leading to borders of district after the incident. He said that during initial investigation of police it came to light that the looters were conducting recce for past few days before targeting Seth.
