Hit hard by hubris

harinder@tribunemail.com

The Assembly elections and the Lok Sabha polls are poles apart, even if these are held within months of each other. Euphoric over its emphatic victory in the 2019 General Election, the BJP had conveniently forgotten this basic truism of electoral politics. The results of the Haryana and Maharashtra Assembly polls have bitterly reminded the saffron party that extrapolating the bigger battle’s outcome to that of the smaller one is a perilous strategy. The ruling party’s tally of seats has dropped significantly in both states. The fall has been harder in Haryana, where Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar faces a Herculean task cobbling together a coalition government. In Maharashtra, ageing stalwart Sharad Pawar has shown the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance that he is no also-ran even in the twilight of his career.

The BJP, which had won all 10 Lok Sabha seats in the northern state in May this year, committed the blunder of writing off the beleaguered Congress and the fledgling Jannayak Janata Party (JJP). With the Grand Old Party’s high command lying low, it all boiled down to how hard ex-CM Bhupinder Singh Hooda and former Union Minister Selja could push themselves. And both did a fairly good job as the Congress comfortably emerged as the second-largest party — quite a turnaround after its forgettable show in the 2014 Assembly elections. Another key factor was Khattar’s failure to dispel the perception that the state government was being remote-controlled from New Delhi.

The plank of national security had done the trick for the BJP in this year’s Lok Sabha polls in the backdrop of the Pulwama terror attack and the Balakot airstrikes. The party tried to run a similar tape in the Assembly elections, where local issues are of paramount importance. In the self-congratulatory mode after the abrogation of Article 370, the BJP came a cropper in addressing the concerns of farmers and other major vote banks. The voters of Haryana and Maharashtra have pricked the party’s bubble of invincibility. Accepting the mandate with humility and recalibrating its policies should be the way forward. There is no room for complacency any more.
