P.C. George claims death threats from Poojari

Legislator says the calls originated in Senegal

Independent legislator and leader of the Janapaksham P. C. George on Friday claimed that the Central Intelligence Bureau (CIB) had traced at least six threatening calls he received in January on his mobile phone to underworld don Ravi Poojari.

He told reporters that the calls related to the stance he had taken in defence of Bishop Franco Mulakkal whom the State police had “wrongly implicated” in a case about the serial sexual abuse of a nun at a seminary in Kottayam.

Mr. George said he retorted sharply in Malayalam when he realised the caller, purportedly Poojari, tried to sound threatening.

The MLA said he dared the underworld don to harm him. Mr George said the caller had threatened to hurt him and his family and tried to coerce him to recant his defence of the bishop. “I told him his antics would not pass muster with me,” he said.

Police stance

A senior police officer said he could not immediately confirm Mr. George’s statement. The officer said his counterparts in the CIB in Kerala could not be directly contacted to verify the facts of the incident.

However, he said the threatening call on January 11 and 12, looked into by the State police on Mr. George’s complaint, appeared to have come from a VOIP number. Mr. George had claimed that the CIB told him that it had originated in Senegal.

False identity

The officer said the Mumbai Crime Branch had tracked the wanted person to Senegal recently where he was living under a false identity with a passport generated in Burkina Faso, a lesser known African nation. The Mumbai Police have initiated legal measures to extradite Poojari to India.

The Kerala Police want Poojari on suspicion of having threatened a cinema actor and boutique owner in Kochi to order a hit on her if she did not settle a debt with a client of his. Karnataka and Maharashtra and Goa police also wanted him on charges, including murder and extortion.
