We aren’t that hateful

Amit Shah

Indian Penal Code

Rabindranath Tagore

Let us hope the judiciary will not let the Citizenship Amendment Bill pass. This bill is not India., Union Home Minister of IndiaUnited States Senator Bill Sherman, the chairman of the sub-committee for Asia, the Pacific and nonproliferation used the word ‘crackpot’ to describe it but it is much, much more than that. It is without exception the most anti-Indian idea ever imagined, an idea which, if executed will visit upon India a wound from which it may never recover 0 – truly ‘tukde-tukde’ to use that terrible phrase. I am obviously talking about the Citizenship Amendment Bill, which per many reports is likely to be once again brought before Parliament in the upcoming winter session.The bill, inter-alia, defines illegal immigrants on the basis of religion – it broadly stipulates that illegal immigrants in India from nearly every religion will be given citizenship, except Muslims.Whatever your views on whether India should give shelter, rights, dignity and even citizenship to ‘illegal immigrants’ many of whom came here fleeing persecution in their country, the bill doesn’t seek to persecute these immigrants, it is designed to target Muslims.The matter as should be obvious to anyone who hasn’t shut their eyes willingly doesn’t define ‘illegal immigrants’, it re-defines India as home and shelter to almost everyone except Muslims.I will presume to speak for nearly every Indian here – we don’t believe India is ‘saare jahan se accha’ (better than the whole world) because of where it is today (millions are still deprived of justice-social, economic and political) but because of where we intend to go and how we intend to get there. India is Hindu Muslim, Sikh, Christian, Parsi, and much more. India is Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi, Marathi and much more. Languages, religions, colour, cultures, genders – India, the only nation in the world that is this diverse in its unity.India is saare jahan se accha. No one has attempted this before and endured for so long. We are an outlier and despite countless prophecies of doom, despite many wounds inflicted on us – some by ourselves and some by others, we endured to the absolute bafflement of the world.I was speaking at a gathering of journalists, school and college students and people from other walks of life in Jaipur where I outlined the dangers of fascism and genocide and the risk that India may also succumb to the same dangers. A young man in the audience who subscribed to a particular political ideology took great offence – I was expecting offense but I wasn’t prepared for what offended him and he left me speechless for a bit. He took offense that I could even think that such a thing would ever happen in India. “I belong to XYZ village where most people are of religion X and a small percentage of religion Y and I promise you, no politician has been born or will ever take birth who can attack people of religion Y in our village. We will die before they suffer a scratch, you are lying, lying about India because you are biased against politician ABC,” is what he said in Hindi.I could only mumble that I hope you’re right, I am wrong and all of India is just like your village. This man – drastically opposed to my political preferences, ended up giving me hope.I have hope that the judiciary will not let the aforementioned bill pass. The bill is prima-facie violative of the Indian Constitution and no judge will let it stand no matter what.But what if my hopes about what the courts will do or not do are misplaced? The court hasn’t always ruled on the side of justice- most recently in the matter of the oppression in Jammu & Kashmir – leading to people being deprived of medical care and dying, nine-year-old children being imprisoned, and countless other horrors. The court dismissed away the rights of the queer community when it upheld the constitutionality of Section 377 of the– a blunder it later corrected.I have faith in India and Indians. I have faith in us. It is not that we haven’t failed to stand up for each other before. It is not that we haven’t let each other down. But we are not vile. We aren’t that hateful. We are India. That bill is not India.Heavens forbid but I believe that if and when the time comes, millions of Indians will stand up like the people in the village that young man described to me and refuse to let a government, any government reduce India to a few religions, to persecute and discriminate so blatantly.
