Punjab: Wanted for three murders, national-level shot putter among four gangsters held

Khanna police seized three firearms, ammunition and six motorcycles from the gang members

LUDHIANA: In a major success, Khanna police on Wednesday arrested four gangsters, including a national-level athlete, with three weapons, ammunition and six motorcycles.

The gang members — Shubam Parjapat Bigni of Muglapura in Oklana Mandi of Hisar in Haryana, Rajinder Singh of Ikolahi in Khanna, Ranjit Singh of Turmari in Khanna, Gurjit Singh of the same area and Anju Bala of Dhanjar village in Fatehabad of Haryana — had allegedly robbed people of vehicles at gunpoint in Sirhind, Gobindgarh, Khanna and Doraha.

Khanna SSP Gursharandeep Singh said a police party was checking vehicles and persons near Amloh Road Khanna as part of a drive when it got a tip-off about the gang.

The informer shared that the gangsters who had weapons had gathered at a vacant land near GT Road in Khanna and were planning to execute a big crime.

Police said after getting the information, police party raided the place and nabbed them with .38 bore revolver, five live cartridges from Shubam Parjapat; .315 bore pistol, 4 live cartridges from Gurjit Singh; .12 bore double barrel gun, 4 live cartridges from Rajinder Singh of Turmari; a long axe from Ranjit Singh; and two stolen motorcycles from the spot.

Police officials said a case was registered against the criminals. They added that accused revealed that they had stolen four other motorcycles and a tractor-trolley, which were later recovered.

Cops said during investigation, it came to the fore that Shubam Parjapat was a national-level shot putter and was wanted in 17-18 cases, including three murder cases, registered in various districts and he had been declared a proclaimed offender in some of the cases.

“He was a good companion of gangster Lawrence Bishnoi (a hardcore criminal) when they were in the jail. After his release from jail, he worked with notorious gangsters Mohit Mental, Kala Rana, Raju Bisodiya, Rajan Ambala,” the SSP said.

He said in 2017, Mohit Mental and his accomplices killed Gurdeep Singh of Mahua Kheri (Haryana) and then murdered the main witness — Randhir Singh of Mahua Kheri — in Gurdeep Singh’s murder case in May 2018.

“Shubam, Mohit Mental, Pinky and Kalia killed Puran Chand, who was a witness in Randhir Singh’s murder in August 2019. Mohit Mental was a wanted criminal for Haryana Police and carried a reward of Rs 1.5 lakh on his head,” the SSP added.

“In 2019, Shubam and his accomplices killed a man named Jeetu while snatching a car in Rajasthan.” He said the accused was declared a PO in that case.

Police said in September 2019, Shubam and his accomplices Raju, Rajan and Kala shot Sonu Shah of Chandigarh and he is still PO in that case. Shubam was residing with his Rajinder Singh (who is friend of his jail days) and Ranjit Singh at Turmari village with fake identity.

“They all were stealing motorcycles and robbing people at Khanna, Gobindgarh, Doraha. In his attempt to form a new gang, Shubam had planned to buy illegal weapons. All the accused are being questioned and there is a possibility of major disclosures from them,” the Khanna SSP said.


