Huge cache of mongoose fur seized in joint raids in Bijnor, 26 arrested

BIJNOR: In a joint operation, teams of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, forest department and local police raided ten places in Bijnor ’s in Sherkot area and seized 113 kg of mongoose fur and 24,060 paintbrushes made of them. The raids took place on Thursday morning, and over 100 officials of the three departments took part in it.As many as 26 people were also arrested for their role in illegal trade.Sherkot is known for brush making units, and some of them use mongoose fur for making the paintbrushes. Due to the illegal trade, the units in Sherkot are always on the radar of the departments working to preserve endangered species.Mongoose is a protected species under Schedule II and part II of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 . Trading of its body parts attracts three years jail term. India is home to six species of mongooses, which are found in forest and plane areas.According to sources, the paintbrush unit owners receive mongoose furs from several states, including Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Haryana, Rajasthan, some parts of Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and some wetland areas of UP.After manufacturing the paintbrushes, which are considered valuable by professionals around the world for painting fine details, the unit owners sell them in black markets of India, China and some European countries. Forest officials say that mongoose fur is hard to detect during X-ray scans at the airport, which has led to the brisk growth of the illegal trade. Besides, they said, these paintbrushes are also couriered to several countries for a premium price.According to Bijnor divisional forest officer (DFO) M Semmaran, “Teams of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, Delhi and forest authorities along with local police raided 10 places in Sherkot. Brushes and fur were recovered from seven places. A case is being registered against the accused under sections of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. There have been 26 arrests so far, probe is on.”In September last year, a probe team of the Uttar Pradesh Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (UPWCCB) had seized 145kg fur of mongoose and 10,000 paintbrushes in Sherkot.
