[GROUND REPORT] Karnataka floods claim 17 lives; citizens battle for survival

As many as 28 relief camps have been set up across the state to house the evacuated residents. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights 17 people have their lives, while more than 10,000 houses have been damaged As many as 28 relief camps have been set up across the state to house the evacuated residents The coastal part of the state has been issued a warning for the next 48 hours for heavy to very heavy rainfall

Bengaluru: After seven days of torrential rains in Karnataka, the situation is still grim here. So far, 17 people have lost their lives while more than 10,000 houses have been damaged. The authorities have rescued 7,500 people moved to 28 relief camps set up across the state.

On Wednesday, after being criticised by the residents for not visiting the flood-affected areas in Gadag district, Cabinet Minister CC Patil visited the residents and talked to people about the problems they face. He told media that the government is spending a huge amount in the flood-affected areas despite lack of funds.

In the northern part of Karnataka, even though there has been scattered rain yet the authorities have evacuated several people and they have been moved to relief camps. The coastal part of the state has been issued a warning for the next 48 hours for heavy to very heavy rainfall.

Heavy rains continue to lash #Karnataka. 17 people dead so far. More than 10,000 houses damaged. 7500 people moved to 28 relief camps set up across the state. @NehaHebbs with the details pic.twitter.com/qHSeaG6XJE — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) October 25, 2019

As many as 28 relief camps have been set up across the state to house the evacuated residents. Following the devastation caused by the unprecedented rains, the Met department has announced that there will be no relief for the residents. According to state government data, a total of 150 livestock have been killed and more than 10,000 houses have been damaged.

Meanwhile, a red alert has been announced for the coastal Karnataka. And for the northern part and northern interior part- orange and yellow alert have been issued by the department. To bring back normalcy in the state, in Bagalkote, as many as 3,734 people have been rehabilitated in seven relief camps. A total of 7,220 people have been rehabilitated across Karnataka.

Furthermore, around four Additional Directorate General of Public Information Indian Army (ADGPI) teams were pressed into action for relief and rescue operations in the flood-hit Raichur district.
