Modi magic fizzles out in Maharashtra, Haryana

People elect the government they want. From Har Har Modi Ghar Ghar Modi to banking on Aya Rams-Gaya Rams to save face, BJP sure has come a long way. It is brazenly thumping its 56 inch chest despite dismal performance in Maharashtra and Haryana assembly elections. In Maharashtra, the same Uddhav Thackeray who used to repeat Rahul Gandhi’s Chowkidar Chor Hai slogan but had meekly accepted demotion to playing the second fiddle has today regained courage to remind Amit Shah about the 50:50 arrangement. In Haryana, the party brass is trying to cover up drastic fall in BJP’s vote share between May and October by reminding cadre that before 2014 BJP was usually placed third or fourth.

Mr Modi had unleashed the full fury of his arsenal – Article 370 abrogation, declaring all opposition leaders corrupt anti-nationals and artillery strike on PoK. It wouldn’t be surprising if after cutting a sorry figure in the two-state elections, BJP starts calling the voters of Maharashtra & Haryana anti-nationals. The ground reality is that most voters have started worrying that Moditva is ruining the economy – making rich richer and poor poorer and unravelling the secular fabric of the nation. These voters still consider Gandhiji as father of nation and reject the lesson being taught in some Gujarat schools that Bapu committed suicide and Godse is deshbhakt. BJP must thank the first past the post system which allows people to become Prime Minister with 20 crore-odd votes and claim to represent 135 crore Indians.

To save face, BJP spokespersons and friends in media are once again targeting Rahul Gandhi to divert attention from Modi’s failures. The issues raised by Rahul Gandhi during the Lok Sabha polls – the economic ruin brought by Modi’s misgovernance and harebrained policies like demonetisation and GST leading to destruction if MSMEs, farmers distress and rising unemployment – are going to haunt the Modi government. The Pulwama terror attack may have saved Modi’s chair but abrogating Article 370 is a mistake by BJP for which India will have to pay.

BJP, meanwhile, has already rolled the dice for the next round of state elections

A confidential memo of the home ministry, which is now in public domain, advises the state governments to keep a tab on possible communal flare-up. Historically there is only one party which makes electoral gains every time sparks fly due to friction between two communities. Of late once again there is an effort to polarise the electorate by making sometimes subtle and sometime blatant remarks with communal overtones. For example, when you call your main opposition party a Muslim party and try to tar the opposition leaders as Pakistan supporters, the intentions are clearly to seek votes by creating a religious divide and poisoning the minds of the youth.

Will Mr Modi who had been challenging the opposition to include restoring Article 370 in their manifestos have the grace to now reinstate the Article as well as the statehood of Jammu and Kashmir in its original form? Of course not! You cannot expect such high-degree of political integrity from run-of-the-mill politicians who as Nitin Gadkari pointed out are ready to take the tali (credit) for success but not gali (blame) for electoral losses. All the Shah’s horses & all the Shah’s men will hope they can put Humpty Dumpty together again before the big battle for Bengal. People get the government they deserve.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
