Patiala: 2 arrested in separate murder cases

PATIALA: The police here have traced two murder cases that took place in October last year and in January this year. In the recent case, the police have nabbed a man of Uttar Pradesh for killing migrant labour from Bihar.The police revealed that the accused identified as Ram Kumar of Uttar Pradesh killed his friend Vikas Kumar Mukhia following an altercation between the two. The probe was carried out by the police team under Manjit Singh Brar , DSP (Investigation).Police claimed that the deceased from Bihar was living here in Patiala and was running a cycle rickshaw near bus stand and railway station area from last three months. The police added that on the intervening night of January 26 and 27 this year dead body of the deceased Vikas was found near Railway station but it was identified two days later. The police said that a case under sections of murder with FIR No. 19 was registered on January 27 at Anaj mandi Patiala police station on the complaint of local resident Balwinder Singh who runs his shop on Gurudwara Dukh Niwaran Sahib to railway station road. The police said that dead body of the deceased Vikas was found in a pool of blood by a shopkeeper who immediately informed the police.In another case, the police have solved out a murder case of Sukhwinder Singh who was working as a driver in a private gas company. The deceased Sukhwinder was living on rent in Hoshiarpur district and was working in Ropar based gas-company. Sukhwinder, who used to unload gas in Rajpura as a routine, was found dead in the bushes near new PUDA Colony in Patiala following which a case was registered at Tripuri police station in October last year.Tracking the case, the police revealed that Sukhwinder’s accomplices, Sanichar logan alias Chotu of Jharkhand and Harjap Singh, who were also working as drivers with the same company, had murdered Sukhwinder. The police said that both the accused were having an undeclared tussle with deceased and on October 13, they took Sukhwinder along with them in an alto car to Patiala from Rajpura, around 30 km. The police added that the trio had consumed liquor on the way and landed in a fray following which Chotu and Harjap killed Sukhwinder by strangulating him with his turban and later threw his body into the bushes near PUDA colony in Patiala.DSP SS Chauhan , who unearthed the murder case, said,"The accused Chotu has been arrested while the raids are being conducted to nab the other accused Harjap Singh. The accused had confessed his crime before the police and revealed how they murdered Sukhwinder. The missing report of Sukhwinder was lodged with Rajpura police as he was supposed to reach his destination in Rajpura. Later the case was registered with Tripuri police as the dead body was found in Patiala city.”
