Karnataka: Serial rapist Cyanide Mohan gets death penalty in fourth case

Woman from Balepuni village was Cyanide Mohan's 17th victim. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Cyanide Mohan sentenced to death in fourth rape and murder case Mohan forced the victim to consume poison after raping her Woman from Balepuni village was Cyanide Mohan's 17th victim

Mangaluru: A Mangaluru court on Thursday sentenced to death serial rapist Cyanide Mohan in the fourth case of rape and murder against him.

The verdict was pronounced by Sixth Additional District Sessions judge Syedunnisa in connection with the rape and murder of an Anganwadi worker from Balepuni village of Bantwal Taluk in Dakshin Kannad District of Karnataka in 2005

According to a report, the accused was held guilty of the rape and murder of his 17th victim. He was convicted on October 22 and the quantum of punishment was announced on Thursday.

The convict had promised to marry the victim after befriending her near BC Road Bus stand. Later, he took her to Bengaluru and raped her in a lodge. To prevent unwanted pregnancy, Mohan forced the woman to consume cyanide.

Cyanide Mohan was convicted on several counts including murder, abduction, rape and poisoning.

The court also slapped Cyanide Mohan with 10 years of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs 5,000 (for kidnapping). If Mohan failed to pay the fine, he would have to undergo an additional one year of rigorous imprisonment.

On rape count (section 376 of IPC), the convict was again given seven years of rigorous imprisonment and slapped a fine of Rs 5,000.

Earlier, Mohan was sentenced to death in three other rape and murder cases. But his death sentence was overturned by Karnataka High Court in two cases.

However, the death penalty was upheld in one of the three cases. While the death sentence in two other cases was commuted to life term and five years of rigorous imprisonment.

The report further suggests that the fresh death sentence will be carried out only after it is confirmed by the high court. The convict is also facing trial in three other rape and murder cases.

As part of his 'modus operandi', Mohan forced his victims to consume cyanide tablets to prevent pregnancies after their rape.

In this case, around 41 cases were presented in the court. The president of the Anganwadi Association also identified the accused during the identification parade.

According to public prosecutor Judith OM Crasta, all the sentences given to the convict will be merged once it's confirmed by the Karnataka High Court.


