Dushyant Chautala and Deepender Hooda: Gen-next Jat scions searching for new ground

Haryana politics identified itself with Jat monopoly for long. The BJP, in 2014, broke this stereotype and breached the power gates riding high on Modi-wave that had brought it to power in New Delhi the same year.

The Jat-dependent political parties and leaders were suddenly found to be irrelevant in Haryana. The counter-Jat polarization had succeeded. Search for new kind of politics began without losing Jat vote base. Dushyant Chautala, a leader from the Jat community but not necessarily a Jat leader, came up with an answer in the just-concluded Haryana Assembly election.

But Dushyant Chautala is not alone in search of the political ground beyond his own community. Deepender Hooda has been striving for the same for 15 years.

Both Dushyant Chautala and Deepender Hooda have asserted in their interviews and public speeches that they are not here to represent only Jats but "all 36 biradaris" (communities) of Haryana. The talk of "36 biradaris" in Haryana translates into pan-Haryana approach.

This is in sharp contrast to the approach adopted till now by the elders in the respective families the two come from.

Dushyant Chautala is the great-grandson of Chaudhary Devi Lal, the former Deputy Prime Minister in the VP Singh government. Devi Lal formed Haryana Lok Dal (Rashtriya) in 1996. Dushyant Chautala was then an eight-year-old boy.

Two years later, it was renamed the Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) and Devi Lal's son, Om Prakash Chautala became its top leader. When leadership passed to the next generation, Abhay Singh took control of the party. Om Prakash Chautala and his other son Ajay Chautala are in jail serving sentence in a corruption case.

Early this year, the situation came to the extent that Abhay Chautala expelling Ajay Chautala's son Dushyant Chautala from the party. Dushyant Chautala, undeterred, launched the Jannayak Janata Party claiming the legacy of Devi Lal, who was fondly called Jannayak (the leader of the masses) by his supporters.

Political observers say Dushyant is trying to cast himself in the mould of Devi Lal but with a difference. One of his partymen was quoted in media reports calling him "the first gentleman Chautala". This could be due to several reasons.

After completing his schooling from St Mary School in Hisar and the Lawrence School in Sanawar of Himachal Pradesh, Dushyant Chautala studied at the California State University. He late completed Masters of Law from National Law University.

Unlike other Chautalas, who carry the image of musclemen politician with strong Jat back-up, Dushyant Chautala presents the new face of Jat leadership in Haryana. He is fluent in English and does not shy away from displaying his oratory skills in English. He has travelled throughout Haryana to demolish the notion that a Chautala can only be an advocate of Jat community.

This was the reason why Ashok Tanwar, the rebel Congress leader, declared support to Dushyant Chautala ahead of Haryana Assembly election. Ashok Tanwar said he would call upon "all 36 biradaris" to ensure that Dushyant Chautala becomes the chief minister.

In attempting to find space for Jat leaders beyond the bounds of their community, Dushyant Chautala has similarity with Deepender Hooda, who is equally suave and well-educated. He studied at the famous Mayo College of Ajmer and holds an MBA degree from an American university.

Deepender Hooda is a three-time Lok Sabha MP. He was one of the few Congress leaders to retain their seats in the Modi wave of 2014. He, however, lost in 2019 from his Rohtak seat. This loss was also explained as his "alienation" with the Jat votes in the Jat-dominated region.

In the run-up to the 2019 election, Deepender Hooda, in his interviews, emphasised that his politics were not limited to Jat community. He too talked about "all 36 biradaris" of Haryana.

This is in contrast with both his father Bhupinder Singh Hooda, who built his political capital on Jat politics and grand-father Ranbir Singh Hooda, who was a freedom fighter and an influential Jat leader.

Bhupinder Singh Hooda, in fact, tried to cash in the anti-Khattar sentiments among the Jat community to turn the Congress's prospects around in Haryana Assembly election. And, he succeeded to a great extent. The Congress more than doubled its tally from 15 in 2014 to 31 this time.

But Deepender Hooda's loss in 2019 Lok Sabha polls was also a wakeup call for Hooda Senior, who was seen keen on getting the support of other communities as well, particularly of the Dalits. This benefited the party as it pocketed more than half of the assembly seats reserved for Dalits.

This Haryana Assembly election is a clear indication that among other things, the new Jat leaders - Dushyant Chautala and Deepender Hooda - are looking out for ways to break the stereotype that a Jat can only be a leader of the Jats.
