Cyclone Kyarr Update, PMC Bank Depositors Seek PM Modi's Help And Other Top News

The Indian Meteorological Department has issued a red alert for parts of Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Goa over the possible formation of cyclone Kyarr.

According to the IMD, the deep depression over the east-central Arabian Sea is very likely to intensify further into a Cyclonic Storm on Friday. Read more

'PM Modi, Please Help Us': PMC Bank Depositors Continue To Protest, Hundreds Gather In Mumbai

What does one do when their hard-earned money and savings is deposited in a bank and one fine day, the bank tells them they can't withdraw the same?

This is exactly the situation of thousands of Punjab and Maharashtra Co-operative (PMC) Bank depositors who are desperately waiting to withdraw their money. Read more

Two More Truck Drivers Shot Dead In Kashmir As Terrorists Try To Derail The Apple Trade In The Valley

Two non-Kashmiris who had gone to the valley to transport apples were shot dead by terrorists in Kashmir's Shopian district and their truck was set on fire. A third truck driver was also injured in the incident.

One of the dead has been identified as Mohammed Ilyas, a resident of Alwar in Rajasthan, while the injured has been identified as Jeevan from Hoshiarpur in Punjab. The other deceased has not been identified yet. Read more

Brazil President Has Just Said Indians Won't Have To Pay Visa Fees

In a welcome move, Brazil President Jair Bolsonaro said the South American nation will drop its requirement that visiting Chinese and Indian tourists or businesspeople obtain visas.

Bolsonaro, a far-right politician, came to power at the beginning of the year and has made it a policy to reduce visa requirements from a number of developed countries. But the announcement, made during an official visit to China, is the first he has made expanding that policy to the developing world. Read more

BJP Leader Bakhshish Singh, Who Claimed EVMs Only Vote For BJP, Just Lost His Own Constituency

Three days ago, BJP MLA Bakhshish Singh Virk hogged the limelight after he was seen addressing a gathering and telling them that no matter whom they cast their votes for, the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) will invariably send their votes to the BJP.

The video was shared by former Congress President Rahul Gandhi. Read more
