Epic battle for climax of Rinzing Denzongpa’s film Squad

Belarus

Michael Bay

Mirror had earlier reported that Rinzing Denzongpa and director-producer Nilesh Sahay had gone to meet action star John Abraham , who is a close friend of Nilesh, to seek his blessings for their upcoming action entertainer, titled Squad. The film, which marks Rinzing's acting debut, has now completed its first schedule inand going by the accounts of the film's team present on the sets, the project boasts of some brechathtaking action sequences, choreographed by stunt co-ordinator Kier Beck, which has led the way along with stunt crew from six other countries.Keir Beck, who is known for acclaimed Hollywood films like The Matrix and Mad Max Fury Road, is all praise for the recently-concluded schedule of Rinzing and Nilesh's action entertainer. Speaking from the sets of his next film, Beck recounted the momentous shoot for the climax of the Hindi film, “We had one of the biggest climax fights with 400 stuntmen. It was a modern-day battle, and not to give out too much from the film's script, but the toys that we were assigned for filming the sequence were amazing too.He goes on to add, “There are very few times that one writes something on paper and it translates to the screen so accurately. Through all the hardships, we managed to achieve something special." The stunt director is extremely excited about the outcome but won't divulge any details.Beck also praises his director. “Nilesh is extremely hyper in a very good way and motivated. I didn’t see him sit down for a second, often he would go with his megaphone curating 400 people to all their positions before the carnage, reminding me of a young,” he said.On Rinzing, Beck said, "The boy has great screen presence and does action extremely well.”Nilesh whose company also represents Beck in India, adds, “It was the best experience working with Kier who is a dear friend. I and a lot of other people are looking forward to working with him in India soon. The second schedule of Squad is all set to start on November 10."
