Rural police constable booked in MCOCA case

Popat Gaikwad is accused with three others in a robbery and attempt to murder case in Shirur



A constable attached with the local crime branch of Pune rural police has been booked under the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) after being accused in a robbery and attempt to murder case.



The constable has been identified as Popat Gaikwad. He was booked by Shirur police along with Sameer Kale (29), resident of Baramati, Amol Oval (37), resident of Vrindavan, Haveli, and Ajeet Jadhav (34), resident of Baramati.



These four allegedly took part in criminal activity on September 1and the constable is absconding since. The victim, 24-year-old Suraj Bandal from Shirur, had filed a complaint against the four accused. According to it, on September 1, Gaikwad with the help of the others, assaulted Bandal and stole jewellery worth Rs 2.48 lakh from him. After the robbery, they attacked him with stones and a knife, and attempted to kill him.



Shirur police have lodged an FIR against the four under sections 307 (attempted to murder), 397 (robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) , 398 (attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code.



Police have arrested Kale and Oval in the case and have recovered the stolen jewellery. Jadhav is yet to be found. On interrogation, they revealed that the main conspirator of the crime was Gaikwad. They committed the crime on Gaikwad’s instructions, they told police. The investigators sought call details of all accused and found that Gaikwad was continuously in touch with the other accused.



Gaikwad has been absconding since an FIR was lodged against him but he had earlier filed an anticipatory bail application in the sessions court. On Thursday, when his bail application came upfor hearing, cops submitted that they have been invoked MCOCA against all the four accused. Police submitted the detailed report of the crime and opposed his anticipatory bail application.



According to the report submitted by inspector PV Khanapure, attached with Shirur police station, there are 22 cases of house break-ins, robbery and dacoity against Kale. The 22 cases have been registered in Yavat, Baramati, Daund, Phaltan and Malshiras taluka. Oval has a record of seven cases against him, including robbery, dacoity and attempt to murder.



Police further submitted that Gaikwad was booked by the Parner police (Ahmednagar district) for house break-in and robbery few months ago. He was suspended after that.



Advocate Seoul Shah, who represented Gaikwad, told Mirror, “There are no direct allegations against my client, as the cops have booked him only on the statement given by one of the arrested accused. There is no FIR against him; the Parner FIR is registered against unknown persons.”



“There is no crime syndicate and Gaikwad did not commit any offence of robbery with the help of other accused. Also there is a confusion between the statements of the other accused which were recorded by the cops. Now we will be filing anticipatory bail before the special court (MCOCA),” he added.




