Three more to be sued for excavator attack

Dadeldhura, October 25

Three more persons are likely to be sued for attempted murder in relation to Monday’s infamous excavator attack on a woman in Dasharathchanda Municipality-9 of Baitadi, during road construction.

Acting on the statement of excavator driver Kishor Bohara recorded with the District Government Attorney’s Office of Baitadi, police yesterday took the heavy equipment owner Bhawanidatta Joshi and locals Bhojraj Joshi and Dharmanand Joshi in custody.

In his statement, the heavy equipment driver said that he had attacked the woman with the bucket of his machine at the provocation of the three. “Following their arrest, preparations are on to file an attempted murder case against the trio as well,” said DPO Baitadi DSP Dilli Narayan Pandeya.

One person was seriously injured when the excavator targeted and hit locals with the bucket during a dispute over the construction of a dirt road in Gwallek, on Monday afternoon. Local woman Gauri Joshi was seriously injured and seven others also sustained injuries in the attack that ensued a quarrel between two groups of locals at odds over the construction of Sunnakhan-Parsa road.

Meanwhile, Nepali Congress central office has formed a probe committee to investigate the case. The committee led by NC former district president Bahadur Singh Thapa carried out a field inspection of the site and held discussion with locals yesterday. The committed has reckoned that the incident was triggered by attempt to construct the road unlawfully. “When the dozer owner and a group of locals unilaterally tried to press ahead with the construction of the road that was sanctioned neither by the municipality nor the ward office, it had led to the incident,” said Thapa.

Another committee formed by the district administration committee under the leadership of its Assistant CDO, however, has yet to submit its report. Though the committee was slated to submit its report today, it is expected to submit the report only after Tihar festival.

READ ALSO:
