Alliance University V-C murder: Bengaluru police arrest seven more suspects

Alliance University V-C murder: Bengaluru police arrest seven more suspects

Alliance University Vice-Chancellor Ayyappa Dore was murdered in Bengaluru while he was talking a walk on the night of October 15.

news Crime

The Bengaluru police probing the murder for Alliance University Vice-Chancellor Ayyappa Dore on Friday arrested seven more people in connection with the crime. Ayyappa Dore was murdered while he was talking a walk at the HMT playground in the city’s RT Nagar on the night of October 15.

On Friday, the police arrested Kantharaju (28), a musician, Sunil Rao (31) an employee in a private bank; Sunil’s brother-in-law Arun Kumar (40); Fayaz (29), a mechanic; Vinay (24), a cab driver; Fayaz’s sister Rizwana (38), and Salma (28), a woman who worked at a dance bar and was allegedly in a relationship with the previously arrested prime accused, Suraj Singh.

According to police, Suraj Singh had allegedly carried out the crime at the behest of Sudhir Angur, to prevent his brother, Madhukar, from gaining control in the university. Ayyappa Dore was allegedly shifting his allegiance towards Madhukar, which allegedly prompted Sudhir to plot the crime.

Upon the arrest of Suraj, the police learned that Kantharaju, Sunil, Fayaz and Vinay had allegedly conducted a reconnaissance of Ayyappa Dore’s house upon instructions given by Suraj. “They learnt of his routine and had decided to kill him during his evening walk,” the police said.

Police say that Arun, Rizwana and Salma were in charge of the logistics and the trio has been charged with criminal conspiracy and harbouring the accused. A senior police official told TNM that Suraj Singh and Salma were in a relationship and had planned to leave the country once they received a pay off for Ayyappa Dore’s murder.

“When Sudhir Angur (the co-founder of Alliance University) approached Suraj Singh, an employee at the university to kill Ayyappa Dore, Suraj was promised ‘whatever he wanted’. During the investigation, we have found that Suraj was promised Rs 1 crore and travel expenses to leave the country. He had informed Salma of his plan and had promised that she would live in luxury,” the police added.

Police said that Rizwana had harboured the accused in her house and that the murder weapon was also kept at her house, which has been recovered. “Rizwana also tried to mislead the investigators by giving false information,” the police added.

Soon after the murder, Rizwana allegedly tried to mislead the police by saying that Fayaz had gone to Kadri. After the police initially questioned her, she allegedly called her relatives in Kadri and informed them that the police may come visit.

On October 20, the police arrested Ganesh (37) a rowdy-sheeter, after being shot. Police chased Ganesh to the Karnataka State Seeds Corporation Limited godown in Sanjay Nagar where he was hiding, he attacked two police personnel in an attempt to escape and was shot before being captured.

Three days before Ganesh’s arrest the police had arrested Sudhir Angur, who revealed that he had contracted the job to Suraj Singh, who was also arrested the same day.
