Delhi: New prosecutor to argue Geetika Sharma case

NEW DELHI: Though former Haryana minister Gopal Kanda has won his political battle from Sirsa assembly seat, his legal tussles seem far from over. The newly-elected independent MLA is facing trial in an abetment to suicide case of an airhostess, Geetika Sharma, who worked for his airline. He was also booked in the suicide abetment case of the woman’s mother, Anuradha Sharma.While in Anuradha’s case Kanda got a stay on the order summoning him as an accused, the trial in Geetika’s case is in progress. Geetika committed suicide in 2012. She was 23 at the time.The trial recently saw a few twists and turns when the special prosecutor appointed in the case remained absent during the hearings.Miffed with this, the court directed the home department special secretary and a senior police officer to explain how the state intended to prosecute the case.“When the special public prosecutor is not appearing and the director (prosecution) has shown his inability to depute any prosecutor, this court is constrained to issue notice to the special secretary (home department), Delhi government as well as Rajiv Ranjan, additional DCP, to appear and apprise this court how the state intends to prosecute this case,” special judge Ajay Kumar Kuhar had said.Subsequently, the director of prosecution informed the court though a letter that the case was assigned to a different prosecutor. On the last hearing on October 11, the court took note of the letter. The accused, through his counsel RS Malik, had also sought exemption from appearance as he was contesting the assembly polls.Police had filed a closure report in Anuradha’s case in a magisterial court on April 2, 2017. But the court issued summons to Kanda to appear as accused on March 18 this year. Kanda challenged the summons arguing that the mother committed suicide six months after Geetika’s death while he was in jail. A sessions court on April 6, 2019, stayed the summoning.Kanda has been out on bail since March 4, 2014. He was arrested on August 18, 2012 in Geetika’s suicide abetment case. The trial has been posted on November 27 and 28 for prosecution evidence.
