Know Story Behind Naraka Chaturdashi, Follow These Rituals On This Day

Naraka Chaturdashi also known as Choti Diwali is a Hindu festival which is celebrated on second day of five-day long Diwali festival. Diwali is a five-day festival that begins with Dhanteras, and ends with Bhai Dooj. It is also known as Kali Chaudas, Roop Chaudas or Naraka Nivaran Chaturdashi.

It is celebrated a day before Lakshmi Puja or Diwali and comes a day after Dhanteras or Dhantrayodashi.

According to Hindu literature, Narakasura (demon) was killed on this day by Krishna, Satyabhama and Kali. In some regions of India, Kali Chaudas is the day allotted to the worship of Mahakali or Shakti as they believe that Narakasura was killed by Kali on this day.

On Naraka Chaturdashi's morning, Abhyang Snan or a holy bath is taken before the sunrise. Application of kajal in the eyes si believed to keep away the kali nazar (evil eye). Puja is performed with oil, flowers and sandalwood. Various dishes are prepared using the rice taken from the fresh harvest available at that time. Prasads are also made using jaggery, sugar, ghee and rice flakes. Houses are lit with diyas and lamps in the evening.

In some regions like Goa, paper-made effigies of Narakasura filled with firecrackers are made and they are burnt early morning. A bitter berry is crushed under the feet signifying the killing of Narakasura by Lord Krishna. It symbolizes evil and removal of ignorance.

On this day, here are few messages you can send to your friends and family:

I pray that your day be guided by the presence of the divine being. May your day be a blessed one. Happy Choti Diwali.

May this sparkling festival of lights fill your life with happinness, joy, peace and success. Happy Choti Diwali.

On Naraka Chaturdashi, here's wishing you a happy, healthy life. May you always grow and prosper.

Let your sorrows burst like crackers,

your happiness be like sparkles,

your dreams soar like rockets

and let your life be enlightened by lamp

Happy Chhoti Diwali and a prosperous new year ahead.

May this Naraka Chaturdashi bring

Pot full of health, wealth and life

May God always be with you

And bring an end to all your strife

Happy Naraka Chaturdashi

Choti Diwali reminds us that in the end evil never survives. It has to end. Happy Choti Diwali.

Also Read: Watch Dazzling Fireworks| Diwali Celebrations By Dubai Tourism & Indian Consulate

Also Read: The Many Mythological Stories Behind Diwali

Also Read: To Look Like a Diva This Diwali, Head Out To These Boutiques In Hyderabad
