Kamlesh Tiwari murder case: Islamic body ready to ‘provide legal aid’ to accused

File picture: Kamlesh Tiwari | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Kamlesh Tiwari, the chief of the Hindu Samaj Party, was killed in his residence-cum-office in Lucknow on October 18 Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed 15 times, shot in the face and an attempt was made to slit his throat

Lucknow: Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind, the largest Muslim body in India, has decided to bear the legal expenses for the five accused held in the Kamlesh Tiwari murder case. The Islamic body has further offered to extend the service of its legal cell in the case.

As per reports, the Gujarat branch of Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind contacted the families of the accused in the state. The family members of the five accused purportedly told the Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind that they had no money to bear the legal expenses. Therefore, the Gujarat unit of the Islamic body has decided to extend monetary support to the accused.

Kamlesh Tiwari (45), the chief of the Hindu Samaj Party, was killed in his residence-cum-office in Lucknow on October 18. Both the assailants, Moinuddin Pathan and Ashfaq Shaikh, both residents of Surat, were earlier this week arrested by the Gujarat Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS)

The autopsy report of former Hindu Mahasabha leader had revealed some gruesome details.

Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed 15 times, shot in the face and an attempt was made to slit his throat. It seemed that the killers did not want Tiwari to survive under any circumstance.

The stabbing was mostly on the upper part of Tiwari's body, revealed the post-mortem report. It added that two deep cut marks on Tiwari's neck underlined that an attempt was made to slit his throat.

The assailants also shot him once, in his face.

On October 18, the assailants had come to meet Tiwari on the pretext of working for his outfit and offered him a box of sweets. However, they opened the box, took out the firearm hidden in it, attacked Tiwari, and fled.

Meanwhile, the lone eyewitness in the murder case is still waiting for security by the Uttar Pradesh Police. Saurashtrajeet Singh was the one who had ushered Moinuddin and Ashfaq into Tiwari's office.

"The two assailants were masquerading as Hindus and had come to seek Tiwari's help in marrying a Muslim girl. One of them claimed to be in love with a Muslim girl. I heard Tiwari promising legal and other help for the wedding. Then I left the place," Singh had told the media.

He had also said: "I can recognise the two who killed Kamlesh Tiwari and now I am the sole witness and also the prime target. But Uttar Pradesh Police has not paid heed to my pleas for security."

Singh added: "I have not stepped out of my house since the day of the murder. I thought the police would give me the security, but they have dumped me."

Recalling the afternoon of October 18 when Tiwari was murdered, Singh said: "I clearly remember the face of the man with the cap, who gave me Rs 100 to buy a packet of cigarettes. I returned within five minutes with the cigarette packet, but then Bhaiyaji (Tiwari) asked me to get 'pan masala'. When I returned, Bhaiyaji was lying in a pool of blood and I saw the duo running away. I have been with Bhaiyaji for three years, but had never seen or heard about them."
