Firing, Shelling Along LoC On, Indian Soldier Injured

Firing, Shelling Along LoC On, Indian Soldier Injured

SRINAGAR - Guns on Line of Control (LoC) between India and Pakistan began to roar again in Mendhair sector of Poonch late Friday evening, injuring one Indian solider and damaging civilian property on either side.

According to Indian defence sources, Pakistan resorted to heavy shelling from across the border, in Dalwani near Mandhair sector in Poonch district, in which an Indian soldier was seriously injured, while public property worth lacs suffered considerable damage.

Reports suggest that in the retaliatory fire from Indian side Pakistan also suffered damage. Both sides while blaming each other for attacking civil population have claimed to have inflicted heavy damage to each other.

In Manyari village of Hira Nagar sector cross LoC shelling was reported on Thursday, in which some livestock was injured and the public property suffered heavy damage.

Meanwhile in Tangdhar sector of Kashmir division also, intermittent cross LoC shelling has been going on since early August in which many human lives have been lost.

Earlier on Friday one woman was killed in cross LoC shelling in Haridal Teewal, while four persons including three women were seriously injured. One police constable of Jammu and Kashmir police Irshad Hussain was injured in Syedan Gundi Village, where he was on guarding the local Imam Bara.

The civilian population, along the LoC in Poonch and Kathua sectors are terrified with the continued clashes between the two sides.

Pak summons Indian envoy over

Pakistan on Friday summoned India's Deputy High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia and condemned the "unprovoked ceasefire violations" along the Line of Control that killed three Pakistani civilians.

The Director General (South Asia & SAARC) Mohammad Faisal told Ahluwalia that the ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation.

He alleged that India committed "unprovoked ceasefire violations in Shahkot and Khuiratta sectors on October 24 and due to indiscriminate and unprovoked firing by the Indian Army, three innocent civilians were killed and one was injured".

Faisal further alleged that the Indian security forces along the LoC and Working Boundary have "continuously been targeting civilian populated areas with artillery fire, heavy-caliber mortars, and automatic weapons which still continues".

Tension between India and Pakistan has spiked after New Delhi withdrew Jammu and Kashmir's special status and bifurcated it into union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

India has repeatedly urged Pakistan to "respect" the 2003 ceasefire arrangement between the two countries.

Be Part of Quality Journalism Quality journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce and despite all the hardships we still do it. Our reporters and editors are working overtime in Kashmir and beyond to cover what you care about, break big stories, and expose injustices that can change lives. Today more people are reading Kashmir Observer than ever, but only a handful are paying while advertising revenues are falling fast. ACT NOW

CLICK FOR DETAILS

Related
