V Nanammal, India's oldest yoga teacher, passes away in Tamil Nadu

COIMBATORE: The country lost its oldest yoga teacher and exponent, V Nanammal , on Saturday at around 12.30pm when she breathed her last. Her family said the yoga teacher who was confined to her bed for the past 30 days due to a fall she suffered, died peacefully.Her son Balakrishnan said that she had such a sound knowledge and insight of her body that she predicted her death 40 days back after her husband’s death anniversary rights and left the world on her own terms.The 99-year-old Nanammal, a resident of Ganapathy, was a popular figure on Youtube for yoga and naturopathy followers and ofcourse in Coimbatore, because she hails from here, shot to national fame when she won the Padma Shri award in January this year. She won the award for dedicating her life to teaching yoga to thousands and people and being one of the earliest people to spread the ancient practice across Tamil Nadu . The day the award was announced she told TOI, that she "was more happy that this recognition had come for making all those she teaches yoga remain healthy".Born in an agricultural family at Zameen Kaliayapuram, she moved to Negamum after marriage and later to Ganapathy. Having learned yoga at the age of eight from her father, she mastered over 50 asanas. Over the past five decades, Nanammal has trained more than 10 lakh students and was teaching 100 students daily even a few months back at the Ozone Yoga Centre, run by her and her son, also a yoga instructor, V Balakrishnan.Though Nanammal was physically active and followed a healthy lifestyle, age began leading her to suffer falls often and taking months to recover from them. However, it was around 40-days back that Nanammal declared to her entire family, including her six children, 12 grand children and 13 great grand children that she was going to pass away in 48 days. She died just eight days earlier than her predicted day. "It was on the day of my father’s death anniversary, when we had gathered for his rituals. That day she said her life was over, she blessed us to live well and prosperously and predicted she would die on the 48th day since that day,” said Balakrishnan.Balaskrishnan said Nanammal suffered a fall exactly 10 days after her prediction, leaving the yoga guru bed ridden since then. "Then she began heaving very light food and for the past 15 days was having only water, coconut water and water-based liquids for the past two weeks to ease herself into death. Today, she spent the morning conscious and talking to us and suddenly wanted to lie down at around 12 because she was feeling uneasy and passed away lying down naturally," he said.Nanammal has been an inspiration for so many motivational speakers, human resource programs and fitness instructors to use as an example for how physical fitness helps mental fitness and overall health.
