HVCC unveils additional transfer agreements

TROY, N.Y. – After announcing an expansion of academic agreements with the University at Albany this past Monday, Hudson Valley Community College unveiled several new transfer agreements signed over the past eight months – from Business Administration to Digital Media – providing another compelling reason for graduating high school students to start their higher education at HVCC.

National Transfer Student Week was from Oct. 21-25. The week promotes and encourages the support of students who transfer from two-year to four-year colleges to complete their education.

“Hudson Valley has an excellent track record of moving students successfully from graduation directly into junior status at four-year colleges and universities,” HVCC President Roger A. Ramsammy said.

“These new agreements are an expansion of the many opportunities we already offer current and prospective students. Hudson Valley is an affordable option and a smart choice for students on the path to a bachelor’s degree and beyond. More than half of our graduates continue their education at the baccalaureate level,” Ramsammy added.

The new transfer agreements include:

Hudson Valley’s A.A.S. in Mortuary Science will transfer to SUNY Canton’s B.Tech in Funeral Services Administration

Hudson Valley’s A.A. in Liberal Arts and Science: Humanities and Social Sciences, Communications Media and Non-Media tracks will transfer to SUNY Cobleskill’s B.S. in Communication in Technology

Hudson Valley’s A.A.S. in Community Health Navigation will transfer to The College of Saint Rose’s B.S. in Public Health

Hudson Valley’s A.A.S. in Civil Engineering Technology will transfer to SUNY Delhi’s B.Tech. in Construction Management; Design and Building

Hudson Valley’s A.A.S. in Construction Technology-Building Construction will transfer to SUNY Delhi’s B.Tech. in Construction Management; Design and Building

Hudson Valley’s A.S. in Business Administration will transfer to The Sage College of Albany’s B.S. in Business

Hudson Valley’s A.A.S. in Early Childhood Education will transfer to The Sage College of Albany’s B.S. in Childhood Education

Hudson Valley’s A.S. in Digital Media will transfer to SUNY Oneonta’s B.S. in Digital and Studio Art.

In addition, a renewed agreement with Binghamton University will allow qualified graduates of the Engineering Science A.S. degree program to enroll in computer, electrical, mechanical and industrial and systems engineering programs at SUNY Binghamton’s Thomas J. Watson School of Engineering and Applied Science.

For up-to-date information on the college’s transfer agreements, one can visit the Center for Careers and Transfer on the second floor of Siek Campus Center or call (518) 629-7326.
