Speke drug and gun gang jailed for 300 years – Click Liverpool

A total of 22 people have been jailed for 309 years, four months after being convicted of gun and drugs offences and members of the community, whose lives were made a misery by this group’s actions, can rest assured knowing that their community is much safer.

Residents living in the area around Eastern Avenue in Speke suffered from firearms related crime, drug dealing, assaults, the anti-social use and criminal use of motorbikes and some were afraid to go out following firearms discharges in their neighbourhood.

But in May 2018, following a thorough and complex investigation by detectives, warrants were executed at 31 addresses in Aigburth, Bootle, Dingle, Dovecot, Halewood, Speke, Wallasey, Wavertree, Widnes, Plymouth, Nottingham, Staffordshire. Twenty five people were subsequently charged with firearms and drugs related offences and following four trials 22 people have been convicted.

During the course of the investigation police recovered 10 firearms including St Etienne revolver; A Tikka bolt action sawn off rifle; a double barrelled sawn off shotgun and a T H Kommer self-loading pistol. Officers also recovered thousands of rounds of ammunition; two

improvised explosive devices capable of causing serious harm, or worse; more than £61,264 in cash; Ladies and Gents Rolex watches, three stolen motorbikes and Class A (heroin and cocaine) and Class B (cannabis) drugs with an estimated street value of between £108,059 and £163,338.

Following the sentencing Det Chief Supt Mark Kameen, said: “Those convicted this week were arrested as a result of Operation Bombay – a complex and thorough investigation which started in March 2017 and culminated on 3 May 2018.

“The investigation was launched in response to escalating violence and criminality in the Speke area between rival organised crime groups in the area, which was impacting on the lives of the genuine, decent people who lived in the area. A number of concerns had been raised to us by partner organisations in relation to some members of the public being afraid to go out because they had been intimidated, or in some cases assaulted by members of these crime groups, drug dealing was taking place in the area and firearms were being used to resolve disputes.

“As well as fear and intimidation within the wider community these groups were involved in the criminal exploitation of vulnerable young people and adults in the area and further afield in the West Midlands and Wales. Through violence and intimidation they would coerce these vulnerable people into County Lines drug dealing.

“As a result of our proactive investigation we were able to build up a strong evidential case and put those involved before the courts where justice has been done. Serious Organised Crime Prevention Orders (SOCPOs) have also been taken out against Christopher Wallace, Jermaine Bryan, Paul Gregory, Anthony Tierney, Connor Courtney, Ciaran McHale and Dillon Walsh, and will be put in place on their release from prison. These will stop them from travelling out of the country for five years and will contain other restrictions on their associations with certain

individuals and the use of mobile devices.

Merseyside Police will also be looking to use Proceeds of Crime legislation to recover any criminal assets and cash made through criminality. The Proceeds of Crime legislation will be used in relation to Christopher Wallace; Anthony Tierney; Neil Huyton; Connor Courtney; Callum Burrows; Jake Burrows; Kevin Morgan; Joanne Ritchie; Kevin Marlow; Barry Kelly; Lee Price; Paul O’Neill and Ian O’Brien.

“I want to take this opportunity to reassure residents that when we receive information about drug related crime and gun crime we will act. In relation to drug dealing, we often have to carry out an extensiveoperation, which can take some months, to gather evidence to ensure that when we get those involved to court the only option available is a

prison sentence.

“The message is clear – Merseyside Police is relentless in its pursuit of those involved in serious and organised crime and we will do all we can to find those involved and put them before the courts to keep our

communities safe.

“But we cannot do this without the public. We rely on members of the public to tell us when there are criminal issues in their area so that we can take positive action and protect our communities. Any information supplied to us in relation to serious and organised crime will be acted upon.

“I would like to take this opportunity to thank the detectives involved in investigating this complex and far reaching drugs conspiracy, their tenacity has led to the justice that has been served today. I would also like to thank the prosecuting counsel and the Crown Prosecution Service for all their hard work.”

Inspector Paul Holden and his local policing team are responsible for policing Speke and following the arrests in May 2018 they have seen the green shoots of success in the area. Inspector Holden explained: “Before these individuals were taken off the streets crime and anti-social behaviour had escalated considerably, which caused some considerable

distress amongst the decent members of the community.

“Since the culmination of this investigation the area has seen a 63 per cent decrease in anti-social behaviour; a 43 per cent reduction in Section 18 wounding offences; an 80 per cent reduction in ASB calls during the evening period and no firearms discharges.

“This has resulted in a growing confidence in the local community, who are now able to get on with their daily business without fear for themselves, or family members and friends. There is a palpable community spirit in the area, which is being supported by local community groups who are playing their part in the regeneration of the area.

“For me and my officers it has been an absolute pleasure working in the community over the last 12 months and seeing the difference this investigation has made to so many people. Things are looking good and by working together with our partners, community groups and the community we can build on the good work that has already taken place.”
