Delhi: Illicit gambling dens explode in city this Diwali

A few days ago, the Delhi Police raided an illegal casino operating from a South Delhi hotel room and arrested as many as 58 people - mostly young businessmen who had been invited through WhatsApp.

The organisers confessed that they had planned six high-profile pre-Diwali 'casino parties' in different locations of the city. "Special casino tables and imported alcohol had been organised at the venue," said Southwest Delhi DCP Devendra Arya.

This is only one of the many such Diwali casino syndicates. Many more have mushroomed, especially in posh pockets of South Delhi, MAIL TODAY has learnt. "There are many big shots living outside Delhi. We have invited some of them to our casino in Delhi. We have sent them complimentary air tickets and one-night stay in five star hotels against the entry fee of Rs 2 lakh," said an organiser.

Clients include businessmen, flush with cash, often of the illicit kind, from places such as Gujarat, Chennai, Chandigarh and Bhopal, he said, adding that the entry fee goes up to Rs 10 lakh. Those who sit

on 'basic tables' (entry fee Rs 1 lakh) also include gym and start-up owners, besides realtors, he said. A businessman in town on an invite said that organisers have managed to create another world behind the tall walls of farmhouses in the name of private parties.

"Safety is a top priority this year. Players have been told to move to bitcoin as the cryptocurrency doesn't leave a money trail," he said. Other 'players' admitted that foreign women are also brought to make parties more 'happening'. Sources say these illegal games are also being played in Delhi's suburbs of Gurugram, Ghaziabad and Noida.

THE SCALE

Police officials estimate that each year, during Diwali, over Rs 1,000 crore are pumped into illegal gambling in the National Capital. As these games involve cash, it attracts a lot of unaccounted money. But experts say these figures are just the tip of the iceberg.

Operators are increasingly using digital platforms and online apps, hosted outside the country, to hold chance game events amid a closed, members-only community, sources said. The weeks ahead of Diwali are considered the peak season for gambling when playing cards or other luck games is considered auspicious by many, swelling the number of players looking to try their luck.

Operators create exclusive clubs online where clients can place their bets in real time and the money is collected offline the following day.

THE LEGAL POSITION

Most forms of gambling are illegal in India, as the Public Gambling Act of 1867 clearly states that running or visiting a public gaming house is punishable by fines or prison terms. The states of Goa and Sikkim, however, allow casinos on their territories.

"Gambling is prohibited in a 'common gaming house' when there is an element of commercial motive for the organisers. However, gambling in a private enclosure where there is no invitation to members of the public and no element of 'profit or gain' is not illegal," said an official.

WHAT POLICE SAY

Cops say they're taking more action. "Big money rides on these illegal gambling dens that secretly operate from some of Delhi's hotels and farmhouses and also push drugs and sleaze. They are dealing in bitcoin as the cryptocurrency doesn't leave a money trail. We're in action mode," said a senior police official.

"We are keeping an eye on such activities. Whenever we get tip-off, we conduct raids," said the Delhi Police Spokesperson. Parvinder Singh, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (South), said: "We have busted gambling rackets in South Delhi."
