Six security personnel injured after terrorists hurl grenade at CRPF team in Srinagar

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: At least six jawans of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) got injured after a grenade was hurled by terrorists at the CRPF team in Srinagar’s Karan Nagar area on Saturday. The attack occurred while they were inspecting vehicles at a checkpoint, reported news agency PTI. The jawans later retaliated by firing in the air.

The continuous attacks from cross the border are in the backdrop of India’s move to abrogate Article 370 from Kashmir and divide it into two Union Territories -- Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir -- which will come into effect from October 31. The security arrangements were beefed up for the heightened terror activity during the period of transition.

Also Read: ‘Dushyant to be deputy,’ says Khattar as he stakes claim to form govt, oath-taking today

According to a report released by the Home Ministry, Pakistan-based terrorist groups have made 328 attempts to illegally enter into the Jammu and Kashmir in the year 2018. Out of which 143 were successful. The report also stated that 257 terrorists and 91 security personnel were also killed in the attacks in Jammu and Kashmir last year, which also made it the highest number of casualties in the state in the last five years.

"Jammu and Kashmir have been affected by terrorist and secessionist violence, sponsored and supported from across the border for more than two and a half decades. Since the advent of militancy in Jammu and Kashmir (in 1990), 14,024 civilians and 5,273 security forces personnel have lost their lives -- up to March 31, 2019," the report stated, news agency PTI reported.

Also Read: ‘Kyarr’ to intensify into severe cyclonic storm; to bring heavy rains, strong winds in Karnataka and Maha: IMD

Meanwhile, the shootouts and encounters between the police and other security agencies continue in the state. Three terrorists were killed on October 15 in an encounter between police and terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag district. The encounter took place after the police got the information of the terrorist hideout, and launched a search-and-cordon operation by the Jammu Kashmir police.

Posted By: Talib Khan
