Stories of Bollywood dreams in a small town

singhking99@yahoo.com

Neha Kirpal

Over the years, there has been a distinct shift wherein Bollywood films have been set in small towns rather than in big cities, primarily due to their charm, honesty, language, dialect and comparatively simpler outlook towards life. Taking this cue, a play set in Benaras, whose ghats have of late become quite a hotspot for film shootings, is all set to be staged in Delhi.

Directed by Mohit Takalkar, Mosambi Narangi is Aadyam theatre group’s third play of this season. It is about two young men, Mosambi (Rajit Kapur) and Narangi (Ajeet Singh Palawat), both junior artistes on a star-studded Bollywood film being shot in a small town. It has been adapted from a popular Irish play, Stones in His Pocket, written by Marie Jones. The play is about a big Hollywood film being shot in a small village in Ireland where small Irish folk play extras. The Indian adaptation naturally translates this into Bollywood, which is deeply embedded into the fabric of Indian living.

The play has been written by Ashok Mishra, who belongs to the area and is familiar with its language and people. It helps that he is a screenwriter as well, and understands Bollywood too. “What he has concocted is absolutely stunning. He has blended the backdrop so smoothly in the story that it hardly seems like a foreign play adapted into Hindi — it’s so rooted, honest and genuine,” says Takalkar. Two young musicians, Anadi Nagar and Kartavya Sharma, play live music during the play, creating sounds with different instruments to create a kind of soundscape of the place.

While on the surface, Mosambi Narangi comes across as a rib-tickling comedy on the film business with caricatures of various behind-the-scenes persons, such as assistants, EDs, camerapersons and directors, it also deals with multiple poignant themes of loss, grief, death, aspirations versus greed... Takalkar reveals there were plenty of challenges in putting together the play whose script itself is very complex. The two lead actors spent two months to rehearse, he adds. Also, the characters do not change clothes each time he or she doubles up as another—it’s simply a flick of a stole, or the wearing of caps, goggles or spectacles. “We rely completely on the actors’ bodies, voices and their ability of changing it physically,” adds Takalkar.

Takalkar’s Pune-based non-profit, Marathi experimental theatre group, Aasakta Kala Manch, works on two to three plays a year. He started it in 2003 and has done Hindi, English and Urdu plays. Takalkar has also been to repertories in Bangalore and Jaipur, where he did plays in Kannada and Rajasthani, respectively. While Mosambi Narangi will be staged in Delhi on November 2 and 3, he is in talks to adapt The Little Prince for the stage next.
