A real horror show

Urban mythology

London’s Tower of London

Mukesh Mills in Colaba is said to be haunted by those who perished in a fire

A non-believer strolls through Sanjay Gandhi National Park alone

SGNP’s ‘bhoot bangla’ — labelled thus on official signboards

Bhangarh Fort

The price of realty at Grand Paradi at Malabar Hill is scarier than its legends

Have you met the hitchhiking ghost of Aarey Milk Colony?

BySpontaneous fires, banshees and ghost riders — discover the most haunted places in India, this Halloween.is replete with ghost stories and accounts of paranormal activity — this holds true all across the world, not just in India. But if New York has Dakota building, which is supposedly haunted by the ghost of John Lennon and others; Paris has Hotel Lutetia, inhabited by the spirits of concentration camp survivors; andis home to ‘presences’ with illustrious bloodlines — India too has its fair share of ‘places with paranormal exposure’ as experts like to call them. Many swear that they’ve seen apparitions drifting around an abandoned Mumbai mill, for instance, while many others have heard the cries of a long-gone Peshwa on the plot of a Pune fort, and still others will tell you of Bangalore’s ghostly night-knocker. Are these places really haunted, or are these legends simply the product of fertile imaginations, warmed by the heat of campfires? What better time than Halloween to revisit haunted histories and see what we make of them.Some of the following legends inspired me to pen short stories around them, and these make it into my book, India’s Most Haunted: Tales of Terrifying Places (HarperCollins India).When it was built, in the late 19th century, Mukesh Textile Mills in Mumbai’s Colaba neighbourhood was probably a bustling site — with workers transporting massive bundles of cotton to the dock nearby. But caught up in litigation, the place has worn a rundown look for years now. Spread over 11 acres, the property is not open to public. But peek through its large gates and you may well pick up on more than the smell of decaying construction. Long-time residents of the area say that spirits roam the property, linking these presences to a fire that consumed the place seven years after it was remodelled (in 1975).The cause of that fire is shrouded in mystery, but what is known about the incident is that it claimed many lives. Ever since, passers-by have claimed to have heard whispers and cries coming from the abandoned property. Its dilapidated condition rendered it a popular site for film shoots, but the cast of a horror movie that was being filmed on the site also reported hearing mysterious footsteps, eerie laughter and other spooky sounds. Some said they had seen ghostly apparitions. During the filming of another movie, reports claim, an actor came to be possessed by a spirit — she apparently spoke in a voice that was not her own, and asked the others to leave the compound immediately.Psychological experts would tell you that the actor, thus afflicted, may have suffered from ‘histrionic personality disorder’ or some other mental health condition. When more than one person sees the same ‘paranormal entity,’ it could also be explained by the ‘folie à deux’ syndrome — where the delusion is shared by others who are either influenced by a dominant person who suffers from psychosis, or who suffer psychosis themselves. Perhaps the legend is the result of one of these things, or perhaps it isn’t — whatever the case, the property certainly fuels one’s fancy.Developments in Mumbai’s Aarey Milk Colony may have the city residents all heated up right now, but legend has it, the temperature dips the moment you enter this area. Some have claimed to experience a prickling sensation on their skin, some say they felt numb. These experiences usually precede the sighting of an ‘old lady’ apparition on the stretch of road that runs through this place.Another legend here involves a young girl’s spirit — this ghost is said to flag down cars, asking for a ride. According to those who claim to have accommodated the ghost rider — who, in an unusual departure from paranormal tradition, is said to be seen in ordinary clothes (not white, red or black garbs) — the spirit does no harm, other than to send shivers down the spine with stories about death and the after-life. In case her limited conversational skills don’t get your adrenaline going, this spectre has one more trick up her sleeve: she is believed to disappear as soon as she’s dropped off.Another phantasmal hitchhiker apparently roams through Mumbai’s Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP) — a ‘woman in white’, who apparently moves at the speed of light. Legend has it, the woman was killed by a leopard. And, if you don’t stop your car when her spirit flags it down, you’ll see her in the rear view mirror, right behind you. Guards here apparently prefer to do their rounds in groups, and they make it a point to chant prayers before sunset.Such stories are par for the course in forests — where the wind plays devilish tricks with sounds, and the twisted branches of trees look like the outstretched arms of monsters. The right lighting or lack thereof, and hey presto! A lamppost turns into a ‘woman in white’. Not convinced? Why not drive by and see what you see.In a superstitious country like ours, you’d think that many people would believe that living in a place where someone committed suicide, or was murdered, would attract bad fortune — or, at the very least, bad spirits. But then, the real mystery would be the soaring prices of properties like Malabar Hills’ Grand Paradi, abode of the rich and influential, where the price of realty is really much scarier than any ghost story you may have heard.All three generations of one family ended their lives here, according to some reports, by jumping off the same floor, seven years apart. Another apartment complex on nearby Pedder Road — Sterling Apartments — has also seen a series of suicides, and other untimely deaths over the years, and has another set of scary stories associated with it. In other Indian cities, too, sites with such histories tend to get tagged as ‘haunted’, though it seems to have little effect on those who occupy these spaces. Kolkata’s Writers’ Building, for instance, is supposed to be one of the most haunted places in India, and counts among its other-world inhabitants, a British inspector general, who was killed by freedom fighters. People continue to work in the building though. Some have, however, claimed to have heard screams and the sound of footsteps coming from unoccupied rooms.Talks of ‘negative energy’ and scary sightings notwithstanding, when it comes to prime properties at least, it seems people can be pretty selective when it comes to phasmophobia.Shaniwarwada, an 18th century fort in Pune that once served as the pride of the Maratha Empire, is believed to be haunted by Peshwa Narayan Rao — who was believed to have been murdered by his jealous uncle Raghunath Rao. It’s not uncommon for historical monuments — with their invariably violent pasts — to become the subjects of such legends. Rajasthan’s, a 17th-century structure, even has a government notice outside warning visitors not to enter before sunrise or after sunset. Yet, there have been reports of ghostly shadows, unexplained lights, and the sounds of music and dance after hours — now whether that’s a bunch of ghosts letting their hair down, or troublemakers or youngsters enjoying the privacy that the dark legend affords it, is, of course, anybody’s guess.In the industrial area of Peenya in Bangalore, as well as in other parts of Karnataka, the 1990s saw the birth of a horror legend. This one I actually bore witness to, as my family and I had moved to the garden city at the time. Though just a child then, I remember the story vividly: that of a female spirit that would come knocking at doors at night and claim any man who dared to answer. It sprouted the tradition of writing ‘Naale Ba’ (‘Come tomorrow’) outside homes. I’m not certain the message keeps malevolent spirits at bay — but perhaps it works on nosy neighbours.
