Hang me if I’ve wronged, says D K Shivakumar

Hang me if I’ve wronged, says D K Shivakumar

Bengaluru: Congress leader D K Shivakumar on Saturday declared that he had not committed any mistake, and that his 50-day incarceration had “made me stronger” and that “my fight will continue.”

Addressing an emotional news conference at the Congress headquarters here, Shivakumar said he spent his time in prison introspecting why he was in this situation.

“If I’ve done anything wrong, let God and the law punish me,” he said. “Whatever I have declared in my affidavit, including details about my wife and daughter, is before the people of the state and the country. It’s being talked about and investigated. If myself, my brother and any family member has gone against the law, I’m ready to accept any punishment,” he said. “If I’ve wronged, let them hang me.”

The Enforcement Directorate, Shivakumar said, had moved Supreme Court against his bail. “I’m also told that the state government has permitted the CBI to conduct an inquiry on me. I’m ready to face it,” he said.

“My case, money-laundering and I-T case, will be a big precedent in India,” he said.

Throughout, Shivakumar was measured in his comments, while never once launching a direct attack on the Modi administration or the BJP. “There’s only one thing I want to tell (investigating) officers – your experiments on me, regardless of who is behind it, let’s see how that goes,” he said.

The former minister vowed to make public in the coming days “facts and documents” related to his case.

“By birth, I’m an agriculturist, businessman by profession, educationist by choice and politician by passion. I’ve not betrayed anyone at any point and I’ve never worked against my conscience.”

Trying to hold back tears, Shivakumar lamented how his 86-year-old mother was subpoenaed to appear in Delhi for questioning.

“Imagine this happening to your mothers,” he said. “Emotionally, I’m hurt that my kids will be ridiculed as children of a father who went to jail.”

Thanking his party, his supporters, his BJP friends and the media, Shivakumar said he was not weakened. “My fight for justice will continue.”

Ashoka flays Congress

In Hubballi, Revenue Minister R Ashoka criticised the Congress party leaders for giving a grand welcome to Shivakumar, who was released on bail, saying, “he has not returned after winning a war”.

When the case is still before the court and is in the initial stage, such a behaviour is not correct. It is being done as a damage control measure to maintain the image of Shivakumar, Ashoka charges.
