Exclusive: Russia says Bagdadi killing faked by US, part of new move against the region by Deep State (updating) – Veterans Today

…by Gordon Duff, Senior Editor and Nahed al Husaini, VT Bureau Chief Damascus

– First published … October 27, 2019 –

“The Russian Defence Ministry has no reliable information about US servicemen conducting an operation to ‘yet another’ elimination of the former Daesh leader Abu Bark al-Baghdadi in the Turkish-controlled part of the Idlib deescalation zone”, ministry spokesman Maj.Gen. Igor Konashenkov said.

Russian intelligence inside Syria reported that their S400 radar systems which cover Idlib saw no American aircraft over the area where the Baghdadi raid was claimed.

The Russians are very disappointed with Trump and say the US is putting Idlib’s huge al Qaeda force under joint command with a newly formed ISIS under American protection in Iraq and newly occupied areas of Syria where American forces just took over even more Syrian oil assets. From a private source:

“America sees its big failure inside Iraq in that when the US, Israel and Saudi Arabia created ISIS, they did so while Syria with the exception of Kurdistan, was united. Now they are fostering a civil war first, then a new ISIS and the Kurdish region of Iraq is under nearly complete Israeli control. Baghdadi is part of this process, using his personal influence in Iraq’s Sunni community.”

Russia has given Trump too much rope. Remember that in May 2018, the US claimed to have killed 300 Russian contractors who were moving with Syrian forces to secure the same oil fields in Deir Ezzor.

Russia allowed the US to move American oil companies into Syria then were blackmailed to look the other way while Syria’s oil was looted, in order to maintain some American cooperation and to limit US operations against Damascus from US, Saudi and Israeli bases in the US occupied zone in Southern Syria, a zone America still holds and still plans to use to keep Damascus under direct threat.

From Russia Today moments ago:

Russia’s Defense Ministry said. The US coalition didn’t even carry out any airstrikes in Idlib recently.

Earlier, Trump made a rare Sunday address from the White House informing the world that al-Baghdadi was eliminated in northwest Syria in a “daring nighttime raid” with the involvement of US special forces, planes, helicopters and drones. The Islamic State (IS, formerly ISIS) leader met his end “crying and screaming” in the face of the Americans’ might, he said. But the Russian Defense Ministry insisted that “there were legitimate questions and doubts about the very fact [of the US operation] and, especially, its success.” It also rejected Trump’s claims that Russian forces opened up the airspace under its control in Syria to American planes to facilitate the operation against the IS leader. Moscow pointed out that it recorded no US coalition airstrikes in the Idlib area in northwest Syria on Saturday when the raid was held. The ministry questioned the very possibility of al-Baghdadi’s presence in Idlib as the area is held by Al-Qaeda offshoot, Jabhat al-Nusra, who have always been mortal enemies of Islamic State. French Defense Minister Florence Parly also questioned the significance of the claimed US achievement, pointing out that the raid only marked “an early retirement for a terrorist [al-Baghdadi], but not for his organization.”=”Moscow noted that Islamic State was crushed in Syria in early 2018 in a joint effort by the government in Damascus and the Russian forces, meaning that yet another report of al-Baghdadi’s demise “bears no effect on the operational situation in Syria or on the actions of the remaining terrorists in Idlib.'”

We have been told by Moscow, only moments ago, that Baghdadi is alive, healthy and working with the US in Iraq. This information is exclusive, directly from high level intelligence sources who are always right, and VT has proven time and time again.

What we don’t know is whether Trump lied knowingly, something he does continually anyway, or is simply being handled. Now that Trump’s withdrawal from Syria has been reversed and all the troops sent to Iraq have now returned to Syria, 100% of them, just redeployed to Deir Ezzor from Hasakah, his “peace move” is now exposed as a total fake.

More on that in a bit as to why, and what the Deep State has in store for Syria then Iran.

Additionally, our sources inside Syria and Iraq tell us that Baghdadi was moved from Turkish protection, across the Eurphates and is now with US military intelligence inside Iraq. This kind of thing isn’t unusual, as fake terrorist leaders, built up by phony intelligence and in the “infotainment” industry are a valuable commodity. Let’s get the whole story first.

*

The Deep State is running a 4 pronged attack, beginning in Hong Kong, to pressure China toward making concessions, not on trade but on currency and banking, where China with other non-aligned partners threaten the Rothschild world banking system run through SWIFT with a secondary trade system and new currencies including crypto, challenging the endless fake crypto “pump and dump” that has already poured billions into organized crime coffers.

Planning here is left to Google Corporation and Facebook, the defacto organizational heart of the Deep State and their AI capability. We are fearful for Mark Zuckerberg as due to his recent arrogance before Congress, he has become an embarrassment and may well be in personal danger, something that would break the hearts of any person who loves and admires Deep State toads.

From Hong Kong, the mechanism that formerly organized color revolutions and blamed them on George Soros, began the Indian (Israeli) crackdown on Muslims inside Kashmir and attacks on Pakistan. Pakistan’s border crossings north of Kashmir had been attacked also but this project is a provocation against Imran Khan, trying to weaken his reform movement.

Thousands of Indian troops are being fed into Kashmir where people are dragged out of their homes and beaten in the streets, India’s revenge against hundreds of years of Muslim and British rule. Behind this, however, is an arms race between China and India where Russia continually feeds technology into India, which keeps valuable contracts with China coming to Moscow.

The problem behind this is that Israel has been manufacturing ICBMs in India, installing them in facilities that the US has built inside Israel, ICBMs capable of hitting North America, useless against Iran.

These are missiles that could simulate a nuclear first strike on the US from Russia just like 9/11 simulated an Islamic terrorist attack on the US. This is all a creation of the fruitful mind of Benjamin Netanyahu.

The next step was in Lebanon where very real demonstrations against a weak government are now being taken over, as in Ukraine, with agent provocateurs adding to violence and Saudi paid, and we mean thousands, fake demonstrators trying to retarget anti-government demonstrations against Hezbollah.

Hezbollah’s intelligence services have traced all of this down and will likely retaliate against those involved in the Israeli-Saudi plot. Hezbollah, after years of fighting against the Deep State attempt to overthrow Syria and destroy Iraq and Iran, is now one of the most formidable military forces in the world, trained and armed by Russia and highly experienced.

This is all coordinated with recent moves in Baghdad, riots that have killed nearly 100, that, in reality, should be demonstrating against ISIS-US-KRG-Turkish theft of nearly half of Iraq’s oil revenue since 2014 and nearly $1.5 trillion during the US occupation, which has led to cascading economic disasters and off the scale unemployment for years.

A US backed puppet government still rules Iraq while commercial and economic life within that nation have left it a hollowed out shell with all cash moving to Dubai’s banks while Iraq rots.

The Baghdadi move is coordinated with Lebanon and Baghdad uprisings, now seeded and controlled by the Deep State and the rise of a new ISIS fed by revenue from stolen Syrian and Iraqi oil. See Gordon Duff’s analysis, filmed only hours before the Baghdadi announcement, from this Press TV interview. (Begin at 3:40)

Then, on October 26, 2019, Russia announced that their satellite images confirmed the US operation stealing Syrian oil.

From Sputnik News : Russia, citing satellite imagery, says the United States has been smuggling Syrian oil to other countries under the protection of its troops before and after the defeat of the Daesh Takfiri terrorist group in the region. Russian Defense Ministry spokesman Major General Igor Konashenkov said on Saturday that “the space intelligence images showed that oil was actively extracted and massively exported for processing outside Syria, under the reliable protection of US troops, before and after the defeat of the Daesh terrorists.”Konashenkov stressed that the convoys were guarded by US private military companies and special operations forces.” And then this: “Russia Concerned Over US Military Returning to Northern Syria Commenting on Esper’s statement that some US troops will remain in north-eastern Syria, Russian Defence Ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov said that the statement did not come as a surprise. “WHAT WASHINGTON DOES NOW – THE CAPTURE AND HOLDING UNDER ITS ARMED CONTROL OF OIL FIELDS IN EASTERN SYRIA IS, SIMPLY SPEAKING, INTERNATIONAL STATE BANDITISM,” HE STRESSED, ADDING THAT SYRIAN OIL RESERVES AND OTHER MINERAL RESOURCES BELONG SOLELY TO THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, NOT TO DAESH OR TO “AMERICAN PROTECTORS FROM DAESH TERRORISTS”. He also said that “neither international law, nor the American legislation itself can justify the US troops’ goal to guard Syrian hydrocarbon reserves from Syria itself and its people.” Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov suggested that the fresh contradictory signals the US has sent regarding Syria may indicate Washington’s desire to maintain conditions that allow for continued pressure on Damascus. “WE ARE VERY DEFINITELY WORRIED THAT THE SIGNALS FROM THE WHITE HOUSE MAY REFLECT THE SAME ATTITUDE: TO PRESERVE THE CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUING MULTI-COMPONENT PRESSURE ON THE LEGITIMATE AUTHORITIES IN DAMASCUS”, HE POINTED OUT, ADDING THAT “THIS IS THE MOMENT WE DON’T AGREE AND WE CAN’T AGREE WITH THE UNITED STATES ON THE SITUATION.” What we are actually seeing is something far more sinister. You see, when Iraq is pushed to a civil war, and this is what is being done right now, orchestrated out of Israeli controlled Northern Syria or as it is called, the Kurdish Regional Government in Erbil, coordinated with US forces inside Iraq and Syria, a new ISIS is being built to justify more American troops inside Iraq. To do this successfully, a new and more controlled US backed government must be installed over the current puppet regime and Iranian influence erased, through another fake “color revolution” as is being attempted right now. From there, of course, a war on Iran can be staged, Iraqi oil revenue can be stolen to finance it and ISIS can be reconstituted as the US moves ISIS leaders that it had been keeping in training camps in Kurdish regions of Syria that recently “escaped” into the new US controlled zone on the Syrian Iraq’i border. Then of course, Mosul will be retaken, joined with Erbil, the MEK terror group will return to partner with ISIS and a new decade of war will ensue. Addendum I Bin Laden and the Deep State, Published in Russia Bin Laden’s Last Words
