The Navhind Times

Dysfunctional Issues

Film: Made in China

Cast: Rajkummar Rao, Mouni Roy

Directed by: Mikhil Musale

Duration: 2 hrs

Rating: * *

Based on the novel of the same name, Made in China has a screenplay that is all over the place for a while before settling down to the main issue – that of discussing sexual issues. In the first half you wonder where it is all heading and in the second, you wonder why they didn’t come to the point straight away.

It opens with the death of a Chinese general who is attending a summit in Gujarat. An investigation in launched which leads to Raghuvir (Rajkummar Rao) and in a rather long flashback, we learn about his story.

He unsuccessfully tried his hand at many businesses which never really took off – his latest venture then becomes Chinese medicines, an aphrodisiac to be precise and another businessman (Paresh Rawal) gives him a tip or two about how to run a business. Back home, Raghuvir tries to convince a sexologist (Boman Irani) to sell his products and the issue of lack of conversation about sexual disorders is highlighted. The doctor doesn’t mince words while talking about how matters of sex are not discussed in our society.

Raghuvir is backed by his wife (Mouni Roy) in all his ventures and she is shown to be a liberated woman.

The problem is not so much with the characters as it is with the screenplay. There are portions that look a bit out of place and irrelevant to the story. At the same time though, Musale manages to make his characters convincing, especially Raghuvir and the doctor. Their interactions make for the most charming part of the film. Both the actors, Rajkummar Rao and Boman Irani are utterly convincing in their roles but they needed the backing of a better script to pull off the film.

Off The Wall

Film: Hirkani (Marathi with English subtitles)

Cast: Sonalee Kulkarni, Ameet Khedekar

Directed by: Prasad Oak

Duration: 1 hr 39 mims

Rating: * *

After his directorial debut Kachcha Limbu was well received, Prasad Oak turned to a historical tale set during the times of Shivaji Maharaj. It has a wafer thin plot revolving around a village woman who daringly and, some may even say foolishly, climbs down a steep valley. The veracity of the incident is not confirmed but surely it needed a better screenplay to tell the story – the crux of it happens in barely 20 odd minutes.

It starts with the coronation of Shivaji, which has no context to the film, and a song that goes on till eternity and before you can recover from it, another one follows which goes on half way till eternity. For a film that is less than 100 minutes, there are way too many songs, making it a case of from ear to eternity.

Heera (Sonalee Kulkarni) lives with her hubby (Ameet Khedekar) who is a soldier in Shivaji’s army and their little baby. You wonder where it is all heading because in the first half the film just meanders aimlessly till it gets to the point. Heera gets locked in the fort on the hill with her baby at home. Since there is no way out, she tries to climb down from the side where there is a valley – some would say it was stupidity rather than courage – there was every chance of her getting killed in that adventure. Mostly relying on special effects, her journey on the way down is not particularly exciting either, it has all the standard tropes and an abrupt end. From a rather precarious position on the cliff, she mysteriously reaches the ground and is seen running in the forest.

Because the actual core story is so brief, there are fillers that don’t add any value whatsoever to the proceedings.

All in all, this mishmash of an adventure is quite disappointing.

Sharp Shooters

Film: Saand Ki Aankh

Cast: TapseePannu, BhumiPednekar, Prakash Jha

Directed by: TusharHiranandani

Duration: 2 hrs 26 mins

Rating: * * 1 / 2

Saand Ki Aankh is one of those incredible and heart-warming true stories to come out of rural India. But like most biopics, the problem is that it is dramatised so heavily that it ends up looking like a standard Bollywood film and occasionally, even like a television soap with the manner in which it tries to evoke emotion.

Two women, both in their 60’s, take up shooting at that age in an extremely patriarchal and win several medals in competitions – that story has a winner written all over it. But the problem is that there is no subtlety in the storytelling and everything is underlined to a degree where it starts grating on the nerves at times. But still, the story of Chandro and Prakashi Tomar deserves to be told for more reasons than one.

Set in Uttar Pradesh, Chandro (Bhumi Pednekar) and Prakashi (Tapsee Pannu) are sisters-in-law in a family where women do all the house work and produce kids while the men just sit and smoke hukkah and order the women around. It can’t get any more feudal than this. The patriarch is Ratan Singh (Prakash Jha) who calls the shots and decides what is okay and what is not, particularly when it comes to the women. “Yeh bandook mardonga gehna hain, mardon ke haath mein hi achcha lage” he thunders.

But it is the elderly women who have a talent for shooting and manage to hit bull’s eye (sand ki aankh) with remarkable accuracy. Egged by a good doctor (Vineet Singh) who runs a small shooting range they practice their skills and since they know the men in the house won’t approve of this activity, in a clandestine manner they participate in shooting competitions. All this is handled in a rather dramatic fashion and needed a tighter edit.

Ironically, the actual shooting competition doesn’t have much zing, it is done without much excitement – from being made fun of, in no time they become champions.

While the much important issue of gender and women empowerment is raised, it is done with a lot of theatrics. But you can’t help but cheer for the women who brought about a remarkable change and scaled heights against all odds.

Both Tapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar are in fine form while Prakash Jha as the egoistic male fits the bill.

Unlike the real life ladies, Saand Ki Aankh doesn’t hit bull’s eye but it tells a story of an extraordinary achievement.

Uncomfortably Numb

Film: Housefull 4

Cast: Akshay Kumar, Riteish Deshmukh, Kriti Sanon

Directed by: Farhad Samji

Duration: 2 hrs 26 mins

Rating: *

To put it plainly, watching Housefull 4 oscillates between getting all your teeth extracted, without anaesthesia and watching a bunch of kids play – the latter can be fun but you can’t do it for hours.

The film was written and made with the aim of making it as silly and stupid as possible – there was an outside chance that the film still could have been fun. Unfortunately, for the filmmakers, it has turned out to be much sillier than they had aimed for.

Of course some will laugh watching knives being stuck in Akshay Kumar’s posterior, as if that were the funniest thing on Earth but then people also laugh when someone slips on a banana skin.

This is the same film which was to be directed by Sajid Khan who had to quit the project because of the #metoo allegations that had surfaced against him – but that has not prevented any misogynist and sexist jokes in the film.

The story, if one can call it that, is divided in two timelines, the present day and 1419 although I can’t quite make up my mind as to which one was worse. Akshay Kumar plays Harry who wants to marry Neha (Kriti Kharbanda), Roy (Riteish Deshmukh) is paired up with Pooja (Pooja Hegde) and Max (Bobby Deol) has eyes for Kriti (Kriti Sanon).

The three women have more inheritance than Bezos and Ambani’s put together and to pay off a debt, the men decide to marry them. The wedding is set to happen in a place called Sitamgarh, which is older than the hills. But Harry starts getting those flashbacks there – turns out he was King Bala in that place and the rest of the characters were also present in different avatars. In this reincarnation tale, even pigeons (curiously titled Neil, Nitin, Mukesh) are born again. But since the ‘story’ has to move forward, there is another complication introduced – the pairing of the men and women was different in the previous birth and they have to reset their combination in the present.

Such films thrive on confusion, endless nonsensical chatter (‘Kabootar ka yuck brings good luck’) and more characters. We see Johnny Lever as the manager of the resort who changes his colours, figuratively and gender, literally. Then there is Chunky Pandey as Aakhri Pasta and his name is historically significant because it proves that the Italian dish was present in India about six centuries ago.

There is very little you can take home from this big budget flick – if anything, your heart bleeds because all the money spent on the lavish sets and costumes could have been put to much better use. This Housefull then turns out to be utterly brainless.
