Crook arrested in jacuzzi linked to hunting rifle used in bloody 'revenge' attack

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest crime reports and stories from Liverpool Echo straight to your inbox

A well-known drug dealer from south Liverpool was linked to a hunting rifle which was used in a shooting which left a man needing a colostomy bag.

Jack Ross was an associate of a Speke based gang called the East Side Boys which sold hard drugs, bullied locals and fought a turf war with criminal rivals.

Families could not walk past their drugs hub on Eastern Avenue for fear of being beaten up in the street. The gang sourced guns and bombs from Dingle crook Christopher Wallace, who turned a back street garage into an armoury.

The ECHO can now reveal how Ross was linked to a high powered hunting rifle which was used in a shooting which left three men in hospital. One of the victims was seriously injured and had to undergo surgery.

While Ross's DNA was found on the gun, he could not be linked to the actual shooting.

On March 18 2017, three men were doing DIY work inside a house Ramsbrook Close, Speke. A Mini Cooper then pulled up nearby and a gunman approached the house. He then fired a Tikka rifle through the letterbox of the house, and the three men standing in the hall were all hit.

One of the workmen was shot in the thigh, and the second was hit in the arm. A third man was hit in the lower back and buttock. He was seriously injured and had to undergo surgery. Ian Unsworth QC told Liverpool Crown court that the man had to have a bullet removed from his body during surgery. He then had a colostomy bag fitted.

After the shooting two men were seen getting inside a blue Mini Cooper, which then drove off with its lights not on. The Mini then hit a private hire taxi nearby, and the two men ran off.

Police were called to the area. Officers found three cartridge cases at the scene of the shooting, which were from the Tikka rifle. A forensic examination of the Mini found DNA matching Jack Ross.

Months later police recovered the rifle after spotting a white handkerchief tied to a tree in a field off Alderwood Drive. The Tikka rifle was hidden nearby.

Mr Unsworth told the court that although Ross's DNA was found on the gun and in the stolen car, he could not be linked to the actual shooting.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Ross made no comment during a police interview, and entered a not guilty plea to the charge of possession of a firearm with intent to endanger life. He later pleaded guilty to possession of a prohibited firearm, which is a lesser offence.

Judge Watson told Liverpool Crown court that a relative of Ross's had been injured in a gangland shooting and that "revenge was not far from the surface".

Ross, a well-known drug dealer, worked for the Burrows brothers 'East Side' crime gang.

(Image: Merseyside Police)

Ross was also involved in a County Lines operaton which flooded the Shropshire area with hard drugs. The gang used local dealers - who provided safe houses, transport and information about the patch.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

On April 10 he was arrested while enjoying the jacuzzi at the DW gym in Widnes. He was charged with drug offences and later jailed for five years and six months in relation to a County Lines drug ring.

On Thursday Ross was jailed for three years. Operation Bombay resulted in 20 men and one woman jailed for over 300 years.
