Coast Guard gets forest land in Murud to set up base

Rajpuri village

26/11 terror attacks

Environmentalist D Stalin

NGO Vanashakti

Activist Sumaira Abdulali

Awaaz Foundation

In 2010, a station had been commissioned in Murud-Janjira. However, it is still operated from a rented accommodation

Notification for diverting 11 hectares of forest inwas issued on Friday.Nearly 11 years after the, the state government has granted a permanent plot to the Coast Guard to set up a base in Murud by diverting nearly 11 hectares of forest land.The notification for diverting 10.90 hectare of forest land at Rajpuri village in Murud of Raigad district was issued on October 25, 2019, by Virendra Tiwari, joint secretary of the forest department.In the aftermath of the carnage in 2008, the committee set up to identify the lacunae in the security arrangement, had suggested the construction of two coast guard stations in Dahanu and Murud Janjira. Dahanu and Murud are located in the north and south of Mumbai, respectively.A full-fledged Coast Guard station has been constructed at Dahanu but since it does not have a jetty, only hovercrafts can operate there.In 2010, a station had been commissioned in Murud-Janjira by Coast Guard Director General Anil Chopra. However, it is still operated from a rented accommodation in Murud.Coast Guard Inspector-general, Vijay Chafekar said, “Since land has now been diverted by the forest department, we will construct a proper office with accommodation for the officers and the men. This is a hill-top land in Janjira where we plan to develop infrastructure, including a helipad.’’At present, the Coast Guard has two interceptor boats in Murud. The Murud unit is headed by Commandant Arun Singh and there are six officers and 50 men posted there.A senior officer of the Coast Guard said, “It took the state government more than a decade to grant us the land. Now construction will take another three years.’’ofsaid the government should have explored other possibilities instead of giving forest land. There are huge tracts of land reclaimed for SEZs, which never took off, he said.Activist Zoru Bhathena said, “The fact that our government can’t find any other piece of land anywhere along the coast is clear-cut proof of the administration’s lack of intention in saving our environment.” When the protectors of our environment become destroyers, we know we are in trouble, Bhathena said.ofsaid that the diversion of forest land for infrastructure needs of the Coast Guard will become a precedent and pave the way for further exploitation of forest land for all kinds of purposes. Such diversions cannot be the norm and should only happen after all remedies are exhausted, she said. It is impossible to believe that no other parcel of land along the entire coastline of Maharashtra can be used to set up a Coast Guard complex, she said and added that Murud-Janjira is rich in biodiversity and holds great promise for tourism.
