The Shillong Times

Girl shot after restraining father from drinking

Sambhal (Uttar Pradesh): An alcoholic father shot dead his 17-year-old daughter who tried to stop him from drinking in Uttar Pradesh’s Sambhal district, police said. The father has been arrested and he has confessed to killing her. Nem Singh, 52, a resident of the Bandarai village in the Sambhal district, allegedly shot dead his daughter, Nitesh, from a point-blank range late on Saturday. The girl was taken to the hospital, where doctors declared her dead on arrival. The body was sent for an autopsy. According to the police, on hearing the gunshot, neighbours rushed to the spot and informed the police. Nem Singh’s wife had committed suicide 15 years ago and after her death, Singh had started drinking excessively. He had even sold a big part of his agricultural land. His eldest son, Gaurav, used to oppose his drinking habit and daughter also sided with the brother. Two years ago, Gaurav moved to Delhi along with his wife. Singh’s younger son, Saurabh, and daughter Nitesh continued living with their father. Praveen Kumar Solanki, SHO, said when Singh shot his daughter, Saurabh was not at home. “We have arrested Singh and he has confessed to his crime. We have also recovered the country-made pistol used in the crime,” Solanki said. (IANS)’



Woman runs away from ‘eggless’ marriage

Gorakhpur: In a bizarre incident, a woman ran away from an ‘eggless’ marriage, after she was allegedly denied eggs by her husband in Uttar Pradesh’s Gorakhpur district. According to the police, the woman, who lives in Campierganj, had earlier eloped with her paramour four months ago and after she returned, she told the police that her husband did not give her eggs to eat and that made her upset. The woman fought with her husband on Saturday for eggs and, once again, ran away from her home. Since her paramour was also not at his house, it is believed that the two might have eloped together. The husband is a daily wage labourer and said that he cannot afford to buy eggs everyday for the family. He also alleged that his wife’s beloved took advantage of her weakness for eggs and started bringing them daily. “She was fond of eggs and her paramour regularly brought eggs for her,” he added. (IANS)



UP accident kills 1, injures 35

Banda: A minor boy was killed and 35 others were injured when their bus turned turtle after it hit a speed-breaker here, police said on Sunday. According to police, the incident took place near Mawai Bujurg village under the Kotwali police station area of the city on Saturday. Superintendent of Police (SSP) Ganesh Prasad Saha said the private bus, carrying devotees from Kanpur Dehat, was on its way to Chitrakoot Deepdan Mela. “The bus was moving at a high speed, and as a result it jumped off a speed breaker. One person, identified as Lokendra, died on the spot while 35 others sustained injuries. All the injured were admitted to a district hospital,” he said. The SP added that the condition of 8-10 pilgrims is serious. Gas cutters were used to cut the roof of the bus and pull out the injured. (PTI)



Man dupes 4 of Rs 2.4 crore

Surat: A man posing as a ‘tantrik’ allegedly stole 5.5 kg of gold worth Rs 2.4 crore from four persons after luring them with promise of buried treasure in Surat in Gujarat, police said on Sunday. The accused convinced land dealer Jagdish Sakhwada that 36 kg of gold was buried in a pot beneath the latter’s house, said a Kamrej police station official. “The accused, who identified himself as Sanjay Sharma, asked that 5.5 kg of gold be deposited with him to conduct a ritual that would reveal the exact place where the pot is buried,” said Deputy Superintendent CM Jadeja. “Sakhwada and three of his friends managed to pool in Rs 2.4 crore and got 5.5 kg of gold from a goldsmith. The accused carried out the ritual and then asked the victims to open the room after 15 days. Sharma even left a cobra in the room,” he said. Sakhwada and his friends soon realised they had been duped after which they filed a case against Sharma and an associated in Kamrej police station on Friday. (PTI)

Infantry Day celebration in J-K



Ladakh: Lieutenant General Harinder Singh, General Officer Commanding, ‘Fire and Fury’ Corps laid wreath at the War Memorial in Leh on Sunday, to pay tribute to the soldiers who lost their lives in the line of duty, on 73rd Infantry Day on Sunday. Infantry Day is observed as a remembrance of the first military event of independent India, when the Indian Army repelled the first attack on the Indian soil on October 27, 1947, in the Kashmir Valley. The victory was accomplished by the personnel of the First Battalion of the Sikh Regiment. (ANI)



Serial blasts in Odisha injure 2

Berhampur: At least two persons were injured when unidentified miscreants triggered bomb blasts at five locations in Polasra town in Odisha’s Ganjam district, police said on Sunday. The miscreants hurled crude bombs at five places in the town and fled on Saturday evening. The reason behind this and the identity of those involved in it are yet to be ascertained, police said. Two persons were injured in one of the blasts that took place at Ranipenth market area. The two were first admitted to a local community health centre and later shifted to MKCG Medical College and Hospital here. The condition of one of them is stated to be serious. Ganjam SP Brijesh Kumar Rai visited Polasra town and started investigation, police said. Patrolling has been intensified in the area to nab those involved in the serial blasts. (PTI)
