Pollution in Delhi the lowest in last 5 years on Diwali night: CM Arvind Kejriwal

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has said that this year pollution has been the lowest in the national capital on Diwali night in the last five years.

He said, "After 8:30 PM yesterday, I could hear some sound of crackers bursting. I was very happy that as compared to the last few years, there was less bursting of crackers. The pollution figures obtained have revealed that pollution has been the lowest in the last five years on Diwali night."

He said that his government aims at elimination pollution in Delhi. He said, "Our aim is to eliminate pollution from Delhi. I am glad that the people of Delhi have attended and enjoyed the Diwali laser show organised in Connaught Place. People are turning up in huge numbers. Next year, we will organise laser show at various locations in Delhi."

"I hope that pollution would not affect any scheduled matches in the city. We are also implementing the Odd-Even scheme from 4th November. Many matches have happened before during this season and this match should also be played," he added.

He also appreciated the people of Delhi for not lighting fireworks on this Diwali. He said, "We have gotten to know from nearby NCR towns that many crackers were burst. The people of Delhi have done commendable work, they have controlled Dengue and pollution both, but crackers were used in nearby locations such as Ghaziabad, Noida and Gurgaon."

Taking a jibe at the BJP, he said, "I want to appeal to the BJP leaders to stop mocking the people of Delhi. The people of Delhi have worked really hard to reduce pollution in Delhi, and pollution was the lowest this time in the last five years. Cracker bursting was also the lowest in the last five years. BJP should not mock the people of Delhi."

He also said, "Our teams are working on stopping garbage burning, we are also trying to control dust and pollution. The Delhi government and the people of Delhi are trying everything in their abilities to reduce pollution in the state."

He also said that stubble burning from the neighbouring states is affecting the ar quality. He said, "As we all know, smoke from stubble burning started entering Delhi quite early this year. It used to normally start around the last week of October, but it has started in the first week of October this year. The level of the smoke is also much higher this year."

"We will take strict actions against those violating the rules under the Graded Response Action Plan. The Delhi government is committed to implement the GRAP. Delhi is the only state to implement GRAP unlike other cities where the agencies have no control over the cities. Delhi is the only state where the people are collectively trying to reduce pollution in the state. Strict action will be taken against violators," he added.

The Delhi Government measured the levels of pollution at 24 designated locations in Delhi on the Diwali night. Pollution levels were low as compared to the Diwali nights of the previous years.

The assessment of Ambient Air Quality was undertaken at 24 locations i.e. R. K. Puram, Mandir Marg, Punjabi Bagh, Anand Vihar, Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Major Dhyanchand National Stadium, Dr. Karni Singh shooting range, PGDAV College(Sriniwaspuri), DITE Okhla, Mother Dairy (Patparganj), ITI Vivek Vihar, ITI Jahangirpuri, DITE Wazirpur, Satyawati college (Ashok Vihar), Shaheed Sukhdev Business college (Rohini), Narela, Sonia Vihar, Shri Aurobindo Marg, Najafgarh, Pusa, Dwarka, Mundka, Bawana, and Alipur.

Noise levels also monitored at five stations R.K.Puram, Mandir Marg, Punjabi Bagh, Civil Lines and Anand Vihar.

Also Read | Toxic Diwali aftermath: Delhi air quality dips to very poor; Kolkata, Mumbai breathe easy

Also Watch | Delhi chokes post Diwali, Centre wants immediate action
