J&K Grenade Attack: Terrorists Target Bus Stand In Sopore, 20 Injured; Search Operation Underway

At least fifteen people, including a woman, were injured when terrorists lobbed a grenade on civilians at a bus stand in Sopore, north Kashmir on Monday afternoon. (ANI)

#Terrorists lobbed a #grenade on #civilians at #BusStand #Sopore. 6 #civilians sustained #injuries. Information is preliminary in nature. @JmuKmrPolice — Kashmir Zone Police (@KashmirPolice) October 28, 2019 This is the second grenade attack in last 48 hours in Jammu and Kashmir. On Sunday, militants had also lobbed a grenade at a market in Srinagar, injuring seven people. The militants hurled a grenade in Hari Singh High Street Market, which is a few hundred metres away from the city centre Lal Chowk, a police official said. On Saturday, 4 CRPF men were injured in a grenade attack at Karannagar, Srinagar. #JammuAndKashmir: Nine people injured in a grenade attack near bus stand in Sopore today. Two of the injured have been brought to a hospital in Srinagar. pic.twitter.com/uI5OI18z4Q — ANI (@ANI) October 28, 2019 Significantly, the attack has occurred a day before a delegation of MPs from the European Union is slated to visit the region. A European parliament delegation will arrive in Kashmir for a day-long 'unofficial' visit on Tuesday. The visit has been arranged by a European NGO and comprises members from different EU member states. This is the first foreign delegation visiting Kashmir after the scrapping of article 370 on August 5. The delegation will meet cross sections of people in Srinagar and fly out the next day. The members will also get an opportunity to access the ground situation on their own, sources said.

At least twenty people, including a woman, were injured when terrorists lobbed a grenade on civilians at a bus stand in Sopore, north Kashmir on Monday afternoon. One civilian is seriously injured and has been referred to a hospital in Srinagar. The others are undergoing treatment at a local hospital, officials said. The police have, meanwhile, cordoned off the area and have launched an operation to nab the attackers. No arrests have been made so far, police said.
