Chandigarh: Six minor girls suffer eye injuries, three operated on

While trying to light the Anar, her face was above the flame. (Express photo/Representational image)

A four-and-a-half child from Ferozepur is the youngest among the six minor girls at PGIMER, Chandigarh, who suffered serious eye injuries on Diwali due to the bursting of crackers.

Beauty Kumari, who suffered an injury to her right eye, was brought to PGIMER on Sunday night, and was operated on at the department of ophthalmology (eye) on Monday.

Speaking to Chandigarh Newsline, Bajrangi, father of Beauty, said, “She was playing alone and bursting crackers near our house. She tried to burn an Anar, keeping it on the flame of diya, which suddenly burst.”

“Beauty did not know how to burst crackers. While trying to light the Anar, her face was above the flame. When the Anar exploded, it hit her right eye. Our neighbours saw her crying and informed us immediately. After that, we rushed her to a local hospital at Ferozepur, from where she was referred to Faridkot. She was again referred to PGI. She had just begun her school, which will be affected if her eyesight is lost,” said Bajrangi, a daily wager.

Dr Savleen Kaur, department of ophthalmology, PGIMER, said, “Due to the cracker explosion, Beauty’s eye has suffered major damage. She was operated upon at PGI today, and will be under observation for next few days.”

Apart from Beauty, two other girls — Meenakshi, 17, from Guhla, Haryana, and Radha Kumari, 9, — too have suffered eye injuries due to cracker explosions. They too were operated upon on Monday and will be under observation for next four-five days.

“There are a total of six minor girls who have been referred to PGI for serious eye injuries. Among the six, Beauty, Meenakshi and Radha were operated on today while three other — Pooja, Riya and Shana — have been asked to come to eye OPD for next two weeks as the first 15 days are critical after the injury,” said Dr Savleen Kaur.

Ram Sabere, father of Radha, said, “I had gone to the market. While my younger son was bursting crackers near our residence, Radha was watching. When the cracker (bomb) exploded, it directly hit the left eye of Radha. She was crying in pain. We immediately took her to Civil Hospital, Ambala, from where she was referred to PGI at 9 pm, as the injury was grievous.”

“It is my mistake. I was not there with my children when they were bursting crackers. However, now I have decided that I will never allow my children to burst crackers ever in life and will spread the same message to everyone in my locality, as the onlookers too are injured in the process many times,” said Ram Sabere.

15-year-old boy’s hand amputated

A 15-year-old boy’s right hand had to be amputated at PGI due to a cracker injury.

Vijay from Baddi (Himachal Pradesh) was brought to PGI by his family members on Sunday after he suffered a hand injury. An official said Vijay was bursting a cracker (bomb), which suddenly exploded in his right hand.

Due to the explosion, Vijay suffered a major injury to his hand. His family members took him to a hospital at Pinjore, from where he was referred to PGI, since the injury was grievous. Vijay’s hand had to be amputated at the Advanced Trauma Centre. (ENS)
