Maoists wary of launching armed attacks in Kerala

KOZHIKODE: The question often asked after every police encounter is that whether the Maoists would retaliate in the same coin as they do in central India. Observers wonder why the Maoists in Kerala are not responding to ‘encounter killings’ in equal measure.There is a line of thinking with the Maoists in the Western Ghat Special Zonal Committee (WGSZC) that there should be some ‘reply’ to the state violence. But the leadership decided against any adventurous action in Kerala taking into consideration various factors. Maoists have realised that there are no police stations in Kerala that can be easily targeted.In the initial days of the formation of the new guerrilla zone, there was a plan for a high-profile attack. But after studying the terrain of Kerala, the technical committee under the WGSZC concluded that it would be impractical for the armed squads to attack a police station and retreat to safe place.Moreover, they believe that mounting a big attack will be incompatible with the strength of the subjective forces in the Western Ghats.In a secret document of the CPI (Maoist) accessed by the TOI, a senior Maoist leader operating in the Western Ghats, say that following the path of Peru or Nepal in Kerala would be disastrous. “I felt that you had instead formulated this programme modelled on the conditions when the Peru and Nepal Peoples’ Wars were launched,” said the document.The Maoist leader felt that the mechanism of the party to defend the police reprisal is weak in the state.“We had not formulated any concrete programme to defend ourselves from the enemy offensives. According to principles of war, it is mandatory to think about self-defence while planning an offensive and to think about offensive while defending ourselves,” he said.The leader also warns of the possible consequences and the reaction from the government. “Once we resort to armed attacks on the enemy, there is every chance for the enemy to resort to a big offensive on us. This offensive would be launched both in the rural and the urban areas,” the Maoist leader said in the document.The public and the police expected retaliatory attack by the Maoists after the killings of Kuppu Devaraj and Ajitha at Nilambur in 2016. Again, some kinds of attack were anticipated after the killing of the Maoist cadre C P Jaleel in March this year. It remains to be seen whether the Maoist leadership will stick to the policy even after the killing of three cadres in Palakkad
