Louisiana: 78-year-old woman sentenced to 22 years in jail for trying to kill lawyer who lost her case

Patricia Currie (File Photo) | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Currie was arrested in October of last year with a fully loaded shotgun Only wanted to scare him after he bungled my bankruptcy case, claimed Currie The incident was a 'calculated and coldblooded attempted murder': Assistant DA

New Delhi: Two years after she tried to murder her lawyer in cold blood, a 78-year-old woman was sentenced to 22 years imprisonment by a Louisiana court on Thursday. Convicted on charges of aggravated assault with a firearm and resisting arrest, Patricia Currie was 75-years-old at the time of the incident in 2016.

She was arrested after a call was made to the St Tammany Parish Sheriff's Office about a violent crime underway at a law office on Highway 21 in Covington on October 27 of last year. A resident of Mandeville, Currie was taken into custody from the floor of the lobby of the law office. She was wearing plastic bags on her feet and hands and a towel draped across her lap.

In his statement to the deputies, Currie's lawyer Keith Couture said that he was walking across the office when he heard a door open. He turned around to see her sitting on a chair with a loaded shotgun in her hands. I asked her about the purpose of her visit and she told me that she had come to kill me, Couture told the court. Fortunately, the lawyer managed to wrestle the shotgun out of Currie's hands before he called the police.

Deputies who arrived at the scene claimed that Currie was uncooperative and even refused to give her name to the officers. She was later booked into the St Tammany Parish Jail. A court has been hearing her plea since.

In her defence, the accused claimed that she had no intention to kill Couture and only wanted to scare her after he bungled her bankruptcy case. However, the assistant district attorney of Washington and St Tammany Parishes told the court that the incident was a 'calculated and coldblooded attempted murder'.

He cited the findings of deputies who recovered a loaded .410 shotgun in Currie's possession along with four additional shotgun shells in her underwear at the time of the arrest. She also had a box of ammunition in her vehicle, revealed investigators.

Following a jury deliberation that lasted for merely 15 minutes in August this year, Currie was found guilty of attempted second-degree murder. The offense carries a minimum sentence of 10 years. However, a court on Thursday sentenced her to 22 years in prison. Born on November 13, 1940, Currie is a resident of N Beau Chene Drive, Mandeville which falls under the Parish Governing Authority District 4.
