Hope, despair on EU delegation’s visit

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, October 28

Kashmir Valley is riding between hope and hopelessness on eve of the first visit by a foreign delegation – 28 parliamentarians of the European Union (EU) – since the abrogation of Article 370.

The 28-member delegation of the EU parliamentarians will visit Kashmir on Tuesday and has evoked mixed emotions from people of the region where the Internet services continue to remain suspended and daytime shutdown of markets and public transport remains in place.

In Srinagar’s volatile old city, where residents in many areas are already observing a shutdown for the past several days during morning shopping hours in anticipation of a foreign delegation’s visit, a resident said he hoped the EU delegation will “listen to common people”.

“We are awaiting international intervention for a long time. We hope that institutions like the EU and UN will live up to our expectation,” Irfan Ahmad, a postgraduate student and a resident of old city, said.

A fortnight ago, several localities in Kashmir Valley had observed a morning time shutdown for several days, in addition to the usual daytime shutdown, when there were rumours that a foreign delegation will visit the region.

While Kashmir valley has observed a spontaneous daytime shutdown of markets and public transport since the abrogation of Article 370, the shopping time has been limited to morning hours.

The visit of the EU parliamentarians is the first high-profile visit by any foreign delegation since the abrogation of Article 370 on August 5, when communication services were suspended and travel restrictions were imposed across Kashmir valley.

As the news of the EU delegation’s visit spread slowly through word of mouth in the region, people expressed hope as well as hopelessness.

Iltija Mufti, daughter of former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti who is under arrest since the abrogation, said the “iron curtain” between Kashmir and the world needs to be lifted. “The government of India must be held accountable for pushing J&K into turmoil,” she said in a tweet published on her mother’s Twitter account.

“Hope it (EU delegation) gets a chance to speak to people, local media, doctors and civil society members,” she said.

Gulzar Ahmad, a resident of an uptown locality in Srinagar, termed the delegation’s visit as a “mere eye wash”. “The pain is in the heart and in the mind and they are providing medicine for leg wound,” he said.

‘Speak to locals’

The government of India must be held accountable for pushing J&K into turmoil. Hope it (EU delegation) gets a chance to speak to people, local media, doctors and civil society members. Iltija Mufti, daughter of Mehbooba Mufti
