On Tantrik’s Advice, Childless Man 'Sacrifices' Nephew To 'Appease' Goddess Kali

Bhagalpur :

A 10-year-old boy was allegedly sacrificed by his paternal uncle following the advice of a tantrik to propitiate goddess Kali in Bhagalpur district of Bihar, police said on Monday. The accused Shivnandan Ravidas, who did not have any children, was told by local tantrik Vibhash Mandal that his crave for an offspring would be fulfilled if he sacrificed a child belonging to a close relative during the Kali Puja, Senior Superintendent of Police Ashish Bharti said.

The incident took place at Dilauri village under Pirpainti police station area late on Sunday night, he said. Ravidas took his nephew to a pre-assigned place under the pretext of buying him firecrackers and slit his throat, Bharti said. The child's parents lodged a complaint with the police after his body was found from a heap of bamboo shafts in the village.

Ravidas and the tantrik were arrested, the SSP said.

Black magic or suspicion of black magic has been reason behind many crimes, especially in rural India. Recently, a 30-year-old man had murdered his mother because he suspected that she was 'doing black magic on him.' According to news agency ANI, the incident took place on December 23 in a village in Telangana. Boinpalle Police of Rajanna Sircilla District said that, "On December 23, a person by the name of Srinivas, killed his mother by strangulating her to death. He suspected that his mother practiced black magic on him, from which he was falling ill often. So the accused decided to murder his 52-year-old mother at her residence." The man has been booked under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.

But it was the Burari case in the National Capital that rocked the nation. In this case, 11 members of a family allegedly committed suicide. Many reports suggested that the Chandawat family of Delhi's Burari area were under some influence and they were preforming some black magic ritual. However, the probe by the Delhi Police has pointed out the ritual gone wrong theory. According to the police, the family members never intended to end their lives. They were performing a ritual also known as 'badh pooja', in which, members tied themselves with the iron mesh in the house. But it was not a mass suicide. The probe has also ruled out any foul play or the theory that Lalit, one of the sons , killed everyone and then committed suicide.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
