Caretaker of rehabilitation centre found dead

GHAZIABAD: A caretaker of a drug rehabilitation centre in Sahibabad’s Lajpat Nagar area was found dead on the premises on Monday. Police have registered an FIR for murder against eight youths who were living at the centre and are now absconding.Police said the deceased had been identified as Sabir Khan (48), a resident of Seelampur area in Delhi.“The incident occurred around 2 am on Monday when Sabir was sleeping inside his room at the rehab centre — Abhaar Nasha & Multi Kendra — in Lajpat Nagar’s C-block,” said a police officer.An employee with the rehabilitation centre said that at 11 pm, everyone when to sleep after celebrating Diwali and having dinner. “Sabir’s room is located on the ground floor while all the patients live in the first floor of the building,” the worker said.“Around 2 am, we heard a sound coming from Sabir’s room. When we went to his room, it was locked from outside and the building’s door was open. When we opened Sabir’s room, we found he was lying dead on the floor. We immediately took him to a nearby hospital where doctors declared him brought dead. We then informed the police and Sabir’s family members,” he added.Police have recovered CCTV footage in which eight persons were seen entering Sabir’s room around 1.30 am and tying his hands and legs with a rope. He was beaten to death by the accused persons and they fled from the back door of his room, a policeman said.A senior police officer said that 33 inmates were present at the centre during the time of incident.“All the eight accused were admitted to the rehab centre around three months back. They have been identified as Shahrukh, Deepak, Khem Chand, Vishal, Trun Tyagi, Jogendra, Chand and Sudhir, all aged between 30 and 40 years and hail from various parts of Ghaziabad, Delhi and Haryana,” the officer informed.Rakesh Kumar Mishra, circle officer, Sahibabad said a case has been registered against all the eight persons. Meanwhile, Sabir’s body has been sent for autopsy and reports are awaited.“Based on the complaint lodged by victim’s family, an FIR under section 302 (punishment for murder) has been registered against all the eight accused persons. We have taken down their details from the entry register of the rehabilitation center and have formed teams to nab them. Currently, we are not clear as to how they have committed the crime but further investigation is underway” said Mishra.
