Hyderabad 19-yr-old and boyfriend allegedly kill mother, spend three days with body

Hyderabad 19-yr-old and boyfriend allegedly kill mother, spend three days with body

Keerthy and Shashi allegedly strangled Rajitha and later dumped her body at a railway track near Ramannapet to make it look like an accident or an attempted suicide, say police.

news Crime

The police in Hyderabad on Monday uncovered a gruesome murder of a woman in Munagunoor in Hayathnagar. The police said that 39-year-old Rajitha was allegedly murdered by her 19-year-old daughter Keerthy Reddy, who took the help of her boyfriend Shashi.

According to the police, after committing the murder on October 18, Keerthy and Shashi allegedly spent three days together in the same house. After the smell became unbearable, they allegedly dumped the body on a railway track near Ramannapet, to make it either look like an accident or an attempted suicide, say the police.

The duo has now been arrested. According to media reports, the role of a third friend is also being probed.

The police say that 19-year-old, who is an undergraduate student allegedly killed her mother as the latter was admonishing her for being in relationship with two young men. The murder took place on October 18 with Keerthy allegedly strangling her mother to death, while her boyfriend Shashi held her feet, say police following a preliminary probe.

After Keerthy's father Srinivas Reddy, a truck driver, returned home, she feigned ignorance about her mother's whereabouts. She told her father that she had gone to Visakhapatnam and did not return.

Srinivas Reddy then lodged a complaint with the police. During investigation, the police grew suspicious due to inconsistency in the statements given by Keerthy. During interrogation, she allegedly confessed to the crime.

Meanwhile, the Government Railway Police found the body and informed the local police, who identified it to be that of Rajitha.

Police say that a case had been registered under Section 174 (suspicious death) of the CrPC and further investigations were ongoing. An FIR will be registered following legal advice, say police.

Read: Hyderabad in shock after macabre crime in which man's body was cut into pieces by kin

IANS inputs
