Troops desert Colonel Kirori Singh Bainsla after his battle cry

Gurjar leaders who have been crucial during the strategizing and carrying out of agitations for Gurjar reservation are not likely to join Col Kirori Singh Bainsla at the Mahapanchayat scheduled to be held in Sawai Madhopur on Friday February 8. They feel that Baisla has not been able to deliver results for the community and are staying away. Some of these leaders held separate meetings with Dy CM Sachin Pilot on Thursday in city where solutions for the issue were discussed.

Gurjar leader Himmat Singh Gurjar told DNA, “I will not be present for the Mahapanchayat tomorrow due to some prior engagement. However, I did meet deputy chief minister Sachin Pilot today and discussed about Gurjar reservation issue. I urged him that the government should put an application before the Supreme Court for early hearing of the SLB related to the SBC Reservation Act of 2015. We can now be given reservation as the 50% reservation ceiling has been broken by the Central government.” “He told me that he would consult with the legal department of government on the issue.”

Capt Hari Prasad, who has been right hand man of Baisla said, “I will be in Hindaun on Friday. I wish to not say anything further,” he said.

But there are some who will be standing by the colonel at the Mahapanchayat on Friday. “I will be going for the mahapanchayat as it is an issue for the benefit of our community,” said Attar Singh senior Gurjar leader. Meanwhile, Col Baisla was busy touring villages in Sawai Madhopur to garner support for the Mahapanchayat and was unavailable for comment. What makes the situation more difficult for Baisla is that - Malarna Dungar in Sawai Madhopur - the venue of Friday’s Mahapanchayat is not considered as a Bainsla stronghold.

But, it has been decided for its strategic position as there are two railway tracks near Malarna Dungar - Delhi-Mumbai track and Jaipur Sawai Madhopur. In case they move for sit in, Delhi and Rajasthan would be disconnected from Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh. This would be quite unlike last time - when Gurjars halted tracks at Bayana - a diversion to maintain rail traffic was managed - rendering halted tracks ineffective. Further, there is a heavy concentration of Gurjar villages who could move in easily in case of need.
