Police probe fireworks set off in Jurong West

- Advertisement -

Singapore – Police are looking into an incident of fireworks being set off at Jurong West Street 73 on Sunday night, October 27.

Two videos of the fireworks being set off, ostensibly in celebration of Deepavali, were posted on the Facebook page All Singapore Stuff, and has been widely viewed and shared since it was posted. One shows at least two men setting off the fireworks on the ground between housing blocks, and the other shows a view from upper floors, where the fireworks can be seen reaching the top levels of the building, while onlookers watch from their corridors.

In the second video, the fireworks are seen ricocheting from the walls of the housing block.

It is undetermined whether the two videos are from the same fireworks-launching incident.

- Advertisement 1-

Illegal fireworks launched from ground <Reader's Contribution>Fire hazard sia play fireworks in HDB estate. If one of the sparks fly into someone's home sure catch fire! Posted by All Singapore Stuff on Sunday, October 27, 2019

The police told Channel NewsAsia (CNA) that authorities received an alert of “a case of discharge of fireworks” at about 8:00 on Sunday evening.

There are no reports of injuries from the launched fireworks, but police have begun to investigate the matter.

The police said, “Members of the public are reminded that it is an offence to possess, sell, transport, send, deliver, distribute or import any dangerous fireworks.

The police have zero tolerance against acts that endanger the lives or safety of others as well as cause undue alarm to the public, and will not hesitate to take action against those who blatantly disregard the law.”

Individuals found guilty of discharging dangerous fireworks may receive a jail sentence of up to two years or receive a fine between the amounts of S$2,000 and S$10,000, or both penalties.

- Advertisement 2-

Illegal fireworks at Jurong <Reader's Contribution>Last night got fireworks in Jurong sia! Is dis allow? Posted by All Singapore Stuff on Sunday, October 27, 2019

Fireworks have been banned by the Government since 1972 due to the concern for public safety. However, they are allowed only at specific events when it has been determined that proper safety procedures have been put in place.

Earlier this year, Singapore saw its first conviction under the Dangerous Fireworks Act when 54-year-old Alagappan Singaram, a cleaner, admitted to launching fireworks together with his son in November of 2018 at Bukit Batok.

In 2017, three men were arrested for launching fireworks in Yishun.

- Advertisement 3-

And last year, two men were arrested in Yishun again as they celebrated Deepavali by setting off fireworks very early in the morning of November 7. At around 3:30 am, netizens reported seeing fireworks set off, and even posted videos of the sparklers.

Earlier in the day, fireworks had been lit at Race Course Road in Little India. Police rushing to the scene were spotted towards the end of videos that were posted.

The two men arrested were ages 48 and 29.

Netizens shared photos of the fireworks in Yishun early this morning, seemingly shocked and amused at once, with captions such as, “Fireworks at 0330H. I know I’m in Yishun. @leogohtw” on Twitter and “3.27am #fireworks from my bedroom window. #HappyDeepavali#OnlyInYishun #OMGWhyLa#ThereGoesTheNeighbourhood” @fabreyas on Instagram./ TiSG

Read also: Deepavali fireworks at Yishun for the second year in a row

Follow us on Social Media

Send in your scoops to news@theindependent.sg
