Molly-Mae Hague gushes about Tommy Fury and says he is the ‘perfect person to live with’

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get daily celeb exclusives and behind the scenes house tours direct to your inbox

Love Island couple Molly-Mae and Tommy Fury have gushed about living together, after moving into their lavish Manchester pad in September.

Molly-Mae, 20, said her beau Tommy, also 20, was the “perfect person to live with” as the couple stunned on the red carpet as they appeared in front of the press and fans for the Pride Of Britain Awards in London on Monday 28 October.

When asked how they find living together, the Instagram influencer told OK! online: “It’s really good. We are just going from strength to strength, it’s just perfect. He’s the perfect person to live with.”

(Image: Getty)

While Molly-Mae’s boxer beau added: “The bubble continues.”

Throughout the evening, the couple looked very content in their bubble as they walked arm in arm along the the red carpet outside Grosvenor House, where the Pride Of Britain Awards were hosted.

A loved-up Molly shared a number of videos on her Instagram story showing her and Tyson Fury’s brother looking close, including a sweet clip of him sorting out the train of her pink, maxi Pretty Little Thing dress, which was designed exclusively by the 20 year old, as she posed for the cameras.

Meanwhile, Tommy shared a photo of him looking adoringly at Molly-Mae while she faces the camera and smiles.

This comes after Molly-Mae, who recently gave fans a tour of the couple’s love nest, insisted she and Tommy “don’t argue” during a question and answer video posted on her YouTube channel earlier this month.

In the video, when asked about their biggest argument, Instagram influencer Molly-Mae, said: “Honestly, this isn’t even a lie, we’ve not had one argument”.

And boxer Tommy added: “Literally not even one, that’s why I said: ‘Can we even pick one?’”

Then Molly-Mae said: “This is the weirdest thing, because I am – I wouldn’t say I’m an argumentative person but I can be quite grouchy sometimes or hormonal, or when I’m hungry I can be really aggy.

“But, we just don’t argue, do we? It’s not really like that with us. We don’t even bicker…”

(Image: Getty)

Tommy then added: “I have you in tears every single day.” To which Molly-Mae explained: “Yeah, we just constantly laugh, like I’m not even saying this like: ‘Oh we’re the perfect couple,’ because we’re not but we just don’t argue.”

Later in the video, the couple answered a question on their plans to have children, where Tommy joked they want “eight”.

Speaking about their visions of the future, Molly-Mae said: “We both definitely want children, but obviously we're both only 20 years old.”

Tommy then joked: “We've been trying to make children most nights. Yes we have, we've been snoodling in the bedroom, I want twins by the time I'm 22, simple as that.

“Molly wants six kids, I want eight,” he quipped.

As one Love Island romance blossoms another comes to an end. As India Reynolds and Ovie Soko, both 28, split last week.

India had confirmed the couple’s break up as they narrowly avoided each other at the Pride of Britain Awards last night.

Speaking to reporters about her ex beau Ovie, India said: “I hope we can still be friends."

The couple are said to have made the “amicable” decision to go their separate ways because of “conflicting schedules”.

The Daily Mirror Pride of Britain Awards, in partnership with TSB, will broadcast on ITV on 5th November at 8pm
