Amid visit by high-profile delegation of EU MPs; UN urges India to 'restore the rights' of Kashmiris

Rupert Colville, spokesperson of UNHRC/ Twitter: UN Geneva | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights NSA Ajit Doval briefed the EU delegation over a lunch Four of the 27 EU MPs decided to return to their respective countries

Geneva/ Srinagar: The United Nations, on Tuesday, expressed 'concern' over the 'deprivation' of 'human rights' of the population in Kashmir. Citing the official spokesperson of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN Geneva Twitter handle urged India to 'restore the rights that are currently being denied'. The UN statement comes at a time when 23 European Union (EU) MPs are visiting the Valley to carry out a first-hand assessment of the situation in Kashmir.

"We are extremely concerned that the population of Indian-Administered #Kashmir continues to be deprived of a wide range of human rights and we urge the Indian authorities to unlock the situation and fully restore the rights that are currently being denied," the UN Geneva Twitter handle said in a tweet.

It may be noted that New Delhi has always maintained that Kashmir is India's internal matter and that no third party intervention, including that by the UN, has been acceptable to India. In fact, in September, when Pakistan raised the Kashmir issue at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in New York, India reiterated its position at the world forum.

Meanwhile, the team of EU MPs originally consisted of 27 members, however, four decided to refrain from visiting the Valley and have reportedly returned to their respective countries. This is the first high-level foreign delegation to visit the Kashmir Valley since August 5, when the government decided to abrogate Article 370 and revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

"We are extremely concerned that the population of Indian-Administered #Kashmir continues to be deprived of a wide range of human rights and we urge the Indian authorities to unlock the situation and fully restore the rights that are currently being denied," -- @UNHumanRights pic.twitter.com/GQYF6Jqroi — UN Geneva (@UNGeneva) October 29, 2019

"Their visit to Jammu and Kashmir should give the delegation a better understanding of the cultural and religious diversity of the region of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, apart from giving them a clear view of the development and government priorities of the region," a PMO statement earlier said.

The team was briefed by senior security officials on the situation in the Valley. Meanwhile, at least four people were injured in a number of clashes that took place in Srinagar and other parts of the state. Blockades were put up in at least five locations in Srinagar, while shops and businesses remained closed due to the clashes.

The delegation was given an overview of the situation in the Valley by National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval who hosted a lunch for the visitors. The visit comes weeks after the government denied permission to a US senator to visit the Valley.

The state will be bifurcated into two Union Territories on October 21.
