Indian Serial Killer ‘Cyanide Mohan’ sentenced to Death

This case is the fourth where he has been sentenced to death.

The notorious serial killer known as Cyanide Mohan was sentenced to death at a court in Mangaluru, Karnataka on October 24, 2019.

He received the death penalty after being convicted of murdering a woman in 2005.

Additional District and Sessions Judge Sayeedunnisa handed down the sentence to Cyanide Mohan for raping and murdering the young woman at a bus station in Bengaluru on October 22, 2005.

The serial killer was convicted on October 22, 2019, for numerous offences in relation to the case including murder.

As well as receiving the death penalty, Mohan was also handed a number of prison terms.

This includes ten years for abduction, ten years for poisoning, ten years for voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery, seven years for rape, seven years for destroying evidence, five years for robbery and one year for cheating.

Public prosecutor Judith Crasta stated that the prison sentences will run concurrently until the death sentence has been confirmed by the High Court.

The judge has also directed the district legal services authority to pay compensation to the victim’s sister.

Mohan has previously been convicted of murder. This case is the fourth where he has been sentenced to death.

In two previous verdicts, the death sentences were reduced to life imprisonment and a five-year jail sentence.

After being foud guilty of killing the woman in 2005, this has become the 17th murder case where he has been convicted. There are three ongoing cases against the serial killer.

Mohan had targeted women and used the same method when committing the murder. He used cyanide, which led to him being nicknamed Cyanide Mohan.

A series of cases emerged where a man would use fake identities to lure women by promising to marry them.

Once he met them, the suspect would rape them before giving them a cyanide pill, telling them it was a contraceptive pill.

The cyanide pills would result in their deaths.

Bantwal rural police investigated the string of murders and had noticed that the way in which the victims had died was the same.

An investigation led to officers identifying Mohan as a suspect and he was first arrested in 2009.

In the case of his 2019 conviction, Mohan got to know a childcare centre worker from Bantwal. He convinced her to go with him to Bengaluru after promising to marry her.

Once there, he forcibly had sex with her. The next day, Mohan met the victim at the bus station and gave her a cyanide pill, claiming it was a contraceptive.
