LATEST | Explosion occurs at Arun III Hydropower Project in Nepal

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will lay the foundation stone of Rs 1,938 crore highway project at Jalpaiguri in West Bengal today. Congress president Rahul Gandhi will address a 'thanksgiving rally' for farmers at the BHEL Jamboree Maidan in Bhopal. The Supreme Court will hear a petition filed by BJP spokesman Ashwini Upadhyay challenging Article 35A. According to this new petition, Article 35A violates the rights of the women of Jammu and Kashmir who marry people from other states. India will play New Zealand in the second T20 in Auckland. Bangladesh Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen will meet Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj in New Delhi. Bangladesh has sealed off its border with Myanmar to stop further influx of refugees fleeing the troubled Rakhine state.

22:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Nepal: An explosion has taken place at Arun III Hydropower Project. More details awaited.

18:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Punjab government has announced 6% Dearness Allowance (DA) to government employees and pensioners, with effect from February 1, 2019.

16:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar arrives in Shillong. Kumar will be questioned by the CBI in connection with the Saradha Chit Fund Scam case.



Meghalaya: Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar arrives in Shillong. He will be questioned by CBI here, in connection with the #SaradhaScam. pic.twitter.com/7ab0wwO3sa

— ANI (@ANI) February 8, 2019



14:33 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

Delhi's Patiala House Court extends ED remand of Rajiv Saxena, a co-accused in AgustaWestland case, to four more days.













13:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Jammu and Kashmir: Two persons have been rescued from near the police post in Jawahar Tunnel area in Kulgam district where an avalanche took place earlier today. One of them is in critical condition.



Jammu and Kashmir: Two persons have been rescued from near the police post in Jawahar Tunnel area in Kulgam district where an avalanche took place earlier today. One of them is in critical condition. pic.twitter.com/xBQcd2kTGK

— ANI (@ANI) February 8, 2019



13:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi's rally in Jalpaiguri is scheduled for 3:30 pm. The rally comes just a few days after Trinamool Congress government and Centre were at the loggerheads over CBI's action against Kolkata Police Chief Rajeev Kumar.

11:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

Supreme Court dismisses a plea of RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav challenging the Bihar government's order asking him to vacate the bungalow allotted to him while he was the deputy chief minister. CJI Ranjan Gogoi also imposed a cost of Rs 50,000 on Tejashwi Yadav.













10:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In 14 children injured in fire in UP madrasa

Fourteen children were injured when a fire broke out in a madarsa at Shuru village in the district, police said Friday. The blaze started Thursday night from a candle kept in a room in the madrasa in Kotwali Police Station area during a power cut, they said. A refrigerator near the candle caught fire which spread rapidly, they said. Fourteen children were injured, ten of them seriously, and they were rushed to a hospital, police said, adding an investigation was underway.

10:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Madhya Pradesh: Poster seen in Bhopal portraying Congress President Rahul Gandhi as Lord Rama and Prime Minister Narendra Modi as Ravana.



Madhya Pradesh: Poster seen in Bhopal portraying Congress President Rahul Gandhi as Lord Rama and Prime Minister Narendra Modi as Ravana. pic.twitter.com/MNaMu3cBjI

— ANI (@ANI) February 8, 2019



09:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

Andhra Pradesh: A woman and her daughter in law murdered at their residence in Bondilipuram, Srikakulam yesterday. The family of the victims claims that money and jewellery have been stolen. Police begin investigation.

















08:28 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Twenty-four houses collapsed and at least 20 people were injured when a sudden storm having high wind speed swept through a village in the Ecotech Sector 3 area here Thursday night, police said. The incident took place in Ali Bardipur village at around 8:30 pm, Ecotech-3 police station in-charge Inspector Anita Chauhan said. The injured are undergoing treatment at various hospitals in Greater Noida, she said, adding that the condition of four victims was stated to be critical. The inspector said the fire brigade and police reached the spot after getting information about the incident, adding that search and rescue operations were underway. The police said some cattle were also injured in the incident.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
