J&K: 5 non-Kashmiri labourers shot dead by terrorists in Kulgam

Night and weekend curfew in Jammu and Kashmir 2022: Know guidelines, rules: What is allowed, what is not

In a first, Amit Shah releases district-based Good Governance Index for Jammu and Kashmir

J&K: 5 non-Kashmiri labourers shot dead by terrorists in Kulgam

India

oi-PTI

Srinagar, Oct 29: Terrorists targeted a non-local labourer and shot him in the leg when he was in his residence in Kulgam district of Kashmir on Tuesday evening, police said.

Zahuruddin, a daily wager from West Bengal, was in his rented residence in Katrasoo village when he was attacked. He has been admitted to a hospital and stated to be out of danger, they said.

The attack happened on a day a delegation of parliamentarians from the European Union is visiting Kashmir to talk to locals and ask them about their experience after the abrogation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 on August 5.

Since the Centre's decision on Article 370, terrorists have been targeting truckers and labourers, mainly who have come to the Valley from outside Kashmir.

On Monday, a trucker from Udhampur district was killed by militants in Anantnag, police said. This was the fourth truck driver to be killed by militants since August 5.

India withdrew invitation to visit Kashmir after he sought to talk to locals: EU Parliamentarian

On October 24, terrorists killed two non-Kashmiri truck drivers in Shopian district.

On October 14, two terrorists, including a suspected Pakistani national, shot dead the driver of a truck having Rajasthan registration number and assaulted an orchard owner in Shopian district. The driver was identified as Sharief Khan.

Two days later, Punjab-based apple trader Charanjeet Singh was killed and Sanjeev injured when terrorists attacked them in Shopian district.

The same day, a brick kiln worker from Chhattisgarh was shot dead by militants in Pulwama district.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Tuesday, October 29, 2019, 21:54 [IST]
