Assailants follow man home, shoot him for overtaking their car in Uttar Pradesh

The victim being treated at a hospital in Uttar Pradesh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The incident took place in Azamgarh district of Uttar Pradesh Police have registered a case and are investigating the matter The victim is currently undergoing treatment at a local private hospital

Lucknow: Police in Azamgarh district of Uttar Pradesh has registered a case against unidentified assailants for allegedly opening fire at a man. Shockingly, the complainant has alleged that he was attacked following a tiff after he overtook the accused's vehicle. More details are likely to emerge in this case as it is under active investigation. However, no arrests or identifications have been made in this regard as of yet.

This incident is being reported less than 24 hours after a 22-year-old man stabbed for objecting to eve-teasing, succumbed to his wounds in Kairana area of UP's Shamli district. A video of the incident being widely circulated on social media shows a group of men attacking the victim who confronted them for allegedly eve-teasing his sister. The sister said that the accused regularly harassed and ogled her outside the college.

Talking about the incident from Azamgarh, Superintendent of Police (Rural) told media outlets that a man was shot at by a group of people. The argument between them started when the victim reportedly overtook the accused with his vehicle. This angered the accused who then followed the victim to his home and shot at him inside his own residence. "He says that the accused followed him to his house and then shot at him. We are investigating the matter," said SP (Azamgarh).

Azamgarh: A man was allegedly shot at by a group of people at his house after he entered into an argument with them over the issue of vehicle overtaking. SP(Azamgarh Rural)says "He says that the accused followed him to his house & then shot at him.We're investigating the matter." pic.twitter.com/aJ0qeTuigY — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) October 29, 2019

Meanwhile, the victim has been shifted to a private local hospital where he is currently undergoing treatment. He has been identified as 38-year-old Arun Srivastava. In his statement to the police, Arun has claimed that he got into an argument with a resident of Pakadpur village which led to him being shot at in his own home. He further added that the road where the incident took place was crowded owing to a Ramleela being held there.

A very similar incident was reported from the neighbouring state of Bihar in September of this year when an autorickshaw driver was shot dead as a result of road rage. Ravi, aged 22, was killed in the Nadiraganj area of Civil Lines police station of Gaya in the early hours of September 2. Footage retrieved from CCTV cameras covering the scene of the crime revealed that a car was trying to overtake the autorickshaw driver who was not receptive to the move and tried to keep the car behind him. This angered the driver of the four-wheeler who then overtook the autorickshaw and shot at the driver, killing him instantly.
