Tamil Nadu bids tearful adieu to Sujith after toddler loses 80-hour battle with borewell

October 29, 2019 - this date will be etched in the minds and hearts of the people of Tamil Nadu forever - it was the day when the state had to bid adieu to two-year-old Sujith.

After an 80-hour-long rescue operation, at 2:30 am on Tuesday, Principal Secretary J Radhakrishnan broke news, which shattered hopes of not just Tamil Nadu but the entire nation, which was hoping that the little kid who fell into an open borewell in Manapparai, Trichy on Saturday might emerge alive.

"On October 25, Sujith fell into the borewell and we have been working hard to pull him out of it. But then at around 8:30 pm, we were informed that there is a decomposed smell coming from the well and we sent an expert doctors' team and NDRF, SDRF crack teams. They have informed us that the body is highly decomposed. We have stopped the other operations of digging," the principal secretary told media.

Doctors, NDRF and SDRF worked tirelessly for 80 hours in hopes to rescue two-year-old Sujith, before the stench of decomposed body forced them to call off the ops (PTI image)

By around 4 am, the NDRF retrieved parts of the decomposed body of the young boy. "The body was in a highly decomposed state and we extracted the body but only a few parts of the body had been retrieved. Only the major part of the body came out. There were geographical difficulties and also the weather condition was causing issues for the rescue operation," said Jitheesh TM, commander NDRF rescue operation team.

Sujith’s body was taken to the Manapparai government hospital where a post-mortem was conducted and by 7 am the body was brought to the burial ground for the last rites. Sujith had an emotional send-off by inconsolable parents and hundred of villagers from in and around the Sujith’s village who rushed to pay their last respect.

Senior AIADMK leaders C Vijayabaskar, Valarmathi, Vallamandi Natrajan and Congress Karur MP Jyothimani were also present at the spot, all through the ceremony.

"We should find a permanent solution to this crisis. In the upcoming parliamentary session, I will move a bill in this regard. There have been more than nine cases of similar deaths in the state and there might have been several cases that did not get register. Imagine what the child must have gone through in those horrific hours when he was stuck in the borewell. A tragedy like this should never happen again," said Jyothimani.

DMK chief MK Stalin, who paid a visit to the family, tweeted, "Sujith who suffered for the last four days and kept the entire country anxious has attained permanent peace. How do we console his parents? Sujith’s loss is not just the family’s loss but the loss of the entire nation. Sujith will always be remembered in our memories. There have been many who have lost their lives by falling into borewells and preventing another incident like this from happening will be the biggest tribute that we can pay to Sujith.

Sujith's family mourns his demise (PTI image)

Meanwhile, the Madras high court bench expressed concern over the demise of Sujith and said it's not just his parents but an entire nation that has lost a child. While the court observed that every individual has a sense of social responsibility to prevent incidents like these, it also pulled up Officials for not inspecting if the rules brought in by the government were being followed at the borewell dig sites.

The court also questioned the government if it has a record of the permission given to dug borewells as well as the number of borewells that are unused. It also said that appropriate compensation should be given to Sujith’s family.

As hundreds of people bid farewell to the two-year-old braveheart, the only prayer they said was that there must not be another Sujith.
