Accused wanted in Jalandhar tiffin bomb blast arrested by Ludhiana police

LUDHIANA: Accused wanted to CBI in Jalandhar tiffin bomb blast has been arrested by the Crime Investigating Agency (CIA-II) of Ludhiana commissionrate on Monday late night from Jivan Nagar of Sirsa, Haryana. According to cops, the accused had provided RDX to other accused for making bombs which was supposed to be used for killing Thakur Uday Singh, head of Namdhari Sect Sri Bhaini Sahib in December 2015. However, on the way the bomb exploded inside the car near village Dugri of Maqsudan of district Jalandhar.Following arrest of wanted accused, the CBI team also reached Ludhiana for questioning him.According to Ludhiana police the accused Ratan Dhanjal alias Chuha, 34 of Sirsa, Haryana has been arrested in a blind murder case of a 25-year-old man in Sahnewal area of Ludhiana. In that murder case of a man Saurav was found murdered in the vacant plot in village Bilga, who was allegedly given poisonous substance.Assistant commissioner of police (Detective) Surinder Mohan said that the police received secret information that the accused Ratan Dhanjal was involved in murder case of Saurav, 25 of Doraha. He was missing from from February 6, 2015 and his dead body had found from a vacant plot in Sahnewal, on February 9, 2015. The Sahnewal police had registered a murder case against unidentified accused. Following tip-off the Ludhiana police conducted raid at Jivan Nagar in Sirsa and arrested accused.The ACP added that the Dhanjal is wanted to CBI in car bomb blast case in Maqsudan of Jalandhar. In that blast a man Ajay Kumar had died while Jagmohan Singh had suffered injuries. During interrogation the accused has confessed that he had provided RDX to other accused for making bomb. Presently the case is being probed by CBI.Official added that, the CBI had already arrested Palwinder Singh alias Dimple of Delhi, Harbhej Singh of Village Jivan Nagar of Sirsa and Hardeep Singh of Bullath, while the court had declared Ratan Dhanjal and Mehnga Singh as a proclaimed offender on November 28, 2017.ACP Mohan said that the accused has confessed that after Jalandhar bomb blast, he lived in different states including Rajasthan and Maharashtra. Besides, he also took shelter at different religious places.On Tuesday the accused was presented before court and the court has remanded him one day in police custody.The investigation of Jalandhar tiffin bomb case, Murder case of Mata Chand Kaur, wife of former Namdhari head Satguru Jagjit Singh, and murder case of Namdhari leader Avtar Singh Tari are already under investigation with CBI, as the investigation agency found a link between all three cases. Importantly, last month the CBI has made first arrest of Palwinder Singh in the assassination of matriarch Chand Kaur.
