Ghaziabad: 8-year-old son at home, retd BSF constable shoots at wife, say police

According to police, Kumar took voluntary retirement from the BSF so his wife could not get any part of his salary.

A retired BSF officer allegedly shot his 30-year-old wife, while she was performing puja a day after Diwali, at her Ghaziabad residence. The couple’s eight-year-old son was in the house when the incident took place.

The woman, Pooja, was alone at home with her son with when her husband Dev Kumar allegedly barged inside and shot her. She has been referred to Subharti Hospital in Meerut and is critical, police said.

“Pooja lives in Krishna Kunj colony with her son. Husband and wife had been living separately for the past few months, allegedly because of a marital dispute. The two had an argument on Diwali as well. He went to her home afterwards and shot her from close range. The son was in the house at the time. Neighbours heard the gunshot and the child’s cries, and were alerted. They rushed her to a nearby hospital, while the accused fled the spot,” said Kashi Prasad Mishra, CO Modinagar.

According to police, the couple had been facing problems for a while now and Pooja moved out even as Kumar kept being posted in various parts of the country. Pooja eventually approached the local court and got an order to receive a part of his salary as allowance, police said.

According to police, Kumar then took voluntary retirement from service from the BSF so she could not get any part of his salary. He was last posted as a constable in the BSF J&K’s division.

Pooja went to court again and was granted a part of Kumar’s pension. For several months, the two had regular arguments over the money he was supposed to give to her.

“Their argument escalated on Diwali and he came back with a gun the next day. It appears that he stuck the barrel close to her face and pulled the trigger. The bullet hit her near the nose but missed a key area of her brain, else she would have died on the spot. We are looking at CCTV footage to ascertain his location,” said Mishra.
