Punjab: Man kills self after shooting wife, firing at son

A SWEET shop owner allegedly killed himself after shooting his wife and 14-year-old son with his licensed revolver at their home in Chatta Mohalla of Malerkotla town, Sangrur, Tuesday. While his wife died at the spot, his son survived.

Police said Vijay Jain (40) was suffering from depression and had undergone treatment. Vijay allegedly fired seven rounds with his revolver, killing his wife Asha (39). He then allegedly shot at his son Sahil before shooting himself.

According to the FIR registered by Sangrur police, the injured boy called up his grandmother Darshana Jain (64), who lived in the same colony, and asked her to rush to their home. In her statement, Darshana Jain said she rushed to her son Vijay’s home and saw her daughter-in-law’s body in the bedroom on the ground floor. She then went to the first floor where Vijay and Sahil were lying injured.

Both were rushed to Dayanand Medical College and Hospital (DMCH), Ludhiana, where Vijay died. Police said Sahil was admitted in the ICU after undergoing surgery and his condition is stable.

Malerkotla DSP Sumit Sood said that according to family members, Vijay was a patient of depression. “He owned a sweet shop and had no financial problems. We have not recovered any written note but according to the family, he was severely depressed for the past few years. On Tuesday, at around 4 am, he shot his wife. Then he targeted his son and then himself,” he added.

Inspector Deep Inder Pal Singh, SHO, Malerkotla City-2 police station, said Vijay shot his wife, son and himself in the chest. “Autopsy reports are awaited. According to the family, he often used to say things like ‘I will kill myself’ and that ‘if he kills himself no one will be left to take care of his family’ etc. No reason for his depression has come out but he was a patient and had undergone treatment,” he added.

Police has filed FIR for murder and attempt to murder against Vijay Jain on statement of his mother at Malerkotla city-2 police station.
