Delhi man held for trying to kidnap DU student a serial molester: Cops

Police are conducting raids to nab his two associates. Police said Sharma has confessed to allegedly molesting around 50 girls. (Representational Image)

A 23-year-old man has been arrested for allegedly raping a minor girl after kidnapping her in his autorickshaw. The incident took place in the Central Range on September 17.

Yog Dutt Sharma was arrested on October 26 after a Delhi University student lodged an FIR, alleging that she was molested by him. She also alleged that he tried to kidnap her in his auto. During questioning, police found he had allegedly raped the minor.

Police are conducting raids to nab his two associates. Police said Sharma has confessed to allegedly molesting around 50 girls. While police have not found any related complaints, they said he has several robbery cases registered against him.

“On October 21, a DU student said she was going towards a Metro station when an auto driver asked if she wanted a drop. When she refused, the driver tried to pull her inside the auto. She managed to escape after raising an alarm… the accused also fled,” said a senior police officer.

Using CCTV footage and technical surveillance, police traced the accused and arrested him Saturday. During questioning, he revealed he had allegedly molested around 50 girls. Suspicious of his modus-operandi, they matched the case details with the rape case.

“The minor girl was called and she identified the accused. The accused initially tried to mislead police, but he finally admitted to his crime. He disclosed that the girl boarded his share auto… his associates were in the vehicle, posing as passengers. The accused then took her to an isolated area and allegedly raped her. The girl was scared and did not tell her parents, as he had threatened her with dire consequences. She finally told her mother, who informed police,” the officer said.

The accused was produced before a Delhi court and sent to 14-day judicial custody.
