Dr. Kafeel Khan visits Hyderabad, alleges victimization of Dalits, Muslims in health sector

Hyderabad: Dr. Kafeel Khan who was victimized by UP Govt. has started countrywide campaign. As a part of his mission, Dr. Khan visited Hyderabad. He also called on Mr. Zahid Ali Khan, Editor of Siasat Urdu Daily and Mr. Ameer Ali Khan, News Editor of Siasat Urdu Daily yesterday.

It may be mentioned that Dr. Kafeel Khan was arrested by UP Govt. for alleged negligence of his duties in the hospital and he was kept in jail for nine months. It was alleged that due to shortage of oxygen, children died in Govt. hospital.

Giving the details of the allegations, Dr. Khan told that BSF had sent oxygen cylinders to the hospital with their staff but Govt. denies it. He said that he would approach Allahabad High Court next week against his suspension. He also mentioned that the miscreants who attacked his brother have not been arrested even after the lapse of 8 months.

It may be recalled that Dr. Kafeel Khan’s younger brother, Kashif Jameel was shot at. He was seriously injured after receiving three bullets.

Dr. Khan has started a foundation and wants to establish a 500 bed hospital in Gorakpur. He mentioned that he has drafted a report in which he has suggested certain recommendations. He intends to send these recommendations to major political parties before 2019 elections. In his recommendations, he has requested Central Govt. to enhance health budget from Rs. 60000 crore to 120000 crore and also to fill up vacant post in Health Dept. He alleged that even today, Dalits and Muslims are being targeted in health sector. He said that 81% of the doctors are associated with the private sector.

Quoting the report of WHO, he pointed out that there should be one doctor for every 1000 person whereas in the country there is one doctor for every 10000 people. He termed ‘Ayushman Bharat’ a deception and bundle of lies. Govt. intends to provide insurance for 10000 families of Rs. 5 lakh for each family. It is not possible to cover this insurance program for 50 crore people.

He said that after his release from jail, the parents of the children who have died in BRD Hospital welcomed him and supported his mission.

No evidence of medical negligence against Dr Kafeel Khan: Allahabad HC

There was “no material on record, which may establish medical negligence”, said the Allahabad High Court while granting bail to Dr Kafeel Ahmed Khan in connection with the death of over 60 infants at Gorakhpur’s BRD Medical College Hospital.

“…there is no material on record, which may establish medical negligence against the applicant individually. This is quite apart from the fact that no inquiry was undertaken or initiated,” Justice Yashwant Verma said in a detailed order, according to the report published in The Indian Express.

The kids had allegedly suffocated to death due to disruption in the oxygen supply in August 2017.

The court cited Yogi Adityanath government’s affidavit submission as the primary reason for granting bail to Dr Kafeel.

“…the (UP) State in its affidavit and more particularly in paragraph 16 thereof does not attribute the deaths to the shortage of oxygen,” Justice Yashwant Sinha said in a detailed order.

In another significant point, the court said that Dr. Khan was kept in jail even as he was “not stated to be part of the tendering process that resulted in the enlistment of the entity, which was charged with the supply of oxygen.”

“The applicant has admittedly been in custody for 7 months. Learned AGA (Additional Government Advocate) stated that no aspect of the investigation remains outstanding. This clearly obviates the need for the continued custody of the applicant (Dr. Khan). The applicant admittedly is a medical practitioner, a government employee with no prior criminal history,” it said.

The court said that the State Government in its affidavit also “does not refer to any evidence which may establish or even tend to indicate that the applicant has tried to influence witnesses or to tamper with the evidence.”

Dr Khan, a paediatrician, in charge of the acute encephalitis syndrome ward was initially hailed as a hero, but later faced charges which fall under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.

[source_without_link]Siasat News[/source_without_link]
