Pakistan Minister Issues Threat: 'Countries Backing India On Kashmir Will Be Hit By Missile'

New Delhi:

A Pakistan minister has threatened any country that will support India over the Kashmir issue with 'missile attack'. Pakistan Federal Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit Baltistan Ali Amin Gandapur had said that any country which will not stand with Pakistan over Kashmir will be taken as 'enemy' and hit with missiles.

"If tensions with India rise on Kashmir, Pakistan will be compelled to go to war. Those countries backing India and not Pakistan (over Kashmir) will be considered our enemy and a missile will be fired at India and those nations supporting it," Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit Baltistan Ali Amin Gandapur said at an event on Tuesday.

Pakistan-based journalist Naila Inayat tweeted a part of the video in which the minister is seen making the inflammatory remarks. Gandapur’s statement went viral soon.

Minister for Kashmir Affairs, Gandapur is back and how: "any country that will not stand with Pakistan over Kashmir will be considered our enemy and missiles will be fired at them as well, in case of war with India."

I hope Trump received the message. pic.twitter.com/lcwuZwJiNq — Naila Inayat à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤²à¤¾ à¤‡à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤¤ (@nailainayat) October 29, 2019

Pakistan has been trying to raise the Kashmir issue at international level but has no got any support over the matter. Islamabad has unilaterally downgraded bilateral ties afterNew Delhi's move to abrogate special status of Jammu and Kashmir.

Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, in his UNGA speech had warned of a nuclear war breaking out over Kashmir.

Meanwhile, five migrant labourers from West Bengal were killed and another injured in a terrorist attack in Kulgam district of Kashmir on Tuesday evening.

The attack happened on a day a delegation of parliamentarians from the European Union is visiting Kashmir to talk to locals and ask them about their experience after the abrogation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 on August 5.

Earlier in the day, suspected terrorists opened fire on CRPF personnel deployed at a school where a Class 10 examination was underway at Drabgam in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday.

Since the Centre's decision on Article 370, terrorists have been targeting truckers and labourers, mainly who have come to the Valley from outside Kashmir.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
