Sena Questions Centre Over Visit By European Lawmakers To Kashmir

Amid the power tussle between the BJP and Shiv Sena over chief minister's post in Maharashtra, the Shiv Sena's mouthpiece Saamna which has been targetting the BJP has published an ambivalent column about the Centre's decision to allow European Parliamentarians to visit Kashmir. While praising PM Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah for the abrogation of Article 370 in Kashmir, the editorial questioned the need for the European lawmakers' delegation to visit the region saying that it was akin to internationalising Kashmir, and hoped the situation in the region remains normal.

READ | Maharashtra elections: Shiv Sena considering more options to form govt

Allowing European lawmakers to visit Kashmir akin to internationalising issue

The Shiv Sena criticised the decision of having the European lawmakers' group visit Kashmir saying that since India's stance had gained worldwide acceptance what was the need to invite the delegation to the region. The party said it would hurt India's position that Kashmir is an internal matter and not an international issue. The party said that those opposing Kashmir's integration with India would try to use this event to further their argument in internationalising the issue.

READ | Nawab Malik: BJP-Shiv Sena alliance should respect people's mandate

Praise for PM Modi-Amit Shah

Besides criticism over the visit of a European delegation visit to Kashmir, the party had words of praise for the Centre for abrogating Article 370. It also said that PM Modi had already won the battle for Kashmir in relation to terrorism backed by Pakistan. The article also said that Home Minister Amit Shah is capable to respond to those who asked how Indian Opposition weren't allowed to visit Kashmir but the same was allowed for the European lawmakers' delegation.

READ | Pak minister says nations backing India over Kashmir will be targetted

BJP-Shiv Sena bicker over Saamna column

Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut on Tuesday hit out at Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis for claiming the party mouthpiece 'Saamna', of which the former is executive editor, was trying to derail talks on formation of the next government. Speaking to reporters earlier in the day, Fadnavis expressed resentment over editorials in 'Saamana' against the BJP. "The paper's role is to derail the talks. Will the paper take a hard stand on the Congress-NCP?" the CM had asked. Hitting back, Raut said, "Saamna wrote against the Congress-NCP and that is why the BJP-led govt came to power in 2014. I am putting forth the Shiv Sena's stand," Raut said.

READ | Pak minister says nation backing India over Kashmir will be targetted
