45 Sena MLAs want to back us: BJP MP

editorial@tribune.com

Mumbai, October 29

Around 45 newly elected Shiv Sena MLAs in Maharashtra are keen on government formation in the state by joining hands with the BJP and want Devendra Fadnavis as the Chief Minister, BJP’s associate MP in the Rajya Sabha, Sanjay Kakade, claimed on Tuesday.

Amid the ongoing tussle between the ruling allies over forming the next state government, Kakade, while speaking to a television channel, also said he did not think that the Shiv Sena would sit in the Opposition.

The BJP and the Sena, which won 105 and 56 seats, respectively, in the just concluded state Assembly polls, are locked in a bitter battle over sharing of power.

“Out of 56, there are 45 MLAs who have expressed their interest in government formation along with the BJP. They are calling and asking us to induct them into the government,” Kakade told the TV channel.

He said the Sena MLAs have been saying “do whatever, but we want to be part of the government with BJP”.

“There are some 45 MLAs of the Shiv Sena who wish that their party should go with the BJP and an alliance government should be formed as soon as possible with Devendra Fadnavis as the Chief Minister,” said Kakade.

He said these 45 MLAs will convince Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray to form an alliance government under the leadership of Fadnavis.

“All these Shiv Sena MLAs, among whom some are ministers, are used to being in power and they want to remain in power. I am sure that Thackeray will agree with some more portfolios and the alliance government will form with Fadanvis as the Chief Minister,” he said.

He said Congress president Sonia Gandhi and NCP chief Sharad Pawar have already clarified that they have been mandated to sit in the Opposition and in such a condition, the Shiv Sena does not have any other option but to be a part of the alliance with BJP.

When contacted, Kakade said the 45 MLAs were of the opinion that the BJP and Sena should join hands for government formation.

As the BJP’s tally went down in the October 21 state Assembly elections, compared to its 2014 performance, the Sena has been raising pitch for “equal sharing” of power. — PTI

War of words over ‘Saamana’

The paper’s (Saamana) role is to derail the talks. Will the paper take a hard stand on the Congress-NCP? Devendra Fadnavis, Maharashtra CM

Saamana wrote against the Congress-NCP and that is why the BJP-led government came to power in 2014. Sanjay Raut, Sena leader

Cong again asks sena to come forward

Senior Congress leader Prithviraj Chavan on Tuesday said his party would “consider” any “concrete” proposal on government formation from the Shiv Sena, which is locked in a bitter tussle with the BJP over sharing of power. Chavan said any proposal from the Sena must be for both the Congress and the NCP.
