Salman Khan to begin shooting for Radhe next week – more details inside

Salman Khan to begin shooting for Radhe next week at the Mehboob Studios | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Radhe - Your Most Wanted Bhai will hit the theatres on Eid next year Salman Khan will commence its shooting on November 4 at the Mehboob Studios

With every Eid, Salman Khan brings a new blockbuster. The actor has a not-so-secret obsession with Eid and he has been constantly bringing new films during the festive days of Eid. From Wanted in 2009 to Bharat in 2019 and now Radhe in 2020, Salman has released films after films on Eid for his fans.

Salman's fandom is always anticipating for his film's release on Eid. And, next year's announcement for Eid has come with a banger. In 2020, the actor will be seen in the role of Radhe who is quoted as the most wanted bhai. The film will be directed by Prabhu Deva and it is produced by Salman Khan, Sohail Khan and Atul Agnihotri under the banner Salman Khan Films.

The actor will begin shooting for the film on November 4 at the Mehboob Studios which will go on for a month. After which, he will begin promotions for Dabangg3.

Atul Mohan has revealed some inside details of Salman's shoot schedule and the upcoming film. In his tweet, he mentioned that Salman will begin shooting for his upcoming film Radhe next week with a month-long stint at Mehboob Studios. After completing this schedule, Salman will be busy promoting Dabangg3 before leaving for a foreign land to shoot for a few songs.

#Exclusive #SalmanKhan will begin shoot of #Radhe next week with a month long stint at Mehboob Studios. After completing this schedule, Salman will be busy promoting #Dabangg3 before leaving for a foreign land to shoot few songs. #Radhe #YourMostWantedBhai arrives #Eid2020 pic.twitter.com/X0GYVjIzCr — Atul Mohan (@atulmohanhere) October 29, 2019

The 53-year-old actor is currently hosting Bigg Boss season 13 on television. The show has been in controversy since it first aired on television due to various factors. Its 'Bed Friends Forever' concept had also received backlash.

Meanwhile, Dabangg3 trailer recently released on YouTube and the film will release on December 20. The trailer of the film received mixed reviews from fans and critics.

Here is the trailer of Dabangg 3:

For more news and updates, stay connected to Zoomtv.com and follow us on Twitter, Instagram and Facebook at @Zoomtv.
