Will strip 5 officers of medals: Centre

Central deputation of 5 IPS officers may be blocked

NEW DELHI/KOLKATA: A new front has been opened in the Centre-versus-state battle, with the ministry of home affairs all set to take “punitive action” against five senior IPS officers posted in Bengal The home ministry has accused state director-general of police Virendra, additional DG (security) Vineet Kumar Goyal, additional DG (law and order) Anuj Sharma, Salt Lake commissioner of police Gyanwant Singh and Kolkata Police additional commissioner Supratim Sarkar of “taking part in the dharna” convened by Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee to protest against last Sunday’s CBI ’s “special operation” at city police commissioner Rajeev Kumar’s residence.The home ministry move drew an immediate reaction from the Bengal government, with CM Banerjee strongly refuting the Centre’s charges. “These officers are tasked with (the state’s) security. They met me for 10 minutes on Sunday evening to brief me and left that night itself. They never stepped on the dharna dais on Monday and Tuesday,” she said on Thursday, which was corroborated by others who were present at the Esplanade site from Sunday night to Tuesday evening (when Banerjee withdrew the agitation).Central officials said the “action” against the five senior cops might include stripping them of awards they won for meritorious service during their career, barring them from seeking deputation at the centre for a certain period and removing their names from the centre’s empanelled seniority list.The MHA is expected to take similar action against city police chief Kumar, against whom it has also sought disciplinary action.Banerjee made light of the MHA “threats”. “I will give Bangabibhusan (the state’s highest award) to these officers if the centre takes back their medals. I will send a kawra chithi (strongly worded letter) if they send me one,” she told reporters on the sidelines of the Bengal Global Business Summit on Thursday afternoon.The home ministry is also believed to have asked the Bengal government to take action against them for alleged violation of All-India Service Rules. In a clause-by-clause communication on Tuesday, the ministry said every member of the service shall at all times “maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and do nothing unbecoming of a member of the service”. The Bengal government has denied receiving any such letter.Officials here said on Thursday that the MHA action smacked of “political vendetta”. “This violates the principles of natural justice. The chief minister is also the state home minister and these officers report to her. There is no rule that spells out that a police officer will brief their superiors only at designated places,” an official said.“The CM also gets Z-plus security cover. A pre-budget cabinet meeting was due at the Esplanade site on Monday morning, which came with its security and traffic implications. The state budget also has a significant police component. And one of the officers named on Thursday, incidentally, is tasked with CM’s security,” the official added.State home secretary Atri Bhattacharya refused to comment on Thursday’s developments. The five officers, too, refused to speak. But their colleagues said they were at Esplanade in their official capacity.Another official insisted not even one officer had been on the dais during the entire tenure. “The footage will show that no one was sitting beside the CM on the dais. These officers left the spot on Sunday once the entire area was sanitised and all anti-terror checks were carried out,” a senior home department official said. “They never stepped on the dharna dais even on Monday and Tuesday,” he added.
