Karnataka lottery scam: Marketing professional arrested for duping people in the name of expensive gifts

The people realised that they were duped when they opened the gift boxes and found cheap vegetable cutters. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man arrested for duping people in the name of offering expensive gifts in lucky draw Accused identified as Satish P ran two call centres Victims realised they were cheated after finding vegetable cutters in gift boxes

Bengaluru: A 33-year-old marketing professional has been arrested for allegedly duping people in the name of running a lottery scheme. The arrest was made by Ramanagara police.

The accused has been identified as Satish P, who is a resident in Ivarapalli village of Begapalli taluk in Chikkaballapura.

According to a report, the accused ran two call centres where telecallers employed by him would call people promising them expensive gifts after a lucky draw.

The accused had hired 18 women to work at the call centre and operated a firm called Pristine Smart Shoppe. Satish had another call centre at Mysuru where he employed five more women.

The modus operandi of the accused included dialling random numbers and offering costly gifts like mobile phones in a lucky draw.

The victims were informed that they would get their gifts at local post offices by paying Goods and Services Tax (GST) and postal charges.

The people realised that they were duped when they opened the gift boxes and found cheap vegetable cutters. The victims were from various parts of the state.

"In the past, the accused worked as a telecaller for herbal product companies," the reported quoted Anoop Shetty, Superintendent of Police (SP) Ramanagara.

The police raided Satish's godown and call centre in Sahakarnagar area of Bengaluru following multiple complaints of cheating.

The cops have seized an SUV, gifts boxes, vegetable cutters, 27 mobile phones, laptop, a computer used by call centre employees.

Police say an investigation is underway in the case and few more arrests are likely in the case. Police officials say they may also arrest cell centre employees following further investigation.

Man arrested for duping 8 people on pretext of govt jobs in Railways, BHEL

In a similar incident on October 22, a 47-year-old man was arrested from New Delhi's Paharganj for allegedly duping 8 people of Rs 62 lakh on the pretext of providing them with a government job.

Delhi Police DCP Jasmeet Singh said the accused, Parveen Srivastav, had duped victims on the pretext of providing jobs in Railways and Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd.

Police had recovered one laptop, one pen drive, and forged documents seized from his possession.

The accused was arrested following a complaint by a Gautam Buddh Nagar resident, Neeraj Gautam. The victim said the accused Parveen Srivastav lured him and others in providing the job.
