Not Nazi Lovers, Not Here To Meddle In Indian Politics: EU Delegation Responds To Controversy

Response to Owaisi’s “Nazi” remark: On Kashmir: “The Kashmir visit has been a very good experience”, an EU MP representing the 23-member delegation said. “We are not here for political interference. We are here for fact-finding," he said while adding that Kashmir is an internal matter of the country. “Our motive was to interact with common people. We spoke to them. The people of Kashmir want to grow on the path of development. They want schools and hospitals,” said another EU MP. “Some people told us that the Centre gives enough funds for Kashmir, but not all of it reaches them due to prevailing corruption in the system,” noted another MP. They said that Kashmir is moving on towards peace and development. Terrorism: The MEPs expressed grief over the terror attack in Kulgam in which five labourers from West Bengal were killed. They said that terrorism is a global problem. “India is a peaceful nation. It has been a victim of several terror attacks. But terrorism can never finish a country,” they said. We support India to find the best possible solution to deal with terrorism, they stated. Stressing that terrorism is now a world problem, one of the members, Thierry Mariani said he did not want Kashmir to become a "second Afghanistan." Also Watch: Key Highlights of EU Delegations' press conference on Kashmir

Responding to the political row over their Kashmir visit, the European Union MPs said on Wednesday that they are not Nazis or Hitler supporters and have nothing to do with Indian politics. Criticising terrorism in the region, they stated that they do not want Kashmir to be another Afghanistan. Four MPs from the European Union delegation visiting India, addressed the media in a conference in Jammu and Kashmir, and briefed about the purpose of their visit. Refuting all the allegations made by AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi and other opposition parties, the Members of European Parliament said that their visit became the target of a false propaganda. “We are here to collect facts and information on Jammu and Kashmir, a lot was being said about it, not depending upon rumours, we have come to seek ground reality here, we have nothing to do with Indian politics,” said an EU MP.
