All Help To Families Of 5 Workers Killed In Kashmir: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee

New Delhi:

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday said that all help will be extended to the families of the five workers from Murshidabad district who were killed in terror attacks in Kashmir.



Describing the killings as brutal, Banerjee expressed her shock and grief over the incident. "We are shocked and deeply saddened at the brutal killings in Kashmir. Five workers from Murshidabad lost their lives. Words will not take away the grief of the families of the deceased," Banerjee wrote on her Twitter handle.

In a most unfortunate incident in Kashmir yesterday, five innocent labourers were brutally killed in a pre planned manner.

We are totally shocked!

Presently there are no political activities in Kashmir and entire law and order is with the Government of India.(1/3) — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) October 30, 2019

We, therefore, demand a strong investigation so that the real truth comes out. We are deputing Shri Sanjay Singh ADG South Bengal to find out details from them.(2/3) — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) October 30, 2019

Our party MPs and MLAs have reached Murshidabad to meet the family members of victims.

Our government is providing Rs Five lakh each to the victim’s family and render all assistance to them.(3/3) — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) October 30, 2019



"All help will be extended to the families in this tragic situation," she added. Five labourers, hailing from West Bengals Murshidabad district, were killed in a terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Kulgam district on Tuesday.

On Tuesday, five migrant labourers from West Bengal were shot dead by terrorists in Kulgam district of south Kashmir. Another labourer was critically injured by the terrorists, police said.



All the victims hailed from Murshidabad district of West Bengal, the police said. The attack happened on a day a delegation of parliamentarians from the European Union is visiting Kashmir to talk to locals and ask them about their experience after the abrogation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 of the Constitution in August.



Since the Centre's decision on Article 370, terrorists have been targeting truckers and labourers, mainly who have come to the Valley from outside Kashmir.



On Monday, a trucker from Udhampur district was killed by militants in Anantnag, police said. This was the fourth truck driver to be killed by militants since August 5.



On October 24, terrorists killed two non-Kashmiri truck drivers in Shopian district. On October 14, two terrorists, including a suspected Pakistani national, shot dead the driver of a truck having Rajasthan registration number and assaulted an orchard owner in Shopian district. The driver was identified as Sharief Khan.



Two days later, Punjab-based apple trader Charanjeet Singh was killed and Sanjeev injured when terrorists attacked them in Shopian district.

(With PTI Inputs)
