Ayodhya: When Mulayam Singh Yadav ordered police firing on karsevaks heading to Babri Masjid

Mulayam Singh Yadav was the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh in 1990, when the BJP, VHP and the RSS had given a call for karseva in Ayodhya. With karsevaks marching towards Babri Masjid, he ordered the police to open fire. (Photo: India Today Archives)

Year 1990 seems like a distant past. But two incidents of the year continue to impact Indian society and politics even today. First was rolling out of the Mandal Commission report that the previous governments had virtually deposited in cold storage. The second came as a reaction to it - but with a past link - in the form of aggressive campaign for a Ram temple in Ayodhya at the site of the Babri Masjid.

Though the campaign for a Ram temple in Ayodhya was underway since a 1986 resolution of the RSS Pratinidhi Sabha, it gathered momentum after then BJP president LK Advani decided to lead a nation-wide rath yatra.

The RSS-BJP had viewed the VP Singh government's Mandal Commission move - that gave caste-based reservation to OBCs in jobs - as an attempt to divide Hindu society and they had declared Hindu unity as their social objective. Mandal Commission report was implemented in August and Ram temple campaign accelerated in October that year.

VP Singh government was on shaky ground at the Centre due to infighting in the ruling Janata Dal. In Uttar Pradesh, Mulayam Singh Yadav of the same party was the chief minister. The Janata Dal was vehemently against the Aydohya campaign by the RSS, the BJP and the VHP.

"Let them try and enter Ayodhya. We will teach them the meaning of law. No masjid will be broken." Mulayam Singh Yadav had declared this in October 1990, opposing the rath yatra of LK Advani.

LK Advani could not enter Ayodhya as he was arrested in Bihar by Lalu Prasad government of the Janata Dal. But the Ayodhya campaign had seen a huge gathering of karsevaks (volunteers) in the Uttar Pradesh city.

As they tried to march towards the Babri Masjid - intention not clearly declared - on October 30, a clash erupted between the karsevaks and the police. October 30 was the "D-Day of the karseva". The organisers -- the VHP, the RSS and the BJP - wanted a Ram temple at the site of Babri Masjid but it was not yet clear what the karsevaks would do to the mosque.

On the morning of October 30, the police had barricaded about 1.5 km-long pathway to the Babri Masjid. Ayodhya was in an unprecedented security cordon. Curfew had been imposed. Yet, sadhus and karsevaks marched towards the structure.

By noon, police received orders from then Chief Minister Mulayam Singh Yadav to open fire at the karsevaks. The firing led to chaos and stampede. Police chased down the karsevaks in the streets of Ayodhya.

Another round of clash erupted on November 2, when the karsevaks came back and resumed their march towards the Babri Masjid adopting a different tactic.

The karsevaks comprising also of women and elderly people would touch the feet of the security personnel deployed to prevent the demonstrators from marching ahead. Stunned by feet-touching gestures - two days after the firing incident - the security personnel would step back and the karsevaks would move forward to do a repeat.

The security people saw through the tactic and warned them. The karsevaks would not be deterred. The security forces responded by opening fire the second time in three days.

Many died in the clashes. Official records showed 17 deaths but the BJP put the death toll higher. Among the dead were Kothari brothers - Ram and Sharad - from Kolkata. They were seen atop the Babri Masjid on October 30 holding saffron flag.

Their bodies were found on November 2 in a lane near the Hanuman Garhi temple, which is in the vicinity of the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid site. It was alleged that police had dragged them out of a house and killed them.

In 2017, addressing his supporters on his 79th birthday, Mulayam Singh Yadav justified his order to open fire at kar sevaks. He told his supporters that he had a discussion with Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the late BJP leader and the prime minister of the country, over the number of deaths in the police firing.

While Vajpayee claimed 56 deaths, Mulayam Singh Yadav put the death toll at 28. On another occasion, Mulayam Singh Yadav said it was a "painful" decision to open fire but was taken in the "interest" of the country.
