'Trying to remove chapter on Tipu Sultan from textbooks': Karnataka CM to TNM

'Trying to remove chapter on Tipu Sultan from textbooks': Karnataka CM to TNM

Madikeri MLA Apachu Ranjan has written to the government asking for an order to remove the chapter from history textbooks.

news Crime

Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa on Wednesday said that the state government is trying its to remove material related to Tipu Sultan from middle school history text books.

Speaking to TNM, Yediyurappa said, “I am against Tipu Sultan and I am against Tipu Jayanthi. Our government will not allow the celebration of Tipu Jayanthi. We are trying everything we can to remove Tipu Sultan from school textbooks.”

Yediyurappa’s statement comes two days after Karnataka Minister for Primary and Secondary Education Suresh Kumar released a statement regarding the formation of a committee to look into the issue.

Controversy erupted over the issue of removing a chapter on Tipu Sultan from school textbooks when Madikeri MLA Apachu Ranjan wrote a letter to Minister Suresh Kumar, asking him to issue an order to remove the chapter from history textbooks.

“Tipu Sultan was concerned about expanding his kingdom and his religion but he has not fought for the freedom (of the country). We cannot call him a freedom fighter. He supported the French and persecuted Kodavas in Coorg (now Kodagu) and Christians in Mangalore (now Mangaluru),” Apchu Ranjan’s letter stated.

Apachu alleges that Tipu converted tens of thousands of Christians to Islam in Mangaluru, and questioned how he could be called a freedom fighter. In the letter, Apachu also alleges that Tipu was against Kannada since the language used in his kingdom was Persian.

On October 28, Suresh Kumar acknowledged Apachu Ranjan’s letter and stated that a committee comprising experts and Apachu Ranjan would be formed to determine whether the chapter on Tipu Sultan must be removed. “We will discuss the issue and come out with an answer within three days,” Suresh Kumar’s letter stated.

Tipu Sultan ruled the erstwhile Mysore Kingdom from 1782 to 1799 and was involved in multiple battles against the British East India Company for territory in modern-day south India. The BJP government decided to cancel Tipu Jayanti celebrations this year. The celebration has been held every year in November since 2015, started by the Siddaramaiah-led Congress government.

Every year since, on the days leading up to the celebration, BJP and pro-Hindu groups ran a campaign against Tipu Sultan. However, the Congress government led by then CM Siddaramaiah had continued to celebrate it.
