Article 370 internal issue, stand by India in fight against terror: EU delegation in Kashmir

By PTI

SRINAGAR: EU parliamentarians visiting Jammu and Kashmir on Wednesday termed Article 370 an internal issue of India and said they stand by the country in its fight against terrorism.

Addressing a press conference on the last day of their two-day visit to the Valley, the group of 23 members of European Parliament also condemned the killing of six labourers from West Bengal by terrorists on Tuesday.

ALSO READ| Security beefed up in Kashmir after terrorists kill five migrant labourers

"If we talk about Article 370 it is India's internal matter. What concerns us is terrorism which is a global menace and we should stand with India in fighting it. There was an unfortunate incident of the killing

of five innocent labourers by terrorists. We condemn it," said Henri Malosse from France.

The migrant labourers shot dead by terrorists in south Kashmir's Kulgam district. Five died on Tuesday and a sixth, who was seriously injured, on Wednesday. Malosse said the team got a briefing from the army and police as well as young activists and exchanged "ideas of peace".

MEP from Poland Ryszard Czarnecki said the international media coverage seems biased. "Once we go back to our countries we will inform them of what we saw," he said.

ALSO READ| Shiv Sena disapproves of European Union MPs visit to Jammu & Kashmir

Newton Dunn from the UK described the visit, aimed at getting a first-hand assessment of the situation after the revocation of the state's special status under Article 370, as an "eye-opener". "We belong to a place Europe which is peaceful after years of fighting. And we want to see India becoming the most peaceful country in the world. And for that we need to stand by India in its fight against global terrorism. This visit has been an eye opener and we would definitely advocate what we have seen on ground zero," he told reporters.

The delegation is the first high-level foreign visit to Kashmir after the August 5 decision of the Centre to revoke the state's special status and bifurcate it into two union territories, Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. Wednesday is the last day of Jammu and Kashmir as a state.

Thierry Mariani, also from France, told the media he had been to India many times and this visit was not to interfere in the internal matter of India but to get a first hand knowledge of the ground situation in Kashmir.

"Terrorists can destroy a country. I have been to Afghanistan and Syria and I have seen what terrorism has done. We stand with India in its fight against terrorism. By calling us fascists, our image has been tarnished. It's better that one should know about us properly before tarnishing our image," he said.

ALSO READ| Pak-based terror outfits planning to target forces, govt installations in Kashmir

The team originally comprised 27 parliamentarians, many from extreme right or right wing parties, but four did not travel to Kashmir and have reportedly returned to their respective countries, officials said without divulging any reason.

The team arrived here on Tuesday to a complete shutdown, blockades, stone pelting and clashes between people and security forces in several parts of the city and the Valley. Terrorists also fired at a bullet-proof, mobile bunker of the CRPF in Pulwama but there were no casualties.

ALSO READ| Rahul Gandhi questions government on European Union MPs trip to Kashmir

On Monday, the MPs met Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Delhi. While welcoming the MPs to India, he "expressed the hope that they have a fruitful visit to various parts of the country, including to Jammu and Kashmir".

"Their visit to Jammu and Kashmir should give the delegation a better understanding of the cultural and religious diversity of the region of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, apart from giving them a clear view of the development and government priorities of the region," a PMO statement said.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, who hosted a lunch for the 27 visitors, also gave them an overview of the situation in Jammu and Kashmir. A few weeks ago, a senator of the United States was denied permission to visit Kashmir.

A joint delegation of opposition MPs, including Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, undertaking a visit to Kashmir about two months ago, was not allowed to go beyond the Srinagar airport after their arrival from Delhi and were sent back to the national capital.
