EU delegation talks about its Kashmir visit, calls the visit 'eye-opener'

Srinagar

Shiv Sena

Islamophobia

Untitled Carousel EU delegation on visit to Kashmir includes far-right leaders; Opposition criticises government for political hypocrisy A group of 27 European-union parliamentary delegations were allowed to visit the region to 'see the ground reality' and to counter Pakistan's stance. Opposition leaders criticised the government for political bias as no Indian politician was invited.

Kulgam

Article 370

Pakistan post

Untitled Carousel Clashes erupt as EU delegation visits J&K to ‘assess situation’ After checking into a luxury hotel, MEPs briefed by army brass, before meeting with JD(U), BJP members and taking a shikara ride on Dal Lake.

The European-union parliamentary delegation, who was allowed to visit Kashmir, held a press conference on Wednesday morning for select journalists to inform them of what they saw in their one-day visit to the valley.The press briefing of the EU parliamentarians was facilitated by the Indian army in"We had a beautiful experience and were impressed by the beauty of Kashmir. I am glad I got to meet the people we met," said Henri Malosse at the press conference.Another MP Thierry Mariani, from France, said, "It was an excellent visit and we had fascinating meetings with representatives of civil society. We won't interfere in Indian politics. We are here only to get facts and information." The EU MPs also thanked the Indian government for its hospitality. The GoI has maintained that this is a private visit, organised by an NGO, something that has also been slammed not just by the opposition but also by the government's own allies - JD(U) andThey also said that the team got a briefing from the army and police as well as young activists about the situation in Kashmir and exchanged "ideas of peace".Addressing the many media reports and comments of Opposition leaders, one of the EU MP said that they are not Islamophobes or Nazi Lovers and they won't meddle in India's politics."It's a good sign that India has a free press. I could have been shocked by this criticism but I understood it is linked with Indian politics, which is not my concern," said Mariani."By calling us fascists, our image has been tarnished. It's better that one should know about us properly before tarnishing our image," he further added, referring to the media reports that said the delegation included a large number of MPs who belonged to right-wing and extreme right-wing parties.AIMIM chief Asauddin Owaisi on Tuesday also had tweeted saying the MEP's suffer fromand are Nazi lovers.EU parliamentarians also condemned the killing of five labourers shot dead by terrorists in, South Kashmir yesterday (October 29)."If we talk about, it is India's internal matter. What concerns us is terrorism which is a global menace and we should stand with India in fighting it. There was an unfortunate incident of killing of five innocent labourers by terrorists. We condemn it,' said Malosse.EU delegation also slammedthe visit. "Innocents are being targeted", said an EU representative in the media briefing.The MPs said that they want India and Pakistan to resolve their issues by dialogue only, as violence will achieve nothing. "Terrorism is not just in Kashmir, it's a global problem," said one of the MPs."India is a peaceful country and Europe and India have close connections. We had fascinating meetings with representatives of civil society. One person told me that there was too much corruption. It’s been an excellent visit and interaction," said an MP sharing his experience on the visit.On their interaction with locals, they said, "We are Indian citizens and we want to be treated like other citizens in the country ... we want development in Kashmir like other parts of the country, the locals told us."The team of 27 arrived here on Tuesday to a complete shutdown, stone-pelting and clashes between people and security forces in several parts of the city and the Valley.Speaking to ANI, Nicolaus Fest, European Union MP said, "I think if you let in European Union parliamentarians, you should also let in opposition politicians from India. So there is some kind of disbalance, the government should somehow address it."(with inputs from agencies and Anil Raina)
