EU MPs’ delegation in Kashmir amid complete shutdown, clashes

EU MPs’ delegation in Kashmir amid complete shutdown, clashes

Meets army, panches, sarpanches, some others, does boating in Dal

SRINAGAR, Oct 29: Amid tight security cover, complete shutdown, protests and clashes in a number of areas, a delegation of 23 European Union (EU) MPs, arrived here on a two day visit to “asses the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.”

Soon after their arrival, they visited the headquarter of army’s 15 corps, where top brass of army and other security agencies briefed them about the security situation on borders and hinterland and Pakistan’s continuous support to “cross border terrorism”, official said. Army hosted lunch for them.

After lunch, the EU MPs, who are mostly from extreme right wing and right wing groups, started meeting delegations in a local hotel. The delegations included panches, sarpanch, municipal councilors and some young boys and girls. BJP leaders also met the EU MPs. As per reports the delegation met around 40 to 50 people, who had come in various delegations. Reports added that the meetings of EU MPs here were organized by government machinery and only those who support centre’s move to abrogate articles 370 and 35 A and convert J&K state into two union territories were allowed to meet them.

The common people, leadership of main stream parties including National Conference, PDP, and Congress were kept away from the visiting delegation. Some leaders and workers of these parties said they wanted to meet the EU MPS and brief them about the ground situation but were not provided a chance. “ We were not told about the visit and not provided information as how to meet the delegation. We also wanted to approach the government to arrange meetings of EU delegation with our detained leaders. But that too was not possible, “said a leader.

The EU MPs did not meet the three detained former chief minister Dr Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti. Farooq, booked under PSA, is detained at his residence at Gupkar Road, while Omar and Mehbooba have been detained in two stated owned guest houses, converted into sub jails.

Talking to reporters a EU MP, Hermann Tertsh from Spain, said,” We are conscious that we are being kept away from some people and allowed to meet some people. But it is a good occasion to listen to some views.”

He added that it is an organized visit and “ we are also conscious of the conditions we are travelling in.”

In the late afternoon, the EU MPS enjoyed boating in Dal lake amid tight security cover. They were scheduled to meet the governor Satya Pal Malik in the evening.

Earlier, a convoy of security vehicles escorted the MPs, who were travelling in bullet-proof jeeps, from the airport to their hotel where a traditional Kashmiri welcome awaited them.

There was a complete shutdown in the city and a number of people were injured in numerous clashes between protesters and security forces in various parts of the Valley and in Srinagar, officials said.

People put up blockades in at least five different places in Srinagar, including Downtown Srinagar and 90 Feet Road. Shops and business establishments were closed and transport off the roads due to the clashes.

Vendors, who had been setting up their stall over the past weeks, also did not turn up today, officials said. However, board examinations for Class 10 were held on schedule with worried parents waiting outside exam halls for their children.

Because of the clashes the movement of private vehicles was also affected and so was the attendance in government offices.

The 23 EU MPs are the first high-level foreign visitors to Kashmir after the August 5 decision of the Centre to revoke Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 and bifurcate the state into the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

The team originally comprised 27 parliamentarians, many from extreme right or right wing parties, but four did not travel to Kashmir and have reportedly returned to their respective countries, officials said without divulging any reason.

On Monday, the members of the European Parliament met Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Delhi. While welcoming the MPs to India, he "expressed the hope that they have a fruitful visit to various parts of the country, including to Jammu and Kashmir".

"Their visit to Jammu and Kashmir should give the delegation a better understanding of the cultural and religious diversity of the region of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, apart from giving them a clear view of the development and government priorities of the region," a PMO statement said.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, who hosted a lunch for the 27 visitors, also gave them an overview of the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

A few weeks ago, a senator of the United States was denied permission to visit Kashmir.

A joint delegation of opposition MPs, including Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, undertaking a visit to Kashmir about two months ago, was not allowed to go beyond the Srinagar airport after their arrival from Delhi and were sent back to the national capital.
