Vijay Deverakonda to team up with Majili director Shiva Nirvana

Actor Vijay Deverakonda’s first production venture Meeku Mathrame Cheptha, having director-turned-actor Tharun Bhascker Dhaassyam, Abhinav Gomatam, Vani Bhojan, Avantika Mishra, Anasuya Bharadwaj, Pavani Gangireddy, Naveen George Thomas in major roles is releasing on November 1. Touted to be a hilarious roller-coaster, the film had its pre-release event on Tuesday in Hyderabad.

Apart from the team of Meeku Mathrame Cheptha, the pre-release event was attended by the directors and producers of Vijay Deverakonda’s previous and upcoming films as well. Interestingly, the pre-release event had also become a stage to spill the beans about Vijay Deverakonda’s upcoming projects.

It’s already known that Deverakonda is going to begin the shoot of his new film Fighter under the direction of Puri Jagannadh from January onwards. Charmme Kaur, who is co-producing Fighter along with Puri, was also present at the pre-release event as one of the chief guests. Conveying her wishes to the Meeku Mathrame Cheptha team in her speech, she said, “Hello, all the rowdies here, how are you? So, Meeku Mathrame Cheptha (I will only tell you)! Fighter is going to start (its shooting) very soon. The script has come out kickass and the training for our VD (Vijay Deverakonda) has started in a full-fledged mode. You are going to see VD in a new avatar.”

When Dear Comrade was released, the speculations had been rife on Vijay Deverakonda’s future projects. One such project was of Majili director Shiva Nirvana. And now it seems the film will finally see the light of the day. Shiva Nirvana himself revealed the news in his speech at the pre-release event. He said, “I have been traveling with Vijay Deverakonda from the past two months. He always gives me positive energy with a beautiful smile whenever I meet him (smiles). I feel happy (to collaborate with him). I would like to share a secret with the permission of Vijay. I am going to do a movie with Vijay Deverakonda after Puri sir’s Fighter. Thank you, Vijay.”

On the work front, Deverakonda is waiting for the release of World Famous Lover. The intense love drama has Raashi Khanna, Catherine Tresa, Aishwarya Rajesh and Izabelle Leite as the female leads.
