Andhra Pradesh: Six Arrested for Murder of Journalist

New Delhi: Six people were arrested for the murder of journalist K. Satyanarayana in Andhra Pradesh. The 45-year-old was a reporter for the Telugu daily Andhra Jyothy and was killed on October 15 by two assailants near his home in S Annavaram village in Tuni mandal of East Godavari district.

According to The News Minute, the six accused who were arrested were identified as Venkata Ramana, Sakuru Durga, Sivaramakrishna Tataji, Gangisetty Suresh, B. Ramesh and Allad Babjee. Another accused, Dorababu, is absconding, according to police. The six arrested persons were produced in a local court and sent to judicial remand.

Based on a complaint from Satyanarayana’s family, the police had registered an FIR against Tuni YSR Congress Party MLA Dadisetti Raja. The family claimed that the attackers were backed by Raja, who is also the government’s whip. According to reports, the MLA’s name was dropped from the FIR after the police’s investigation found that he had no role in the killing.

Also Read: In Jagan’s Andhra Pradesh, Media and Journalists In Line of Fire

Reports say that the journalist had allegedly “threatened to influence authorities” and blackmailed two of the accused, Venkata Ramana and Dorababu. It was unclear what the alleged threats were or on what issue the accused were blackmailed.

According to the New Indian Express, the accused Venkata Ramana reportedly offered Rs 50,000 to the journalist to “settle an issue”. Other reports say he paid Rs 2 lakh. After paying the money, Venkata Ramana and Dorababu planned to murder the journalist, police claimed.

A month before the fatal attack on Satyanarayana, reports said that he had survived another attack. He had requested police protection, which was not provided.

Since the Y.S. Jaganmohan Reddy government came to power in May, there have been a series of attacks on journalists and curbs have been imposed on media freedom. Journalist organisations, civil society groups and opposition parties have expressed their concerns, saying the government is “intolerant” towards dissent.

As The Wire has reported, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) placed India on its list of countries with a poor record of solving murder cases of journalists. In a report released on Tuesday, CPJ ranked India 13th among a list of “world’s worst impunity offenders”, with 17 unsolved murders of journalists between September 2009 and August 2019.

The index defines murder as the “deliberate killing of a journalist in relation to his or her work”. It does not include journalists killed in combat or during ‘dangerous’ assignments. Cases are termed ‘unsolved’ if no convictions have been obtained.
