'I had lived in three continents by the age of eight'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss a story and read the latest headlines with our free email updates

A Leicester man has written a first-person account of a childhood spent in India, Africa and the UK.

By the age of eight, Bharat Patel, who now lives in Queniborough, had lived in three different continents and experienced three very different cultures.

The former ITV Central reporter and journalist has now written a book based on the colourful and often blurred memories of his childhood called Indian Takeaway.

He told LeicestershireLive: "As a journalist I did explore my culture as part of some of my work but this book is different and tells stories that reflect the time that I spent living in these places.

"This is for anyone who loves a good story."

Proceeds for the book will go to Hope Against Cancer, a research charity based in Leicester which Bharat has previously made a film for.

"I know that what they do is really important," Bharat said.

During his time as a journalist at ITV Central News, Bharat created a film about Indian independence which was shot close to where he was brought up in India.

"I realised when I was out there making the film that I come from here but I don't really know much about it so I wanted to find out more.

"I understood the local language, but felt like a foreigner in my own country. Yet still I had a strong sense of belonging, even though I had become 'English'," he said.

After piecing together all the memories that he had and interviewing family members, Bharat began writing his book.

His family members all had fascinating stories that culminated in "the strange and slightly humorous side to the book".

"I remember things like a wild boar randomly running past me in the street or an elephant walking by somewhere and it's amazing - stuff you would never see here and probably doesn't sound real," he said.

After moving the to the UK Bharat realised how different he was, as he tried to adjust to a new life as the only Asian pupil at his new school.

He said: "I adjusted, although very slowly.

"I wondered why so many people with a reasonably comfortable life with servants had come here where they didn't - it was quite common when we moved here for two or three people to have to share a room."

Bharat's book explores his journey from India to Africa and what it was like being an immigrant in Leicester during the '60s.

Indian Takeaway will be launched on November 7 but can be pre-ordered now by emailing enquiries@hopeagainstcancer.org.uk or calling 0116 2700101.
