Kulgam terror attack: Political parties condemn killing of five migrant

Cutting across their respective party lines, political parties condemned the killing of five unarmed non-Kashmiri Muslim labourers from Bengal as an act of cowardice by militants.

State BJP spokesperson retired Brigadier Anil Gupta while expressing solidarity with the families of the deceased said that the killing apart from being barbaric and inhuman is also condemnable for being against the spirit of Kashmiriyat. Referring to the spurt in killings in Kashmir during the last two weeks, he said that “what is common among them is the targeting of non-Kashmiri Muslims.”

‘Kashmir baraifaqt Kashmiri Muslims’ (Kashmir only for Kashmiri Muslims), seems to be a sinister design and underlying message behind the dastardly acts. He said, adding that this trend, unfortunately, has the support of those erstwhile power brokers whose `Sultanat’ (Fiefdom) is being ended. Pointing out that “they are not going to give up so easily’’, he said that this `Nasur’ (ulcer) may become malignant if not nipped in the bud.

Calling the trend dangerous he said it will damage the entire ecosystem of the Kashmiri society, as well as Kashmiris. ” They do not prefer to work as labourers in orchards and they have left professions like barber, mochi, mason, plumber and dhobi long back,” he said.

“Who will provide them with the services which are essential for a society to survive,” he added.

Pointing out that Modi government is determined to defeat such nefarious designs of Pakistan and usher Kashmir towards an era of peace, prosperity, progress and development, he appealed the administration to take speedy measures like a review of security grid, boosting intelligence network and intensify anti-terror operations including covert operations to eliminate terror leadership.

State Congress’ chief spokesperson Ravinder Sharma described the killings as shocking, saying that the deceased had come all along from West Bengal to earn a livelihood, but they became the victim of a senseless and cowardly act of militants.

Meanwhile, Jammu Chamber of Commerce and Industry president Rakesh Gupta also condemned the killing of innocent truckers by militants in Kashmir. Pointing out that truckers ar maintaining the lifeline for every Kashmiri despite such incidents and ground situation, he appealed all the political parties to unite in the interest of the nation “against Pakistan, which has been instigating these killings.”

Babu Singh, founder of Nature-Mankind Friendly Global Party, senior leader Jammu-Kashmir United Peace Movement and Former Minister described the killings as a “brutal and mad crime’’. This is the manifestation of cruelty and inhuman act, which cannot be justified at any angle, he said, adding that “this is not militancy but a cruel and criminal form of brutal terrorism. This cannot be considered the part of Jammu-Kashmir Movement.’” Such types of individual killings act will be proved counter productive, he said and appealed to those who are committing such inhuman acts to stop such madness.
