NIA charge-sheets two from Hyderabad for alleged ISIS links

NIA charge-sheets two from Hyderabad for alleged ISIS links

The duo was arrested by the NIA in August 2018 for propagating the banned terror outfit’s ideology in India.

news Terrorism

Two Hyderabadis have been charge-sheeted by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) for their alleged connection with an Abu Dhabi based ISIS module. The duo was arrested by the NIA in August 2018 for propagating the banned terror outfit’s ideology in India and for making efforts to build bombs.

The two, Mohammad Abdullah Basith and Mohammad Abdul Qhadeer, have now been named as the fourth and fifth accused in an NIA investigation from 2016. The duo has been in judicial custody since August 2018 when NIA officials along with the Telangana Counter Intelligence Cell (CIC) conducted raids in several parts of Old City of Hyderabad.

During the raids, the investigators found various chemicals at the residence of Qhadeer that the NIA claims are precursors for making IEDs. Qhadeer is a resident of Chandrayangutta and is said to have procured the precursor materials for making the bomb over the e-commerce website, Amazon, reported Times of India.

Abdullah Basith is a resident of Chandrayangutta and was allegedly trying to propagate the ISIS ideology. He had been in communication with ISIS handlers. The NIA accuses Basith of identifying, motivating, radicalising gullible youth to work with him in a conspiracy against India.

NIA says the duo had received funds from different sources and had made two attempts to migrate to Syria. For this purpose, Basit along with his other associates had gone to Kolkata in an attempt to migrate to Syria through Bangladesh and Afghanistan in August 2014.

They made another attempt in December 2015 where they had gone to Nagpur with the intention of going to Srinagar and then crossing over to Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) and eventually to Syria. The NIA investigation revealed that Basith had received Rs 53,202 from Adnan Hassan, the second accused, a native of Bhatkal in Karnataka. Basith had also raised funds illegally with the help of one Adnan Ahmed of Hafeezbaba Nagar for obtaining travel documents such as passport and visa to travel to Turkey and later slip into Syria and join ISIS.

The second accused in the case, Hassan was in contact with Basith, his sister and Hanan Qureshi, who are all now considered part of the ISIS module in Hyderabad, over Facebook and Telegram. The first charge sheet filed by the NIA in 2016 named accused Sheikh Azhar ul Islam from Jammu and Kashmir as A1, Hassan as A2 and Mohammed Farhan Shaikh of Thane in Maharashtra as A3.
