Bursting firecrackers with cousins, 6-year-old girl raped and murdered in Bhiwandi

Kongaon police in Bhiwandi are investigating the case (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The girl was abducted from outside her home on Monday night A passerby found her body near a pipeline not far from her home on Tuesday morning A case of rape and murder has been registered at the Kongaon police station

Mumbai: Police in Bhiwandi area of Maharashtra are currently on the lookout for unidentified suspects in connection with the alleged rape and murder of a six-year-old girl. The matter came to light on Tuesday when a passerby spotted the missing child's body near a pipeline less than 500 metres from her home.

The matter was brought to the attention of local police who arrived at the spot and cordoned off the scene of the crime. Forensic officials were called in and the child's body was shifted to Mumbai's JJ Hospital on Tuesday for a post-mortem. A case of murder and rape under sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act has been registered against unidentified suspects.

Officers with the Kongaon police station told media outlets that the girl, a student of Class 1, was lighting firecrackers outside her home with cousins on Monday. She went missing around 8:30 pm which is when the child's parents approached the police and a case of kidnapping was registered in this regard. The charges against the suspects were heightened after the discovery of the victim's body.

Senior inspector Ramesh Katkar stated that seven teams have been formed to identify and track down the culprits. One of these teams is from the Crime Branch, he added. Meanwhile, the gruesome crime has shaken the area and its residents who are demanding justice for the child. Further developments are likely to emerge in the coming days as the police intensify their search for the culprits.

The incident is similar to a case that was reported earlier this month from Thane where an ATM security guard was found guilty of raping a four-year-old child at a creche. Identified as 42-year-old Dashrath Kamble, the accused reportedly went to the creche facility in Yashodhan Nagar where the victim's mother had dropped her off. He then took her to an isolated spot on the pretext of teaching her something and sexually assaulted her.

Figures recently released by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) pertaining to crimes reported in 2017 indicated an alarming rise in the number of crimes against children. According to the data, crimes against children under IPC and Special and Local Laws (SLL) went up from 94,172 in 2015 to 1,06,958 in 2016 and 1,29,032 in 2017. Despite the central government's move to amend POCSO in order to enable it to act as a deterrent for crimes against children, the number of such crimes continues to be on the rise.
