Mumbai: 13-year-old boy held for rape, murder of five-year-old cousin

On Tuesday, the police was alerted that a body had been found near a water pipeline, around 500 m from the girl’s house.

A 13-year-old boy was detained Wednesday for the alleged rape and murder his five-year-old cousin who had reportedly gone missing on October 27, police said. The victim’s body was found Tuesday night, police added.

According to the police, the girl’s parents had lodged a missing complaint Monday. “On Sunday evening, the girl was playing outside her house and bursting crackers. When the child’s mother came out looking for her, she found that the girl was missing,” a police officer said.

On Tuesday, the police were alerted that a body had been found near a water pipeline, around 500 m from the girl’s house. “The body found near the pipeline was identified as that of the child. There were several injuries on her body. We immediately sent the body for postmortem, which revealed she was raped and then strangled to death,” Ramesh Katkar, Senior Inspector, said. “We formed seven teams, including some crime branch officials, to find the accused,” he added.

The victim’s teenaged cousin was apprehended by police Wednesday morning as he was the last to be seen with the girl, police said. “The boy had taken the girl with him for buying firecrackers. His father had given him Rs 12 to buy something for the girl as well,” Katkar said. He added, “We apprehended him as he kept changing his statement.”

The boy, police said, reportedly took the girl to a secluded spot and raped her. “He tried to gag the child when she started screaming and in the process killed her. When he realised that the girl had died, he strangled her and returned home,” Katkar said.

The boy, who lived near the victim’s house, is a student of a local school, police said. “We have seized his phone and found a lot of obscene content in it. The boy had visited several pornographic websites in the past few days,” Katkar added.

“We have handed the boy over to the juvenile home after presenting him before the Juvenile Justice court. We have lodged a case of rape and murder and charged him under several sections of POCSO Act,” Katkar added.
