Gun on campus? Probe concludes it was a toy pistol

Ludhiana: A day after a PAU student’s ‘gun’ act caused quite an uproar on the campus, a police probe has concluded that the 21-year old hosteller had only used an air gun.In a video clip, a PAU student was seen firing in the air on the campus. As the student had used a cracker explosive while firing, it had made cops believe that it was not a real gun.But the probe has found that the student bought the toy pistol from a gun house near Nirankari Bhawan in Bharat Nagar Chowk for Rs 2,000.Meanwhile, alarmed over the increasing use of air gun and toy pistols in crimes, the city police are proposing to ban sale of such toys in the city.Assistant commissioner of police (West) Gurpreet Singh said, “We have verified the matter and identified that the PAU student has used an air gun. This gun is basically used to practise shooting. He had purchased it from a gun house in Bharat Nagar chowk for Rs 2,000. The police have also inquired from the owner of the gun house to verify if the air gun was purchased from his shop. The police have recovered the air gun and released the student.”On Wednesday, the PAU police had rounded up undergraduate student Khushpreet Singh for questioning. He was released after questioning.Cops said as of now, there is no restriction on purchasing air gun or toy pistols, which are available for Rs 800 to Rs 2000. Senior police officials, meanwhile, said in a bid to avoid misuse of such toys in the crimes, they are drawing modalities to ban their sale.“These days, miscreants have started using air gun and toy pistols to execute crimes, including snatchings and robberies. The problem is that nobody can easily differentiate between the real gun and a toy pistol,” said the ACP.“We are concerned about its open and easy sale. Therefore, we have discussed the matter with the district attorney (legal) to find out if a proposal can be sent to the government to ban sale of these toy guns. Ludhiana police will certainly take up the matter with the government,” added the ACP.Use of toyJan 30 | Salem Tabri police busted a biker gang who have executed 51 snatchings and loots in four months. The gang had used toy pistol to carry out the crimesFeb 5, 2018 | Police arrested three persons for kidnapping and robbing a shoe trader. The trader was kidnapped from outside his house in New Model Town using a toy gunOct 9, 2018 | Three motorcycle-borne assailants have robbed some men of Rs 15 lakh after opening fire at him. The police later recovered a toy pistol from the spot
