Bengalis being targeted, says Trinamool; BJP says don’t politicise killings

Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday demanded a “strong investigation” into the killings of five labourers from West Bengal in a terror attack in Kashmir to find out the “real truth” behind it. Banerjee also announced a compensation of Rs 5 lakh each for the families of the victims.

Condemning the incident, Banerjee said in a tweet, “In a most unfortunate incident in Kashmir yesterday, five innocent labourers were brutally killed in a pre planned manner. We are totally shocked! Presently there are no political activities in Kashmir and entire law and order is with the Government of India. We, therefore, demand a strong investigation so that the real truth comes out. We are deputing Shri Sanjay Singh ADG South Bengal to find out details from them.”

Suspected militants shot dead five labourers from West Bengal in south Kashmir’s Kulgam district on Tuesday, the day when an unofficial EU delegation visited the Valley to assess the situation after the abrogation of Article 370 three months ago.

“Our party MPs and MLAs have reached Murshidabad to meet the family members of the victims. Our government is providing Rs 5 lakh to each of the victims’ family and render all assistance to them,” Banerjee said.

Earlier in the day, the Chief Minister had said, “We are shocked and deeply saddened at the brutal killings in Kashmir. Five workers from Murshidabad lost their lives. Words will not take away the grief of the families of the deceased. All help will be extended to the families in this tragic situation,” she said in a statement.

Meanwhile, Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar condemned the “cowardly” act and sought help from governments for the bereaved families. “I was pained by this cowardly and dastardly attack by terrorists on innocent workers who move freely within the country for their livelihood. It is a shocking incident and it must be condemned by all..I am more pained as they (labourers) happen to be from Murshidabad,” said Dhankhar.

Senior TMC leader and state minister Firhad Hakim said Bengalis are being targeted across the country.

“The Chief Minister is pained to see Bengalis are being targeted elsewhere in the country. While some are being burnt alive, others are being shot dead. It is a matter of great concern for us. We are with the families of the victims. Why there should not be any protection for those who work in Kashmir?” Hakim asked.

TMC MP Khalilur Rahman, who visited the victims’ house in Murshidabad district on Wednesday, said: “This incident shows that there is no peace in Kashmir as claimed by the Centre.”

BJP leader Mukul Roy, however, said no one should indulge in politics over the incident.

“It is an unfortunate incident. Terrorists backed by Pakistan are behind this and the central government will take appropriate steps against them. But people must not politicise the incident. It is also a fact that lack of jobs in Bengal is forcing labourers from the state to find jobs in other states,” Roy said.
