UK journo files equal pay case against BBC, but Indian media have long way to go

UK journo files equal pay case against BBC, but Indian media have long way to go

While Samira Ahmed reportedly receives 440 British pounds per episode, a male BBC host Jeremy Vine, receives 3,000 pounds an episode.

news Media

In a case that could set a historic precedent towards narrowing the gender pay gap in journalism, BBC presenter Samira Ahmed has launched a landmark equal pay case against the British public service broadcaster. According to The Guardian, Samira says she was paid 85% less than a male presenter at an equivalent level. Her case is being supported by the National Union of Journalists.

Samira is reportedly demanding back-pay worth hundreds of thousands of pounds for her work on Newswatch, a programme presented by Samira since 2012 that allows viewers to air their comments and concerns on the BBC's coverage. While she reportedly receives 440 British pounds per episode, a male BBC host Jeremy Vine, who presents the programme Points of View, receives 3,000 pounds an episode.

In the case, Samira’s side will argue that both Newswatch and Points of View are similarly-presented programmes that last about 15 minutes. Both programmes allow viewers to voice their opinions, and Samira is arguing that she deserves equal pay.

However, the opposition is expected to argue that the programmes are not similar and are different formats for different audiences, reports say.

Samira arrived at the central London employment tribunal on Monday morning. The case will be heard over the next seven days.

In a statement, Samira said, “I love my job on Newswatch, despite it being difficult and challenging.” She continued, “I know that it is an important part of demonstrating the BBC service to all its audiences and the licence-fee payers. I have a sense of pride working for a public service broadcaster which seeks to represent the diversity of Britain and its licence-fee payers.”

“On the back of my BBC ID card are written the BBC values, which include ‘we respect each other and celebrate our diversity’ and ‘we take pride in delivering quality and value for money’. I just ask why the BBC thinks I am worth only a sixth of the value of the work of a man for doing a very similar job,” she said.

In India, a long road remains towards gender parity in media houses. Independent journalist Geeta Seshu noted that while journalists in the UK fight for equal pay for equal work, societal pressures against women only add more obstacles in that path in India. She described a situation in which two women TV journalists complained of discrimination basis of dark and fair complexion. “On top of discrimination in the wages, there are other forms of discrimination. Even amongst women, there is basis on the discrimination of skin colour.”

“That is the extent of discrimination. We are talking about a completely different situation in India,” she continued. “The BBC has been fighting and working on parity at a very different level. We are still at the bottom. We are struggling to even put our foot on that first rung.”

The International Women’s Media Foundation’s 2011 Global Report on the Status of Women in the News Media found that women in Indian media companies are paid less on average in both higher and lower pay ranges. That includes senior and top management in various roles. In middle management, junior level and technical professional levels, the salaries between men and women were found to be more similar, though women were found to have little involvement in both creative and technical areas of news production, the report said.

Additionally, a survey conducted earlier this year found that women in India earn 19 percent less than men across industries.

Samira’s and Carrie’s fight for equal pay in the media industry is now part of a decades-long battle in multiple countries. In 1970, sixty women employees of Newsweek in the United States filed a claim with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in regards to the magazine’s sexist policy that favoured men in staff writing roles. Women occupied jobs like researcher, mail girl and low-level reporters.

That dispute — chronicled in the 2012 book The Good Girls Revolt and later turned into an Amazon Prime series — ended in historic victory for the women. Newsweek agreed to take steps towards creating equal employment opportunities for women in writing, reporting and news coverage roles.

For the BBC, this is the second high-profile case it has faced in recent years. Last year, the BBC admitted that its former China editor Carrie Grace had been paid significantly less than her male colleagues. It had reportedly told Carrie that she would be paid in line with North America editor, Jon Sopel, at an annual salary of around 200,000 to 250,000 British pounds, but her salary was actually 135,000 British pounds. She resigned from the post after accusing the BBC of creating a “ secretive and illegal” pay culture.

The BBC apologised to Carrie and offered her a payout, which she donated to charity.
