Kolkata: 83-year-old man found dead at residence; son and relatives refuse to claim body

The body cannot be handed over Chandu as he is in prison (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An 83-year-old man was found dead at his residence in Kolkata's Baguiati The deceased's elder son is in prison and his younger son is settled in the United States of America (USA) Allegedly, none of the relatives are willing to perform the last rites of the deceased

Kolkata: The body of a former Indian Air Force (IAF) personnel Shyamal Chatterjee has been unclaimed even after 48 hours of his death. Shyamal Chatterjee was found dead at his residence in Baguiati and was shifted to the RG Kar Hospital morgue. The 83-year-old man's elder son Chandu Chatterjee has been sent to jail on account of a murder.

The body cannot be handed over Chandu as he is in prison. Shyamal Chatterjee's younger son Barish is settled in the United States. Barish refused to come to Kolkata when he was contacted by the police. Chandu's wife Snigdha stays in Bengaluru with their son. She has also refused to come to Kolkata.

A police officer familiar with the case said that even Shyamal Chatterjee's in-laws have refused to come to Kolkata to take his body. The officer said, "We are in a fix. We generally hand over the body to the deceased person's relatives after the post-mortem. But in this case, the closest relative, his elder son, is in jail and other relatives are refusing to claim the body. "

Krishnendu Chatterjee, the deceased's nephew said that when he called Barish, the latter told him that he was caught up with work. Chandu's wife Snigdha learned that her husband had been booked for murder and said that she did not want to be associated with the incident.

Last year, Shyamal Chatterjee's wife passed away and none of the family members came forward to perform the last rites. Krishnendu recalled, "We had to keep the body at Peace Haven for three days, following which the sons came and conducted the cremation. But at least at that time, Kaku (Shyamal Chatterjee) was there to claim the body." Krishnendu has said that he is waiting for the deceased's relatives to claim the body.

Elderly couple found dead at residence in south Kolkata

A similar incident came to light from Kolkata in July this year when an elderly couple was found dead at their residence in Netaji Nagar. The deceased were identified as Dilip Mukherjee and Sapna Mukherjee. The couple was lying in a pool of blood and it was suspected that they had been murdered.

Sapna's neck had been tied with a rope and pipe had been inserted inside her throat. According to the police, the couple had been murdered by two people. The deceased did not have children.


