First group of international MPs visit Kashmir: Their main worry is terrorism

Freelance journalist Ashali Varma has authored the biography of her father late Lt. Gen. PS Bhagat — ‘The Victoria Cross: A Love Story’. She was executive producer with the International Commentary Service Inc, New York in 1990. She was the executive publisher of The Earth Times, New York (1992- 98). She has also worked as the editor of Choices Magazine, United Nations Development Programme. She writes on various issues including human rights, population and sustainable development. LESS ... MORE

At a press conference in Srinagar, 23 European Union MPs from countries that included the UK, Italy, Germany, France, Slovakia, The Czech Republic, and Spain spoke about their information gathering trip to the Valley.

MP Henri Malosse said that there is a fight against terrorists, and that it was tragic that the night before five innocent labourers were gunned down, mercilessly. He also said that the situation of terrorism was like a global war being faced by countries. He was deeply offended he said by news channels and newspapers calling him a fascist and Islamophobic— and added that if someone had said that about him in his country, he would have taken them to court.

Possibly, he was referring to Mehboob Mufti’s tweet clubbing every MP together and saying they were Muslim Haters and right-wing extremists. She is lucky she lives in India not Europe.

He also said that he was met some young activists referring to Panchayat heads and others and their vision for the future was for peace in Kashmir.

Thierry Mariani, a legislator from France said he had close contact with India and been here at least 20 times and his intention of joining the group was to get information on Kashmir. He said he knew how terrorism can destroy a country and had been to Afghanistan and Syria. He said this was a problem in France and Europe also and said that once there is peace in the Middle East, the terrorists could easily move to Kashmir and he did not want that.

He also said hat his conversations with the local people had been very interesting because their message came from the heart. They said they were Indian citizens and wanted development like the rest of India. They told him that the change of status made them hope they can send their children to good schools and their mothers safely to hospitals.

He also said that when he read news reports calling the MP’s Nazis, he was shocked. He did not know why? At least they could have looked up Wikipedia as he has been elected 14 times and has been a minister in France. His advice to these journalists was that they should read up about the MPs before coming to such conclusions.

Bill Newton Dunn from the UK said that he was also shocked by the terror attack that killed five innocent people. He said that India was a peaceful country and Europe and India have much in common. He had not come to interfere in any politics but to find out facts on the ground. He spoke to teachers and others from different walks of like in Kashmir and one man told him the problem in Kashmir was corruption and that some of the money sent from the Centre to Kashmir for projects disappeared somewhere in the system.

They found Kashmir a beautiful place and hoped that tourism could develop more but for that to happen there would have to be a sense of security and an end to terror.

Anther MP said he supported India’s fight against terrorism and that it did not help that Pakistan was arming and sending terrorists into Kashmir.

On the whole, the trip seemed to be a good gesture on India’s part as it removed some of the myths floating around in the Western Press. I hope such people get to be interviewed by their press when they get back as they will be able to explain the ground realities.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
