Eknath Shinde elected Shiv Sena legislative party leader; delegation to meet Maharashtra Governor today

Shiv Sena leader Eknath Shinde

Mumbai: Amid deadlock in Maharashtra over the formation of the government, the Shiv Sena on Thursday elected Eknath Shinde as the leader of its legislative party. A minister in the caretaker BJP-Shiv Sena government, Shinde will be the leader of the party in the Maharashtra Assembly.

Shinde’s name for the post was proposed by Aaditya Thackeray and newly-elected Shiv Sena MLAs supported the proposal.

In fact, there was speculation that Aaditya’s name could be proposed for the post. However, Shiv Sena supremo Uddhav Thackeray, Aaditya’s father, was not keen on his son becoming the head of the party’s legislative unit.

Meanwhile, it has been reported that Shiv Sena leaders including Aaditya Thackeray, Eknath Shinde, Diwakar Raote and Subhash Desai will call on Maharashtra Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari at 6:15 pm.

"Shiv Sena is meeting the Maharashtra Governor at 6:15 pm. We are meeting the Governor regarding the losses faced by farmers due to heavy rain in the state," Sanjay Raut, of Shiv Sena, said.

Earlier in the day, the Shiv Sena launched a fresh attack on its ally BJP, saying equal sharing of power also includes rotational chief ministership for an equal term. The Shiv Sena said in an editorial in its mouthpiece Saamana that it had not given up its claim on the CM’s post.

It accused the BJP of following "use and throw" policy with regard to its relationship with allies.

"Maharashtra chief minister in that press conference (held after the two parties sealed the alliance) had said all government posts would be equally shared. If the post of the chief minister does not come under it, then we need to rewrite the syllabus of political science," the Sena said.

"The BJP, after the spectacular performance in 2014 Lok Sabha elections, parted ways with the Shiv Sena and is trying to enact a second act of ‘use and throw'. But we will not die out easily, because we have people's support," it added.

"Ahead of the Lok Sabha elections, the possibility of an alliance between the BJP and Shiv Sena materializing was bleak. Hence, whatever was decided to seal the deal, should be implemented, that is the only demand of the Shiv Sena," said the Uddhav Thackeray-led party.

"It is more important to follow the agreement between the two parties than playing the number game," said the Sena, which won 56 seats against the BJP's 105 in the recent elections.

"There is no need of any evidence to show what has been decided, but we are living in a time when people lie under oath," the Sena said.

After meeting with Governor BS Koshiyari, Shiv Sena leader Aditya Thackeray said that the delay in the government formation is not good. On being asked about holding talks with the BJP he said that the party hasn’t heard anything from the BJP. He further added that his father and Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray will take the final call on government formation.
