Malayalam voice-over artistes on dubbing for ‘Terminator: Dark Fate’

It is the sixth installment in the iconic franchise starring Arnold Arnold Schwarzenegger

Anwar Perumbavoor can’t forget those 20 hours when he was Arnold Schwarzenegger! The dubbing artiste is the Malayalam voice of Arnold’s iconic character in the dubbed version of Terminator: Dark Fate, which releases today. The movie is the sixth instalment of the Terminator franchise and the direct sequel to The Terminator (1984) and Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991).

P Sreeja Ravi | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

“It is a prestigious project for each one of us because this is the first time an English film is having a simultaneous release in Malayalam,” says veteran dubbing artiste P Sreeja Ravi, who headed the dubbing work of the movie in Chennai.

In the sequel, Linda Hamilton and Arnold return to their seminal roles as the super cool action hero Sarah Connor and T-800. Although Arnold is the face of the franchise, the ones who steal the show in this movie are the three women characters – Sarah, Grace and Dani. Grace, a hybrid cyborg human joins hands with Sarah to save Dani, from the attack of a deadly new Terminator, Rev-9 with the help of T-800, now living as Carl.

Anwar Perumbavoor | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

Anwar admits that he had seen none of the movies of the franchise until he entered the dubbing suite! “It might sound preposterous, but that is the truth. So I had my apprehensions. Arnold is there only in three reels but he has an impact on the entire film. The character might be a machine, yet there were scenes when I became emotional. I feel proud to have been part of this project. I had to dub some of the dialogues multiple times because the team wanted it to be as perfect as it could be. In this era of social media trolls and memes, we had to be very careful. I have dubbed for English movies earlier and regretted doing them after watching the output,” says Anwar, the voice of cartoon characters in Kochu TV and shows in Discovery Malayalam.

Unforgettable experience

Emmima, better known as Emi in the industry, steps into the skin of Sarah. “At the age of 65, I couldn’t have asked for something bigger and better than this. I have not got the opportunity to give voice for such a significant character before. It’s like a miracle, probably like winning a lottery!” says Emi. She has been translating serials into Malayalam and runs a dubbing studio in Chennai. A fan of the franchise, she adds that it was strenuous to dub for the character because she had to speak in a “deep voice”.

Emi | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

Sunitha Radha, who has dubbed for Grace says that it was “awesome” ‘playing’ the super soldier. “She is rough and tough and is on a mission. The action-packed sequences were so much fun. Our team was a little worried because I was in the early months of my second pregnancy but they ensured that it was as stress-free as possible. I have been crazy about the Terminator series and Arnold and this opportunity was unexpected,” says Chennai-based Sunitha, who started out as a child dubbing artiste at the age of three and now regularly dubs for Tamil actors.

Sunitha Radha | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

Dani is Revathy Rajesh. She had dubbed for Saniya Iyyappan in Queen and Nimisha Sajayan in Oru Kuprasidha Payyan. “I had jitters dubbing for the character because the story revolves around her. But Sreeja aunty was confident that I could pull it off,” says Aluva-based Revathy. A Bharatanatyam graduate, Revathy adds that the exciting part was the fights in the end sequence.

Revathy Rajesh | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

Mufthash Maheen, the Malayalam voice of Rev-9, says that the character has few dialogues. “It was effortless but challenging because the character is a machine and there had to be zero emotion. I had to speak in a hard voice,” explains Mufthash, a native of Thiruvananthapuuram, who has dubbed for many new faces in Malayalam and for Vijay Devarakonda in his movies dubbed into Malayalam.

Mufthash Maheen | Photo Credit: Special arrangement

He adds that the dialogues will not stick out. “We have stuck to English dialogues wherever they are needed. Those dialogues that might invite trolls were re-dubbed! I hope that this effort will set a precedent for more English movies to be released in Malayalam,” he says.

Sreeja points out that it is challenging to dub an English movie into Malayalam when compared to other languages. “Often the sync doesn’t happen between the actors’ body language and the Malayalam dialogues.That’s when dubbing falls flat. We couldn’t let that happen because this is a significant project in Malayalam. We finished the work in 10 days and the effort has been appreciated by the team in Mumbai overseeing the project,” says Sreeja, who has over four decades of experience in the field.
