India strips Kashmir of special status and divides it in two

Delhi has formally revoked the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir’s constitutional autonomy and split it into two federal territories in an attempt to integrate it fully into India.

The decision of the prime minister, Narendra Modi, to change Kashmir’s status and tighten the government’s grip over the region in August has stoked anger and resentment while a three-decade armed revolt rages.

At midnight on Wednesday the state was formally taken under direct federal control and split into the territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh, bringing an end to decades of semi-autonomous rule.

Timeline Key events in Kashmir Show 1 August 1947 With the end of British colonial rule, the Indian subcontinent is partitioned into predominantly Hindu India and mainly Muslim Pakistan. Mass migrations follow, with Hindus and Muslims moving to their country of choice. More than a million people are killed in the communal violence that ensues. 1 October 1947 India and Pakistan fight their first war over control of Muslim-majority Kashmir, a kingdom ruled by Hindu Maharaja Hari Singh. The war ends in 1948 with a UN brokered ceasefire, leaving Kashmir divided between the nations, with the promise of a referendum to chose which nation its people wish to join. 8 August 1965 A second war erupts over Kashmir, with India and Pakistan agreeing to a UN-mandated ceasefire the following month. 5 December 1971 The third war between India and Pakistan is fought in East Pakistan, ending with the creation of independent Bangladesh. 10 May 1974 India detonates a nuclear device in the first confirmed nuclear test by a non-permanent member of the UN security council. 1 December 1988 India and Pakistan sign an agreement that neither will attack each other's nuclear installations or facilities; it takes effect in 1991. 8 May 1989 Armed resistance to Indian rule in Kashmir begins. India says Pakistan supports local fighters with weapons and training, which Pakistan denies, saying it only gives local Kashmiris "moral and diplomatic" support. 8 May 1998 India detonates five nuclear devices and Pakistan responds by detonating six of its own. International sanctions are imposed against both. 1 December 2001 India masses troops along its western frontier with Pakistan and the Kashmir boundary after blaming Pakistani insurgents for a deadly attack at the Indian parliament. The standoff ends in October 2002 after international mediation. 8 September 2016 Suspected rebels sneak into an army base in Indian-controlled Kashmir and kill at least 18 soldiers. Indian forces later attack militant bases in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. 14 February 2019 A car bombing of a paramilitary convoy in Indian-controlled Kashmir kills 40 Indian soldiers. Militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed, headquartered in Pakistan, claims responsibility. India blames Pakistan and promises a "crushing response"." 5 August 2019 India's central government changes part of the Indian constitution and downgrades Jammu and Kashmir from one state to two territories. The changes eliminate Kashmir's right to its own constitution, limit its decision-making power, and allow non-Kashmiri Indians to settle there. 31 October 2019 Delhi formally revokes Jammu and Kashmir’s constitutional autonomy and splits it into two federal territories. The state’s constitution, as well as its penal code and state flag, was nullified. Was this helpful? Thank you for your feedback.

The state’s constitution, as well as its penal code and state flag, was nullified, and the region is now subject to the same central laws as all other Indian territories. Jammu and Kashmir will have its own state legislature, while Ladakh will be controlled from the capital.

Girish Chandra Murmu, a former bureaucrat who served Modi when he was the chief minister of Gujarat, administered the oath of Kashmir’s first lieutenant governor in a ceremony held under tight security.

Hasnain Masoodi, an Indian parliamentarian from south Kashmir and a former judge, said Delhi’s decision to revoke the status was unilateral and a “massive assault on the identity and autonomy of the state”.

“We were an independent country 70 years ago, we have a history of 5,000 years and suddenly we have been reduced to a municipality,” said Masoodi. “Everyone has a sense of bitterness. There is a sense of injustice, disillusionment and humiliation.”

It was the implementation of a decision first made by Modi’s government 86 days ago, when legislation was rushed through the Indian parliament to approve the end of article 370 of the constitution, which for over 70 years has guaranteed special privileges to the predominately Muslim region. It had been drawn up in 1947 as the foundation of Kashmir’s agreement to be part of India.

A swift annexation of Kashmir followed in August, with tens of thousands of Indian troops deployed into the region, phones and internet shut down, and politicians and public figures placed under arrest. For the past three months, the several million citizens of Kashmir have lived under severe lockdown, with their freedom to work and go to school restricted.

Syed Babar, a lawyer based in Kashmir’s main city Srinagar, said Kashmir’s transformation into a union territory reflected “a political holocaust inflicted on the people”.

“It is the day of political betrayal and beginning of an era where violence as an argument will have justification and takers, which is very unfortunate,” he said.

The Indian government justified its decision to revoke Kashmir’s special status by repeatedly saying it would end militancy in the region, which had continued with varying intensity for the past three decades.

In recent weeks, however, there have been several incidents of violence targeting non-local truck drivers and labourers. In the most deadly incident earlier this week, five labourers from the eastern Indian state of West Bengal were shot dead in the southern Kashmiri district of Kulgam.

One of Kashmir’s militant groups, the al-Qaida-inspired Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind, announced a new leadership on Wednesday, less than a week after the police said they had wiped out the group after its chief was killed in a gunfight.

Babar said he feared Delhi’s decision would lead to a rise in radicalisation and would serve as an “invitation to foreign militants”.

He added: “There is no room for dialogue now. The space for politics has been bulldozed and there is nothing to negotiate about between people of Kashmir and government of India.”

In a speech on Thursday, hours after the state’s transition into a union territory, Modi said the removal of article 370 heralded a “new age of political stability” in India.
