Wasserman Schultz accuses Ken Cuccinelli of supporting white supremacy: ‘That’s defamatory’

Disgraced former DNC chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz accused Ken Cuccinelli — the acting director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services — of following a “white supremacist ideology” during a scathing attack at a House Oversight subcommittee hearing.

“Americans across this country aren’t fooled by this administration’s specious attempts to distinguish between documented and undocumented immigration,” Wasserman Schultz said. “You and Mr. Trump don’t want anyone who looks or talks differently than Caucasian-Americans to be allowed into this country.”

Cuccinelli fired back: “That’s false. That’s defamatory.”

He’s correct: Recklessly smearing someone as a white supremacist is defamation. Enforcing longstanding federal immigration laws (that lawmakers like Wasserman Schultz approved) does not make you a white supremacist.

Wasserman Schultz reacted by ordering Cuccinelli not to interrupt her and quipped: “Excuse me, there’s nothing defamatory about it.”

Wasserman Schultz continued: “You want to block all immigration and make life harder for immigrants. And you have demonstrated that you will pursue this heinous white supremacist ideology at all costs.”

(Source: Fox News)

Ken Cucinelli said: “I am not a white supremacist. Nor is the President.”

Wasserman Schultz interjected: “Facts matter.”

Cuccinelli quipped: “Yes they do. Truth matters.”

Wasserman Schultz angrily replied: “That’s why I am stating them here today.”

Cuccinelli responded: “No, you certainly are not. You are cloaked in legislative privilege, which means you can get away with not telling the truth.”

Democrats who are virulently pushing illegal immigration and open borders say that anyone who doesn’t want the United States flooded with illegal immigrants is a “white supremacist.”

Keep in mind that many Hispanic-Americans vehemently oppose illegal immigration.

I'm a Hispanic-American and I do NOT want illegal aliens in our country bringing their drugs & crime. Kate Steinle died in her dad’s arms after being shot to death by a 5-time-deported illegal alien in a sanctuary city. Obama's failure to protect our borders is what killed Kate — Ryan Saavedra (@RealSaavedra) December 1, 2017

Lastly illegal immigration drains important public resources that we pay for and in some cases they slow response to save Americans by overwhelming the local healthcare infrastructure. All of the costs are passed back to American citizens and can slow response when you need it. — Robby Starbuck (@robbystarbuck) October 21, 2018

These countries have the strictest immigration laws in the world, according to immigration law firm Haskew. Are they also white supremacists?

Notice that the United States is not even in the top 10.

Japan Denmark Gulf States China South Korea Israel Switzerland Austria Nigeria India.

There’s mounting speculation that President Trump will appoint Ken Cuccinelli as Homeland Security Secretary after last month’s departure of Kevin McAleenan.

In July, McAleenan came under fire after three senior Trump administration officials revealed that a nationwide ICE raid had to be canceled at the last minute because McAleenan had leaked details of the raid to the media.

Protecting one’s borders and wanting to stem mass illegal immigration is not a white-supremacist idea. Why? Because most countries around the world enforce their borders and ban illegal immigration.

Illegal immigration drains taxpayer-funded resources like welfare programs, public schools, hospitals, low-income housing projects, and the healthcare system.

As for Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, her claim to fame is forcing the resignations of the entire Democratic National Committee in 2017 after bombshell emails showed that she had tried to rig the primaries in her pal Hillary Clinton’s favor.

All these Democratic scandals have taken their toll on the flailing party, which many believe has alienated working-class voters and become too radical by pushing for open borders and a sham impeachment.

https://twitter.com/Herbert_L_Reed/status/1152953644666576897

Texas teacher fired for saying her school is overrun with illegal immigrants wins job back
