How a soldier's dispatches to his girl back home will win your heart as well...

At 93, Margaret Ford may be the same age as the Queen. But as she runs her fingers across a letter browned with age and delicate as tracing paper, her eyes sparkle like those of a teenager.

‘Just look at this,’ she says. ‘What a soppy thing my Jim was — shy and reticent on the outside, but with all this passion bubbling underneath.’

And she’s off, her mind whirling back to a day not long after the end of World War II when a young man far from home sat down to write to the girl he yearned to marry.

That man is Margaret’s late husband, soldier Jim Ford. His love letters — all 630 of them —are an almost unbearably moving paean to a love that endured for 67 years until his death in 2013, at the age of 88.

A mixture of the charmingly mundane and achingly romantic, they cover everything from the almost physical anguish of separation to the misery of catching malaria.

Margaret Ford's late husband Jim penned more than 630 love letters to her. They are an almost unbearably moving paean to a love that endured for 67 years until his death in 2013, at the age of 88

In an age of texts and tweets, extended romantic missives are rare — and these are so enchanting that publishers Pan Macmillan seized the chance to publish a memoir based around them. Overnight, Margaret, who lives just outside Lancaster, has found herself the oldest debut author in Britain.

‘I still can’t get over it,’ she says. ‘When Jim died after a long illness, it felt like I’d been stripped naked. He was my life.’

Their love, she admits, was very much a product of their time, with the trials of war providing unexpected fuel for their romance.

‘Can you believe we’d only known each other two weeks when we got engaged? I sometimes wondered what on earth I’d done marrying a man I barely knew. But the war made us live for the day.

‘I never doubted his love. Neither of us was demonstrative. But compared to today’s generation, we were very impetuous. I guess the war taught us that, too.’

Jim poured his feelings into letters, writing up to three times a day when they were courting

Jim poured his feelings into letters, writing up to three times a day when they were courting.

‘We were great for each other. He was the quiet, solid one who never lost his temper. I’m a firebrand. Luckily he could run faster than me — he’d get to the car keys before I could grab them and flounce out. We weathered so much . . . the war, then the tough years afterwards. He stayed on in the Army, serving in the Royal Army Educational Corps for decades, reaching the rank of captain, before becoming a civil servant when he was 50.

‘By then, he’d been posted around the world: Singapore, Korea, Egypt and Northern Ireland, and I followed him on most postings.

‘I kept his letters tied in ribbons, stored in a chest. When he died, I fell on them like a starving woman.

‘They were so comforting, I read them into a tape recorder. I play a tape every night as I drift off to sleep. All the memories I thought I’d forgotten come back.’

Comforting as they were for her, Margaret — a devout Catholic who has no children — imagined the letters would die with her. Then one Sunday morning, as she was waiting to watch a religious service on TV, up popped a programme about ghost-writing, where professional writers interview someone and write up their story in their voice, as a book.

‘I went straight to the internet,’ Margaret says. ‘One phone call and I was on my way.’

Most of us aren’t lucky enough to have a precious cache of letters to remind us how deeply we were once loved. But perhaps it’s a timely reminder to treasure the love we do have.

After all, one look at Margaret, her eyes shining, is enough to convince even the most unromantic soul that love doesn’t always fade.

Here, Margaret selects some of Jim’s most romantic letters and tells the story behind each of them...

I am yours body and soul

March 1946, Transit Camp, Southampton

My own darling, I love you with my heart and soul. It is like heaven when I receive mail from you. When I come home we shall be married.

I can picture us, me getting up first to light the fire, getting ready for work, looking forward to bacon and eggs cooked by you. Then I can picture me returning home, to sit down at tea just you and me until the following morning.

I am yours body and soul.

Margaret says: We met at a dance in Blackburn on March 22, 1946, six months after the war ended. Jim was 20, I was 19. Soldiers were trickling home. Jim had endured horrific conditions in Burma and was preparing to invade Japan when the Americans dropped the A-bombs, ending the war. He was then stationed in India as the country prepared for Partition. He won a precious month’s leave when his name was drawn out of a hat, which is when we met.

I still remember seeing him for the first time: thick blond wavy hair topped by his military-issue bush hat, sky-blue eyes, the biggest smile and 6ft 2in to my 5ft 3in.

I was mesmerised. While he couldn’t dance for toffee, he talked as though he’d known me all his life. He walked me home, kissed me and appeared the next day with a bunch of flowers to escort me to my job as a telephonist at the post office. I’d already been working for seven years. I’d left my convent school just before my 14th birthday because Mum couldn’t afford to replace my outgrown uniform.

We crammed months of courting into hours. On his last day before returning to India, we went for a walk. Jim said: ‘May I call you ‘Macushla’? It’s Gaelic for “pulse of my heart”. And will you marry me?’ Young and silly I may have been but I knew I loved him, so I agreed.

‘They were so comforting, I read them into a tape recorder. I play a tape every night as I drift off to sleep. All the memories I thought I’d forgotten come back,’ said Margaret

It's sacred, having touched your lips

March 1946, Transit Camp, Southampton

Darling, I look at my hat and coat. If they could speak, what a lovely tale of bliss and happiness they would tell. The HAT was with me everywhere I went with you, the CHIN STRAP is sacred, having touched your lips. The COAT we have lain on scores of happy times, you told me you liked it, that it was so soft for your head to lean on.

Margaret says: Mum liked Jim but was adamant: ‘Margaret can get engaged as many times as she likes but she’s not getting married until she’s 21.’

However, she could see my excitement as I ripped open Jim’s letters. I’d written to almost a dozen different lads during the war. But Jim was different.

I saw it as keeping up their morale. I didn’t even mind if they made out I was their girl. One sweet boy even told his parents we were about to get engaged. When his parents came to break the news that his ship was sunk and he was dead, for their sake I went along with the story.

And I was really heartbroken. He was only 20. I look at my long life and weep at all he missed.

Blue undies - and our first tryst

April 1946, Southampton

Darling, there is still some lipstick on my collar. I can just twist my neck and touch it with my lips. I like the colour you have chosen for your undies to wear on our honeymoon — you know blue is my favourite colour. Imagine us on our first anniversary, with someone like you in the nursery.

Margaret says: We were ecstatic when Jim’s transit to India was delayed. I rushed to see him. Daringly, we rented a room — a squalid place where we had to pretend we were married. In our eyes, we were. We were both virgins, but I knew this was it. As for a new nightie, I could only find a long granny-type thing in the shops, with a high neck. It cost me six precious clothing coupons.

I was still so hazy about sex, I was convinced I’d get pregnant immediately. I felt so guilty when I saw a policeman walking the street the next day, I thought he’d come to arrest me. Jim laughingly reassured me.

Sadly, we never had a baby. I fell pregnant aged 39, but the pregnancy was ectopic. We were both too sad to ever talk about it.

My brightest star

June 7, 1946, India

Darling, I am moving to my unit today and this is my last letter. The journey will take days. We have been passing through the desert. The heat is terrific and I am sweating like a kettle. Life to me now is like living in a huge dark room with a long staircase, at the top of which is a bright star — you. As every day passes I climb one step nearer the summit.

Margaret says: I tried to keep busy and went dancing every weekend, but missed Jim terribly. The worst was not knowing when — or if — I would see him again.

A mixture of the charmingly mundane and achingly romantic, they cover everything from the almost physical anguish of separation to the misery of catching malaria

Riots - where are you?

September 1946, India

Darling, I am writing this on the street kerb. There is trouble in Bombay with rioting, and we are here in case the military are called in. I am browned off with everything. To make matters worse, I haven’t had a letter from you for nine days.

I am worried to death. Are you ill? I will be so glad when I am out of this hole and back in England, where everyone isn’t waiting to put a knife in your back. I am almost asleep on my feet but I think I shall be on patrol. Gosh, we are going to be so happy when we are together again.

Margaret says: Indian independence was declared in 1947, under the oversight of Lord Mountbatten. Meanwhile, the British Army struggled to control the violence. In the thick of it, Jim, clearly terrified and sick — he got malaria nine times — was desperate for letters. I hadn’t written because I couldn’t bear the thought of losing him. It was a sort of self-protection not to think about him.

I’d had so many losses already. In 1945 my first real love, Raymond Nash, a dear boy I’d grown up with, was killed when his submarine was sunk. Another boyfriend, Leslie Fielding, had died in July 1944 when his plane was shot down over Northern France.

A lock of your precious hair

November 1946, India

Darling, your pictures have brought so many little things back to me, the way you stand holding your handbag, the dimples in your chin. The lock from your hair has affected me more than ever. I put the curl to my nose and smell it, I don’t know whether it is the smell from the soap which you use. I can’t resist smelling it.

Margaret says: I’d had my photo taken professionally and was thrilled with the result. It’s in my living room now, side by side with his. The dimples have gone and my hair has thinned. But reading his words, I’m back in 1946.

Most of us aren’t lucky enough to have a precious cache of letters to remind us how deeply we were once loved. But perhaps it’s a timely reminder to treasure the love we do have

Lonesome at Christmas

December 1946, India

Darling, I’m afraid nothing exciting has happened this Christmas Eve. We are having turkey and goose tomorrow. The food is the only reminder of Christmas. The weather is so warm one could fry eggs on the pavement (if there was a pavement).

Gosh, they could have all the turkeys and geese in the world if I could be sitting down with you, eating your mother’s chips. And that heavenly moment when we meet again . . . well, every day will be Christmas Day, every second complete with love and happiness.

Margaret says: I hadn’t seen Jim in almost eight months. We’d spent so little time together, I needed letters to make him real. We planned the future and shared secrets we would have been far too shy to discuss face to face. My 21st birthday was approaching. I couldn’t wait to be free to marry.

A springy bed for our honeymoon

May 1947, India

Darling, have you decided on any definite plans for our honeymoon yet? I am dying to hear from you again. I get so darned excited. Have you made up your mind as to what you will be wearing?

I keep thinking of our honeymoon. When we register our room and sign our names as MR and MRS J. Ford, I can see us in the room, you arranging your clothes in the wardrobe. I shall test the bed for springiness, then you will change into another dress. I still have the picture of the pullover you have made for me — I am dying to try it on and give you one big kiss.

Margaret says: While Jim was planning our wedding, I was buying our first home. Putting down all the money I’d saved, and with a mortgage based on Jim’s wages, I paid £550 for the little two-up, two-down house with its outside lavatory that Mum had been renting through my childhood. Naturally, Mum would carry on living with us. That’s how families were then. Besides, bombs had obliterated so many houses, people felt lucky to have a roof over their heads.

Kiss that almost caused a riot

August 1947, India

Darling, I have been told I will be ‘standing by’ to move out from September 3. I am sure the moment I see you standing there I will faint. I have all my clothing ready now, darling. Just this afternoon I bought some dark brown corduroy slacks, which will be just the thing for going on our long hikes — they won’t wear out due to lying on the grass so many times.

Margaret says: I was waiting at the docks in Southampton when Jim’s troopship moored on December 14. I’d expected rows of sweethearts, but I was the only person there. Hundreds of men were waving and cheering. And then Jim was bounding towards me. He kissed me so passionately, two policemen had to hurry us along before we caused a riot.

It had been 19 long months. Twelve days later, on December 26, 1947, we were married.

A Daughter’s Choice, by Margaret Ford, is published by Pan, priced £7.99 paperback and available now.
