BJP, Congress battle over Sardar Patel's legacy

Prime Minister Narendra Modi pays floral tribute to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel to commemorate his 144th birth anniversary, at the Statue of Unity.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday offered floral tributes to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel at the Statue of Unity in Kevadia to commemorate his 144th birth anniversary. This juxtaposed with Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi paying her respects to her mother-in-law and former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi at the Shakti Sthal.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) had claimed that it has successfully achieved its aim of fulfiling Sardar Patel's dream, a life-long Congressman, of unifying the country by abrogating Article 370.

The BJP and the Congress got engaged in a verbal war over the statement and the "sharpest attack" came from the great grand-daughter of Nehru, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, who put out a satirical tweet expressing her happiness over the BJP's attempt to appropriate Patel.

"Today, the BJP's attempt to appropriate Sardar Patel and the tribute makes me very happy, because the BJP's action makes two things clear- one, they have no legendary freedom fighter of their own, almost all were linked with the Congress; and two, even Patel's enemies are forced to revere him," Priyanka Gandhi tweeted.

Hitting back at Priyanka Gandhi, the BJP said that it respected everyone who fought for India's freedom, unlike her party which remembered only those leaders who belonged to the Nehru-Gandhi family.

BJP spokesperson Shahnawaz Hussain said that they wonder if Priyanka Gandhi's comments were motivated by "jealousy" as her party never organised any notable event to commemorate Patel's birth anniversary.

In a speech hailing the unity in India, PM Modi said, "The country took the decision to abrogate Article 370 which had only given terrorism and separatism to that state... More than 40,000 people lost their lives in three decades of terrorism."

PM Modi said that inspired by Patel, he took the decision and so he dedicated it "at the feet of the first home minister of the country".

PM Modi said that he had hammered the political message that the BJP had completed Patel's mission of 'Ek Bharat Shreshta Bharat'.

PM Modi even underlined this by launching a veiled attack on Jawaharlal Nehru. "Patel had once said that had he handled the Kashmir issue, it would have not have taken such a long time to resolve it," he added.
