Illegal garbage dumping raises a stink in Kharadi

Area residents demand action against trash on Fountain Road, say it’s a stinking eyesore that creates health hazard



The issue of garbage being illegally dumped all around town has been raging for months now, if not years, and the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has for long struggled to combat the problem.



In a fresh example of the same, residents of the Kharadi area as well as commuters through Fountain Road here have been are left fuming, thanks to the acute pile-up of waste at this location.



Citizens claim this issue has become worse over the last few months, which is not just posing a health hazard but also completely marring the beauty of the spot. They have demanded immediate preventive measures, emphasising that there are numerous educational institutes like schools in the vicinity.



Local resident Farukh Sayyed shared, “The illegal dumping takes place right behind the Victorious Kidss Educares campus. There is a huge amount of trash that is blatantly dumped at this place and on both sides of the road. It is a health hazard for not just the children at the institute but also the entire surrounding area. It is not just an eyesore, but a health hazard as well, giving rise of droves of mosquitoes that have a place to spawn in.”



He added, “The stench emanating from the dump would repel anyone visiting. It is almost unbearable to even go to a shop, go to school or live here. We have complained to PMC, but it has turned a blind eye to the predicament. PMC should immediately take measures to clear the hazard and also take action against those dumping the garbage here.”



PMC solid waste management department head Dnyaneshwar Molak assured of immediate action and said, “I am unaware of this problem but will look into it, speaking to the area staff concerned and instructing them to clear the filth. Orders will be issued on a priority basis and action also taken against any person found throwing trash around in public.”


