LeT training camps, closed by Pakistan ISI under international pressure, active again

The terror groups are also working on transferring manpower and resources from its tribal areas and Afghanistan to Jammu and Kashmir. (Photo: Representational image)

Training camps belonging to Pakistan-based terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) have reopened after they were shut by ISI and Pakistan Army under international pressure earlier.

An Intelligence Bureau (IB) note accessed by India Today TV suggests that LeT aquatic training camps in Mangla (Mirpur) and Head Maral (Sialkot), which were earlier shut are believed to be reactivated again by JuD/LeT second-in-command Talha Saeed, the son of Hafiz Saeed.

The intel report also reveals that LeT plans to launch its recruitment drives in tribal areas of Pakistan-Afghan border near Swat Valley, Peshawar, Quetta and Illaqa-e-Ghair.

It further adds that Pakistan ISI and terrorists groups have been meeting regularly for setting in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) to set up a control room for "Kashmiri jihad" and in Pakistan-Afghanistan border for recruiting new terrorists.

The terror groups are also working on transferring manpower and resources from its tribal areas and Afghanistan to Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, Pakistan has increased deployment of soldiers at the border along the Line of Control (LoC).

IB's intel note also indicated that Pakistan is building bunkers for terrorists in between their army camps at the behest of the ISI. 10 Baluch regiment of Pakistan is reportedly making the bunkers for terrorists.

Pakistan's premier intelligence agency has also asked the country's army to conduct more infiltrations and ceasefire violations as well. This, according to the intel note, would help terrorists spotted near LoC to cross over to Jammu and Kashmir.

A group of five terrorists has been spotted on the Pakistani side close to India's Machil sector. A few other groups of JeM terrorists have also been spotted close to the LoC in Pakistan.

An additional six groups of LeT terrorists were also spotted in PoK at a launchpad in Jungle Tekri, in front of BG sector in Jammu and Kashmir.

The development spells new trouble for Indian security forces in Kashmir at a time when infiltrating terrorists are slaughtering innocent civilians in the Valley.
