Rajkummar Rao talks about the time he stood outside Shah Rukh Khan's home Mannat for 7 hours

When Rajkummar stood outside SRK's home for hours | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Rajkummar Rao recently revealed that he used to stand outside Shah Rukh Khan's house for hours during his first visit to Mumbai The actor also talked about the time when he got to meet the superstar for the first time Rajkummar's latest release Made In China hit the screens last week

Bollywood superstar Shah Rukh Khan, who is all set to celebrate his 54th birthday tomorrow, is an inspiration to many. A lot of people get inspired by SRK and follow his footsteps to become an actor. One such person to do the same is Rajkummar Rao. Rajkummar, who has now become a household name, recently talked about the time when he used to stand outside SRK's home Mannat for hours.

To get a glimpse of the superstar, Rajkummar used to wait outside his house for 6-7 hours during his first visit to Mumbai. While the actor was delighted to see SRK’s wife Gauri Khan, he got to see Shah Rukh much later while shooting at the Mehboob Studios, Rajkummar said during his appearance on No Filter Neha.

Talking about his first meeting with SRK, the Aligarh actor said that he went to meet the superstar in his van when he got to know that they were shooting at the same location.

Rajkummar further said that Shah Rukh knew everything about him and it made him feel special. “Shah Rukh is so fantastic. He is so charming and after that, of course, now, we are pretty close. Like I know I can message him, I know I can call him and he calls me and I still get pretty excited and you know that fan inside me would never die. I still feel very very happy whenever he calls me,” he added.

Meanwhile, on the work front, Rajkummar's latest release Made In China hit the screens last week. The movie has been directed by Mikhil Musale and also stars Mouni Roy. The actor will be soon seen sharing screen space with Janhvi Kapoor in Hardik Mehta's RoohiAfza.

Shah Rukh, on the other hand, was last seen in Aanand L Rai's Zero alongside Katrina Kaif and Anushka Sharma. He is yet to announce his next project.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for fresh updates on entertainment, lifestyle, fashion and much more!
