Rising Temperatures Could Kill 15 Lakh More Every Year in India by 2100: Study

Mother protects her child during the heatwave in Delhi; June 2019 (Credits: Rajest Mehta/BCCL Delhi)

In June this year, India witnessed intense heatwaves across the country, with temperatures repeatedly breaching 50°C in parts of Rajasthan. Delhi recorded the highest ever June day temperature of 48°C on June 10. Subsequently, July 2019 was declared the hottest month on Earth in the recorded history.

As if these trends were not alarming enough, new research has given some startling projection of the hellish future for India. Research by the Climate Impact Lab in collaboration with the Tata Centre for Development at the University of Chicago shows that if the emissions continue at this rate, the average temperature in India will shoot up from about 24°C to about 28°C by 2100.

If this happens, the projections suggest that around 15 lakh more people are expected to die each year due to climate change by the end of this century. Such mortality rate is as high as the combined death rate from all infectious diseases in India at present.

“Every part of India does not suffer equally... Locations in the hotter northwest or southeast show large increases in death rates, but many parts of the country with milder temperatures also show large increases,” says the study.

Advertisement The researchers acknowledge that the average increase in temperature masks the regional extremes. The regions such as northwest India, Indo-Gangetic plain, southeast coast of India that are already facing the brunt of heat extremes may witness average summer temperatures of around 40°C if the high emissions continue.

Currently, Punjab is the hottest state with an average daily summer temperature of 32°C. Haryana, Rajasthan and Delhi are also very close to this figure. By 2100, 16 out of 36 states and UTs are projected to be hotter than Punjab. The national capital Delhi’s average summer temperatures are also expected to increase from 31.5°C in 2010 to 35°C in 2100.

The projections also indicate that the extremely hot days are likely to increase substantially. The days with more than 35°C are set to climb from 5 per year in 2010 to 42 per year in 2100.

The research shows that mortality rates can be significantly reduced if sufficient adaptations measures are implemented. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions also holds that key. The projections show that if the world follows a lower emission trajectory by significantly cutting down the carbon emission, the death rate can be reduced by about 80%.

Even though the vulnerability of India to short-term weather extremes and long-term climate change is well-established, this research provides a comprehensive analysis of impacts on specific locations. The researchers believe that having localised information such as this can guide policymakers towards investing in climate change mitigation and adaptation.
