Bringing back 131 West Bengal labourers from Jammu and Kashmir, says Mamata Banerjee

Mamata Banerjee said that the state administration has initiated a process to bring back 131 labourers from Kashmir | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: West Bengal (WB) state government has initiated the process to bring back 131 workers who had gone to Kashmir for work. The decision was taken after five workers from the state were killed in a terror attack in the state on October 29. Earlier today, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee called the killings of the workers - pre-planned murders' and hit out at the Centre over the security scenario in the Valley.

"Total 131 workers who had gone to Kashmir are being brought back to West Bengal with the help of state government. They are from Murshidabad, Dinajpur and Malda," Banerjee told reporters in Kolkata.

"But the manner they were murdered brutally after being abducted, I think it is a pre-planned murder," she earlier said. Banerjee also demanded a 'strong investigation' into the matter.

"In Kashmir, there are no political activities and there is no political party there currently. The entire administration belongs to the central government, the Army and the other central forces... they are taking care of it... And on that day a delegation of European Union parliamentarians was visiting the state. In spite of all this, how could they abduct these poor innocent fellows ... I'm really shocked (sic)," she added.

Five labourers from West Bengal's Murshidabad district were killed by terrorists in Kulgam area of Kashmir on Tuesday. One of the workers who was injured by the terrorists reportedly succumbed to injuries, taking the death toll to six.

Security in the Valley has been beefed up since August 5, when the Centre decided to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by abrogating Article 370. The state was bifurcated into two Union Territories (UTs) on October 31 and Lt Governors of UTs of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh were sworn in on Thursday.
