Moment baby girl rescued by Indian police as family bury her ALIVE

Female foeticide, the act of aborting a foetus because it is female, is a major social problem in India where there is a strong preference for sons over daughters.

A recent study found 500,000 unborn girls were being aborted every year. A UNICEF report in 2006 revealed that 10 million girls were killed - either before they were born or immediately after - by their parents from 1986 in India.

The practise is most prominent in Gujarat and the North Indian states, where there are low recorded rates of female children.

Female infanticide, the act of killing unwanted baby girls, is a long-standing cultural problem across the whole of the Indian sub continent owing to the patriarchal nature of society.

Male children are preferred in the belief they will bring wealth and prosperity to the family while female children are often viewed as burdens.

Another factor is the dowry system, where the family of the bride give a large sum of money or valuable goods to the groom and his family.

Although the dowry system has been outlawed it continues to be deeply ingrained in Indian culture.

Families with several daughters can find the practise of paying a dowry a serious burden.

Female foeticide began in the early 1990s as a result of the availability in India of ultrasound techniques capable of determining the sex of an unborn child.

As a result, 80 per cent of Indian districts have reported a greater ratio of male to female children since 1991.

The practise is believed to have led to an increase in human trafficking with women being bought and sold as brides in areas where there are a greater proportion of men.

Campaigners have for decades argued sex-selective abortions are driving a 'genocide' of India's female population.

A Government report earlier this year found the country has 63 million fewer women than it should do because of parents preferring boys.

Chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian revealed the shocking statistics in a report and said India must 'confront the societal preference for boys'.

In China, the world's most populated country, men outnumber women by almost 34 million - significantly more than the entire population of Australia.

Experts claim the controversial one-child policy, which lasted from the 1970s until 2015, helped to create the imbalance as families sought to have a son.

In both Indian and Chinese culture, the birth of a son is often a cause for celebration and family pride.

However, the birth of a daughter can be a time of embarrassment and even mourning as parents look toward the immense debts they will need to take on to pay for marriage dowries.

Professor Rob Brooks, an evolutionary biologist at University of New South Wales told SBS that sons are preferred in some culture's because they are more likely to 'take care of parents in old age'. Girls are more likely to marry and help look after someone else's parents, he said.

India's Government revealed in January that there will be 105 boys for every 100 girls without any human intervention.

But previous estimates from 2011 suggest the problem is already worse than that, with 914 girls under the age of six to every 1,000 boys the same age.

In China, the UN states there are nearly 116 boys for every 100 girls, however reports claim the ratio is much higher in poor rural areas.

Campaigners have warned sex-selective abortions are often the only work newly qualified medics in India can find because of a surplus of staff.

The Times has previously reported how illegal ultrasounds can cost in the region of 10,000 rupees (£135) in some Indian cities, but warned portable scanners are available to some villagers at a fraction of the price.
