Indian leaders not blind towards climate change: French minister Brune Poirson

French minister Brune Poirson is hopeful that the initiative taken by countries like India and France in setting up the multi-nation International Solar Alliance will be able to provide solutions that could prove effective in combating climate change.

Poirson, France's Minister of State for Ecology and Inclusive Transition, is in Delhi to co-chair ISA's second assembly since its inauguration in Paris in 2015. The International Solar Alliance is an inter-governmental organisation that strives towards effective exploitation of solar energy to reduce dependence on fossil fuels.

In a free-wheeling conversation with India Today TV, Brune Poirson said, "We don't want all countries to go through what the West went through - pollution, pollution and pollution because of fossil fuels. We want to leapfrog from fossil fuels and maybe no electricity even, to solar energy. It's great for France to be leading that with India."

Poirson candidly admitted that no country is doing enough to fight climate change but also expressed hope in the commitment India has shown so far. "India is very much aware of the impact of climate change. It doesn't seem that Indian leaders are turning a blind eye. I'm working with them towards developing solutions. I believe the Indian government is acting," she said.

The French minister lamented United States' walking out of the Paris declaration of 2015. US President Donald Trump had said the agreement signed by 195 nations from across the world would undermine the US economy.

"The decision of the US to withdraw from the Paris agreement is a decision we regret. We think it's not a good decision and it doesn't send the right message," Poirson told India Today TV. "We need to base all our work on science. Science is telling us often that the reality is difficult," she added.

However Poirson doesn't advocate creating a hopeless picture of the future. She explained, "Believing in a doomsday scenario and believing that climate change is not a reality is exactly the same thing. It may sound very shocking. Being overly negative and being overly ignorant to reality leads to the same thing - no action. We need hope because it leads to action."

Brune Poirson is a on a whirlwind day-and-a-half tour of Delhi and hasn't had much opportunity to step outdoors after back-to-back meetings but she's aware that air pollution is a worrying concern for the capital's residents.

As someone who spent close to five years living in the city until 2015, she shares the concerns. And as an environment minister, she had some suggestions to combat Delhi's toxic air.

"I would invest massively in affordable public transportation. Also (I would) work on demand for energy... so energy efficiency of buildings, so we avoid air conditioning. Also avoid building of coal power plants which will reduce our dependence on fossil fuels," Poirson said. Though, as a parting shot, the minister warned, there are no short-term solutions.
