Rampaging elephant named after Osama bin Laden kills five villagers

An elephant named after Osama bin Laden has trampled five people to death in a rampage in an Indian village.

The male elephant was nicknamed 'Laden' after previously attacking villages and destroying paddy fields in the state of Assam.

This week it went on the rampage and killed five people, sparking a major operation to contain it in the Rongjuli forest.

Laden may now be tranquilised and taken to a different forest with no humans living nearby.

Under surveillance: An elephant which is named after Osama bin Laden and killed five villagers on Tuesday night is seen in a forest today in a picture taken by a drone

Operation: Local people gather with Assam forest officials to contain the elephant - named after the former al-Qaeda chief - which killed five people this week

Villager Rajen Rabha said the elephant's deadly rampage had occured on Tuesday night.

'But that was not all. In the past Laden has also attacked our villages and killed people and destroyed our paddy fields,' he said.

The animal was alone, he added, saying that forest officials were using domesticated elephants to observe it from a safe distance.

They are also using drones to survey the forest and have today released pictures of the former al-Qaeda chief's namesake walking among the trees.

Assam forest minister Parimal Shuklabaidya said an eight-person committee including wildlife experts would decide what to do.

Forest officials rangers use drones today to locate the rogue elephant which has previously attacked villages and destroyed paddy fields in the state of Assam

Assam forest officials (some of whom are pictured with a drone today) say Laden may now be tranquilised and taken to a different forest with no humans living nearby

'We are yet to decide on how to deal with the animal. There are suggestions that we should tranquilise the animal and take it to forest where there is no human habitation nearby,' Shuklabaidya said.

As elephants' natural habitat shrinks, nearly 2,300 people have been trampled in India in the last five years, according to official figures.

In addition, some 700 elephants have been killed since 2011.

Elephants frequently migrate from the Garo hills region of Meghalaya to Goalpara and even to Bangladesh.

But like elsewhere in India, the area has recorded high numbers of dangerous incidents in recent years amid rampant deforestation.

Some elephants there have been poisoned or shot by locals, while others have died on electric fences or railways cutting through migratory routes.
