Mamata Banerjee To Bring Back 131 West Bengal Workers From Kashmir

Days after the brutal killing of West Bengal workers by terrorist in Kulgam district of Jammu and Kashmir, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Friday announced that total 131 workers who had gone to Kashmir are being brought back to the state. She said that they are being brought back with the help of the state government. They are from Murshidabad, Dinajpur & Malda, news agency ANI reported

READ: Mamata questions Kulgam attack despite 'precautions' for EU MP visit

Condemning the killings of labourers from West Bengal in a terror attack in Kashmir, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday demanded a "strong investigation" into the incident to find out the "real truth". She also announced a compensation of Rs 5 lakh each for the families of the victims. However, both the BJP and the TMC started politics over the killing.

READ | Kulgam Attack: Pakistan-backed Terrorists Target Non-locals, Kill 5

Mamata Banerjee demanded a strong investigation'

"In a most unfortunate incident in Kashmir yesterday, five innocent labourers were brutally killed in a pre-planned manner. We are totally shocked! Presently there are no political activities in Kashmir and entire law and order is with the Government of India," she said. Banerjee tasked a senior Bengal police officer to find out details about the brutal killings. "We, therefore, demand a strong investigation so that the real truth comes out. We are deputing Shri Sanjay Singh ADG South Bengal to find out details from them," she tweeted. Five migrant labourers from West Bengal were shot dead and one critically injured by terrorists in Kulgam district of south Kashmir on Tuesday. The Chief Minister assured the families of the victims of all possible help. "Our party MPs and MLAs have reached Murshidabad to meet the family members of victims. Our government is providing Rs five lakh with each to the victim's family and render all assistance to them," she posted on the microblogging site. Earlier in the day, Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar had termed the killings as a "cowardly act" and sought help from the government for the bereaved families".

READ: Mamata calls for probe into Kulgam attack, announces grant for kin

BJP on Mamata Banerjee's allegation

On Wednesday, BJP's Rahul Sinha retaliated to Mamata Banerjee's allegation on Centre over the killing saying she has the 'habit of playing politics over dead bodies.' The BJP leader further questioned if the West Bengal Chief Minister supports Pakistan and terrorists. He said, "Mamata has a habit of playing politics over dead bodies. Without condemning the act of terrorists she is blaming the central government. This proves who she supports. Does she support Pakistan and terrorists? This is my question to her," the BJP leader said.

READ: Rahul Sinha slams Mamata over Kulgam, asks does she support Pakistan?
