Community radios on climate hit right notes, find listeners

Fighting Fani | Odisha

—Amava Bhattacharya

Crop Concerns | Tamil Nadu

—V Mayilvaganan

Deluge and After | Uttarakhand

—Mohammad Anab

Earlier this year when cyclone Fani hit Odisha , a community radio in Puri worked overtime — urging people to evacuate their homes, disseminating information about shelters and providing alerts. That continued until Fani damaged most of its equipment. Community radios in several parts of India have emerged to fight against climate change, helping communities understand how it affects their lives. If in the east, radios are helping farmers battle drought, in the north they are asking people to move to solar energy and less waterintensive crop varieties. Down south, there are lessons on how to prepare for a cyclone.Days before Fani hit Puri in May this year, Rojalin Pradhan, programme executive of a community radio in Konark, repeatedly advised people to evacuate their homes. On May 2, as winds grew intense, the 34-year-old was stranded in her office in Icchapur while broadcasting one of her programmes for Radio Namaskar. “Early next morning the cyclone made its landfall and I got to work.”Initially, Rojalin updated people on weather forecasts but soon internet lines snapped. “Locals kept calling for information until phone lines went bust and our transmission tower collapsed,” she told TOI.The office has been damaged thrice in the past 10 years, but it hasn’t dampened the spirits of its staff. It was set up in 2010 by NGO Young India. It’s not just through radio broadcasts that they’re empowering communities to fight climate change. The station holds sessions on ecological issues in villages to enhance engagement.The result: Women in Siripur village now shun plastic. Those in Nalakana have planted saplings to fight deforestation. In another district, where drought is the scourge, Radio Surabhi — set up in 2015 — is teaching locals about crops that require less water. Shishir Kumar Das, chairman of the radio in Daspalla, Nayagarh, said the radio reaches three lakh people in 200 villages. “We broadcast in Odia and Hindi and provide the information through folk songs and folk tales to make it more interesting,” said Das.Venkatachalam starts speaking softly into the mike on how useful silt can be in agriculture. But he’s no expert, just an ordinary farmer. That’s precisely why people from 80 villages have tuned in to the broadcast of the community radio from a Tamil Nadu village.“People want to hear from others like them,” said P Muthukumaraswamy, head of the Kalanjiam Community Radio (KCR) at Madurai-based Dhan Foundation which started KCR in 2008, four years after a tsunami hit Nagapattinam. “After Gaja, there was extensive damage to crops, farmers suffered losses. We conducted programs on timberbased crops that could withstand cyclones,” said Naguvir Prasad, former in-charge of KCR. Today, programs provide information on solar energy, organic fertilisers, less water intensive crops and irrigation methods. From catering to a few villages, KCR now has people calling from 80 villages. Radio jockey Ranjitha is a familiar name. “I enjoy the fame but more than that it’s educating farmers to live better lives that matters to me,” she said.KCR has also started conducting workshops for villagers on climate change and disaster management. These help them decide what content to showcase. In one of the workshops, the team found that awareness on soil health management was low and Venkatachalam was a farmer who had managed to boost soil health on his fields by applying silt. That’s how he came in to share his wisdom.In Uttarakhand, seven community radios formed the Community Radio Consortium for Environment Protection (CRCEP) shortly after the devastating Kedarnath floods in 2013. The staff underwent a six-month training to understand climate change-related disasters. “They were told how unplanned development near river banks that ignore natural waterways can contribute to floods,” said N Ramakrishnan, director of the Ideosync Media Combine, which trained them. Since then, the radios have produced several programmes on climate change.The Uttarakhand State Disaster Management Agency is also supporting community radios in disasterprone areas, offering to build disaster-proof buildings for them if they commit to making programmes on disaster management. Kumaon Vani Radio in Mukteshwar has been working closely with the agency to increase disaster-preparedness among communities.But operating radios in the hills has its challenges, said Rajinder Negi, station manager, Henvalvani community radio in Tehri.“The signal is often blocked out by tall peaks. It was a challenge we faced when passing on information during Kedarnath floods. But in some cases, we were able to connect family members with those stranded,” he said.
