Tiger spotted in Marathwada after over four decades

After four decades,

in Marathwada

AURANGABAD/NAGPUR: A tiger has been spotted in the Marathwada region for the first time in more than four decades. The state forest department confirmed the presence of a young male tiger in Hingoli district of the region, who has travelled nearly 200km in five months so far while crossing huge tracts of farmland and even a swollen Painganga river.Tiger C1, who is more than 3 years old, is from the Tipeshwar wildlife sanctuary in Pandharkawda of Yavatmal district . As per records maintained by TOI, this is the fifth-longest recorded dispersal of a tiger. Since C1 is still on the move, it could set a new dispersal record. Tigers migrate to find new territory or in search of a mating partner.C1, which was radio-collared in February this year, was being continuously monitored by forest officials. From October 19 to 30, it was in the Umarkhed forest range under Pusad division of Yavatmal. On October 30, it was captured on camera in the Isapur sanctuary (Nanded-Yavatmal border). On Thursday, it entered Hingoli division of Marathwada. It had also briefly forayed into Adilabad district of Telangana.Hingoli district forest officer Keshav Wable on Friday said, "The tiger has killed four cows in two villages in Hingoli district and is currently staying put in the outskirts of Kalgaon village. It first killed a cow in Linde village (Hingoli taluka) on the night of October 30.Later, it killed three cows from nearby Kalgaon village. While nobody suspected it could be a tiger attack, the camera trap installed later in the rural parts have confirmed the presence of a tiger," he said.Aurangabad chief conservator of forests (territorial) P K Mahajan confirmed that the tiger is C1 from Tipeshwar. "As per official records, an incident of tiger hunting was recorded at Gautala Autramghat Sanctuary in 1972 and since then no tiger has been spotted in Marathwada," he said.C1 is the offspring of T1 of Tipeshwar. It also has two siblings - C2 and C3. C1 and C3 were radio-collared in February this year as part of a long-term monitoring project - 'Studying the dispersal of tigers across the Eastern Vidarbha Landscape (EVL) Maharashtra, India'.According to Ravikiran Govekar, field director of Pench Tiger Reserve which governs Tipeshwar WLS, C1 "extensively explored the landscape in Adilabad division, Pandharkawda division, FDCM Kinwat, Nanded division, Painganga sanctuary, Pusad division and Isapur sanctuary before entering Hingoli".It is in search of new territory and moving around extensively. Only a few cattle kills have been reported in the areas it has ventured into and there have been no other issues. Since it is in search of new territory having adequate prey base and a mate, C1 is expected to settle down in a suitable area soon. It is being monitored scientifically by the team of Wildlife Institute of India and local forest officers. We are trying our best to allow the tiger to follow its natural movements,” Govekar added.C3 is still in Tipeshwar while C2 has been seen in the Painganga sanctuary recently, according to Govekar. “In May-June, an interstate camera trapping exercise was done between Telangana and Maharashtra in Adilabad, Tipeshwar and Painganga corridor after movement of this tiger (C1),” said Govekar.Forest officials have refused to share pictures from the camera trap citing National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) rules. They added that the affected cattle owners will get compensation for their lost livestock.Villagers, panicked by C1’s presence, have been asked to stay calm. The forest department has also appealed to them not to sleep in the open and take care of their livestock by confining them in closed places during the night hours.Environmentalist Kishor Pathak said, “The forest authorities must not take any step under pressure from the local residents. They should counsel the villagers and take them into confidence till the tiger moves to a safe habitat.”
