Prepare for all-out battle: Rahul Gandhi to AICC functionaries

(This story originally appeared in on Feb 8, 2019)

(This article was originally published by The Economic Times on 08/02/2019)NEW DELHI: Congress chief Rahul Gandhi has asked AICC functionaries to prepare the party for an all-out electoral battle by projecting an inclusive and positive agenda for the nation and for the well-being of the poor and socially backward sections. He also said details of the party’s minimum income guarantee scheme promised to the poor would be given soon.Attending her first formal event as AICC general secretary, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said she would make any sacrifice to revive the Congress glory and “liberate” UP from “religion-caste communal divide”. She will address the UPCC executive in Lucknow on Monday. Priyanka and Jyotiraditya Scindia will interact with party workers at PCC office in Lucknow from February 12 to 14.The siblings were speaking at a meeting of AICC general secretaries and AICC incharges called by Rahul to prepare for the Lok Sabha elections. Addressing a news conference later, AICC general secretary (organisation) KC Venugopal and party spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said Priyanka thanked Rahul and other leaders for giving her an opportunity to serve the country. “She has assured everyone that she will work with Congress workers to make the Congress tree fully green…She will tirelessly work to revive the Congress in UP.”They also said Rahul had stressed on the need for finalising the list of Congress candidates for the Lok Sabha elections by the month-end and called for maximum possible representation for youth and women in the list. Congress leaders who lost two or three elections must make way for younger leaders, Rahul said.Addressing a conference organised by the AICC minority wing, earlier, Rahul launched a frontal attack on PM Modi by saying that the PM was a “coward” who ran away from his challenge for a debate on national security and the Rafale deal. “Modi is a coward. He will run away from debate on national security… If someone stands up to him, Modi runs away. I challenged the PM to a 10-minute debate on Rafale deal , but Modi is running away from the debate,” Gandhi claimed and added he “fully understood Modi, as I am fighting him for five years.”Mahila Congress chief Sushmita Dev said the proposed bill to ban instant triple talaq was flawed and vowed to scrap it.
