Happy B’day SRK: I Visited Mannat At 12 AM & Here’s Everything That Happened

Baazigar main baazigar, dil walon ka main dilbar...

Shah Rukh Khan celebrates his 54th birthday today, and as any diehard fan would know and tell you--the situation outside his house at midnight was wild! I’ve been living in Mumbai for a while now, and never did I think I would muster up the courage to venture down Bandstand in Bandra, and partake in a public celebration outside the filmstar’s residence, Mannat.

Last night, I decided to brave my Enochlophobia (fear of crowds) and experience what millions long to, every year. Why? Because Dil Toh Pagal Hai, man!

Mannat at midnight on 2 November

As I got off my cab about 20 meters from SRK’s home, it was as I’d imagined. Only much (read: MUCH) louder. Throngs of people were lined up in countless rows in spite of the pouring rain. They were screaming his name and frantically waving huge posters that read, “Happy Birthday SRK!” There were about 30 policemen scattered around the area, laathis in hand, exhausted expressions on their faces. Since I had a press card, I was allowed to walk right up ahead, bang opposite the popular cage-like podium on which he makes THE appearance of the year.

As I watched the crowds roar in anticipation, I worriedly asked a cop: “Do these guys rush forward once he’s out?” “Of course, it gets uncontrollable. Sab pagal ho jaate hai,” he warned. Obviously, he couldn't tell I was anxious about the probability of a stampede. I smiled sheepishly and silently asked the (SRK) universe to be kind.

Clock strikes 12, no sign of SRK

As I stood among wet SRKians who looked with awestruck eyes at his palatial home, I slowly but surely began to ease out and get comfortable. Soon, I found myself blending in well, looking at my watch and then at the dimly lit room on the third floor of Mannat--the only place in the building that seemed to have occupants.

Of course, there were a few false rumours doing the rounds there, one being that SRK was to make an appearance on a balcony located at the building on the right-hand-side of the 200-crore property, but after I confirmed with his security personnel, I focused on the original target. As the clock struck 12, and every person present began an exhilarating countdown, I braced myself for the moment. 3...2...1… Alas! There was no sight of the superstar.

Without giving up hope, the hordes of fans roared “We want Shah Rukh,” and started singing “Happy Birthday.”

The legend arrives

By 12.25 am, a cop van pulled up in the lane beside Mannat, sending the crowd into a bigger frenzy, as it seemed to signal that SRK’s arrival would be soon. The excitement was growing, and surprisingly, so was my threshold of tolerance. Then, at exactly 12.43 am came the moment we were waiting for.

Dressed in a black hoodie, blue baggy denims and sneakers, Shah Rukh climbed up the ladder to the podium, and with the warmest smile, waved in all his glory. From kids looking zapped, to oldies howling, I saw it all.

My goosebumps were testament to the magic that I could feel in those few minutes. SRK’s stardom felt almost tangible--the pulse of Bollywood-loving-Mumbai was striking!

Camera flashes, balloons floating around, gifts been tossed in the air, and of course, the Badshah, lapping it up. “Peeche hato, varna paani phenk ke marunga!” a police guy screamed. Did they care to oblige? Hell no! An official later told me, “They see Shah Rukh and go completely mad. Even if we whack them with the laathis, they don’t care.” Pretty much unstoppable!

Crowds slowly disperse

After SRK did his thing up there and went back in within 3-4 minutes, all that noise finally began to tone done and crowds slowly began to disperse. From the folks who came in Mercedes and Audis to those who traveled by autos, cycles and trains--every one slowly dissipated.

As thrilled fanatics replayed all the pixelated videos they shot on their smartphones, reveling in the magical instance they had just witnessed, I walked down the road feeling rather content myself. Back when I was in school, I’d often read about all the antics that fans were up to on 2nd November each year, and I’d daydream about what it would be like to be a part of this tradition at least once. I lived a miniscule but special dream last night. The craze, the commitment, the love in the air… it was all too overwhelming!

Here’s wishing my first love a happy birthday! I’ll love you Jab Tak Hai Jaan…




