'Killing of Maoists state-sponsored act': Kerala CPI demands magisterial probe

'Killing of Maoists state-sponsored act': Kerala CPI demands magisterial probe

Meanwhile, Kerala CM Pinarayi has backed the police action saying that they fired in self-defence.

news Politics

Expressing displeasure at the way four Maoists were gunned down in the forests near Palakkad this week by the Thunderbolt wing of the Kerala Police, the Communist Party of India (CPI) state leadership on Friday condemned the act as one that was "state-sponsored" and sought a magisterial probe.

Incidentally, the CPI is the second biggest ally of the ruling Left government led by Pinarayi Vijayan and right from the day of the incident, the CPI has condemned the act of the police.

A team of CPI leaders led by two legislators and party assistant secretary K. Prakash Babu, went deep into the forests to the site where the shooting took place, despite being asked to refrain from visiting the area. The team undertook the visit to assess the situation on what happened at the scene of the encounter.

Babu and his team walked close to three kilometres to reach the place and after going around the place told the media, "This was no encounter at all between the police and the Maoists. The four who were shot dead had bullet injuries on their back and the head. This clearly shows that it was nothing but a fake encounter. If it was a real encounter, one will be easily able to find out bullet marks on trees and such places. Just look at this place where we stand, does it signify an encounter having taken place here? This is nothing but a state-sponsored act of gunning down people," said Babu, who is a former legislator.

"This is in no way acceptable. We demand a magisterial probe as a probe by the police won't bring out anything. The need of the hour is to rein in the police who just cannot be allowed to act like this," added Babu.

Meanwhile, at the state secretariat meeting of the CPI(M) held in the state capital on Friday, the Chief Minister informed party members that the Maoists were heavily armed and had AK-47 and other weapons. Pinarayi backed the Thunderbolt personnel, claiming that they returned fire in self-defence, reported TNIE.

According to the police, the person killed on Tuesday was a top Maoist from Tamil Nadu, Mani Vasakam. His family has identified him and claimed the body.

The bodies of Suresh and Sreemathi, the other alleged Maoists who were slain in the encounter, have also been identified by their family members.

However, Murukeshan, the brother of Karthik, another alleged Maoist who was killed, had difficulty identifying his body. Speaking to ToI, Murukeshan said that his mother would have been able to identify the body better, however, she was not allowed to see the body. Karthik was from Tamil Nadu.

Since this Left government assumed office in 2016, eight Maoists have been gunned down, while during the rule of the Congress' Oommen Chandy, two Maoists were arrested in a joint operation from neighbouring states.

(With IANS inputs)
