PUNJABIS STUCK IN ARMENIA Kapurthala-based travel agent held

Hours after external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj spoke to chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh and asked him to apprehend the travel agents responsible for the plight of Punjabis stuck in Armenia, Punjab Police on Thursday arrested a travel agent in Kapurthala.

Komaldeep, 27, a resident of Jandiala in Amritsar, was working as a middleman for an Armenia-based travel agent, Harpreet Kaur, in Kapurthala and its surrounding areas.

Kapurthala senior superintendent of police (SSP) Satinder Singh said raids are on to nab the other accused booked for sending four people to Armenia fraudulently.

On Tuesday, Kapurthala police had registered three FIRs against six travel agents, including Harpreet, Gurdev Singh, Paramjeet Kaur, Parminder Kaur of Dhilwan, Komaldeep of Jandiala and Jaswinder Kaur of Beas in Amritsar under Section 420 (cheating) and Section 13 of the Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling Act, 2012, for duping Harmanjeet Singh of Nadala town, Jatinder Singh of Amritsar district, Shamsher Singh of Bholath and his wife Pinki.

The accused agent had sent them to Armenia on travel visa after promising him a work visa in December 2018, police said.

Earlier in the day, the CM assured Swaraj strict action against the agents. The CM also directed to director general of police (DGP) for appropriate action.

After talking to Amarinder, Swaraj also called up to Sangrur MP Bhagwant Mann, who brought the issue to her notice, and assured him that the accused agents will be arrested soon.

After HT report on February 7, Swaraj contacted to the Indian ambassador to Armenia and the four people from Punjab, who sent a video seeking help from Mann.

Swaraj tweeted: “I have seen the news report in Daily Hindustan dated 7th February reg four Indians from Punjab who are stranded in Armenia. Indian Ambassador in Armenia has reached them and is providing all help and assistance. @IndiainArmenia”.

“I have also spoken to @capt_amarinder, Chief Minister, Punjab to apprehend the concerned travel agents. He has promised immediate action in the matter,” she tweeted.

After Swaraj’s tweet, the CM replied: “@SushmaSwaraj ji a case has already been registered and I’ve instructed the @DGPPunjabPolice to take appropriate action against the suspects immediately. Will keep you informed”.

In the video, the youths claimed that they did not have food for five days and the landlord has asked them to leave the place.

“We are receiving hundreds applications and videos on daily biases from abroad but the state government is not serious about the matter. If we want to save our youth from fake travel agents, the government should set an example by punishing these agents,” Mann said.
