EXCLUSIVE | Shiv Sena ready to form government in Maharashtra if BJP fails, says Sanjay Raut

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut (in picture) declared that the party have the support of people to attain the magical number -- 145. (Photo: India Today)

Amid no end to deadlock over power-sharing with its ally BJP over the formation of the next government in Maharashtra, Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut said the party is all set to form the government in the state if the BJP fails to do so.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut, speaking exclusively to India Today TV, declared that they have the support of people to attain the magical number -- 145.

"If BJP fails to form the government, Shiv Sena will give a magical figure of 145. Shiv Sena is very capable of forming the government. We are ready. We have the support letter of people who are ready to help us to form the government. We will take it to the Governor if BJP fails to form a government," Sanjay Raut said.

Sanjay Raut assured that the Shiv Sena is one step away from forming the government in Maharashtra, adding that he is not just making these statements for the sake of it.

"We have the majority. Mein hawa mein nahi bol raha. (I am not simply making statements). Look at this document -- everything is ready. I will just say that we have the figure," Sanjay Raut told India Today TV.

'First, let BJP get chance'

Sena's Sanjay Raut, however, said the BJP should get an opportunity to form the government first as they are are the single largest party. The BJP emerged as the single largest party by winning 105 seats while the Sena emerged victorious on 56 seats. The total strength of the Maharashtra assembly is 288.

"First of all, BJP is the largest party, they should get the opportunity to form the government first. They took so many people from Congress and NCP and with them, they went till 105. They have ED and Governor house to get the magical figure of 145. Today, they are threatening President's rule," Sanjay Raut said.

Blaming the BJP for failing to form government till now, Sanjay Raut said: "There is a lot of delay in the formation of the government. BJP has the list of newly elected MLAs and they have to submit the list to the Governor. We also have doubts as to why are they not going ahead with it. It seems that BJP has failed to form the government."

Sanjay Raut also went on to say that the Governor should have taken "suo moto action" till now in Maharashtra government formation.

"Here, the Governor has full rights to find ways to form a government. The Governor should have taken suo moto action which too is not happening right. We are very much concerned," Sanjay Raut said.

'BJP is lying'

Stressing that there is no point in presenting new power sharing proposals now, Sanjay Raut said the 50-50 formula with BJP was decided before the assembly elections in the presence of Amit Shah and Devendra Fadnavis. However, the BJP changed its stance post poll results.

"There is not point of proposals and all. When the alliance was declared, it happened in front of BJP's Amit Shah, Devendra Fadnavis and they said that everything will be distributed equally. But, after elections, BJP changed their tune," he said.

Sanjay Raut also said there have been no talks held between Shiv Sena and BJP after the poll results, adding that the latter is "lying".

"BJP is lying. There have been no talks with BJP. Why should we talk if formula was decided? If they don't want to implement formula, they don't know any such formula and they are lying on camera. No talks with them at all right now," Sanjay Raut said.

Oath-taking at Wankhede?

With no clarity on Maharashtra government formation, the BJP had earlier booked the Wankhede Stadium for November 5 for the swearing-in ceremony.

Reacting to this, Sanjay Raut said: "See if they have majority let them do it at Wankhede Stadium or where they have sent Chandrayaan-2, let them do it there. What is stopping them from doing it? But, nine days have passed since the results and the government is still not formed. We also want government to be formed. Maharashtra wants stability."

"Till now I have not seen anyone waiting for the tenure to get over. And the oath-taking ceremony is before the term gets over. And November 9 is the last day of this government. I think till last breath, till last hour Devendra Fadnavis will stay CM. After that, what Devendra Fadnavis and Governor will do, we don't know."

The Shiv Sena has been locked in a bitter battle with the BJP over sharing of power since the results of the assembly elections were declared on October 24.

BJP with 105 seats and 15 Independents and Shiv Sena with 56 seats and 7 independents are very well in the majority and in a position to form the government in Maharashtra. The simple majority mark in the house of 288 is 145.

However, both -- Shiv Sena and BJP -- have been locked in a tussle over "kaun banega mukhyamantri".
