Tis Hazari scuffle: 20 police officials injured, vehicles vandalised in clash with lawyers over parking

New Delhi: Vehicles torched, shots fires outside Tis Hazari court after cops, lawyers clash | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: A scuffle broke out between police personnel and lawyers outside the Tis Hazari Court in New Delhi on Saturday. The lawyers alleged that two of their colleagues were injured in the clash, including one in police firing. The injured lawyers have been admitted to St Stephen's Hospital.

The scuffle reportedly broke out following an argument over parking between a lawyer and a cop which turned ugly. The lawyers accused the police of opening fire on them as the situation escalated, but the police denied the charges.

"A police vehicle hit the vehicle of a lawyer while he was coming to the court. When the lawyer confronted them he was ridiculed and 6 police personnel carried him inside & thrashed him. People saw this and called the police," Jai Biswal, Tis Hazari Bar association's office-bearer was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

"SHO and local police came there but were not allowed to go inside. We informed the High Court, a team was sent there along with six judges but even they were not allowed to go in. When they started leaving, cops fired bullets," he added.

Meanwhile, Delhi Police said that 20 police officials, including an Additional DCP and two SHOs and eight advocates, sustained injuries during the brawl. An inquiry team headed by a Special CP will inquire into the matter, the police said.

Delhi: A scuffle has broken out between Delhi Police and lawyers at Tis Hazari court. One lawyer injured and admitted to hospital. A vehicle has been set ablaze at the premises. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/8wrvNXuLLT — ANI (@ANI) November 2, 2019

The lawyers set ablaze a police vehicle and vandalised eight others in the vicinity and locked down the compound disallowing media and police personnel to enter the premises. An ANI journalist was allegedly attacked by lawyers while he was covering the scuffle.

Commenting on the incident, the chairman of Bar Council of India slammed the Delhi Police and said that it will not be tolerated.

"It is a very brutal action of Delhi Police. Simply, because of some parking issue, police started firing on innocent advocates. Bar Council cannot tolerate this," Manan Kumar Mishra said.

The police have locked down the premises to prevent the situation from worsening.

Meanwhile, lawyers sat on a protest at the gate of the court premises, alleging that police personnel had opened fire during the incident and demanded action against those responsible.

Delhi Congress chief Subhash Chopra reached the court complex along with party members and called for action against the personnel involved in the clash.
