Kartik Aaryan during struggling days was told by casting director that he would be jobless

Bollywood’s handsome young man Kartik Aaryan is known for his good looks and charming screen presence.

Mumbai: Bollywood’s handsome young man Kartik Aaryan is known for his good looks and charming screen presence. He has a massive number of fans on social media much of which is dominated by females. The actor who is currently at the highest peak of his career remembered his days of struggle.

In an interview with Filmfare magazine, Kartik opened up on the phase of rejections and criticism he had undergone.

The ‘Luka Chuppi’ actor was once told by a casting director that he will be a good for nothing person. Kartik revealed, “After queuing up for hours for auditions and then being told in front of everyone, ‘Go. You’re not fit,’ was humiliating. It breaks your self-confidence. A popular casting director would ignore me. He’d say, ‘Iska kuch nahin ho sakta. He won’t get work even in ads and serials. He’s wasting his time. He’ll end up struggling all his life”.

Later after watching one of the films of Kartik the casting director realized his rude behavior. He took back his harsh words and apologized. Kartik said further, “He called me and said, ‘I’m extremely sorry. The only time I went wrong in my whole career was with you. You proved me wrong”.

The actor further gave insights about his struggling days. He spoke about getting to know on the auditions for Pyaar Ka Punchnama via Facebook.

“I read about the auditions of Pyaar Ka Punchnama (PKP) on one of the FB walls. I had no money to make a portfolio. So I cropped my pictures from the college album and sent it to them. They called me for the auditions. The process carried on for six months. Finally, Punchnama happened. My monologue from the film went viral. It was on everyone’s phone. It was trending everywhere – on FB as well. It’s funny that the same platform, which led me to the Punchnama audition, brought me fame. People started calling me ‘the monologue boy’. The film became a sleeper hit” he said.

If this hardship wasn’t enough the actor also faced an accident in an auto before shooting for the romantic film ‘Pyaar Ka Punchnaama’.

“My autorickshaw overturned and my leg got stuck in it. I was badly injured. I was taken to the hospital on a cycle by strangers. I called my mom and began crying that I’d lose the film. When director Luv Ranjan and producers Kumar Mangat and Abhishek Pathak came to see me that night, I begged them, ‘Sir please mujhe film se mat nikalna’. Thankfully, they waited for me” he said.

On the work front, the actor will be next seen in touted sequel to Love Aaj Kal by Imtiaz Ali releasing on Valentine’s Day. His other films include Bhool Bhulaiyya 2, slated to release on July 31 2020 and Pati Patni Aur Woh on December 6 2019.
