Huzurnagar win does little to help TRS turn the tables on opposition

HYDERABAD: The resounding victory in Huzurnagar appears to be short-lived for the ruling TRS thanks to the unrelenting fight put up by the RTC joint action committee (JAC) in the last 28 days.TRS leaders were under the impression that after the Huzurnagar verdict, all the political parties like BJP, Congress, CPI and others would disassociate themselves from the RTC strike and the employees' unions would call off the strike.With confidence sky high, chief minister and TRS president K Chandrasekhar Rao, who addressed the media on the day (October 24) when the election result was out, attacked the RTC unions and also the political parties. He thought the RTC workers would distance themselves from the strike and give representations to the respective depot managers to admit them back in duties. But, only one driver has come forward till now.In fact, the strike has intensified with the employees and political parties sticking their neck out by actively taking part in agitations and meetings. The huge success of 'Sakula Janula Samme' on October 30 couldn't have come at a worse time for the TRS leadership. KCR has reportedly decided to expose both the parties by claiming that they do not run public transport in states where they govern and have privatised RTCs totally or partially. He also wants to make it clear that RTC merger with the government is next to impossible and privatising routes is the only way out.Sources close to CM said in BJP-ruled Uttar Pradesh which has a population of 20 crore, there are only 12,000 buses with the state-run RTC and about 50,000 routes have been privatised. In Telangana , the government is proposing to privatise 4,000 routes only, officials argued. In Chhattisgarh, majority routes have been handed over to private operators. In Congress-ruled Madhya Pradesh, the state transport corporation was closed in 2005 and private operators run buses. In Jharkhand, all the 6,000 routes have been privatised.To corner BJP, the state government said though the Centre has a stake of 31% in TSRTC, it has never offered help to the corporation.
