Sharad Pawar to meet Sonia on Sunday?

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, November 2

Nationalist Congress Party leader Sharad Pawar is likely to meet Congress party president Sonia Gandhi on Sunday to discuss formation of a coalition government in Maharashtra, according to sources here.

Pawar was earlier due to hold a meeting with Sonia Gandhi on Monday. The meeting has been brought forward to Sunday amidst indication that Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis may stake claim to form the government even without support from the Shiv Sena, according to sources.

One of the proposals under consideration between the two parties is of the Congress providing outside support to a coalition government by the Shiv Sena and the Nationalist Congress Party. The Congress party’s leaders are divided about partnering with the Shiv Sena for forming the government. While former Chief Ministers Prithviraj Chavan and Ashok Chavan are said to be keen on forming a non-BJP government, other leaders like Sushilkumar Shinde and AICC General Secretary in-charge of Maharashtra Mallikarjun Kharge want the Congress to sit it out.

Pawar has been holding meetings with the Shiv Sena and the Congress ever since the results of the elections to the Maharashtra assembly were announced last week.

Meanwhile, the Shiv Sena continued to carry on its attack against the BJP on Saturday. Sanjay Raut, Shiv Sena’s Rajya Sabha MP and editor of party mouthpiece Saamna, hit out at the BJP for threatening president’s rule in Maharashtra. “Is the President of India in your pocket?,” Raut asked while speaking to reporters here. He said President’s Rule is imposed only after all options have been exhausted.

The Shiv Sena leader, however, said he was still hopeful of a 50:50 power sharing deal with the BJP. “The Shiv Sena will stick to the coalition dharma till the end,” Raut said.

State BJP president Chandrakant Patil too told reporters that the issue with the Shiv Sena would be resolved soon. However others in the BJP said the party may stake claim with the support of some Independent MLAs and woo rebels in other parties to help Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis win the vote of confidence.

A new government has to be sworn in by November 9 when the term of the Maharashtra assembly comes to an end.
