2008 CRPF camp attack: Four awarded death sentence, one gets life imprisonment

After hearing the arguments, the forum observed that the complainant’s claim had been wrongly repudiated.

A Rampur court on Saturday awarded the death sentence to four accused, including two Pakistani nationals, for the 2008 attack on a CRPF camp in which eight people were killed. A fifth accused was sentenced to life in prison.

The four given the capital punishment are Pakistani nationals and alleged Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) operatives Imran Shahzad (42) and Mohammad Farooq (41), as well as Mohammad Shareef (41) and Sabauddin (40). The fifth accused, Jung Bahadur, was sentenced to life in prison.

The family of CRPF personnel Anand Kumar, who was killed in attack, said they were satisfied with the judgment. Kumar’s brother Bittu Kumar said, “We were regularly demanding the death sentence for the people involved in the attack. My family is satisfied with today’s judgment.”

Defence Counsel M S Khan said they would file appeal against the court’s judgment.

The court on Friday had convicted all five, while acquitting two others — Gulab Khan (41) and Mohammad Kausar (48) —for want of evidence.

Sabauddin is also facing trial in connection with the December 2005 attack at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, in which one retired professor was killed. The trial in the case is going on through video-conference from the Lucknow district jail, said a jail official.

In a separate case Saturday, the Rampur court sentenced Mumbai native Faheem Ansari to 10 years’ imprisonment.

Police said they had recovered two hand grenades, a pistol, a fake Mumbai driving licence,a Pakistani passport and nine hand-drawn maps of Mumbai from Ansari. One of the maps was said to have carried sketches of the routes in Mumbai used by Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorists in the November 28, 2008 attack.

“The court has awarded 10 years’ imprisonment to Faheem Ansari. The court’s judgment would be sent to jail, and its officers would calculate how much time he has served,” said a government counsel.

Sabauddin and Ansari had faced trial in the Mumbai terror attack case, but were acquitted by a court in that city.
