Surat history-sheeter gave pistol to Kamlesh Tewari killers

SURAT: Yusuf Ishrat Khan , 24, a city resident, arrested by Gujarat Police and Uttar Pradesh Police from Kanpur on Saturday for his links with people who killed the leader of Hindu Samaj Party, has a criminal background. He was arrested in a joint operation by the police of two states for providing the pistol to the accused which was used by them to murder Kamlesh Tewari. Khan had been arrested by city police in multiple cases, including Arms Act, in the past.Khan began his criminal career by joining the gang of Hasim Siddiqui in Limbayat area of the city. Hasim’s gang is involved in extortion and land disputes. Khan parted ways with Hasim in 2017 and both were waiting for an opportunity to attack each other.Khan suspected Hasim of getting him arrested by crime branch officials in 2018 with three pistols. He told police that he brought the pistols for his personal safety since he faced threat from Hasim. However, police investigation revealed that he had brought the pistols from Uttar Pradesh to sell them to buyers in the city to make quick money.On September 13, 2018, Khan was shot at by an unidentified assailant on platform no 1 of Surat railway station when he got down from Ranakpur Express. Two bullets hit him and he was shifted in a critical condition to a hospital. Khan had suffered bullet injuries under chest and right hand. Sarfaraz alias Shibu alias Tiger Mohammad Shaikh, 26, a welder and member of Hasim’s gang, was arrested by police on September 16 for the attack. Shaikh told police that he had personal enmity with Khan since the day they worked for Hasim.Khan’s name cropped up in an extortion offence registered with crime branch in July 2019. The accused and his accomplices had threatened a businessman of action posing as officials of GST, customs and police departments. The gang had extorted over Rs56 lakh from the businessman, threatening to book him for tax evasion. Khan is yet to be arrested in this offence.“Khan is one of the accused and a part of the gang that was involved in extortion. He had been on the run ever since registration of the offence,” said a police officer in crime branch.
