Shutdown, demos in IOK on Guru’s anniversary

Srinagar, February 07, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, complete shutdown will be observed on Saturday and Monday to mark the martyrdom anniversaries of prominent Kashmiri martyred leaders, Muhammad Afzal Guru and Muhammad Maqbool Butt.

Call for the strike has been given by the Joint Resistance Leadership comprising Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik. Giving details of protest calendar, the leadership in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, said that on the martyrdom day of Muhammad Afzal Guru on Saturday, 9th of February, a complete shutdown would be observed across the Valley. On 10th of February, prayers will be held in all main masajid for these martyrs.

Recalling the sacrifice of martyr Muhammad Maqbool Butt, the JRL said that a complete shutdown would be observed on Monday, 11th of February 2019. Besides shutdown, protest demonstrations will be held at Lal Chowk in Srinagar demanding the return of mortal remains of these martyrs to their motherland for a proper burial. A memorandum will also be sent to UN Secretary General, seeking the intervention of the World Body for settlement of the Kashmir dispute.

India had hanged Muhammad Afzal Guru in New Delhi’s Tihar Jail on 9th of February, 2013 and Muhammad Maqbool Butt, on 11th of February, 1984 for their role in Kashmir freedom movement. Their bodies remain buried in the premises of the jail.

The Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, in a statement in Srinagar said that the stubborn attitude of Indian leadership was responsible for the continued bloodshed in the Valley. He paid rich tributes to the youth martyred by Indian troops during a cordon and search operation in Pulwama district, yesterday.

Meanwhile, thousands of people braving heavy snow participated in funeral prayers of martyred youth, Irfan Ahmed Shaikh, at Chakoora in Pulwama district, today. Four rounds of funeral prayers were held for the youth who was killed by Indian troops during a cordon and search operation at Chakoora, yesterday. He was buried amid massive pro-freedom and anti-India slogans.

A report submitted by the Senior Superintendent of police before the Human Rights Commission in Srinagar, today, revealed that the police had closed Gaw Kadal massacre case. More than 50 innocent people were killed when personnel of Indian Central Reserve Police Force opened indiscriminate fire on protesters at Gawkadal Bridge in Srinagar on January 21 in 1990. Indian police filed a charge-sheet against illegally detained Kashmiri journalist, Asif Sultan, along with nine others in a false case registered against them in August 2018.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
