Just like dad

Mithun Chakraborty

Rajkumar Santoshi

bindaas

Shah Rukh Khan

Akshay Kumar

Shakti Kapoor

Gulshan Grover

misgivings

Even before he can introduce himself, the uncanny resemblance gives Namashi away — he is celebrated actor’s son. Having recently wrapped up the shoot for his debut feature,’s Bad Boy, the 27-year-old is not one to discount how his lineage has helped him bag a break in Bollywood.“Let’s be honest, Rajkumar Santoshi wouldn’t have even met me if I wasn’t Mithun Chakraborty’s son,” says the actor, who has been paired with Amrin Qureshi, also a debutante, in the “romcom about aboy who falls for a girl who has an entirely different personality”.Ask him why he has started acting so late and he says it’s because of his father. “When I was 22, I really wanted to work in films, but my father felt that I looked far too young and immature, and that I will get easily typecast,” he says. At the time, he was offered to play a part in a multi-starrer, which his father convinced him to turn down. “That film was a blockbuster, but the actor who played the role I was offered hasn’t got any work since...”Growing up in Ooty, where incidentally, Mithun has “shot more films than in Mumbai”, and where he runs a string of hotels today, Namashi always felt at one with the film industry. “I literally grew up on the sets, and almost every actor who has shot in Ooty, fromandto Govinda, would come and stay with us,” he says. Sometimes, encounters with stars, especially those who played leading villains back in the day, would be rather traumatic. “When I would seeor, for instance, I would run in the opposite direction, and accuse them of doing horrible things to my dad,” he says. “That’s how obsessed I was with films.”Unlike Namashi, who was a regular fixture at his dad’s film sets, his disco dancer daddy, he says, only dropped in a few times on his film shoot. “We were shooting at HMT grounds in Bengaluru at 5 am on the first day. I was very nervous. Raj-ji [Rajkumar Santoshi] is a tough guy who screams and shouts if you don’t get things right. Then suddenly, I saw a familiar face smiling from a distance,” he says. “My dad had come to surprise me. I was like ‘ek aur teacher aa gaya’. But he just said that I was doing exceedingly well for a newcomer.”Like many who harbour dreams of making it in films, Namashi signed up for Kishore Namit Kapoor’s classes, followed by Alok Ulfat’s intensive workshops, to sharpen his acting skills. Once he felt he was ready to test the waters, he joined Improv Comedy Mumbai, a collective of comics, and took to performing at live gigs.“Doing comedy in the age of trolling was not easy. But I wanted to be independent and try and make it without using my dad’s name,” he says. This, however, turned into a futile pursuit, despite “joining every casting WhatsApp group and doing the Aram Nagar rounds”.“The first time I auditioned, it was for a chocolate commercial, and I cracked it. But as destiny would have it, my maternal uncle passed away the following day, so I had to opt out and be with my mother,” he says. “Casting agents post requirements for actors like ‘young, fair complexion, curly hair and tall’, and when I’d turn up for auditions, there would be 40 people who would fit that description perfectly. Sometimes, if my name was lower in the list, I wouldn’t even get a chance to audition as most casting agents tend to pick someone from the first 20 people they screen.”Being a Chakraborty naturally comes with its share of. “Anyone who meets me wants to know if I can dance and act like my dad,” he says. “Well, I’ve got a break in films without an audition thanks to him. Now, my performance will decide whether I deserve the second film.”
