30-year-old TN man arrested for allegedly murdering mother, grievously injuring father

30-year-old TN man arrested for allegedly murdering mother, grievously injuring father

Early on Saturday, Prakash attacked his mother Pappathi (49) and his father Arumugam (53) with a weightlifting rod.

news Murder

The Trichy police on Saturday arrested a 30-year-old man for allegedly murdering his mother and grievously injuring his father. The accused, identified as Prakash of Ganesapuram attacked his mother Pappathi (49) and his father Arumugam (53) with a weightlifting rod over an argument in the early hours of Saturday. He then surrendered before the Golden Rock Police at around 3.00 am on Saturday.

While Pappathi died on the way to the hospital, Prakash’s father is currently undergoing treatment at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Government Hospital.

Prakash was allegedly involved in a verbal argument with his mother during the wee hours of Saturday when the attack took place. He had just returned home after having dropped his wife off at her parents’ house in Oddanchathiram, Dindigul. Due to repeated quarrels between her and his mother, Prakash’s wife had decided to spend some days at her maternal home. Prakash had married nine months ago and his mother Pappathi was allegedly not on good terms with her daughter-in-law.

Unable to take the constant fights in the house, Prakash grew angry with his parents for making him send his wife away to her parents’ place. A case of murder has been booked against him and he has been arrested. According to TOI, Prakash is unemployed.

In December last year, the Tambaram bus terminus in Chennai bore witness to a gruesome murder as a man hacked his mother to death and attacked his sister, allegedly over a property dispute. The accused, Devarajan, had filed a case in the Chengalpattu district civil court against his mother, Muthamma, and sister, Vijayalakshmi, seeking a share in the property.

In the court, Muthamma stated that Devarajan was not taking care of her and that it was her daughter who was doing it. She had said that she did not consider Devarajan to get a share in the property. Enraged, Devarajan attacked both of them while they were on their way back home after the hearing.
