Alliance University V-C Ayyappa Dore murder: Bengaluru police make three more arrests

Alliance University V-C Ayyappa Dore murder: Bengaluru police make three more arrests

Police say that the prime accused, Suraj Singh, had offered to pay the three persons Rs 20 lakh each.

news Crime

The Bengaluru police probing the murder of Ayyappa Dore, the former Vice Chancellor of Alliance University, have arrested three more persons in connection with the crime. Ayyappa Dore was hacked to death with machetes and knives on the night of October 15 at HMT grounds in Bengaluru's RT Nagar.

Manjunath alias Manju (26), a resident of Bengaluru's JC Nagar; Srinivas (18), from Munireddypalya; and Mahendra (31), from Anekal, were arrested on Saturday. Investigating officers say that the prime accused in the case, Suraj Singh, an employee of Alliance Unversity, hired the trio to allegedly conduct reconnaissance missions before the murder. All three of them are unemployed. “They are all college dropouts and Suraj Singh had offered each person Rs 20 lakh," a senior police official said.

Suraj Singh had allegedly assured them jobs at Alliance University. Manjunath, Mahendra and Srinivas were allegedly in-charge of scouting the area surrounding the grounds and were also in charge of surveilling Ayyappa Dore. "They also arranged for the vehicle that brought in all the accused to HMT grounds. The weapons were also arranged by these three persons," the police official added.

Suraj Singh, who worked as a legal affairs manager for Chancellor Sudhir Angur, had allegedly been promised Rs 1 crore to carry out the murders of Ayyappa Dore and Madhukar Angur, Sudhir's brother. Sudhir had allegedly promised Suraj the money so he could leave the country with his girlfriend, Salma, who is also an accused in the case. Both Sudhir and Suraj were arrested on October 16.

“We have questioned Madhukar Angur and he informed us that he had met Ayyappa Dore two days before the murder. Ayyappa Dore had informed Madhukar about his suspicion of being followed and watched all the time. Madhukar told us that he too felt that he was being followed," the police official added. The police had earlier arrested other accused persons — Ganesh, Sunil Rao, Anil Kumar, Fayaz, Rizwana, Kantharaj, Vinay and Salma.

Police say that Sudhir allegedly confessed to contracting the murder of Ayyappa Dore on October 10 after he received a call from the latter on October 9, where Ayyappa had demanded that Sudhir repay Rs 4.5 crore that he had borrowed from within 24 hours. Sudhir allegedly tasked Suraj to hire men to kill Ayyappa Dore on October 10, after the phone call.

Also read: Murdered Alliance Uni ex-VC allegedly had financial tiff with Chancellor Sudhir
