Tis Hazari Court violence: Delhi HC issues notices to Centre, Bar council, Delhi Government

Lawyers and police clashed at the Tis Hazari Court complex in Delhi on Saturday afternoon, in which at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured. (Photo: PTI)

Delhi High Court Chief Justice has taken suo moto cognizance of the tussle at the Tiz Hazari Court.

Delhi HC has also issued notice to the Centre, Bar Council of India, Bar Council of Delhi, Delhi government, and all the Bar associations of district courts of Delhi and the Delhi High Court Bar Association.

Four FIRs have been lodged in the matter. One on the complaint of District judge. One on the complaint of police personnel and two on the complaint of lawyers.

"We have sat yesterday for around 4 hours... we have sat today also... We want to diffuse the situation.. it should be a collective effort, " Delhi Chief Justice DN Patel said. The matter will now be heard at 3 pm.

Additional Sessions Judge Pinki has inspected the incident spot today. 'Lok Adalat' scheduled for today in Court, has also been cancelled.

Tis Hazari Court Police-Lawyers clash: 'Lok Adalat' scheduled for today in Court, has been cancelled. #Delhi pic.twitter.com/S8f5DXRitS ANI (@ANI) November 3, 2019

A cross FIR has now been filed in the matter based on complaints of both the side. The cross FIR has been registered under sections 307 (attempt to murder), 186 ( Obstructing public servant), 353 (assault on public servant) and 427 (mischief causing damage) of the Indian Penal Code. The FIR has been registered on the basis of complaints received from both parties (police and lawyers).

A special investigation team (SIT) has also been formed by the police to look into the matter which left at least 20 policemen and eight lawyers injured. Twelve motorcycles, one Gypsy van, eight jail vans that were outside the lockup were demolished. Some vehicles were set on fire.

Since the incident, police deployment has increased inside court premises and police in all districts are on high alert. The police are also going to scan the CCTV and mobile footage from the spot to ascertain what actually happened on Saturday.

Lawyers and police clashed at the Tis Hazari Court complex in Delhi on Saturday afternoon, in which at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured while 17 vehicles vandalised, according to officials and eyewitnesses.

Lawyers claimed that four of their colleagues were injured, including one in police firing.

Delhi: Lawyers injured in the scuffle with Delhi police, at Tis Hazari Court, have been admitted to St Stephen's Hospital. pic.twitter.com/HauUDGzEne ANI (@ANI) November 2, 2019

Following the incident, the lawyers called for a strike and they will be staging a protest on Monday. The Bar Council of Delhi has also decided to grant Rs 2 lakh each of the two lawyers who are currently in ICU and Rs 50,000 to the lawyers who got injured.

The policeman who fired at the crowd is still hospitalized. Accordingly to police, his statement will be taken, when he is fit for the same, to assess the exact sequence of firing. One of the SHOs who was injured in the violence at Tis Hazari Court received 10 stitches while another is in the ICU.

Delhi:Station House Officer(SHO) Rajeev Bhardwaj received stitches after being injured in the Police-lawyers clash at Tis Hazari Court yesterday. (Pic Source: Police) pic.twitter.com/PXP2fL6wuK ANI (@ANI) November 3, 2019

According to eyewitnesses, when the lawyers attacked the policemen, those in khaki ran to the lock-up in the court premises to save themselves. The crowd of lawyers outside tried to break the lock of the cell, failing which they set fire to the front portion.

The resultant violence left many policemen injured and they had to take cover in the lock-up till additional forces did not reach the spot.

Delhi HC CJ meets senior judges

On Saturday, Delhi High Court Chief Justice DN Patel held an over five-hour-long meeting with senior judges on Saturday regarding the clash.

The meeting, which got over around 9.40 pm, was also attended by the joint commissioner of police, New Delhi deputy commissioner of police and Delhi additional chief secretary, high court Registrar General Dinesh Kumar Sharma said.

According to the registrar general, the chief justice has taken a "very serious view" of the matter and the high court was "deeply concerned about the safety of litigants and lawyers". In the meeting, the senior police officers said an FIR had been lodged and the investigation was on.
