Four cases registered in Tis Hazari violence; HC issues notice

uttara@tribuneindia.com

New Delhi, November 3

Delhi Police registered four FIRs in Saturday’s violence between policemen and lawyers that left several people wounded on both sides, Delhi Police spokesperson said on Sunday.

The development comes hours after Delhi High Court issued notices to Centre, Delhi government, police over Tis Hazari violence.

The cases were registered on separate complaints of the district judge of Tis Hazari court, two advocates, and a Delhi Police constable who was injured in the incident, additional PRO of the Delhi Police Anil Mittal said.

On the complaint of the district judge, a case has been registered on the charges of obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions, assault and rioting, the spokesperson said.

Two cases have been registered against police personnel on the complaint of two advocates, including a woman, on the charge of attempt to murder, voluntarily causing hurt, wrongful confinement, criminal intimidation, theft and use of criminal force on woman with intent of outraging her modesty.

Another case was filed on the complaint of a police constable, injured in the incident, on the charge of obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions, assault, attempt to murder, rioting and robbery, Mittal said.

The Delhi High Court issued notices and sought responses of the Centre, Delhi police commissioner and the chief secretary on the clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari court here on Sunday.

A Bench headed by Chief Justice DN Patel decided to conduct an urgent hearing on the issue after taking suo motu cognisance of media reports on the incident.

The Bench initiated the proceedings at around 1 pm and issued notices to the authorities. It will take up the matter again at 3 pm. It asked the police officers, who were allegedly involved in the clashes, to be present in the court at 3 pm.

The Delhi Police was represented by advocate Rahul Mehra, while senior advocate Mohit Mathur appeared for Delhi High Court Bar Association.

The Bench said it wants to defuse the situation and the judges held a meeting for four hours last evening and they are here since morning to calm down the situation. The court also issued notices to the Bar Council of Delhi and all the bar associations of the Delhi district courts.

Lawyers and police had clashed at Tis Hazari Court complex here on Saturday afternoon during which at least 10 police personnel and several lawyers were injured while 17 vehicles vandalised, according to officials and eyewitnesses.

Lawyers had claimed that four of their colleagues were injured, including one in police firing, but police denied that it had opened fire.

The injured included Additional Commissioner of Police (North District) Harinder Kumar, SHOs of Kotwali and civil lines, and the operator of deputy commissioner of police (north), police had alleged.

Registrar General (RG) Dinesh Kumar Sharma said a closed-door meeting was held in the morning by the chief justice and senior most judges of the high court.

The meeting was also attended by senior police officers and additional chief secretary of the Delhi government, he said.

After the meeting got over, the court decided to hold a hearing at 1 pm, he said.

The Bar Council of India has written a letter to the high court seeking a direction to the Delhi lieutenant governor and other authorities to lodge an FIR under Section 307 (attempt to murder) and other relevant provisions of the Arms Act against the police officials.

The letter also sought immediate arrest of responsible police officials and initiation of a judicial enquiry by a retired Supreme Court or high court judge. PTI
