Twitter showers love on Soundarya Rajinikanth and Vishagan Vanangamudi as pre-wedding reception pics go viral

Twitterati shower love on Soundarya Rajinikanth on pre-wedding reception | Photo Credit: Twitter

Looks like the wedding bells have started ringing in for superstar Rajinikanth's daughter and Tamil filmmaker Soundarya Rajinikanth. A pre-wedding reception was hosted for her forthcoming marriage to actor-businessman Vishagan Vanangamudi by the megastar-turned-politician aka Thalaiva.

The pre-wedding reception was hosted at Raghavendra Kalyana Mandapam in Kodambakkam, Chennai. The bride had looked ethereal in a yellow and blue silk sari and the groom too looked splendid in the traditional attire.

As soon as the first photos started pouring in, fans started bestowing their love upon the VIP 2 producer and the Vanjagar Ulagam actor. Check out the photos as well as some of the fan reactions below.

Long live god bless couples — mathavan with sakthi ,#2. 0 (@mathan051980) February 8, 2019

Rajini sir daughter Soundarya's marriage reception pictures.

Latest one.#Rajnikanth



We wish ur daughter a very peaceful happy married life dear @rajinikanth sir.

Lots of love and best wishes from ur fans. pic.twitter.com/45MXEqziQN — Sana_khan (@AnnaTom10) February 8, 2019

Return gift by @rajinikanth's family on occasion of his daughter Soundarya's reception today. pic.twitter.com/kAb2eicy6X — bharathnt (@bharath1) February 8, 2019

Only recently, the couple had posed for a photo shoot and looked absolutely made for each other in the pictures. Check out the photos below. Twinning in monochrome outfits, the two looked absolutely perfect together as they were all smiles in the recently-surfaced photos.

The couple is ready to tie the knot on February 11, 2019, reportedly. Soundarya is 2.0 star Rajinikanth's younger daughter. She had begun her career in the south Indian cinema as a graphic designer for various Tamil movies including Sivaji, Chandramukhi, Sivakasi, etc.

She went on to make her directorial debut with the 2014 movie Kochadaiiyaan and has also produced the 2010 movie Goa. She is next expected to produce Ponniyin Selvan, which is likely to hit the theatres later this year. Vishagan owns Apex Laboratories Pvt. Ltd, a pharmaceutical firm. Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
