Mumbai police raids 'khabri adda- dance bar' in Malad; 22 arrested, 10 dancers rescued

Reportedly, the arrested include stewards, waiters, supervisor, cashier and manager. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police arrested 22 persons, including 14 customers and rescued 10 bar dancers The bar is owned by a police informer named Mahendrakumar Bhandari Further probe in the case has been handed over to the Dindoshi police.

Mumbai: The Mumbai Police's Anti Narcotics Cell (ANC) on Saturday raided a dance bar in suburban Malad area of the commercial capital. The police arrested 22 persons, including 14 customers and rescued 10 bar dancers.

The police officials seized Rs 93,930 and musical instruments from the premises. A police official told media person that the Kaka Bar and Restaurant (where the raid was conducted) is known to be frequented by so-called police informers, on Poddar Road. The official added that they have rescued 10 bar girls who were seen performing on a makeshift dance floor. According to a report, the bar is owned by a police informer named Mahendrakumar Bhandari. In 2015, the police had arrested 28 people for indecent behaviour from the same bar.

ANC Deputy Commissioner Shivdeep Lande told a news agency that the bar is notorious for being a safe house for shady elements who claim to be police informers. He added that since the bar was known as 'khabri adda', there used to be a thinking that it would not be raided by police. Acting on a tip-off, the police raided the bar on Saturday and arrested 22 persons, including 14 customers for violating the norms.

Reportedly, the arrested include stewards, waiters, supervisor, cashier and manager. The police have registered a case under section 294, 114, 34 of the IPC, 3,8 (1) (2)(4) of Maharashtra Prohibition of Obscene Dance in Hotels, Restaurants and Bar Rooms and Protection of Dignity of Women Act 2016 and section 131 of MP Act has been registered.

Reportedly, the further probe has been handed over to the Dindoshi police.

In September this year, a raid was conducted by the Mumbai police at a bar in suburban Borivali area. Here 61 people were apprehended and four women dancers were rescued from the premise. Acting on a tip-off, the police raided the Charvak Bar and found that several people were involved in obscene acts. Following the raid, 32 bar staff members and 29 customers were arrested by the team.

Meanwhile, four bar dancers were rescued. The accused were booked under Indian Penal Code Sections 294 (indulging in obscene acts and songs), 114 (abettor present when the offence is committed) and 34 (common intention), Shinde added.
