Inter-faith peace meet in Jaipur before Ayodhya verdict

Inter-faith peace meet in Jaipur before Ayodhya verdict

To prevent the escalation of communal tension ahead of the Supreme Court judgment on the Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute, Muslim bodies decided to hold inter- faith dialogues and peace meetings to create an environment for all to gracefully accept the verdict.

Nov 03, 2019

JAIPUR: To prevent the escalation of communal tension ahead of the Supreme Court judgment on the Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute, Muslim bodies decided to hold inter- faith dialogues and peace meetings to create an environment for all to gracefully accept the verdict.



The verdict is likely to be out between November 4 and 17. Muslim organisations have decided to initiate peace meetings in association with the majority community in the communally sensitive Walled City areas after Diwali.



The views emerged during a day-long consultation programme ‘Challenges ahead for Muslims’ held at Muslim Musafirkhana here.



All India Milli Council (AIMC), Rajasthan Chapter, a social awakening group, will run a campaign and hold a march with like-minded organisations. “The matter is in the final stages and the Supreme Court verdict will resolve the matter forever. It is the time to show mutual respect for each other irrespective the judgment,” said Mujahid Naqvi, spokesperson, AIMC, Rajasthan.



Jaipur has seen a spike in communal clashes in the last few years over petty issues especially in the old areas. The entire Walled City has a mixed populace as both Hindus and Muslims have been living as neighbours since the city came into existence.



Jamat-E-Islami Hind’s social wing head Naim Rabbani is holding a series of interfaith dialogues involving heads of all religious shrines in Jaipur. “It is the time that all peace-loving citizens of Jaipur and the country act responsibly. I have shared the idea with heads of some religious shrines who have happily agreed to become a part of the dialogue. It is a time to reclaim and re-nourish the centuries old Ganga-Jamuni tehzeb of Jaipur,” said Rabbani.



The socio-religious leaders viewed that the issue had already created a sense of fear among the people who have become very vulnerable to fall in the trap of rumour mongers. The matter is being discussed from household to offices. Elaborating on the role of state, Quyum Akhter, president of AIMC, Rajasthan, said “I will urge the government to block the Internet as a precautionary measure to counter the spread of fake messages and rumor mongering.”--Times of India
