Amid political tussle between BJP and Shiv Sena, Devendra Fadnavis to meet Amit Shah in Delhi on Monday

Devendra Fadnavis with Amit Shah | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Shiv Sena that fought Maharashtra polls s in alliance with the BJP In the Maharastra polls, the Shiv Sena had won 56 seats in the 288-member Assembly while the BJP had bagged 105 seats The two alliance partners have been locked in a stalemate over the power-sharing formula

Mumbai: Amid political tussle with ally Shiv Sena over government formation, Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis will meet Union Home Minister and BJP chief Amit Shah in Delhi on Monday.

The two alliance partners-- BJP and Shiv Sena, have been locked in a stalemate over the power-sharing formula for the new government in Maharashtra. While the Shiv Sena has been pressing for a "50-50" power-sharing agreement and equal division of the CM post, the BJP has been maintaining that Fadanvis will continue to be the chief minister for the entire term.

The Shiv Sena that fought the recently-held Maharashtra Assembly elections in alliance with the BJP earlier today said that it might form the government with the support of the NCP and Congress if its demands of sharing the chief minister's post are not fulfilled.

In the Maharastra polls, the Shiv Sena had won 56 seats in the 288-member Assembly while the BJP had bagged 105 seats.

Shiv Sena, in its editorial mouthpiece Saamna said the BJP would fail to prove majority if it claims to form the government without its support.

Earlier today, Fadnavis said that the stalemate over government formation would end soon as everyone has to work for the benefit of the people of the state.

“I think the impasse in the formation of the government will end soon, in the end, everyone has to work for the benefit of the people of the state. I hope the government is formed soon,” he said.

However, news agency PTI quoted its sources as saying that the meeting between Fadnavis and Shah is scheduled to discuss aid from the National Disaster Relief Fund (NDRF) to farmers affected by unseasonal rains across the state.

The term of the current Maharashtra Legislative Assembly ends on November 9.

Earlier today, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said that people would get to know about government formation in Maharashtra in the coming days.
