naked capitalism

Anti-grizzly Fever Grips Wyoming, Again Grizzly Times. It makes me happy there’s a blog devoted to news and opinion about grizzly bears.

Montana veterinarians bring nearly frozen, unresponsive cat back to life (video) WABC

Left high and dry by a crypto founder’s demise FT

No thank you, Mr. Pecker Jeff Bezos, Medium (fine word, “legitimate”) and Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos accuses National Enquirer of extortion over intimate photos WaPo.

Jeff Bezos: “Alexa, send nudes to my secret admirer.” Alexa: “Got it. Sending nudes to the National Enquirer.” — Pranay Pathole (@PPathole) February 8, 2019

(Interestingly, the Enquirer’s parent company, NMI, is hosted on AWS.)

Bonds Faced Their Waterloo and Came Out Winners Bloomberg

America faces a battle to find buyers for its bonds Gillian Tett, FT

Facebook ordered to stop combining WhatsApp and Instagram data without consent in Germany The Verge

‘We won’: Landmark climate ruling as NSW court rejects coal mine Sidney Morning Herald

Chevron ties executive pay to methane and flaring reduction targets Reuters. Such as they are.

In Praise of Carbon: Review Resilience (Drumlin Woodchuckles).

Venezuela

Brexit

How To Think Clearly About Anti-Semitism Controversies In The Labour Party Current Affairs

5 fights between France and Italy Politico. “The provocation that seems to have tipped the French over the edge was when Luigi Di Maio, leader of the 5Star Movement and deputy prime minister, met with leaders of the Yellow Jackets movement in Paris.” Oddly, or not, we don’t seem to be hearing a lot about the gilets jaunes themselves. Presidents, prime ministers, and ambassadors, yes. Protesters, no.

OPINION: France’s ‘yellow vest’ conflict is heading into calamitous new territory The Local. From last week, still germane.

Gilets Jaunes face big decision as Macron fights back BBC

France’s Yellow Vest Movement Comes of Age The Nation

French lawmakers approve controversial ‘anti-riot’ bill France24

Why Germany has no gilet jaunes protesters Economists

China?

A Profound Development in Japan-South Korea Relations The Diplomat. “The ruling is probably the first time in history that the highest judicial institution of a country has declared colonial rule to be illegal.”

New Cold War

Trump Transition

Democrats in Disarray

Justices grant stay, block Louisiana abortion law from going into effect SCOTUSblog

Health Care

‘Everybody In, Nobody Out’: What We Know So Far About the Medicare for All Act of 2019 Common Dreams. From Healthcare-NOW and the Labor Campaign for Single Payer Healthcare: “Understandably, the transition to a new lead sponsor and an extensive rewrite process has created some nervousness and confusion in sections of the single-payer advocacy community. This has allowed a range of rumors and misrepresentations to run rampant among activist groups, including some rumors that have started spilling into published articles.” A good summary, well worth a read.

After the storm Aeon. Disaster relief.

Class Warfare

The sinking ship of self-interested super rich Anand Giridharadas, Unherd

Antidote du Jour (via):

Bonus anti-antidote:

Baby had one for the road before heading off. pic.twitter.com/QsTegu6VLd — Mark Duckett (@MarkRDuckett) February 8, 2019

See yesterdays Links and Antidote du Jour
