Woman killed, pushed off 18th floor in Noida?

GREATER NOIDA: The body of a woman was found at the base of a tower in AVJ Heights society in Sector Zeta 1, arousing suspicion that she might have been murdered in a flat on the 18th floor and then pushed from there.Cops probing the death initially thought the woman might have committed suicide. But since none of the residents could recognise her, it led to a search of flats in the housing society. In a locked flat on the 18th floor, cops found bloodstains on the walls and a bed. A dupatta dangling from a concrete structure in the space between two buildings has also prompted police to probe if the woman was first killed inside the locked flat and then pushed from the 18th floor to make the episode look like an accident.The locked flat is owned by Mumtaz Khan, a Bihar resident who took up contracts for painting buildings in Noida and Ghaziabad. On Sunday morning, Mumtaz handed over the keys to his brother Shahnawaz, who stays with his family in the same building, and left. He has since switched off his phone and is untraceable.It was around 6am on Sunday when guards of the housing society found the woman’s body lying face down at the base of G block. Residents said they heard a loud thud between 5.30am and 6am. “A guard spotted the woman lying on the ground and oozing blood from the head and neck. It seemed she hit some cemented platform in the duct between two buildings before hitting the ground,” said RK Raina, a resident.Police were informed around 5.55 am and a team arrived to inspect the spot. Jitendra Kumar Dikshit, the SHO of Surajpur police station, said nobody could identify the woman. “It was soon confirmed that the woman was not from the society and had come to flat number 1804 (owned by Mumtaz) on Saturday. It was difficult to believe she would have committed suicide. There was a dupatta around a concrete structure on the 18th floor. We searched all flats, but the one owned by Mumtaz was locked,” he said.Keys to the flat were taken from Mumtaz’s brother and the house was searched. “There were bloodstains on one of the walls and a bed,” Dikshit said.Cops suspect the woman’s head had been banged against the wall. A mark around the neck has also led to apprehension that she might have been throttled to death. “We have sent the body for autopsy. It does not seem to be a mark caused by a sharp object,” the SHO said.Neighbours said Shahnawaz had undertaken a contract to paint the housing society. Since the builder had failed to pay him the entire amount, Shahnawaz was given a few unoccupied flats on the 18th floor. He had, in turn, given one of the flats to Mumtaz.A police team raided a construction site in Ghaziabad where Mumtaz had recently undertaken some painting work, but did not find him there.
