Tis Hazari fallout: HC shifts two cops, ex-judge to probe clash

A view of the police vehicle after it was burnt down during the clashes. (Photo: PTI)

A day after the clash between lawyers and Delhi Police at Tis Hazari court complex, the Delhi High Court on Sunday ordered a judicial inquiry by one of its retired judges into the clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari court complex here and transfer of two senior police officials during the pendency of the investigation.

Advocate Rahul Mehra, representing the Delhi Police, told a bench of Chief Justice DN Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar, which was hearing the matter after taking suo motu cognisance of media reports on the incident, that one Special CP and Additional DCP had been transferred for alleged involvement in the clash.

The special investigation team of the crime branch will probe the matter.

The police told the High court on Sunday that a special investigation team has been formed to look into the case. Four cases have been registered in connection with the clash between police and lawyers in which at least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured while many vehicles vandalised or set on fire.

Registrar General (RG) Dinesh Kumar Sharma said a closed-door meeting was held on Monday morning by the chief justice and senior-most judges of the High court.

The meeting was also attended by senior police officers and additional chief secretary of the Delhi government, he said.

The Bar Council of India has written a letter to the high court seeking a direction to the Delhi lieutenant governor and other authorities to lodge an FIR under Section 307 (attempt to murder) and other relevant provisions of the Arms Act against the police officials.

Bar representatives in their arguments also said that the police was 'deliberately shielding' the responsible personnel. Delhi CM visited St Stephen's Hospital to meet the lawyers who were injured in a clash with Delhi Police at Tis Hazari Court. Meanwhile, Delhi Police registered two more FIRs in the case.

"Two complaints have been given by advocates against the policemen. Accordingly, two separate FIRs under the section of an attempt to murder have been registered," a senior police officer said.

The Bar Council of Delhi has also decided to grant Rs 2 lakh each of the two lawyers who are currently in ICU and Rs 50,000 to lawyers who got injured.

Accordingly to police, his statement will be taken, when he is fit for the same, to assess the exact sequence of firing. One of the SHOs who was injured in the violence received 10 stitches while another is in the ICU.

Meanwhile, advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts here have decided to abstain from work on Monday to protest against the clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari Court on Saturday.

The lawyers said they would not participate in any of the judicial work and only proxy counsel would appear in the courts to take dates in various matters.

(Inputs from Arvind Ojha)
