Three killed, 15 injured in diff road accidents

Ludhiana: Three people were killed in three different road accidents, while 15 other were injured on Sunday.

In the first incident which was reported in the wee hours of Sunday, two friends died, while the got injured. They were returning from Chhath Puja when an unidentified car hit them near the Hardy’s World flyover at 12:20am.

The deceased have been identified as Jatinder Kumar, 20, Nand Lal, 21. The injured has been identified as Sunny, 21, all residents of Mayapuri and hosiery workers.

On Saturday night, the trio had gone to the Satluj for Chaath Puja. They were returning home when the incident occurred.

Inspector Kanwaljit Singh, SHO, Salem Tabri police station, said Sunny was riding the bike while Nand Lal and Jatinder were riding as pillion. They were not wearing helmet. At Hardy’s World flyover, an unidentified car hit their bike from the rear. The car driver escaped form the spot after incident. Jatinder and Nand Lal died on the spot, while Sunny sustained injuries.

The inspector said commuters rushed the three to a hospital and informed the police. Sunny was discharged from the Civil Hospital on Sunday afternoon. On his statement, Salem Tabri police have registered a case against an unidentified accused under Sections of 379 (rash driving) and 304-A (causing death by negligence) of the IPC.

The police said they were scrutinising the CCTVs installed near the Ladhowal toll plaza to trace the accused.

In another incident, an auto driver was killed on Sunday morning when an unidentified vehicle hit him near the Talwandi village crossing in Salem Tabri area.

The deceased has been identified as Nanke, 50, of Partap Nagar of Shimlapuri. The auto driver had gone to the Satluj to drop passengers of Chaath Puja. While returning, his auto developed a technical snag near the Talwandi village around 7am.

Inspector Kanwaljit Singh said Nanke alighted from the auto and started repairing it. In the meanwhile, some unidentified vehicle hit him and escaped. Onlookers noticed the incident and informed the police. The police have registered a case against an unidentified accused.

In the third incident, at least 13 people, including 11 children and two women, were injured when a pick-up van, in which they were travelling, turned turtle at the National Highway 44 near Jugiyana of Sahnewal area.

According to the police, at least 15 people were travelling in the pick-up van. All the injured are from Blala colony of Gonbingarh area, Sahnewal. They had gone to Doraha for Chhath Puja and while returning at 8:30am, the driver lost control over the vehicle.

Rahul Sahni, 19, of Blala Colony said he and several other residents had gone for Chhath Puja to Doraha during the wee hours on Sunday. He along with his brother and father were on motorcycles, while women and children were in a pick-up van.

Investigating officer Jagjivan Singh from Sahnewal police station said the incident occurred due to smog.

He added two children, including Laxmi, 10, and Krishan, 2, were severely injured and were undergoing treatment at a private hospital.

Others who got injured have been identified as Kanti Devi, 35; Reena, 28; Ayush, 13; Sandeep, 17; Shubham, 15; Karamjit, 10; Preeti Kumari, 17; Happy, 13; Aarti, 15; Anjali, 12; and Phool, 11.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
