The Shillong Times

44K Jammu aspirants register for Army recruitment rally

Jammu: Over 44,000 aspirants from three districts of Jammu region have registered themselves to serve the country as the Army on Sunday commenced a 10-day recruitment rally in Samba district to provide employment to the local youth. This is the first major recruitment rally in the newly created Union Territory and the second in the past three months after the Centre abrogated Article 370 provisions on August 5. Earlier in September, a seven-day recruitment rally by the Army in Reasi district saw participation of over 29,000 local youth. “As many as 44,117 aspirants from Jammu region have registered and likely to be screened for their physical and medical fitness during the 10 days long recruitment rally in Samba,” Jammu-based Army PRO Lt Col Devender Anand said. He said the recruitment rally through Army recruitment office in Jammu commenced at Samba and would continue till November 12. This rally is being conducted to provide employment to youth from three districts of Jammu, Samba and Kathua. (PTI)



Weekly flea market opens in Srinagar

Srinagar: The weekly flea market in the city was open on Sunday while some other markets were open till noon, the self-imposed deadline of operations in Kashmir, officials said. They said the weekly-flea market, locally known as ‘Sunday Market’ was open as several dozens of vendors had set-up their stalls on the TRC Chowk-Jehangir Chowk axis through the Lal Chowk city centre. Private cars were plying unhindered and auto-rickshaws and few inter-district cabs were also seen plying in the city here and elsewhere in the valley, they said. However, the other modes of public transport were off the roads, they added. The official said while the situation across the valley so far was peaceful, the deployment of security forces continued in vulnerable areas of the city and elsewhere in the valley for maintaining law and order. Landline and postpaid mobile phone services were working across the valley, but all Internet services continued to remain suspended since August 4 — hours before the Centre announced the abrogation of Article 370 and bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union territories. (PTI)



Infant dies as monkey drops stone

Muzaffarnagar: A four-month-old baby died after a stone dropped by a monkey fell on him at his home in Sohjani village of Uttar Pradesh’s Muzaffarnagar district, police said on Sunday. The incident happened on Saturday in Titawi police station area, they said. Police said the monkey was on the terrace while the baby boy was in the ground floor with his parents. The monkey picked up a stone lying on the terrace that slipped from its grip and fell on the boy leaving him with serious injuries. The baby was rushed to a hospital but doctors declared him dead, police added. (PTI)



Power supply in entire village cut off

Muzaffarnagar: Power supply to a village in Uttar Pradesh’s Shamli district has been disconnected as villagers did not clear dues of over Rs 91 lakhs, officials said Sunday. All 300 consumers in the Jahanpura village, under the Kairana police station limits, have not cleared their electricity bills amounting to Rs 91.88 lakh despite reminders being issued to them, said Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation’s Sub Divisional Officer Atul Yadav. Due to this, power supply to all the consumers in the village has been disconnected, he added. Villagers said due to the power cut they are facing problems with grass-cutting machines and water pumps lying are unused. In October, the state government had issued orders to recover electricity dues following heavy revenue losses. (PTI)



4 girls rescued after bar raid; 48 held

Mumbai: An orchestra bar was raided in Tilaknagar area of Mumbai in the early hours of Sunday, leading to the arrest of 48 persons, including 36 customers, and rescue of four bar girls, police said. The raid on Devikrupa Orchestra Bar, situated on PL Lokhande Marg, was carried out by the police’s Social Service branch, an official said. “We found four bar girls dancing. We have arrested 48 persons, comprising 36 customers, 10 stewards and a manager and cashier. Four girls were rescued,” Deputy Commissioner of Police (Social Service Branch) Shivdeep Lande said. He said a case has been registered under the Indian Penal Code and Maharashtra Prohibition of Obscene Dance in Hotels, Restaurants and Bar Rooms and Protection of Dignity of Women Act 2016. (PTI)



Man, his wife kill mother

Barabanki (UP): A 70-year-old woman was allegedly strangulated to death by her son and daughter-in-law, who then disposed her body off in a canal in Bhikharipur village here, police said on Sunday. Premavati was allegedly killed by her son Satyanam and daughter-in-law Shanti Devi on October 22. Her younger son on October 30 filed a missing person compliant after which police started probing the matter, they said. During investigation Satyanam confessed to the crime and told police about the location of the body that was found on Saturday. Police said Premavati was killed because of a land dispute with her son. (PTI)
