Chennai news: Tamil Nadu: 3-year-old boy dies after Chinese 'manjha' slits his throat in Chennai

Police raided the locality in an attempt to find out the source of the manjha. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 3-year-old boy died after his throat was slit by a Chinese thread in Chennai Victim was riding on a motorbike with his father when the tragic incident took place Police have registered a case in this regard

Chennai: In a tragic incident, a three-year-old boy died after his throat was slit by Chinese thread (manjha) (thread used for flying kites) in Korukkupet area of Chennai on Sunday. The tragedy took place when the boy was riding on the bike with his father.

The victim was returning home from a relative's place in Tondirpet when a glass-coated thread hanging from a lampost got entangled in his neck.

According to a report, the victim was rushed to Stanley Government Hospital, but he succumbed to his injuries.

After the incident, police raided the locality in an attempt to find out the source of the manjha. A case has been registered in this regard.

In a similar incident in 2015, a five-year-old boy died in Perambur when he was riding on the motorbike with his father.

Recently, there have been several incidents of injuries and deaths due to glass coated threads meant for flying the kite.

The state government has already banned the sale and production of such manjha. In another incident in August this year, a 3-year-old boy suffered injuries in his neck after his throat was slit by the Chinese thread in Tambaram area.

In December 2018, a doctor had his throat slit by the same thread in Venkatesan Nagar of Kolathur.

The Chennai police have banned kite flying under section 71 of the Chennai City Police Act. The act also has a provision to penalise manufacture, storage, import and sale of Chinese manjha.

Chinese 'manjha' slits teenaged biker's throat in Delhi

In a similar incident in April this year, a teenager riding his bike lost his life after he came in contact with a Chinese 'manjha' that slit his throat in north Delhi. The incident when the victim, identified as Ravi, was on his bike going to take cooler grass wood from a market at Nirankari Colony.

The victim's throat was found deeply cut. He was taken to a hospital where he was declared brought dead," a senior police officer said. Ravi was a resident of Yograj Colony and worked in a factory. The Chinese manja was banned by Delhi government two years ago after many riders suffered critical injuries and a few of them died in national capital.
