BA parent IAG ups bet on Latin America with Air Europa takeover

Chile’s LATAM Airlines in September then announced it planned to leave the alliance, opting instead for a tie-up with SkyTeam member Delta Air Lines.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

The deal follows a setback in Latin America for IAG after Chile’s Supreme Court ruled against a plan that would have allowed it to bolster cooperation with partners in the oneworld airlines alliance.

IAG, the parent of British Airways and Spain’s Iberia, announced a 1 billion euro ($1.12 billion) takeover of Spain’s Air Europa to boost its presence on routes to Latin America and the Caribbean.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

IAG shares initially rose more than 2% following the Air Europa takeover announcement but some analysts said IAG may have to shed routes in order to win regulatory approval.

IAG shares were up 1.2% at 1315 GMT.

Ryanair CEO Michael O’Leary said his company will ask the UK’s market watchdog to force IAG to make divestments as part of its Air Europa takeover, a deal he said would be bad for competition.

“Potential remedies, perhaps in the form of slot release or behavioral restrictions, may be required and these could impact the potential synergies,” an analyst at Liberum wrote in a note.

IAG also owns carriers Iberia Express, Level, Ireland’s Aer Lingus and Vueling.

“We are not convinced that having just another brand platform is the optimal move, and could see it potentially combining with Level, Vueling or potentially Iberia Express after some time,” analysts at Bernstein said.

Air Europa serves 69 destinations, including long-haul routes to the Americas and the Caribbean. It had a fleet of 66 aircraft at the end of 2018.

Air Europa’s Spanish parent company Globalia earlier this year received authorisation from the Brazilian government to explore the possibility of flying domestic routes within Latin America’s largest economy.

It is unclear if that authorisation will remain with Globalia or be transferred to IAG.

Air Europa will initially keep its brand and as it gets integrated into the existing hub at Madrid it will be a standalone operation run by Iberia boss Luis Gallego, IAG said.
