Quadrilateral Afghan talks aims closure

By Dr. Ankit Srivastava, Chief Editor

When a big tree falls there is tremor-said an Indian Prime Minister over three decades ago. The same wisdom holds true for Afghanistan also, albeit in a different context. The peace process is still continuing and has not been given up yet but in case there is absolute collapse and Afghanistan ever implodes, the chaos won’t be limited to borders. The tremors will spread far and wide, everywhere.

Recently diplomats of four countries huddled together in Moscow for talks focussing on Afghanistan peace and security. They were from the US, Russia, China and Pakistan. However, their exclusion of India-the only sublime power that believes in giving to Afghan people more than taking away – is a tad selfish and worrisome.

The participants expectedly called for resumption of talks rightly stalled by Trump due to repeated Taliban attacks for a better bargaining status. Bringing both the parties to the table-the US and the Taliban-was the common refrain. The meeting also “urged on all sides to reduce violence”. As per the UN Report, around 1100 non-combatants have been killed during the July-September quarter. And that’s really worrisome. Quadrilateral process of talks is a welcome development that could pave the way for regional states to support Afghan peace efforts.

During the Cold War days, the US and Russia’s predecessor, the USSR jostled for competitive influence everywhere, more so in Afghanistan. The USSR wanted access to blue water and Afghanistan appeared the route. That made Kabul the battlefield for supremacy in great power rivalry.

Afghanistan has justified its reputation as the graveyard of empires/super powers-British Empire, the USSR and the US in that order. The mighty USSR with its devastating weapons was still humbled on Afghan soil. Pakistan’s support to Taliban terrorists came to be a huge challenge Soviets could not overcome.

Americans came to Afghanistan to nestle ‘democracy’ and ‘justice’ but were undone by Pakistan army again. When Taliban was on its last legs, as many as ten thousand Pakistan soldiers were manning Taliban defence and that’s a conservative figure. Today both Americans and Russians as well as Chinese are trying to bring peace to Afghanistan in partnership with the Pakistanis. All the participants have their worries. Russia is concerned that terrorism and chaos could spill over from Afghanistan due to geographical proximity. America is worried that Afghanistan could again be the hide-out for terrorists. That’s exactly what Washington insisted in its earlier talks with the Taliban that outside terror groups should not be provided refuge.

China has spread its interests in Afghanistan. It is acutely aware that Afghanistan becoming the base for terrorist could severely impede its interests. Pakistan has also suffered, mostly for its own evil doings, all through the last four decades. Even the Afghans have not been spared.

Lack of development, loss of civilian lives, damage to infrastructure and life- uncertain are the prices they had to pay. All along history hordes of unruly, uncouth Islamic invaders raided India through Afghanistan for centuries unleashing tortures unheard of and unseen. Then comes the question of power. The results of September Presidential polls are yet to be out. The Taliban kept its killing spree right through the polls.

One can imagine what mayhem it can cause if there is power vacuum in Kabul for too long. Before vacuum exacerbates chaos, a representative power acceptable to all must be sworn in Kabul very soon. Afghanistan has been and remains the victim of regional geopolitical rivalries. All Afghans must work for peace as a peaceful Afghanistan is a must for the world peace.

Email: ankits@newdelhitimes.com

Twitter: @ankitndt

Like this: Like Loading...
