Sanjay Gupta says a politician disrupted Mumbai Saga shoot, wanted photo op, money for permission to shoot

Mumbai Saga shoot disrupted by politician, says Sanjay Gupta

Key Highlights Sanjay Gupta allegedly claims that a political leader disrupted his Mumbai Saga shoot today The filmmaker expressed his unhappiness with a series of tweets Mumbai Saga is likely to release next year in June

Filmmaker Sanjay Gupta, who has directed a host of films including Kaabil, Jazbaa, Shootout at Wadala is currently working on his next film titled Mumbai Saga. Featuring actors including Jackie Shroff, Suneil Shetty, John Abraham, Emraan Hashmi, Amol Gupte, Prateik Babbar, Gulshan Grover, and Rohit Roy, the flick is being bankrolled by Bhushan Kumar under his banner T-series. While fans are excited for Sanjay's next work, the director recently shared a piece of information on his social networking handle, which might cause a feeling of displeasure to many.

Sanjay took to his Twitter account on Monday evening and shared a series of posts in which he wrote about an incident that happened on the sets of Mumbai Saga. The filmmaker claimed that a political leader showed up with his "cronies" and disrupted the shoot.

"In the '80s & early '90s when we shot outside city limits invariably the local Dada, Bhai or goon would land up, disrupt shoot & demand his share. Same thing happened today on the location of #MumbaiSaga only this time the goon was a political leader with cronies from his party," he wrote.

The leader's demands included breaking the coconut before they start shooting, photograph with the stars, and cash payment for his "permission". When he refused to give in to the politician's demands, the local police arrived and asked the team to pack up. The filmmaker's post read, "We refused to give in to his ridiculous demands which included that he should break the coconut before we start shooting, a photo op with the stars & eventually cash payment for his 'permission'. We refused & a few hours later the local cops arrived to shut us down."

Although Sanjay had finished filming the main scene, he was very unhappy with the entire incident and stated that he would never shoot at that place again. "Fortunately for us we had finished filming the main scene. We had around 450 Jr Artists & a crew of 250 plus. Can you imagine the loss we would have to face had we not finished in time? We packed up, cut our losses & left. Don't think I'll ever shoot in that place again. Sad," Sanjay wrote.

Check out the screengrab of the tweets below:

Set in the 1980s-'90s, Mumbai Saga will reportedly revolve around all that went into transforming Bombay into Mumbai. The flick is likely to release next year.
