[NEWSWRAP] India Top News, November 4, 2019: From grenade attack in Srinagar to Delhi air pollution

The SC has directed both Centre and Delhi government to take measures to reduce pollution. | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Scroll down for the biggest news events in India and more.

New Delhi: Monday saw a dastardly attack on a busy Srinagar street as terrorists hurled a grenade on citizens, injuring 18. Moreover, the Delhi air pollution featured heavy in the Supreme Court and hefty fines were imposed on violators. Here are the day’s biggest news headlines:

Grenade attack in J&K's Srinagar claims one life; three SSB jawans among 18 injured

At least one person was killed and 18 others injured in a grenade attack carried out by terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir's Srinagar on Monday. Three SSB jawans were among those injured. The attack came five days after the state of Jammu and Kashmir was bifurcated into two union territories. Read More

SC rains down hard on air pollution mess in Delhi-NCR

The SC said the right to breathe and access to clean air is a fundamental right of every citizen. The apex court also said that the blame game over the issue cannot go on for long. The court has directed both Centre and Delhi government to take measures to reduce pollution. Read More

Rohit Sharma reveals why Khaleel Ahmed bowled penultimate over

India’s stand-in skipper Rohit Sharma defended his move to give the ball to Khaleel Ahmed for the penultimate over in the 1st T20I versus Bangladesh at Arun Jaitley Stadium, New Delhi on Sunday (November 3). Defending only 22 off 12 balls, the pacer went for 18 runs with four back-to-back boundaries. Rohit stated, “I did not want our spinners to bowl at the back-end. They (Khaleel and other youngsters) still need to understand when defending smaller targets, they need to bowl according to the plan. They will learn by playing these games.” Read More



Early signs and symptoms of lung cancer

Studies have shown that air pollution, both outdoor and indoor, can increase the risk of lung cancer particularly among the young. Lung cancer, if detected at an earlier stage, is more likely to be successfully treated. So, learning about the disease, including the signs and symptoms, can be helpful. Read on to learn more about this deadly disease, including the signs and symptoms. Read More

Isha Koppikar on casting couch: An actor once told me to meet him alone

Isha Koppikar made her Bollywood debut with a small role in Karisma Kapoor and Hrithik Roshan starrer Fiza (2000). But it was actually her dance number, Khallas, in Ram Gopal Varma’s Company that catapulted her to stardom. Post that, the actress went on to do several films. However, she recently revealed that she did face certain hurdles during her Bollywood journey. Isha revealed that there were times when certain producers told her to be “friendly” with her co-actors. In fact, once she was asked by the producer of a big film to call an actor to be in his “good books”. Read More

HDFC beats estimates, Q2 profit jumps 61% to Rs 3,961 crore

HDFC, India's biggest mortgage lender on Monday reported 61% annual rise in its net profit for the July-September quarter of FY2019-20 led by higher interest income and dividend from subsidiaries. HDFC reported a net profit of Rs 3,962 crore as compared to a net profit of Rs 2,467 crore in the corresponding quarter of the last fiscal. Read More

WhatsApp for iPhone may get two versions of Dark theme modes

The social messaging platform started working on the feature months back, and yet it has not released the feature for Android users. In its latest Android 2.19.311 beta update, WhatsApp has reportedly worked on to give a good appearance to the lock icon in the Dark Bubble. Read More
