Tis Hazari case: Two cops suspended for court clash with lawyers

Khaki vs Black Coats: Lawyers protected from coercive action

NEW DELHI: Taking serious note of Saturday’s clashes between lawyers and police personnel at Tis Hazari courts, Delhi high court on Sunday conducted a special hearing and ordered suspension of two assistant sub-inspectors and transferred an additional deputy commissioner of police and a special CP.A bench comprising HC Chief Justice DN Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar directed the suspension of ASI Pawan Kumar, who allegedly shot at a lawyer, and ASI Kanta Prasad, who allegedly dragged a lawyer into the lock-up. Additional DCP Harinder Singh, who reportedly gave the firing order, and special CP Sanjay Singh, who reportedly ordered lathicharge, have been transferred. The bench appointed retired judge SP Garg to hold an inquiry into the incident and gave him six weeks to complete the probe. He would be aided by the directors of the CBI, IB and vigilance department.In the meantime, the lawyers who were booked were protected from any coercive action. After the “graphic narration” of the violence, the court directed the Delhi police commissioner to record the statements of injured advocates— Vijay Verma, Pankaj Dubey, Ranjit Malik and Sagar Sharma— and lodge an FIR. “Copies shall be presented to this court on the next day of hearing. We direct the government of NCT to provide best treatment to injured advocates, preferably (at) AIIMS,” the bench said. The court also directed the Delhi government to provide monetary relief to the injured lawyers.Senior lawyers like Mohit Mathur, president of the Delhi high court bar association, K C Mittal, chairman of the Bar Council of Delhi, and Supreme Court Bar Association president Rakesh Khanna made submissions on behalf of the lawyers.Advocate Rahul Mehra, who was representing Delhi Police, said that 21 policemen and eight lawyers were injured in the clashes. He said four FIRs in connection with the incident were registered under relevant sections, including charges of attempt to murder. According to the police, two SHOs and an additional commissioner were among the 21 police personnel injured. Mehra informed the bench that both civil and criminal action would be initiated against the errant police officials. He said that CCTV footage had been preserved and the SIT was investigating the matter.Bar Council of India chairman Manan Mishra submitted that advocates, who were the victims, have been booked. “The person who shot at the lawyer has just been transferred. He should be arrested,” Mishra said. Senior lawyer A S Chandhiok was of the opinion that police should withdraw from all court complexes. “Let another (security force) agency be placed instead,” he said.Mathur claimed that a CCTV footage showed a lawyer was dragged by 14-15 people into the lock-up. “We’re supposed to be there. You're (police) not supposed to be there. Male constabulary banged the doors of women lawyers’ chambers,” he said.
