What purpose does the National Security Act serve?

The arrest of three Muslim men in Madhya Pradesh for cow slaughter by booking them under the National Security Act is the fourth such instance of misuse of the NSA that has come to public attention in recent. There was the 10 month long detention of Dalit leader Chandrasekhar Azad from November 2017 to September 2018. His detention under NSA came soon after other charges against him were not enough to keep him in judicial custody any longer. In short, the NSA became a ruse to put an innocent man in jail indefinitely.

Of course, we do believe that an individual is innocent until proven guilty, don’t we? But heck, what are fundamental rights that restate this dictum when there is a convenient law like the NSA that allows the state to keep inconvenient citizens who are a threat to public order behind bars for as long as a year. The NSA’s paternity is interesting. It was a figurative rise from the ashes in late 1980 after a three year vacuum when its precursor the Maintenance of Internal Security Act was repealed in 1977 after Emergency excesses.

Another dissident in faraway Manipur, journalist Kishorechandra Wangkhem , has been languishing behind bars since December under the NSA for criticising the state chief minister Biren Singh and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. While I was thinking that NSA makes dissidents vulnerable there came the Bulandshahr district administration who slapped it on Muslim men accused of slaughtering a cow to prevent them from getting released from jail even if they got bail under the UP Prohibition of Cow Slaughter Act.

To claim each of these men booked under NSA represent a threat to the security of India and have to be kept under preventive detention is a far stretch. I can understand a terrorist like Bhindranwale being put behind bars on NSA but it would equally be true that a terrorist like that would also immediately attract punitive laws like the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act and the Indian Penal Code. To be honest, I think NSA is a law kept in reserve to use by the Indian government in a condition where mass protests are triggered.

So that brings us back to the Emergency. Where those preventive detention/arrests lawful? If not, how can the recent arrests of dissidents and minorities under NSA be lawful? Who needs an Emergency again if laws like NSA do the job efficiently without any of the taint that Indira Gandhi courted for it? Every government is entitled to protect the state from subversion. But who decides who is a subversive? Given the bias in the political executive, the Supreme Court must step in and issue guidelines to check the NSA’s misuse. It fits the character of a law that will keep India in a state of undeclared Emergency.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
