Bombay HC says no urgency to petition seeking FIR against Union minister over pro-cow slaughter remark

Bombay High Court on Monday refused to hear a petition against Union Minister of State Raosaheb Danve, who had apparently said that a ban on cow slaughter shouldn't be a concern, and said there is "no urgency" in hearing the matter.

A video of Danve had recently gone viral during the Maharashtra assembly elections in which he purportedly assured a group about a ban on cow slaughter. The viral video was purportedly shot in Maharashtra's Jalna district.

In the video Danve could be heard saying that a group of people met him "after the government implemented 'Govansh Hatya Bandi' (ban on cow slaughter) expressing concern". Danve can be heard saying that he had assured the people to not worry about the ban on cow slaughter as long as he is a minister in the government. Danve is currently minister of state for consumer affairs, food and public distribution.

A number of complaints were filed by gaurakshaks against Danve after the video went viral. Similarly, Vinod Kothari, a gaurakshak, had approached the Dongri police station with a complaint while the police refused to register an FIR.

Thus Kothari approached the Bombay High Court asking for an urgent hearing of his petition. Kothari's advocate Dhruti Kapadia said, "We are asking for registration of an FIR against Danve. Also, the sentiments of people are hurt because of the video and there could be a law and order problem as well. So we are seeking removal of this video from all social media sites. Lastly we want that a restraining order be issued against Danve which will stop him from leaving the country without police permission."

After the video went viral, Danve issued a clarification and said, "It has been brought to my notice that a video of my meeting in the Muslim area of Kathor Bazaar of Bhokardan, during the Maharashtra assembly election campaign, is being circulated on electronic media and other social media websites. I would like to clarify that I have made no such comment regarding cow slaughter and the video that is being shared online is manipulated to convey a wrong message in the society."

However, Kapadia added, "It is a matter of investigation whether the video is manipulated or not. The viral video is hurting sentiments of many people and thus registration of an FIR is needed."

The petition filed by Kothari will now come up for hearing later this month.
