Police on the hunt for culprits behind manja thread death

15 teams raid kite sellers in northern localities of city

Clamping down on the sale of manja thread in north Chennai localities, the police warned of stringent action against kite sellers who use the killer thread. The police also said they would monitor online sales of kites.

A three-year-old boy’s neck was slit by a manja thread on Sunday when he was travelling on a bike with his parents in R.K. Nagar. The parents had rushed the child to Government Stanley Hospital but the boy died even before reaching hospital.

Gopal, the grieving father, said, “We were living for our child. A manja thread has snuffed out the life of our son. Such a tragedy should not befall any other parent.”

The body was handed over to the parents on Monday. Relatives and residents who gathered urged the authorities to eradicate the manja menace.

Kite flyers questioned

On the orders of Police Commissioner A.K.Viswanathan, police personnel searched outlets known to sell manja thread in Korukkupet, Washermanpet, Kasimedu and Tondiarpet. R.K. Nagar police nabbed four persons in Korukkupet and brought them to the police station on suspicion that they flew kites at the time of the incident.

A senior police officer said, “On interrogation, we found that they were not responsible for the child’s death. Two were released on bail after being booked under provisions of the Chennai City Police Act. We are still investigating to find the persons who flew the dangerous kite with manja thread that took the life of the child.”

Sellers warned

Police also detained 10 persons who had sold kites with the dangerous thread. They were let off after obtaining written assurance from them that they would not sell the thread hereafter. Police personnel also called parents of children who frequently indulge in kite flying and advised them to stop their kids from flying kites with manja thread.

Additional Commissioner of Police, North, R. Dhinakaran, said as many as 15 teams of police personnel had been constituted to raid outlets. “Strong provisions of law will be invoked against those who sell kites with manja thread or any other dangerous thread,” he warned.

According to the police, the death of the boy is the eleventh incident involving manja thread in the city in the last 13 years.
