Revenue employees on warpath, to boycott work for three days

Hyderabad: The brutal killing of Abdullapurmet MRO Vijaya Reddy has caused severe anger amongst revenue officers and employees of the revenue department, who have been in distress following repeated statements of various officers of the state government against the department for indulging in rampant corruption.

Protesting against the killing of Vijaya Reddy, revenue employees and officers on Monday came out on to the roads and gave a call for state bandh on Tuesday. The association appealed to employees to reach Hyderabad and participate in her final rites.

The revenue staff, who have been representing their grievances about reforming the department to weed out corruption, expressed their resentment against statements made from public platforms, including by Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao and other ministers. Though they had wished to resort to a strike from work, they beat a retreat in fear that the government might take severe action against them, like in the case of RTC workers.

Against this background, revenue associations seem keen not to miss the opportunity to ventilate their heartburn against the government after the murder of Vijaya Reddy.

The recent suicide by one Giridhar Rao, tahsildar of Nizamabad Rural, had caused consternation amongst the revenue staff.

Mr Vanga Ravinder Reddy, president, Telan-gana Revenue Employees Services Association, while severely condemning the murder, appealed to all revenue employees to boycott duty on Tuesday and reach to Hyderabad CCLA office to participate in the funeral procession. He said that revenue officers would boycott their duties for three days in memory of their colleague.

Mr V. Lachi Reddy, founder-president, Deputy Collectors Assoc-iation, said the government had the responsibility to ensure these kind of brutal attacks on government employees should not be repeated.

The Telangana NGOs and Gazetted Officers Association condemned the brutal killing, saying it was unfortunate that an executive magistrate, who is supposed to protect people, herself become a victim of a brutal attack.

Mr K. Ravinder Reddy, chairman, Telangana Employees Associations JAC, and Ms Mamata, secretary general, demanded that the government punish the killer and ensure steps to ensure protection for all employees.
