No civilised country can live like this: SC pulls up Centre, AAP govt on Delhi pollution

As Delhi's Air Quality Index (AQI) levels crossed hazardous levels this weekend, the Supreme Court took a serious view of the lapses in controlling the ongoing crop stubble burning in Punjab and Haryana, which is seen as a major contributor to Delhi's pollution woes.

"We are asking all states to ensure that no more fires are set of. In case any further violation is seen we will settle liability from bottom to the top," the bench of Justices Arun Mishra and Deepak Gupta said.

"No civilised country can live like this. We are too liberal," the bench said, which has now indicated that it could make the Gram Panchayat officials and SHOs of the local police stations personally liable for the pollution damage caused by stubble burning.

"If any burning is found, not only the violators should be hauled up but the entire administration from the chief secretary to the commissioner, the collector and the gram pradhans will be held responsible. Let states of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh also answer why they should not be asked to pay compensation as they have completely failed in preventing stubble burning," the court said.

The bench also pulled up the Center for not doing enough to stop the annual problem of crop stubble burning and lambasted the additional solicitor general appearing for the Center when it was informed that the Principal Secretary PMO had called for a meeting with the chief secretaries of the NCR states.

"Meetings are not enough," the irate bench said. It also asked why the state governments were not coordinating better. "This is not the way. Who is responsible? The state governments are responsible. They are only interested in electioneering. They're letting people die," observed the bench.

A Joint Secretary level officer of the Ministry of Environment and Forests also appeared before the bench on Monday afternoon, as the court refused to accept the arguments by the additional solicitor general.

The senior official informed the bench that about 46 per cent of pollution in Delhi was due to stubble burning, while construction dust, diesel vehicles and garbage burning were the other main culprits.

The court also said that it "has no sympathy" for the farmers in Punjab and Haryana, who are forced to resort to stubble burning due to economic compulsions.

"They may be under pressure, but they cannot be allowed to raise pollution. We have no sympathy for them. You cannot kill others for the sake of your livelihood," the bench said, adding that the increasing pollution was "a violation of the fundamental right to life."

The Supreme Court bench has now summoned the chief secretaries of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh to appear before it on Wednesday, with information about the steps being taken to stop crop burning.

The Delhi government also came under fire from the court over the lack of adequate public transport in the capital. The bench asked the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government to submit a report on the benefits of the ongoing Odd-Even scheme, and whether it had any measurable impact on pollution.

"We would understand banning diesel vehicles in Delhi but what's the point of this Odd-Even? We would have understood if you said we have introduced more buses. But where are the buses?" asked the court.

"When I came to this court three years ago, your government said we will introduce 3,000 buses in Delhi. You haven't even introduced 150 buses," Justice Deepak Gupta said.

The bench has also taken note of the pollution caused by the construction and demolition activities in Delhi as well as in Noida, Ghaziabad, Faridabad and Gurugram. It has for now banned all construction or demolition in the NCR, with Rs one lakh fine to be imposed on the violators. The court has also directed that Rs 5,000 fine be imposed on anyone found to be burning garbage.
