Goodwin Jewellers case: Owners planned to shut down months before going broke, say police

THE OWNERS of Goodwin Jewellers had allegedly planned to shut down their shops months before they went broke, police said. Based on statements of complainants and the staff, police are now trying to find out the exact time the owners decided to close their businesses.

According to Ram Shevale, a customer from Naupada, the shop in Thane had started keeping less jewellery and was had not been taking fresh orders since Dussehra.

“I have been their customer for years now. During Dussehra, I wanted to buy a customised necklace for my daughter but the shop claimed that they didn’t have enough workers,” he said.

The stores in Dombivali and Thane also had to lay off a lot of staff in the last couple of months, police said. “During investigation, we found out that a majority of the workers in the store were new and had joined in August and September. They were paid their salaries for September and then given a vacation,” said an officer linked to the investigation.

The officer added, “There was some financial problem, the staff has told us. But they were unaware of the details. We are looking for the managers of the stores as they might have more details.”

More people have come forward to register FIRs against the jewellery store owners. “While we are not registering fresh FIRs, we are taking all complaints and clubbing them with the original FIR,” said a senior officer from Thane police. The officer urged people to come forward with complaints. “Not only will that help us understand the scope of the fraud, it will also help them in reclaiming their invested money,” the officer said.

The jewellers are accused of cheating customers of Rs 15 crore, sources said. Police have already sent teams to look for the accused, A M Sudheeshkumar and A M Sunilkumar, to Kerala and Bengaluru. “They were last traced to Bengaluru, some weeks ago. We’re trying to find them,” said an officer linked to the investigation.

Several other local jewellers in Thane and Dombivali have started facing public ire over monthly investment schemes. According to a jewellery store owner in Dombivali, who did not wish to be named, several customers have come demanding their money.

“We have been working with these people for years, but suddenly the trust has gone. I am trying to pay back whoever has demanded the money but it is disturbing my liquidity,” he said.

Police have also begun interrogating some jewellery store owners in the area. “The police have been demanding to see our audit reports and the amount we have collected. Why are we dragged in this, if someone else ran away with the money?” the owner said.

Thane police seized two flats and a Mercedes even as Palghar police have begun a probe under the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors’ Act, a stringent act for investment schemes. The Navi Mumbai police, where an FIR against Sudheeshkumar for an alleged murder bid on his wife has been registered since 2016, have also started investigation. “Some of their relatives live in Nerul and Vashi. We are investigating and will interrogate them,” said a senior officer.
