Veterans fume at gag plan

Lt Gen. Ashwani Kumar, former army adjutant general who retired last week, had told a TV channel on Saturday that the army headquarters was working on a code of ethics for retired officers.

Several veterans have castigated an army headquarters proposal to draw up a code of conduct for retired officers, which they see as a way of gagging any public criticism of the government or the defence forces.

Several veterans described the idea as “idiotic”, “foolish” or “ridiculous”.

“Code of conduct for Retd Officers? It will require amendments in constitution 2 and also in Army Act…. He seems to be an idiot,” Col Ashok (retd) tweeted. Responding to his post, Brig. V. Mahalingam (retd), tweeted on Sunday: “If true, agree with you. Totally idiotic. What does he think he is. India is not China yet.”

Serving officers are covered under the Army Act but the veterans are not governed by it even though they are allowed to retain their ranks after retirement. An official at the army headquarters said that discussions were under way about having officers give an undertaking, at the time of their retirement, about following a code of conduct.

He said some veterans had been extremely critical of certain government policies and posted unpleasant comments on social media that tarnished the forces’ image.

“This has not gone down well among the top brass. That’s why there’s an attempt to frame a code of conduct…. It’s not clear what the punishment will be if any veteran violates the code.”

A veteran who didn’t want to be named told The Telegraph: “This ridiculous move is a response to veterans’ criticism of government and army policy over the past two-three years.”

The veteran added: “The top brass are rattled and want to crush dissent even among the veterans.”

He said: “Any such code would be an attack on our fundamental rights. They need to change the Constitution for that and pass new legislation in Parliament. This is a foolish idea and will never see the light of day.”

He, however, expressed the apprehension that the government might try to arm-twist any non-pliant veteran by creating problems with his pension payment.

In the run-up to the Lok Sabha polls, over 150 veterans had written an open letter expressing anguish at politicians’ efforts to claim “credit for military operations like cross-border strikes, and even going so far as to claim the armed forces to be ‘Modi ji ki sena’”.

Addressed to the President, the supreme commander of the armed forces, the letter did not name any party or political leader. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had, however, asked first-time voters to dedicate their votes to the soldiers who carried out the Balakot air strikes while Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath had referred to the defence forces as “Modi ji ki sena”.

Veterans have also criticised some of the politically loaded statements made by the army chief, General Bipin Rawat, on Pakistan and China.

They have argued that the army’s job is to secure the borders, not make political statements.

In July, a group of veterans had criticised an army statement that supported the Centre’s decision to levy taxes on the disability pension, given to personnel disabled in the line of duty. Retired officers had accused the army of “campaigning against its own”.

A retired officer, Maj. Gen. S.S. Chohan, tweeted: “Indian Constitution is our code of conduct. And SC is there to protect that.”

He added: “From WhatsApp… ‘A time has probably come for veterans to draft a code of conduct for generals in service.’ Well said buddy.”
