Kolkata: TMC slams Centre for ‘faulty policy on Kashmir’, BJP says it’s about jobs

At a candlelight march, organised by Trinamool Congress, to protest against the killing of five Bengali labourers in Kashmir last month, in Kolkata on Monday evening. (Express photo)

On a day when 133 labourers from West Bengal returned from Kashmir, the Trinamool Congress (TMC) took out a candlelight march here on Monday to protest the killing of five workers from the state, in the Valley last month.

Senior TMC leaders — Sashi Panja and Santanu Sen — led the march organised by the youth wing of the party from Birla Planetarium to Gandhi statue on Mayo Road, demanding an impartial inquiry into the carnage that took place on October 29.

State Minister Panja said this rally was taken out to “wholeheartedly condemn the brutal killing of five labourers from Murshidabad district, in Kashmir”.

“The Centre is saying Kashmir is peaceful, but even today (Monday) a terrorist attack took place there. So, the situation has not improved there,” she said.

Carrying posters and placards, the TMC criticised the central government for its “faulty” policies regarding Kashmir, which they alleged has led to such a situation in the valley.

Responding to the TMC rally, West Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh said instead of blaming the Centre, the state government should take steps to generate employment in order to stop migration.

“Instead of blaming the Union government for the Kashmir incident, the TMC leaders should ask themselves as to why labourers have to leave the state and migrate to far off places like Kashmir. This shows the ground reality of the employment situation in Bengal,” Ghosh told reporters.

Kolkata Mayor and state Urban Development Minister Firhad Hakim, who reached Kolkata Station to receive the labourers with food, said, “The BJP government at the Centre and Union Home Minister Amit Shah threw away all the labourers into a valley of death, while our Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee rescued them. This is the difference between the BJP and the Trinamool Congress.

Five labourers – all residents of Bahalnagar village in Murshidabad district – were shot dead by terrorists in Kulgam district of Kashmir last Tuesday, when an EU delegation visited the valley to assess the situation after the abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370, three months ago. Another labourer from the same place was critically injured in the attack and is undergoing treatment at a Srinagar hospital. They had gone to the valley to work at apple orchards.

“We want an impartial inquiry. The party would stand by the family members of the five victims and extend all possible support to them,” Sen said.

Chief Minister and TMC supremo Mamata Banerjee had earlier strongly condemned the killing of the workers and demanded a “strong investigation” into the incident to find out the “real truth”.

Her government provided a compensation of Rs 5 lakh each to the victims’ families.

A total of 138 labourers, including five from Assam, working in various parts of Jammu and Kashmir, arrived in the city on Monday by Jammu Tawi Express.

(With PTI inputs)
