Shot at, bizman survives road rage by a whisker

Ludhiana: It turned out to be a horrific night out for 23-year-old hosiery trader as he survived a road rage incident by a whisker. Three drunk youths fired at Mayank Khanna of Mohar Singh Nagar at New Shivaji Nagar in the division number 3 area, then dragged him into their car at gunpoint and literally took him for a ride for 10 minutes.

Mayank, who was lucky as the bullet went past him after hitting his ear, even called his friends, who intercepted the assailants’ car near Transport Nagar. But the youths rammed their car into the vehicle, leaving it badly damaged.

A little later, Mayank pulled the handbrake of the assailants’ car and escaped.

Mayank was left bleeding from his ear and also received other injuries in the attack.

The firing and kidnapping incident has been captured in a CCTV camera installed near the crime spot.

On being informed the division number 3 police reached on spot. The police have registered an FIR against the accused, identified as Jassu, Kaku and Rahul Joshi of New Hargobind Nagar, under Sections 307 (attempt to murder), 365 (kidnapping), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 341 (punishment for wrongful restrain), 294 (uttering obscene words) 148 (rioting, armed with deadly weapon), 149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object) of the IPC and Arms Act.

Narrating the incident, Mayank said, “I along with my three friends had gone for dinner at Doraha. At around 11.30pm, we reached New Shivaji Nagar. I was crossing by the office of a councilor in my Creta car when DZire car obstructed our way. I asked DZire car occupants to reverse their car, but they started abusing me.”

“Afterwards, I alighted from the car and the accused too came out. We had heated arguments and then I pushed one of the accused. The accused then overpowered and thrashed me. Meanwhile, another accused Kaku took out a weapon from his car and fired at me. Though I ducked to protect myself, bullet went past me after hitting my ear. Despite resistance, the accused overpowered me and kidnapped me in their car at gunpoint,” he added.

After the firing incident, Mayank’s friend escaped from the spot in his car.

The victim alleged, “From there, the accused took me towards Kidwai Nagar, then Suffian Chowk and Cheema Chowk. In the meanwhile, I called my friend and shared my location and upcoming landmark (Samrala Chowk).”

Mayank’s friend tried to stop the car of the accused near Transport Nagar crossing. However, the accused rammed their car into the other vehicle after the latter turned over. Mayank friends were fortunate to escape unhurt in the incident. The accused then drove towards Samrala Chowk.

Inspector Satish Kumar, SHO, Division number 3 police station, said Mayank realized that the accused would not leave him. So, Mayank pulled the handbrake of their car near a patrol pump near Samrala Chowk and escaped.

The inspector said the police have found a bullet shell fired from a .32 bore pistol from the spot. The police are yet to ascertain if the weapon used in the crime was licensed or not.

The police are conducting raids to nab the accused.

Following the incident, Mayank was admitted to Christian Medical College and Hospital.

Box: Scary night out

Mayank Khanna, a hosiery trader, along with three friends went out for dinner at Doraha.

At around 11.30pm, a DZire car obstructed the way of their car New Shivaji Nagar. Asked reverse their car, the occupants started to abuse him

Afterwards, they had heated arguments. The accused then overpowered and thrashed Mayank.

Another accused Kaku took out a weapon from his car and fired at me. Though he ducked to protect himself, the bullet went past him after hitting his ear.

Then accused overpowered and kidnapped him in their car at gunpoint

The accused took Matank towards Kidwai Nagar, then Suffian Chowk and Cheema Chowk.

Mayank somehow called his friend and shared his upcoming landmark (Samrala Chowk)

Mayank’s friends driving his SUV intercepted the assailants’ car near Transport Nagar crossing, but was the SUV was hit. Mayank friends were fortunate to escape unhurt in the incident. The accused then drove towards Samrala Chowk.

A little later, Mayank pulled the handbrake of car near a patrol pump near Samrala Chowk and escaped

Act caught on CCTV

The CCTV has captured the attack on Mayank. In the video, some area residents and commuters could be seen standing. But, they neither tried to intervene into the matter nor even informed police.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
