Maharashtra power tussle: BJP trying to create blockade in government formation, alleges Shiv Sena

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: The Shiv Sena has once again launched a blistering attack at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), accusing it of creating hindrances in the formation of government in Maharashtra. Before issuing an ultimatum to Devendra Fadnavis to take a decision in the coming days, Sena alleged that the saffron party is trying to run the state from the Centre without forming the government.

In its mouthpiece Saamna, Shiv Sena stressed, "It is important that government in Maharashtra is formed as soon as possible. However, there is a party (BJP) which is creating a blockade in government formation and trying to administer from the Centre or from state level without forming the government."

"This is unconstitutional. The party is creating blockage by backtracking on promises," added the party.

"When the outgoing CM (Fadnavis) returns to Mumbai from the polluted environment in Delhi, he will have to finally decide now. Other parties will decide on the basis of the decisions made by him (Fadnavis). Right now we are concerned about the farmers and the growing rates of vegetables and fruits in the state," read the article in Saamana publication.

Earlier on Tuesday, Devendra Fadnavis expressed confidence that Shiv Sena will come to terms with the BJP and the government will be formed successfully in the coming days. However, Shiv Sena remains adamant on its demand for sharing power with the BJP in Maharashtra.

Shiv Sena has been demanding an equal share in the ministerial berths and a 2.5-year term at the chief minister's post while the BJP has time and again iterated that Devendra Fadnavis will the next CM of Maharashtra for the full five years.

Speculation is rife that if the mooted "50-50" power-sharing formula doesn't work out between the two warring allies, then Shiv Sena may end up joining hands with the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) and Congress. The current Assembly expires on November 8.
