Chandigarh: 3 booked for playing loud music at club till late night

Following the complaint, a police team led by head constable Sukhdev Singh reached the spot and found that the owners of the night club were violating the DC’s orders. (Representational Image)

Zirakpur police booked three persons for allegedly violating the Deputy Commissioner’s orders by playing loud music till late night on Sunday.

The accused, Suraj Chowdhary, Kuldeep Singh and Aman Sikka were arrested and a case under Section 188 (disobedience to orders duly promulgated by public servant) of the Indian Penal Code was registered against them. Later, the accused were released on bail.

The three persons were arrested after residents in the night club area called the police and complained about the loud music that was being played at Pit Brew night club.

Following the complaint, a police team led by head constable Sukhdev Singh reached the spot and found that the owners of the night club were violating the DC’s orders.

The district’s night clubs have become a menace to the administration as they continue to violate directions of the DC, which prohibits late night operations of night clubs.

The DC had imposed the Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) after a Punjab police commando deputed in the security of Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amrinder Singh was shot dead outside Walking Street night club in Phase 11 in August.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kuldeep Singh Chahal in September also wrote a letter to the DC to cancel the licenses of the night clubs in the district, following which the DC directed the Additional Deputy Commissioners (ADCs) to carry out raids and cancel the licenses of the night clubc

on the spot, if they still violated the norms.

At present, five night clubs run in the district with four in Zirakpur and one in Mohali.

Recently, police had also recovered 102 gm cocaine from the driver of the owner of Hypnotic night club in September this year.

Mohali: Eight arrested for impersonating, using fake IDs

The Lalru police on Monday arrested six more members of the gang which made fake identity proofs of defense, police and National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) officials to be exempted from paying toll tax. Police also recovered a pistol from one of the accused. The six accused were produced at the Derabassi court and remanded to three-day police custody.

The accused were identified as Varinder Singh Rana, Aniket, Sachin, Sangeet, Arvind Kumar and Rajiv Tahakur. Police said that the accused were arrested red-handed while preparing fake ID cards.

Lalru Station House Officer (SHO) Inspector Rajnish Chowdhary said, “We recovered many cards of journalists, police personnel, defence personnel and NHAI officials, we are carrying out further investigation and suspect that some more people were also involved.”

Earlier, police had already arrested two persons who were said to be the kingpins of the gang which was active in the last few months and was also accused in several extortion cases. The SHO said that the two accused were identified as Rajesh Bhardwaj and Mohit Sharma.

Another case of car wheels theft in Chandigarh

Unidentified persons took away four alloy wheels of a car in NAC, Manimajra on Sunday night. The car belongs to one Jaspal Singh. He had bought the white color Honda City on October 25.

In his complaint to police, Jaspal Singh reported he had parked his car before his house Sunday night and the next morning, he found all four wheels of his car missing. Jaspal Singh, who lives in a rented accommodation, bought the car on the name of his wife, Inderjit Kaur. Police said the footage from CCTV cameras installed near Jaspal’s residence was being scrutinized.

A case was registered at the Manimajra police station.

It is the third such incident happening in Chandigarh. Earlier, thieves had taken two alloy wheels of two cars each in Sector 16 and Sector 38. In these two cases, the thieves had targeted Maruti Ciaz cars. Two FIRs were registered in these cases, however, police failed to make any headway.
