FNB News - Dar & Malakar appointed as directors of operations in India at Hilton

You can get e-magazine links on WhatsApp. Click here TOP NEWS Dar & Malakar appointed as directors of operations in India at Hilton Our Bureau, New Delhi Rohit Dar and Ranjan Malakar have been appointed as regional directors of operations in India at Hilton.



With the country’s travel and tourism sector continuing to show significant growth potential, the hospitality group has appointed over 10 senior leaders from across industries in the last two years to lead different functions and roles.



The company also moved into new custom designed offices in Gurgaon earlier this year, as it continues to invest in expanding its business and hiring the best industry talent.



Navjit Ahluwalia, senior vice-president and country head, Hilton India, said, “As we seek to capitalise on the enormous opportunity for the hospitality sector in India, in our 100th anniversary year we continue to attract top talent from across a wide spectrum of industries and enhance our leadership team.”



“As such, we are delighted to welcome Dar and Malakar into these new positions, which will help us further improve how we operate our business and drive market-leading owner returns. Their experience will enable us to continue our spirit of innovation and performance,” he added.



Dar brings with him over 25 years of experience in the hospitality sector with a strong all-round knowledge of hotel operations. His most recent position was as general manager, Westin Hyderabad Mindspace.



Malakar has over two decades of hospitality experience in multi-functional roles across locations in India, Maldives, South East Asia and the Middle-East. His latest assignment was as director, operations, IHG Holiday Inn Express and New Projects.



As directors (operations) for Hilton India, Dar and Malakar will be based in the India regional office in Gurugram, and will report to Ahluwalia.



Hilton currently operates 19 hotels across five brands in India, and is one of the fastest-growing hospitality companies in the Asia Pacific region. At the mid-year point of 2019, it had signed 120 new hotels in Asia-Pacific, taking its total estate to 850 hotels open and under development across the region. Rohit Dar and Ranjan Malakar have been appointed as regional directors of operations in India at Hilton.With the country’s travel and tourism sector continuing to show significant growth potential, the hospitality group has appointed over 10 senior leaders from across industries in the last two years to lead different functions and roles.The company also moved into new custom designed offices in Gurgaon earlier this year, as it continues to invest in expanding its business and hiring the best industry talent.Navjit Ahluwalia, senior vice-president and country head, Hilton India, said, “As we seek to capitalise on the enormous opportunity for the hospitality sector in India, in our 100th anniversary year we continue to attract top talent from across a wide spectrum of industries and enhance our leadership team.”“As such, we are delighted to welcome Dar and Malakar into these new positions, which will help us further improve how we operate our business and drive market-leading owner returns. Their experience will enable us to continue our spirit of innovation and performance,” he added.Dar brings with him over 25 years of experience in the hospitality sector with a strong all-round knowledge of hotel operations. His most recent position was as general manager, Westin Hyderabad Mindspace.Malakar has over two decades of hospitality experience in multi-functional roles across locations in India, Maldives, South East Asia and the Middle-East. His latest assignment was as director, operations, IHG Holiday Inn Express and New Projects.As directors (operations) for Hilton India, Dar and Malakar will be based in the India regional office in Gurugram, and will report to Ahluwalia.Hilton currently operates 19 hotels across five brands in India, and is one of the fastest-growing hospitality companies in the Asia Pacific region. At the mid-year point of 2019, it had signed 120 new hotels in Asia-Pacific, taking its total estate to 850 hotels open and under development across the region. This page allows you to send the current page to your friend. Your Friends Email ID: Your Email ID:


