Gujarat: Two arrested in former BJP MLA Jayanti Bhanushali murder case

“We arrested them from Allahabad yesterday (Monday). We are going for their transit remand,” the police said. (Representational Image)

In a major breakthrough in the investigation of the murder of BJP leader Jayanti Bhanushali, a team of Gujarat police tracked down and arrested a woman and her male friend Surjit Pardeshi alias Bhau from Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh late Monday. The woman and Bhau are alleged key co-conspirators who helped Bhanushali’s political rival Chhabil Patel hire contract-killers from Maharashtra who allegedly shot Bhanushali dead onboard a moving train in January this year.

“We arrested them from Allahabad yesterday (Monday). We are going for their transit remand. Once we get it, we shall get them. Our Railway police team is there. They are producing them before a court. Once that is done, they will be brought to Gujarat late night or in a day or so,” Ashish Bhatia, Director General of Police CID (crime and railways) of Gujarat told The Indian Express on Tuesday.

The arrest of the woman and Bhau is another major breakthrough in investigation in Bhanushali murder case. Police say the woman and Bhau helped Chhabil Patel hire sharp-shooters Shashikant Kamble alias Bitiyadada and Ashraf Anwar Sheikh-both residents of Pune to kill Bhanushali early this year. The duo have been on the run since.

“They were hiding in a house which was also used by a religious figure in Allahabad. Our team arrested the woman and Bhau based on intelligence input,” Gautam Parmar, deputy inspector general (DIG) of railways who is heading a special investigation team (SIT) probing the Bhanushali murder, said. In a release, the SIT said that they had got leads about whereabouts of the woman and Bhau and that railway police had been working on them for the past one week. “Once it was confirmed that the woman was in Prayagraj (formerly Allahabad), one team was immediately flown to Uttar Pradesh two days ago while another was sent by rail road,” said the release.

The DIG said that the two accused were living in an ashram-like premises in Daraganj area of Prayagraj. The woman was detained from a road in Daraganj on Monday night while Bhau was arrested from another house. “One Nikhil Thorat, who had assisted the woman and Bhau in the murder, is still on the run,” Parmar said.

Bhanushali, the former BJP MLA from Abdasa Assembly seat in Kutch district and former vice-president of Gujarat state BJP was allegedly shot dead on board Ahmedabad-bound Sayajinagari Express train near Samakhiyali in Kutch district in the early hours of January 7 this year. The BJP leader was on his way back home in Ahmedabad after visiting his native district Kutch.

Police subsequently arrested Kamble and Sheikh. Police say that Chhabil Patel, a former Congress MLA from Abdasa seat who had defected to the BJP in the run up to the Lok Sabha election in 2014, had given a contract to have Bhanushali killed due to political rivalry. Chhabil Patel had lost the Abdasa bypoll in 2014 and the general election to the same seat in 2017 as the BJP candidate. After his defeat in 2017, a video went viral in which Patel was allegedly heard saying, “Mitron, chinta na karta. Dushmano ko dhishkyaon… dhishkyaon… (Friends, you worry not. Enemies will be shot dead) while gesturing with his hand of firing a gun. In his complaint, Bhanushali’s nephew Sunil also referred to this video clip.

In the 2012 Assembly election, Patel, then as a Congress candidate had defeated Bhanushali from Abdasa seat.

The SIT says that Patel hatched a conspiracy with the help of Dumra to eliminate Bhanushali. They sought the woman’s help in hiring contract killers.

Days before Bhanushali was allegedly shot dead, Patel flew out of India. After the BJP leader was allegedly murdered, Patel, a resident of Ahmedabad, issued statements that he had no role in the crime. However, he was arrested as soon as he landed at Ahmedabad airport from the US in March this year.

The SIT previously arrested nine persons. They include Chhabil Patel, his son Siddharth, Rahul Patel, Nitin Patel, another BJP leader from Kutch, Jayanti Thakkar alias Jayanti Dumra. The SIT has also arrested alleged sharp-shooters Shashikant Kamble and Ahsraf Sheikh-both residents of Pune who allegedly shot Bhanushali dead.

The police have also arrested Vishal Kamble of Maharashtra who helped the conspirators hire the shooters. The SIT has also arrested Raju Dhatre, a pickpocket of Pune who is alleged to have dropped the two shooters at Bhachau railway station on a motorcycle and picked them up after they allegedly killed Bhanushali and got off the train after pulling its chain.

Police say that to get rid of his political rival, Chhabil gave a Rs-30-lakh contract to the shooters. He contacted them through the Kutch woman and her friend Bhau. They gave the contract to Vishal Kamble’s gang to have 56-year-old Bhanushali murdered.

“The woman had come in contact with Bhau, a native of Maharashtra, around two years ago while she made an attempt to extort money from some persons,” Parmar said.

Rahul Patel and Nitin Patel are Chhabil Patel’s aides who used to work at the politician’s farmhouse in Reldi village in Bhuj taluka of Kutch. It was at this farm house that the shooters, police say, had stayed at to track Bhanushali’s movements in Kutch. The shooters boarded the train from Bhachau railway station after travelling to Bhachau from the farmhouse on a motorcycle.

Incidentally, the woman in question was booked by Ahmedabad Crime Branch in April, 2018 for allegedly trying to extort money from Bhanushali’s nephew Sunil. She was subsequently arrested and jailed. However, the woman alleged in a court that Bhanushali had raped her. Once, she was alleged to be quite close to Bhanushali but had fallen out with him over some monetary dispute. She allegedly later teamed up with Patel.

After Chhabil Patel’s name cropped up in the Bhanushali murder case, the BJP suspended him from the party.

Incidentally, Kutch (east) police have booked Chhabil’s nephew Piyush Vasani, relatives Rasik Patel and Vasani’s friend Komesh Pokar for allegedly conducting recce of a Pavan More’s residence in Gandhidham town of Kutch . More is a witness in the Bhanushali murder. The trio are in judicial custody presently.

The SIT has filed a charge-sheet against nine persons.
