Vishal's 'Thupparivaalan 2' begins rolling

Vishal's 'Thupparivaalan 2' begins rolling

The makers are planning for a 40-day schedule in London where a major portion of the film would be shot along with some action sequences.

Flix Kollywood

The shooting of Vishal's Thupparivaalan sequel has gone on floors on Monday in Bristol. The film marks the return of Vishal as detective Kaniyan Poogundran with his partner Manohar, played by Prasanna. Reliable sources confirmed that the makers are planning for a 40-day schedule in London where a major portion of the film would be shot along with some action sequences.

Debutant Ashya plays the female lead and the rest of the cast includes Nassar, Rahman, Gautami and Suresh Chakravarthy, who will join the shoot later this month. Maestro Ilaiyaraaja has already been confirmed to compose music and Nirav Sha is the cinematographer for the project.

Thupparivaalan which was released in 2017 was well received by both the audience and critics. In the film, Vishal played a detective called Kaniyan Poogundran, modeled after Sherlock Holmes. Actor Prasanna played his sidekick, a character very close to Sherlock’s partner Dr Watson.

Even before the film’s release, Vishal confirmed he will be reuniting with Mysskin for the sequel. Soon after its release, Thupparivaalan was panned by a section of critics and audience for being heavily inspired by Sherlock Holmes.

Mysskin had said only his lead characters were inspired by Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson. “Everyone gets inspired from something or the other. Edgar Allen Poe came up with the first detective story and then came Sherlock Holmes. There is a thin line between inspiration and plagiarism,” Mysskin had said in a media statement.

Vishal awaits the release of Action, directed by Sundar C. Tipped to be a romantic entertainer, Tamannaah Bhatia and Aishwarya Lekshmi have been signed to play lead roles. Aishwarya, best known for her work in Malayalam films Mayaanadhi and Varathan, would be making her Tamil debut with this project. Produced by Trident Arts Ravi, Hip-hop Tamizha Adhi is composing the music for the film and Dudley of Chennai Express fame is cranking the camera.

Meanwhile, Vishal is also working on another sequel. Irumbu Thirai 2 went on floors recently and the shooting is currently underway. The film is being directed by debutant Anandan and stars Shraddha Srinath and Regina Cassandra as the female leads.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
