Mob beats man to death in West Bengal for tying his cows to roadside posts

Das' cows were reportedly tied to roadside posts (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Violence erupted in Malda district on Saturday night Police have identified Ajoy Kumar Das, a resident of Goloktola village as the victim Three accused have been arrested and the prime accused is absconding

Kolkata: The maintenance of bovine led to yet another deadly altercation - this time, in West Bengal's Malda district. A 42-year-old man died after he was allegedly attacked by a group of young men armed with sticks and rods. Three arrests have been made since the incident on Saturday night, however, the main accused in the case is still absconding.

Police have identified the victim as one Ajoy Kumar Das. A cow owner, he had reportedly tied his animals to roadside posts which caused a major inconvenience for vehicle owners crossing the area. On Saturday night, a group of men with one Chiranjit Mandal leading the charge confronted Das at the Goloktola village and asked him to remove his cows. Das refused and this led to a heated argument.

The group of men then mercilessly thrashed Das and left him bleeding. According to a report, locals rushed the victim to the Bangitola Hospital. He was later referred to the Malda Medical College and Hospital where he succumbed to injuries on Sunday night. His body has been sent for post mortem by the police and an investigation in this regard is underway.

Das' mother lodged a complaint against six persons. Out of these, three people, namely Basudeb Mandal, Bhudeb Mandal and Kajal Mandal have been arrested. They were produced before a court on Monday. An officer with the Mothabari police station told media outlets that Das was suffering from some sort of ailment and the assault added to his condition. Meanwhile, the main accused is absconding.

In October of this year, a violent clash broke out in Uttar Pradesh's Vindhyachal area allegedly over the death of a cow. One person died and five were injured as a result of the clash. Violence erupted after B Bind, aged 65, blamed his nephews for the death of his cow. Other villagers joined in and the fight left as many as six people injured. Among the injured was Bind who died of injuries incurred during the violence.

In recent years, India has witnessed a spike in the number of cow-related instances where violence has led to casualties. The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) released a report pertaining to the number of crimes reported across the country in 2017. Interestingly, the NCRB's report left out hate crimes and lynchings fuelled primarily by cow-related incidents. Activists criticised the central agency for failing to assert the growing danger of hate crimes in India.
