Telangana woman officer death: Victim's driver succumbs to burns a day later

It is being suspected that a land dispute prompted the accused to target Vijaya (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Monday, a woman block revenue officer was set ablaze in her chamber in Telangana The woman's driver tried to rescue her and sustained 80 per cent burns The man battled for his life for 24 hours and breathed his last on Tuesday

Hyderabad: The driver who tried to save the life of a woman official after she was set ablaze, succumbed to his injuries on Tuesday morning. Identified as Gurunatham, the driver sustained 80 per cent burns and was undergoing treatment at Apollo DRDO Hospitals in Kanchanbagh.

Gurunathan had a two-year-old son and his wife is eight-months pregnant. The deceased block revenue officer was identified as Vijaya Reddy. Vijaya Reddy was set ablaze by a farmer on Monday. It is being suspected that a land dispute prompted the accused to target Vijaya.

On Monday afternoon, the accused K Suresh went to Vijaya Reddy's office. He was asked to wait outside the officer's chamber as it was lunchtime. After some time, K Suresh barged into the tehsildar's chamber with a bottle filled with petrol.

K Suresh poured petrol on the tehsildar and set her ablaze. Within seconds, the tehsildar came out of her office, engulfed in flames. Gurunatham and another visitor tried to help Vijaya Reddy, in vain. The accused K Suresh suffered 60 per cent burn injuries and Vijaya died on the spot.

The police have registered a case of murder against K Suresh. The police are yet to ascertain what prompted K Suresh to commit the crime. Mahesh Bhagawat, Rachakonda police commissioner called the attack "ghastly" and assured that strict action will be taken against the accused.

Sabitha Indra Reddy, the education minister of Telangana said, "If people have grievances against officers, they should take it to the notice of the higher authorities. But attacking lives is dangerous. "
