Kolkata Police raid companies allegedly linked to former interim CBI director M Nageshwar Rao

Former CBI interim chief M Nageshwar Rao I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: The Kolkata Police on Friday conducted raids at two different locations of companies allegedly linked to former interim Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) director M Nageshwar Rao. A raid was conducted at a company called Angelina Mercantile Pvt Ltd at Salt Lake allegedly linked to Rao's wife among and one other location.

A 15-member team of Kolkata Police conducted the raids Friday evening on the premises of the companies allegedly linked to Rao's family members. Speaking to ANI, Rao dubbed the raids as propaganda. "All that is happening appears to be propaganda," he said.

The action by Kolkata Police comes just ahead of Commissioner Rajeev Kumar's questioning by the CBI on Saturday (February 9) in a case related to Saradha chit fund scam. The Supreme Court on February 5 directed Kumar, a 1989-batch IPS officer to cooperate with the investigative agency in the case. SC also said no coercive action will be taken against him. Kumar will appear before the CBI in Shillong in Meghalaya. A day earlier CBI moved SC alleging Kumar destroyed evidence related to the case and sought his arrest.

Former interim CBI chief M Nageshwar Rao issues a press statement, refuting any link with M/s Angela Mercantile Pvt Ltd which is being raided by Kolkata Police today. pic.twitter.com/g9RfW3Yl4c — ANI (@ANI) February 8, 2019

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee sat on a 'Save the Constitution' dharna on February 3 (Sunday) after CBI officials reached Kumar's residence to question him in Saradha chit fund case. Banerjee vouched for the Kolkata Police Commissioner's integrity and accused the BJP leadership of a "political vendetta".

"The highest levels of the BJP leadership are doing the worst kind of political vendetta. Not only are political parties their targets, they are misusing power to take control of the police and destroy all institutions. We condemn this."

"The Kolkata Police Commissioner is among the best in the world. His integrity, bravery and honesty are unquestioned. He is working 24x7, and was on leave for only one day recently. When you spread lies, the lies will always remain lies," she said in a statement.

On Thursday, the apex court came down heavily on Rao for affecting the transfer of an officer probing the Muzaffarpur shelter home case despite the court's order against the transfer of then Additional Director AK Sharma.
