Raghavi Thimmayya opts for name change

Raghavi Thimmayya opts for name change

The actor is starring in the upcoming ‘Odeya’ opposite Darshan.

Flix Sandalwood

The shooting of the Darshan starrer Odeya has been wrapped up in Switzerland with the team canning a song sequence in picturesque locations. The interesting fact about the film’s heroine Raghavi is that she will be changing her name to Sanah Thimmayya and that will be her screen name henceforth. The actor is sharing screen space with Darshan for the first time in this entertainer.

Sharing her experience of working with the Odeya team, Sanah said in a media interaction that she learned the nitty-gritty of acting as she got to share screen space with veteran actors. The actor also mentioned that she got the offer to star in the film after she auditioned for it and that the competition had been tough.

Wielding the megaphone for Odeya is MD Sridhar. Earlier, the film had been titled Wodeyar but later the title was changed to Odeya to avoid controversies related to the name. The film is bankrolled by Darshan’s close friend Sandesh Nagraj under the banner Sandesh Productions. The plan earlier was release the film on November 1 to coincide with Kannada Rajyotsava Day but the release now stands postponed to December 20, according to sources.

Darshan is believed to be playing a dual role in the film. Apart from Switzerland, the film has been shot in various locations in India, including Mysuru, Bengaluru and Hyderabad.

Meanwhile, Darshan has wrapped up the shooting of his other film Roberrt some time ago and also completed dubbing for the film. Tharun Sudhir is helming the project as its director. On making this film with Darshan, the director said in an interview earlier that he penned the film not as a director but as Darshan’s fan, which means it will completely satisfy the star’s fans. M Chandramouli (of KGF fame) and KL Rajshekar have written the dialogues for Roberrt.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
