With police embarking on an unprecedented protest, will lawyers who lord over court complexes face the heat?

The Delhi Police protest outside the headquarters inconvenienced me over the one hour stretch I was stranded in traffic. But I didn’t mind it because I believe everyone has a right to protest peacefully, including the police, and this was one road among the thousands in Delhi. What however stops me from offering the police unqualified support is their own conduct. Against those who are powerless the police can act like lions on the prowl but at Tis Hazari last week the police were stunned by power, use of force and organised violence that trumped its own ability to marshal these faculties.

Lawyers behave like the uncrowned kings of court complexes and as a court reporter for four years I had several opportunities to see their imperious and sometimes intolerant behavior. Untrammelled power and delusions of self-importance can often manifest as violence too as had happened at the Patiala House court complex in February 2016 when then JNU student leader Kanhaiya Kumar was produced in a court there. On that occasion, my tribe of journalists and more specifically court reporters found themselves being chased and attacked as police watched mutely, perhaps even complicitly.

Similar events of lawyer muscle flexing in court complexes have also been reported from places as disparate as UP, Thiruvananthapuram and Chennai. Sometimes it is journalists, at other times it is police, occasionally it is lawyers representing reprehensible criminals, and many a time it is the accused who have faced the ire of murderous mobs in black and white. I myself have memories of lawyers stopping others from their fraternity from representing accused in cases like the December 13 gangrape or in terror cases forgetting the dictum that everyone has a right to legal representation and that no one is guilty until convicted. In high profile cases it is a common sight to see lawyers unconnected to the matter barge in and hog limited courtroom space denying space for advocates, journalists, litigants and their families who are integral to the proceedings.

My mother, an advocate, and me, a journalist, have had heated discussions on this subject. She says that unlike earlier days there are dozens of media houses lingering around courts unlike earlier when they were too few to be noticed. For me, it’s a question of quality and the kind of lawyers the country produces. It is high time the Bar Council of India conducts exit exams and a mid-career exam for the lawyers in this country. Only those who can pass this centralised exam in their mother tongues or in English must be allowed to wear the hoary black and white robe and the white collar band/neck-tie. Those who know to use the law will not use force to remedy their grievances.

It is an embarrassment to the country and its criminal justice delivery system when lawyers use violence to force their case, when the top cop cannot stand up for his men, when the high court cracks down hard only on police officers, and police take to the streets in protest instead of using their powers to lodge FIR and make arrests. Hopefully, the judicial enquiry by a retired judge and the police investigation will not have divergent conclusions and that both will reveal all those who broke the law in the unfortunate episodes. Police and lawyers are spokes in the same wheel, sharing a complementary and adversarial relations, when on the side of prosecution and defence. The breakdown and the prospect of stalling work in courts will inconvenience the general public greatly. While a compromise must be effected, those behind the violence mustn’t be allowed to go scot-free.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
