18-year-old youth shot dead allegedly by friend in Tamil Nadu

18-year-old youth shot dead allegedly by friend in Tamil Nadu

Mukesh was visiting Vijay, the accused at his house when the incident took place.

news Crime

An 18-year-old youth was killed after he was shot in the head allegedly by his close friend in Kanchipuram district. The police is on the lookout for the accused and the weapon with which he allegedly shot the deceased.

According to the police, Mukesh, the victim, and Vijay (19) were good friends and lived in Venkatamangalam, around 15 kilometres from Sholinganallur, Chennai. Mukesh was a student at a polytechnic college while Vijay is a food delivery agent with an online app. On Tuesday, around 11.30am, Mukesh reportedly went to meet Vijay at his house.

“Vijay was there in the house and so were his brothers Ajith, sister-in-law and another brother Udhay who was outside the house. As soon as the sound of a gunshot was heard, Udhay and Ajith rushed in to see Mukesh lying in a pool of blood in Vijay’s room while Vijay ran past the duo. Udhay alerted the others around the house and Mukesh’s family and rushed Mukesh to a hospital,” the police told TNM.

While Vijay took the weapon used to shoot at Mukesh with him, Udhay and others rushed Mukesh to a private hospital in Vandalur. However, the doctors in that hospital referred him to the Government Hospital in Chromepet. Since Mukesh suffered a grievous head injury, the doctors at Chromepet Government Hospital referred him to the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital. However, Mukesh succumbed to his injuries on the way to the hospital.

The police are yet to register an FIR in the case. “We are waiting for a complaint from Mukesh’s family to register an FIR. As of now, two special teams have been formed to trace the accused,” the officer said. They are also questioning Vijay’s family members, Mukesh’s family members and neighbours about his whereabouts. Forensic experts have also been engaged to study the scene of crime and collect evidence to find out more about the gun that was used.
