Police crack Korthikota triple murder case; five arrested

SP says accused planed to dig Siva Linga for hidden treasure

The Anantapur police on Tuesday cracked the Korthikota triple murder case by arresting five persons and one of the accused is still at large.

Superintendent of Police B. Satya Yesu Babu at a press conference produced the five accused and weapons seized from them. The five had allegedly murdered three persons sleeping outside Siva temple in the early hours of July 15 in the village to avoid any kind of resistance in their plan to dig the Siva Linga in the sanctum sanctorum for hidden treasures.

Tell-tale signs

The accused Ramavat Hanumanth Naik, 20, Ejaloth Srikanth Naik, 25, Chakali Ganesh, 25, Erragudi Vasudev Reddy, 45, Musalikunta Srinivasulu, 45, and Subrahmanyam Naidu (yet to be arrested) conducted recce of the temple and as per their belief brought two bottles of animal blood to be sprinkled on the Siva Linga and two anthills.

They believed that by sprinkling blood the snakes, which guard the treasure, would not harm them while digging.

When they found three persons sleeping there, including the purohit of the temple, his sister and a devotee from Bengaluru, they used knives and a hammer to murder the three. When they saw the Siva Linga, it was not of the specifications and size, which they were told holds hidden treasure. Upset by this, they fled the scene.

Cop lauded

The police could not get any fingerprints, but using some modern technical knowhow from the cellphone and tower location, the accused were arrested. Investigating Officer Madhu had done a good job in tracing the criminals in 100 days, the SP said.

Some arrested criminals in another case in Chittoor had claimed that they had committed the crime, but later it turned out to be false and all of them were sent back. The police confiscated, knives, five cellphones, a hammer and other weapons used in the crime. Kadiri DSP Ahmed and Additional SP G. Ramanjaneyulu were also present.
