'Serial-killer' mother is accused of murdering six relatives with cyanide over 14 years

Jolly Joseph, (pictured) a 47-year-old mother of two sons, was arrested in October for the murders of her first husband Roy Thomas and five others between 2002 and 2016

A mother in India has been accused of killing six of her relatives with cyanide including her husband and his parents.

Jolly Joseph, a 47-year-old mother of two sons, was arrested in October for the murders of her first husband Roy Thomas and five others between 2002 and 2016.

Police say she has confessed to the killings which took place in Koodathayi, a landlocked village in the state of coastal Kerala in southern India.

Joseph appeared on Friday before a judge, who ordered that she remain in police custody but her lawyer says he is preparing to file for bail.

Two men accused of supplying her with cyanide are also under arrest.

Joseph's mother-in-law, Annamma, a retired schoolteacher was the first to die in August 2002 when she fell unconscious after a meal of mutton soup and died soon after.

Six years later, Tom, Joseph's father-in-law, died after eating a plate of tapioca. Neither of the deaths were investigated at the time.

Joseph's husband of 14 years Roy Thomas died next in 2011 after throwing up his dinner and losing consciousness. The case was ruled a suicide when cyanide was detected in his body.

Joseph's parents in law Annamma (right) and Tom Thomas (left) were first to die in 2002 and 2008

Renji Thomas, Joseph's sister-in-law, said she initially sympathized with Joseph, who was raising two children as a widow.

But when Joseph decided to marry Shaju, her deceased husband's cousin, Renji became suspicious.

Shaju's wife and daughter died in similarly mysterious circumstances in the years before the wedding.

Alphin, the two-year-old daughter, died in 2014 during a family function at a church after eating a piece of bread.

Her mother, Cily, died two years later in 2016 after collapsing during a dental appointment. Joseph was present on both occasions, according to police.

Annamma's brother, Mathew Manjadiyil also died in February 2014.

The Thomas family, which Joseph married into, said they thought they were cursed as family members began to die one by one.

'Initially, it (the case) was quite unbelievable for everyone,' said K.G. Simon, the lead police investigator in the case.

Police say they began to suspect Joseph when they discovered she had lied about being a lecturer at a prestigious college.

No autopsies were conducted, except in the case of Joseph's husband, making it difficult to establish the cause of deaths.
