Northeast Briefcase

14 school students injured in Guwahati road mishap

Guwahati: In a tragic incident, around 14 students were injured after two school buses from Delhi Public School collided with each other near Lokhra area in Guwahati on Tuesday. According to sources, two buses of the Delhi Public School (Guwahati) collided with each other on National Highway 37. The 14 injured students have been rushed to Excelcare Hospital in Guwahati. All of them are undergoing treatment. As per the eyewitnesses, the DPS buses were on their way to the school carrying students when a person ran across the highway and the bus had to apply breaks, immediately. Following this, the bus behind it also stopped but could not control the vehicle and ultimately collided with the vehicle in front, leading to injury of the students including the driver. (UNI)



Brahmaputra Pushkar fest begins in Guwahati

Guwahati: The 12-day Brahmaputra Pushkar & Sanskritik Mahotsav 2019 on the banks of Brahmaputra river got underway here on Tuesday. Pushkar Mahotsav is a river festival which is organised at the banks of 12 important rivers in India. The festival occurs once every 12 years for each river. The mahotsav has been organised by Purva Tirupathi Sri Balaji Samiti Guwahati in collaboration with Sri Mahalakshmi Charitable Trust, Chennai. Attending the inaugural ceremony, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal highlighted the Brahmaputra’s important role in Assam’s socio-cultural life. “Brahmaputra is our culture, civilisation and strength. This festival has given us an opportunity to fulfil Prime Minster Narendra Modi’s vision of ‘Ek Bharat, Shresth Bharat’ and would act as bridge between North East and South India. We must take this opportunity to showcase Assam and NE’s natural beauty to the world through Pushkar Mahotsav,” he said. Saying that the devotees from South India visiting the state to take part in the Mahotsav were not guests but are kin as everyone belongs to the greater national identity of India, Sonowal said festivals like Pushkar Mahotsav help in fostering a sense of togetherness among the people of the country. (UNI)



Pillai takes oath as new Governor of Mizoram

Aizawl: PS Sreedharan Pillai was sworn-in as the new Governor of Mizoram at the Raj Bhavan here on Tuesday. The oath of office was administered by Chief Justice of Gauhati High Court Justice Ajai Lamba. Mizoram Chief Minister Zoramthangam his cabinet colleagues, legislators, former chief minister Lal Thanhawla and senior officials attended the swearing-in ceremony. Pillai, a former BJP Kerala unit president, told media persons that he would render all help possible to the democratically elected state government in getting assistance from the Centre. (PTI)



Tripura man gets life sentence in murder case

Ambassa: The Dhalai District Court on Tuesday awarded life sentence to a murder convict while announcing its verdict here. Reportedly, one Haradhan Shabdakar(34) axed to death his neighbour Gunamani Shabdakar(18) on March 29, 2018 over a land dispute. The father of the victim lodged a complaint with local Ambassa police station and the case was registered under sections 302 and 201 of IPC. After hearing the case, the District and Sessions Judge Data Mohan Jamatia declared the verdict on Tuesday in which Haradhan was awarded lifer and was also slapped a fine. Public Prosecutor Indranil Chakraborty fought for the victim’s family. (UNI)



Nagaland DC warns public on arrival of birds Amur Falcon

Kohima: The Deputy Commissioner of Longleng district M Shayung Phom has notified that Amur Falcons are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and trapping, killing and selling of Amur Falcon is a criminal offence punishable under Section 51 of the Act. According to a statement on Tuesday, the deputy commissioner notified that trapping, killing and selling of Amur Falcon is a criminal offence punishable with three years’ rigorous imprisonment or fine of Rs 25,000 or both under Section 51 of the Act. Phom directed the administrative officers, concerned departments, village councils, ward presidents and NGOs of Longleng to educate the general public to comply with the restraining order, it said. (UNI)
