Govts waking up to Delhi’s air pollution

It is heartening that the Narendra Modi government has woken up to the need to take decisive action to tackle the horrendous problem of air pollution in Delhi, though belatedly. Leaving it to the Delhi government of Arvind Kejriwal and to the stubble burning states of Punjab and Haryana which were playing havoc with the environment amounted to gross disregard of duty by the Centre. It just wasn’t Kejriwal’s cup of tea and the Centre should have known this well and proper. Kejriwal and New Delhi were indulging in a game of one-upmanship, each trying to show the other down while the capital city gasped for breath. The AAP Chief had swept the last Assembly elections blaming all and sundry for the problems of Delhi. With the next elections due shortly, the electorate was bound to ask for his report card which would show huge lapses.

Even now, with the Prime Minister’s office stepping in with a host of firefighting measures, there can be no guarantee that there would be a dramatic improvement in the Air Quality Index which measured an alarming 494 on Sunday in the national capital. Merely calling a review meeting on air pollution for Delhi and its surrounding areas cannot be itself a solution. Strong pro-active follow-up steps would need to be taken to stem the rot. It is some relief that the Cabinet Secretary would be monitoring the situation with the states of Delhi, Punjab and Haryana on a daily basis. The chief secretaries of the three states in turn have also been told to monitor the situation in various districts. But more than anything else, the basic attitude has to change both on the part of Delhi, of the Centre and of Punjab and Haryana.

The Aam Aadmi Party that rules Delhi has claimed that the Centre had postponed three review meetings in September and October last, showing how the issue was treated with characteristic disdain and indifference. The Centre’s claim that the Principal Secretary had presided over a review meeting on October 24 and that the Cabinet Secretary too had met stake holders earlier on October 4 on the issue sound like lame excuses.

Now, the Punjab and Haryana governments have been asked to send enforcement teams across districts to ensure that stubble burning is stopped. But one fails to see why this was not done earlier when the air was thickening with pollution.

We can hardly talk of countries shifting their base of manufacturing and/or marketing from China to India en masse if there is no sustainability in nurturing the environment and ensuring clean and healthy air to breathe. Some lessons need to be learnt and it is apt that the Supreme Court has also decided to monitor the progress of work.

Related
