Left in a dilemma: As govt looks for Maoists among cadres, Kerala CPM offers them help

The arrest of two young party workers on charges of Maoist links has landed the ruling CPI(M) in a political fix at a time the Home department has been on the lookout for Maoists in north Kerala, identified as affected by Left-wing extremism.

The Home department, a portfolio held by Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, has maintained its determination to tackle the Maoist menace since the state became eligible for special financial aid for Maoist-affected districts.

Meanwhile, the CPI(M) is extending support to party cadres who have been arrested with suspected Maoist links. Denouncing police action, the CPI(M) has already arranged legal assistance for the accused.

The police recently arrested Alan Shuhaib (20) and Thaha Fazil (24), students of law and media, respectively, stating that they were Maoists operating under the garb of CPI (M). As per the FIR, both confessed to being Maoists, attracting relevant sections of anti-terror law UAPA.

Explained | Kerala’s Maoists, and how they differ from their comrades elsewhere

Politically, it will be tough for the CPI(M)-led LDF government to adopt a wait-and-watch approach over the arrests under UAPA, as Muslim outfits have already offered support to the arrested duo.

And further police crackdown among party cadres is likely to mean more trouble for the CPI(M).

K S Hariharan, central committee member of Revolutionary Marxist Party of India, said a small section of CPI(M) cadres have been attracted to Maoism. “Young Communists with a rebel mind would find it difficult to come to terms with the present party and its regime. Nowadays, the LDF government is no different from any other government in terms of policy or approach to issues. A section of cadres is dissatisfied over the lack of Left identity in the government, and such elements are likely to be attracted to Maoism. But they are unlikely to move into jungles to wage a guerrilla warfare given the state’s prevalent middle class culture,” he said.

CPI(M) politburo member M A Baby said there could be stray incidents of party workers getting attracted to Maoism.

“The SFI and DYFI (the CPM’s student and youth outfits, respectively) still enjoy considerable sway among Kerala’s youths. But there could be circumstances in which cadres have deviated from the party line,” Baby said.

“The party will look into it if allegations of Maoist links are true,” he said. “At present, Maoist links of the arrested persons is only the police version…”
