Hyundai Styx shows its tail light pattern in new spy shots

Update 2: IAB reader Karthy Rajendran has spotted a fully-loaded Hyundai Styx (Hyundai QXi) equipped with projector headlights and LED tail lights in Chennai. Image gallery updated at the end of the story updated with new spy shots.

11 February -

Update 1: IAB reader PE Robinson also has shared a spy shot that partially reveals the tail lights of the Hyundai Styx.

8 February -

IAB reader Danish Murteza has shared spy shots of a Hyundai Styx test mule snapped in Bhubaneshwar. The new images show the upcoming small SUV’s tail light glow pattern.

The Hyundai Styx is the production version of the Hyundai HND-14, Carlino concept that debuted at Auto Expo 2016. However, Hyundai’s design language has evolved significantly since the concept arrived. Accordingly, the production version has a more prominent, Cascade-design radiator grille and composite lights at the front.

The sides of the Hyundai Styx are reminiscent of the Creta because of the similarly designed greenhouse. It is only at the rear where the Styx will have a truly unique design with little in common with existing Hyundais. In addition to partially revealing the tail lamps, spy media has shown that the license plate indentation is on the bumper.

The Hyundai Styx will measure no longer than 4,000 mm to avoid falling in the same higher tax bracket as the Hyundai Creta. It is planned for sale in markets even where the Hyundai Kona is sold, as a smaller, more economical urban vehicle. Hyundai will likely offer this sub-compact SUV with a 118 hp 1.0-litre turbocharged petrol engine and a 115 hp 1.5-litre turbocharged diesel engine. Y K Koo, MD & CEO, Hyundai Motor India, has reportedly said that this model may have a pure electric variant following later.

Also See: Hyundai Styx (Hyundai QXi) interior partially revealed in latest spy images

The Hyundai Styx will compete with the Ford EcoSport, Mahindra XUV300, Maruti Vitara Brezza and Tata Nexon in India. A report last month said that it would have its world debut at the New York International Auto Show on 17 April 2019. In all likeliness, India will get this model first globally for sales.
