Narendra Modi is Getting Ready to Scrap the Constitution: Tejaswi

Patna: Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) leader Tejaswi Yadav, at a function to induct a few members of the Kushwaha community in the party at the Sri Krishna Memorial Hall in Patna on Friday, fired off a number of political rhetoric to stir up his base ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Speaking on the occasion, Yadav, urging all non-NDA parties to come together in a bid to get rid of it, said that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was planning to scrap the Indian Constitution and was going to replace it with the 'Nagpuria Law' based on its Hindutva agenda.

"India is currently going through an 'Emergency-like' situation where opposition voices are being crushed and leaders who are against Modi are being put in jail on fictitious charges with the use of government machineries like the CBI and senior police officials. The high-handedness of the Center was evident just last week when the Center dissolved the democratically-elected state government in Jammu and Kashmir. The message is clear; there will only be BJP-rule in each state and all others will be removed and put in jail," the RJD acting-chief said.

Pulling the reservation card to drum up support of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe, Yadav said that once the Indian Constitution was repealed, there will not be any reservation as we know it today.

"This is what the BJP is aiming for," he said.

Yadav said that despite all the false cases of corruption leveled against him, his father, and other members of the family, he was not going to be cowed down and will continue to fight against injustice and social oppression against Dalits, backwards, and minorities.

"I am the son of a lion; I am not afraid of anyone,", he declared.

The former Deputy Chief Minister also took numerous shots at his ex-boss and Chief Minister Nitish Kumar saying the people of Bihar had already 'sent him into political retirement' and his days in the Chief Minister's office were numbered.

"Criminals have taken over the entire state and dozens of scams and scandals are taking place right under the nose of Nitish Kumar but he continues to pretend as if everything was just wonderful in Bihar. There is this financial scandal involving Muzaffarpur treasury and then there are those who are accused in the Srijan scam but are roaming free. Evidences of crime related to the girls' shelter in Muzaffarpur have also been erased by the government officials at the direct order of the Chief Minister. Can Nitish Kumar explain how many officials have been charged in these crimes?" he said.
