If only I could influence Amit Shah: IAS officer Gopinathan who quit over Kashmir chargesheeted, attacks Centre

Kannan Gopinathan said that he was accused of tarnishing the image of the government by his interaction with the media.

Former Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer Kannan Gopinathan on Wednesday claimed that a chargesheet has been filed against him, two months after quitting the services over denial of freedom of expression to the people of Jammu and Kashmir.

In a series of tweets, Kannan Gopinathan shared the charges against him as well as slammed the home ministry for targetting him via the chargesheet.

In one of the tweets, Kannan Gopinathan took a dig at the home ministry over the recent clashes between police and lawyers at Tis Hazari court complex in New Delhi.

He said, "So they emailed me the chargesheet. Well @HMOIndia, I know it must be tough as you are unable to manage what’s happening between lawyers and police right under your nose."

"So, in the interest of the nation, I do not want to trouble you more in your weak time. I acknowledge receipt," he said.

So they emailed me the chargesheet. Well @HMOIndia, I know it must be tough as you are unable to manage what’s happening between lawyers and police right under your nose.



So in the interest of the nation I do not want to trouble you more in your weak time. I acknowledge receipt. https://t.co/JKgtdOcWE5 Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

In another tweet, Kannan Gopinathan shared the first page of the Memo he had received earlier and wrote, "Memo for departmental inquiry given after two months of submitting resignation. First page."

Now before @ians_india pushes it as a scoop to all newspapers without my response let me only put it out. You may still clandestinely do it @ians_india. No grudges.



Memo for departmental inquiry given after 2 months of submitting resignation. First page pic.twitter.com/XhVjQg4QW4 Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

Another tweet took a dig at Home Minister Amit Shah where Gopinathan said that he wished he could influence the home minister over Kashmir.

"Here, it is warning me to not bring any political influence. Who is capable of politically influencing @HMOIndia other than Amit Shah. Now if only I could influence him. But let me try anyway. Sir, please restore fundamental rights in Kashmir," Gopinathan said in his tweet.

Here it is warning me to not bring any political influence. Who is capable of politically influencing @HMOIndia other than @AmitShah.



Now if only I could influence him.



But let me try anyway. Sir, please restore fundamental rights in Kashmir. pic.twitter.com/EIa3iZS2nV Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

In one of the tweets, Kanna Gopinathan listed out the charges levelled against him in the chargesheet.

"These are the charges. Same as the memo.

1. Did not put up file in time

2. Did not complete underground cabling project in time

3. Did not submit tour report for relief work in Kerala

4. Did not apply for PM excellence award

5. Submitting file directly to Administrator

Scary!" Kanna Gopinathan wrote.

These are the charges. Same as the memo.



1. Did not putt up file in time

2. Did not complete underground cabling project in time

3. Did not submit tour report for relief work in Kerala

4. Did not apply for PM excellence award

5. Submitting file directly to Administrator



Scary! pic.twitter.com/LMrJvrlY0u Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

He also said that the authorities were upset with him for not continuing his duties in Daman after submitting his resignation.

"Next is that they are upset that I did not continue in Daman after submission of resignation," Kannan said in his tweet.

He mocked the administration and said that he was a "Fakeer aadmi" and that he had just picked up his bag and left.

"Fakeer aadmi hu na ab. Jhola uthake chal pada. Fakeeri yaad hoga. Don’t feel bad. If Daman administration needs help to I still offer my services. Pro-bono though," Kannan said.

Next is that they are upset that I did not continue in Daman after submission of resignation.



Fakeer aadmi hu na ab. Jhola uthake chal pada. Fakeeri yaad hoga.



Don’t feel bad. If Daman administration needs help to I still offer my services. Pro-bono though. pic.twitter.com/c4GjQQxu7t Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

Kannan also accused the home ministry of intimidating him and said, "If this is the way @HMOIndia target officers, no wonder PM Narendra Modi is upset ki aapne 5 saal unki barbaad kar diya. Sad!"

If this is the way @HMOIndia target officers, no wonder @narendramodi is upset ki aapne 5 saal unki barbaad kar diya. Sad!



After 5 years of enlightened leadership one would expect you to be masters in intimidation and targeted harassment at least. Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

He also said, "After five years of enlightened leadership, one would expect you [home ministry] to be masters in intimidation and targeted harassment at least."

Kannan said that he was also accused of tarnishing the image of the government by his interaction with the media.

"Final charge is that my interaction with media created an adverse image of GoI. Sorry tto. It is your actions that creates such an image. Not my interactions," Kanna Gopinathan said.

Kannan also said, "But, it is good to know that you have been watching them. Slowly, you will learn about fundamental rights. That’s the plan."

Final charge is that my interaction with media created an adverse image of GoI.



Sorry tto.



It is your actions that creates such an image. Not my interactions.



But good to know that you have been watching them. Slowly you will learn about fundamental rights.



That’s the plan. pic.twitter.com/IhqSSCpHGE Kannan Gopinathan (@naukarshah) November 6, 2019

Also read | Lost my own voice: IAS officer disturbed over curbs in J&K resigns

Also watch | Kannan Gopinathan reveals why he quit Indian Administrative Service
