Perpetrators of attack must be brought to book: MP IPS Association supports Delhi Police on clash with lawyers

Madhya Pradesh IPS Association on Wednesday condemned the "act of violence by lawyers on the Delhi Police personnel" on Saturday and said, "perpetrators of such attack must be brought to book."

Speaking to India Today TV, Secretary of IPS Association of Madhya Pradesh Simala Prasad said, "We strongly condemn the act of violence against the police personals on duty during the recent incident in Delhi."

The association said, "Perpetrators of such attack must be brought to book and suitable punitive action must be initiated against them by the concerned authorities."

"The political executives and the judiciary must recognise that the police force which functions under extremely challenging circumstances, enjoys the same rights and protection as other sections of society," said Prasad.

The clash between the Delhi Police and Lawyers has taken an ugly turn even as the police force protested outside the Delhi headquarters on Tuesday against lawyers.

The episode dates back to Saturday when some advocates and police officials clashed outside the Tis Hazari court complex. At least 20 police personnel and a number of advocates were injured while many vehicles vandalised or set ablaze.

Protesting against the clash, advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts went on strike on Monday. The lawyers even refused to present in front of the judges at Delhi High Court.

According to reports, protesting lawyers on Monday targeted policemen outside Saket court in Delhi, while another clash broke out between cops and lawyers at Karkardooma court in Delhi's Anand Vihar area.

According to the input, several advocates thrashed a police officer after which the clash broke out. The advocates were striking against the Tis Hazari incident outside the Karkardooma court when the clash took place.

The coordination committee of the District Court Bar Associations on Tuesday termed the protest by police personnel over Saturday's Tis Hazari cop-lawyer clashes as "an attempt to shield senior officers who ordered firing on lawyers in the court premises."

The bar association election has also been suspended due to the violence at Tis Hazari court on Saturday. Elections were due to take place on November 5.
