Lawyers Shut Courts, Want Delhi Police Protesters Arrested: 10 Points

On the third consecutive day of their protest, lawyers have closed the main gates at Patiala House and Saket district courts and did not allow litigants access the court premises. At the Rohini district court, a lawyer doused himself with kerosene and threatened self-immolation. Another advocate climbed the rooftop of one of the buildings in the premises, threatening to commit suicide.

Assuring that the courts will function normally from tomorrow, Bar Council chairman Mannan Mishra said action has been taken against the lawyer who slapped a police officer at the Saket Court on Monday. "We are Indians not Pakistanis," he said, then added, "The police did not take action against the Constable who had fired against the advocate".

The lawyers claim that one of their colleagues was shot in the chest during Saturday's clash at the Tis Hazari Court, in which more than 20 policemen and eight advocates were injured.

"This court should take suo motu action on the provocative statements of the police," Delhi Bar Council Chairman KC Mittal told the High Court. Despite the Bar Council of India Chairman's claim of action against the advocate who slapped a policemen, he claimed they did not know if the man concerned was an advocate.

The lawyers also demanded a gag on the media and accused the police of making provocative statements.

The Delhi Police told the court that another policeman was beaten up yesterday at Palam.

This morning, along with other senior officers, Delhi Police chief Amulya Patnaik met the Lieutenant Governor, who is the Centre's representative in Delhi. The Delhi Police are under the control of the Union Home Ministry.

At least 20 policemen and eight lawyers were injured and 20 vehicles were vandalised in Saturday's clash at Tis Hazari court, which started over a wrongly parked vehicle. The attack was followed by another violent confrontation on Monday, when a policeman was slapped and beaten outside Saket District Court by a group of lawyers.

Yesterday, at least a thousand policemen gathered outside the police headquarters, blocking an arterial road of the city. The policemen were upset over what they perceived as a lack of the government's concern about their well-being. The protesting officers submitted a list of 10 demands, which includes the creation of a Police Protection Act.
