Tamil Nadu: Polytechnic student shot dead by friend over trivial issue

When Vijay’s brothers rushed to the room, they found Mukesh lying in a pool of blood.

An 18-year-old polytechnic student was shot dead by his friend at his residence in Venkatamangalam near Vandaloor in Kancheepuram district of Tamil Nadu after they had a quarrel over watching a video on mobile.

After absconding for a day, the accused, identified as Vijay, surrendered before the magistrate court in Chengalpet on Wednesday. He has been sent to Puzhal Central Prison in Chennai for 15 days.

The deceased has been identified as Mukesh, a second-year student at a polytechnic college. The incident happened when Mukesh went to visit his friend Vijay (20), who works as a food-delivery agent, in Bajanai Koil street in Venkatamangalam town on Tuesday afternoon.

Vijay’s elder brothers Udhaya, Ajith and his wife were present at the house when Mukesh came to meet him. Moments later, a gunshot was heard from Vijay’s room. When Vijay’s brothers rushed to the room, they found Mukesh lying in a pool of blood.

Mukesh was allegedly shot at point-blank range by Vijay, who immediately fled the spot after the incident. Mukesh was rushed to a nearby local hospital after his mother was informed of the incident. However, since Mukesh was in a critical condition, the authorities there directed his family to shift him to the government hospital in Chromepet.

Much to the chagrin of the distressed family, the government hospital in Chromepet asked them to shift Mukesh to Rajiv Gandhi Government Hospital in Royapuram where he succumbed to his injuries.

Kancheepuram district SP Kannan and Thalambur police officials carried out preliminary investigations at the spot and seized the bullet that shot Mukesh. Initial investigation revealed that the gun Vijay used was not a licensed one.

A police officer at Thalambur told indianexpress.com that investigation was going on and they were probing how Vijay got possession of the gun and the ammunition. According to local media, Vijay has a case of robbery against his name registered in Gudvanchery police station.
