Inside Guardian Weekly – can anyone end Mexico's deadly drug war?

The drug war that has paralysed hundreds of thousands of Mexican lives for more than a decade shows little sign of slowing down. The country is witnessing almost 100 drug gang-related murders every day and the battle to stop the carnage has been the bane of presidential administrations from Felipe Calderón to Enrique Peña Nieto. On his election last year, the leftwing populist Andrés Manuel López Obrador promised to end the long-running “war on drugs”with a pledge to battle the social roots of crime with a policy of “hugs not bullets”. Nearly 30,000 murders later, little progress has been made and a wave of high-profile attacks have rocked Amlo’s government. The Guardian has sent reporters across the country to try and make sense of the current state of Mexico’s drug war. Latin America correspondent Tom Phillips witnessed a bloody week in Tijuana, while Mexican novelist Jorge Volpi laments those lost to the violence.



It almost goes without saying (and we seem to say it every week) that the last seven days in British and American politics have been dramatic. Since our last edition the UK parliament confirmed Boris Johnson’s plans for a general election on 12 December and the US House of Representatives voted to move into the public stage of impeachment hearings against Donald Trump. Caroline Davies heads to the PM’s constituency in north-west London, where there is a chance that Johnson could become the first PM to lose his seat since Arthur Balfour in 1906. Later, Julian Borger analyses the Kafkaesque moves at the US state department, where new transcripts released by congressional committees pursuing an impeachment inquiry against Trump cast further light on his administration’s dysfunction. In opinion, Simon Tisdall argues that it’s surely time to throw the kitchen sink at the president.

Elsewhere, as part of the Guardian’s expanded reporting from New Zealand, we look at what a population of 5m will mean to the country; Moldovan writer Paula Erizanu writes on the perils of being a young lefty in eastern Europe and Hannah Ellis-Petersen tells the story of an already famous picture taken this week of water pollution in Delhi.

We also include a fascinating read from Robert Macfarlane, who looks at the movement that wants to grants legal rights to natural phenomena, including rivers, lakes and mountains. While writers and authors from east Berlin and east Germany remember the Berlin Wall, 30 years after it fell.

Subscribe here
