Disha Patani on Salman Khan’s Radhe, Ekta Kapoor’s film & Malang: All 3 of them are very unique & challenging

While there are many stars in Bollywood with a long line up of films, Disha Patani is quite different from them all. The Baaghi 2 actress has a 3 films lined up and all are diverse and different from each other. Last week, Salman Khan’s much awaited film, Radhe-Your Most Wanted Bhai went on floors and Disha was announced as the lead opposite the Dabangg 3 star. Apart from this, Disha recently returned from Chandigarh after shooting some portion of her film with Ekta Kapoor.

Disha also has Mohit Suri’s Malang lined up. With 3 different films in her kitty, Disha opened up about her projects in a recent interview with Times Of India. Disha revealed that she is looking forward to all the three roles since each of them is diverse. The Bharat actress also revealed that Salman’s Radhe, Ekta Kapoor’s film and Malang have unique and challenging roles and hence, she is excited about the work she has lined up for the future.

(Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Salman Khan finds his mother for Disha Patani co starrer ‘Radhe’ in Zarina Wahab)

Disha said, “I am thrilled to be working on such diverse roles in my upcoming movies. All three of them are very unique and challenging in their own ways and I am working hard to do justice to all three characters.” While the announcement of Radhe with Salman happened last week, a BTS video from the first day of the shoot was shared by the actor himself on social media and it promised an action packed entertainer.

Reportedly, in Radhe, Disha will have a small but interesting role. When Salman announced the film, Disha along with Randeep Hooda, Jackie Shroff, Sohail Khan and Prabhudheva posed for a photo. Also, Disha’s first photo from the shooting of Ekta Kapoor’s film showcased her in a superstitious avatar with lots of rings in her hand. Fans speculated that it might be a biopic on Ekta’s life. In Malang, Disha will be seen doing aquatic stunts and for the same, she trained as well. The film stars Aditya Roy Kapur, Anil Kapoor and Kunal Kemmu and will release on Valentine’s Day 2020.
