Terrorists infiltrate in Dera Baba Nanak ahead of Kartarpur inauguration: Intel sources

Intelligence agencies report has revealed that infiltration of a fresh group of terrorists have been noticed recently in Dera Babak Nanak of Punjab where Kartarpur Corridor inauguration is scheduled on November 9.

This report came after an input from Border Security Force (BSF) which suggested terrorist training camps are situated at Mudrike, Shakurgarh and Narowal where a substantial number of men and women are camping and undergoing training for terror activities. The input regarding the movement of terrorists in Ikhlaspur and Shakurgarh are received from time to time.

Sources in security establishment have asked the BSF and other agencies who are responsible for monitoring the international border to submit a report about the fresh infiltration of terrorists.

A higher official in security establishment has asked to submit a detailed report on the matter and also said if infiltration is true then how such infiltration is successful in the Punjab sector.

Meanwhile, Pakistan has released a video featuring Kartarpur welcome song ahead of the corridor's opening ceremony to welcome the Sikh tourists, however, the video is also having posters of Khalistani separatist leaders including Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, Major General Shabeg Sigh and Amrik Singh Khalsa.

These Khalistani separatist leaders were killed in an operation blue star which took place in the Golden Temple in June 1984.

The song has been released by Pakistan's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to commemorate the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji.

Kartarpur inauguration on the Indian side will take place on November 9, while on the same day, Pakistan will also open the doors to welcome Indian pilgrims.

The corridor connects the Dera Baba Nanak shrine in Punjab's Gurdaspur with Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Kartarpur in Pakistan.

Last year, both India and Pakistan agreed on the opening of the Kartarpur corridor on the 550th birth anniversary of the founder of Sikhism Guru Nanak Dev. Guru Nanak spent the last 18 years of his life in Karatrpur which is just a few kilometres away from the International border with India.

With just three days left for the opening of the Kartarpur corridor on November 9, Pakistan is yet to allow the visit of Indian advance teams to Kartarpur Gurudwara to check the arrangements that have been made and has also not responded with confirmation to the list New Delhi had shared of prominent Indian Sikh leaders who are part of the inaugural 'jatha'.
