Man Accused Of Murdering His Tinder Date Says She Died From 'Rough Sex By Accident'

Last year, Grace Millane went missing in New Zealand in December. A week later, her body was found inside a suitcase in Bushland just a few meters from a scenic drive in Auckland's Waitakere Ranges.

Inside the suitcase were also found earrings and a small metal tag which was inscribed with the term ‘freedom’.

A 27-year-old man - the accused in the case - recently appeared in an Auckland court; he is being tried for murder. According to him, he met Grace via Tinder and the accused’s lawyer, Ian Brookie, told the court that Grace’s death was ‘an accident’.

PA

He reportedly said, "Ms Millane died as a result of what they consensually engaged in. An act designed to enhance their sexual pleasure that went wrong and she died as a result."

A CCTV footage shows the pair kissing before they headed to the man’s hotel apartment.

Prosecutor Robin McCoubrey told the court that the accused had first lied that the two only went for a drink, but later he told them that ‘they had engaged in rough sexual intercourse involving biting and hitting’, according to Mirror.

PA

Grace reportedly died from sustained pressure to the neck.

Mr McCoubrey reportedly said, "Only two people know what happened in that room," Mr McCoubrey told the court. One of them can't tell us and the other one hasn't told the truth about what happened."

Why did the accused dispose the body, if it was an accident? Why did he lie the first time? These questions have yet to be answered as the trial is still on.

Another sex-related death, was termed as a 'workplace accident' by a court. A man named M Xavier had died while having sex, while on a business trip to Loiret region for his employer TSO, a railway construction company.

There, he had sex with a ‘complete stranger’, according to Fox News, suffered a heart attack in the act, and died. This happened back in 2013. The Court of Appeal of Paris recently ruled his death as a ‘workplace accident’ and has asked the firm for which he was working, to compensate the family of the employee.

Representation Image/Pexels

The company argued in the court that M Xavier's sexual activity was not a part of work. However, that still doesn't change the fact that he died while having sex on a work trip.

However, the Paris court argument was that it did not matter whether an accident on business trip occurs on work or personal time, unless an employer has proof an employee "interrupted his mission" for personal reasons. The court also argued that sexual activity "is a matter of everyday life, like taking a shower or a meal."
