Karan Patel on returning to Yeh Hai Mohabbatein sets, 'I was just away from it for a while'

Karan Patel returns to Yeh Hai Mohabbatein as Raman Bhalla | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Karan Patel had taken a break from Yeh Hai Mohabbatein to participate in Khatron Ke Khiladi 10 The actor has now confirmed that he will be returning to the sets of YHM as Raman Bhalla Karan also says that he never said he was going to quit the show and that it means a lot to him

Karan Patel had given an official statement a couple of months back that he will be taking a break from Yeh Hai Mohabbatein to participate in Khatron Ke Khiladi 10. The actor shot for the stunt-based reality show in Bulgaria and buzz is that he even made it as a finalist in the show. Karan returned back to India some time back and has now returned to the sets of Yeh Hai Mohabbatein. Actor Chaitanya Choudhary had replaced Karan on the show and fans are wondering what will happen to his character now that Karan is returning as Raman Bhalla.

There were also rumours about the daily soap going off air in some time but those have been going around for quite a few years now. There are also reports of Ekta Kapoor planning a spin-off of the show called Yeh Hai Chaahatein. Raman recently confirmed that he is back on the sets and said that he has no idea what led people to believe that he has quit the show since he never said he has walked out of it.

He told a daily, “I don’t know why people speculated that I quit the show. I was just away from it for a while because I was busy with something else. This show will always be an integral part of my career and life.” When asked about reports of the show going off air and if he feels the content on the show might be monotonous for viewers, he said, “I don’t think so. Though we have been playing these characters for long, people’s love and admiration for us haven’t dipped. It means that I am doing something right. Playing Raman Bhalla will always be a matter of pride for me. If a few think that 'YHM' has run its course, they need to recheck their facts with those who think it should go on.”

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
