From Nankana Sahib to Kartarpur (Part-I )

Sikhs in India constitute two percent of total population. They are followers of ten gurus and worships a holy scripture, the Granth Sahib, and also regarded as last guru. Sikhism was founded by Guru Nanak in 1499 who drew inspiration from both Islam and Hindu beliefs. However, Sikhs possess their own separate and authentic faith. Guru Nanak rejected Hindu ritualism and caste system and preached “IK Onkar” (the Oness of God) which is Sikhs religious philosophy. It is a symbol of Sikhism meaning God is one.

He also prohibited forms of superstition practices, and according to him a true Sikh would not be reborn on his death he would find immediate peace. Guru Nanak was born on 1469 in Nankana Sahib, Punjab, Pakistan and died in Kartarpur district Narowal, Punjab Pakistan. During his preaching and through out he was accompanied by his Muslim servant, Mardana. According to Khushwant Singh, the ninth guru Gobind transformed the Sikhs into a militant fraternity and named Khalsa (pure).

The British helped the Sikhs in the struggle for separate identity by making the observance of Khalsa traditions compulsory for the Sikh soldiers and civil servants. The Sikhs had struggled right through the British rule to defend themselves from Hindu efforts to convert them to Hinduism. First book “Hum Hindu Nahin” was published in 1898 by Kalhan Singh Nabha asserting Sikhs identity distinct from Hinduism.

After independence Sikhs were at the receiving end, living as a minority to a Hindu majority. The Sikhs always felt that their rights are denied by majority Hindus. After partition Hindus and Sikhs started distancing from each other and this resulted into anti Sikh tendencies. The Sikhs also felt that they were a separate and distinct community from religion, language and traditions. The Sikhs under the leadership of Akali Dal demanded a separate province in the Punjab region.

They also demanded that Punjabi should be made medium of instruction for schools across Punjab. On 4 July 1955 the police raided the Golden Temple and Shiromani Akali Dal office and arrested many leaders and workers. On 1 November 1966, Punjab was divided into Punjab and Haryana making Chandigarh a union territory and the capital of both the states.

According to amnesty international thousands of Sikhs burned alive, women raped, men’s hair and beard cut, gurdwaras set on fire. The pro-Khalistan groups in US, Canada and Europe are planning a referendum 2020 for Punjab’s independence. It is being organized by an organization, Sikhs For Justice

It was Dr Jagjit Singh Chouhan who in 1971 raised the demand for Khalistan. He condemned the atrocities committed by Hindus and government of India against the Sikhs. In 1981, the 54th Sikh Education Conference at Chandigarh passed a resolution demanding a free Khalistan to include area of Punjab, part of Haryana, Rajisthan and Jammu. In 1983 Bindranwala made Akal Takhat as his headquarters and demanded a free Khalistan.

On the instructions of Indra Gandhi, an operation was planned condemned “Blue Star” to eliminate Sikh leaders along with their followers. The operation was executed on 2 June 1984 as curfew was imposed across Punjab and all entries all exits were sealed. During the operation thousand of Sikhs were killed in and out of Golden Temple. It was a virtual massacre of pilgrims, women and children who were trapped inside the temple.

Even the Akal Takhat was reduced to rubble. 700 Indian army soldiers were killed and hundreds injured. On 31 October 1984 Indra Gandhi the prime minister of India was assassinated by two of her Sikh body guards. On 1 November 1984 after assassination of Indra Gandhi anti-Sikh riot took place. The genocide of Sikhs was carried out for four days without government interventions which led to killing of thousand of Sikhs in north India.

It was after four days when Indian army was called in to restore order. According to amnesty international thousands of Sikhs burned alive, women raped, men’s hair and beard cut, gurdwaras set on fire. The pro-Khalistan groups in US, Canada and Europe are planning a referendum 2020 for Punjab’s independence. It is being organized by an organization, Sikhs For Justice. Their demand is a separate Khalistan for Sikhs and also reject article 25 (b) (2) of India constitution which says Sikhism is a part of Hindu religion.

The Sikhs wants the constitution to be amended in this regard and also want their religion to be protected from subversion through constitution enforcement.

The writer is a retired brigadier and freelance columnist
