Faheem Ansari, a convict in Rampur CRPF camp attack case, walks out of Bareilly jail

BAREILLY: Faheem Ansari , one of six convicts in Rampur CRPF camp attack case, walked out of Bareilly Central jail on Tuesday evening as he has already served the 10-year jail term awarded by court. A resident of Mumbai’s Goregaon, Ansari was also an accused in 26/11 terror attack in Mumbai. However, he was acquitted later. According to jail authorities, Ansari’s wife had come from Mumbai to receive him.In the Rampur case, Ansari was “held guilty for holding a fake Pakistani passport and also under Arms act.” He was sentenced to 10 years in jail by the court in Rampur after being arrested in the terrorist conspiracy of the attack on the CRPF Group Centre in Rampur in 2008.Since Ansari has already been in jail for the last 12 years, he walked free from the jail after paying a fine slapped by the court.The jailor of the Central prison, Ashok Sagar, told TOI, “We received the releasing order of Ansari on Monday evening. After a fine of Rs 95,000 imposed by the court was deposited by Ansari’s lawyer, he was set free. His wife and a brother-in-law had come to receive him.”According to sources, Ansari went to Lucknow from where he would catch a train for Mumbai to reach home.On November 2, a local court in Rampur awarded capital punishment to four men, including two Pakistani nationals, in the attack on a CRPF camp in which seven jawans of paramilitary force and a civilian were killed. The remaining two of the six convicted on Friday -- Jungbahadur, a resident of Moradabad , and Faheem Ansari of Mumbai-- were given life imprisonment and 10 years in jail respectively.According to sources, Ansari and Sabauddin Ahmed were co-accused in 26/11 case along with Pakistan terrorist Ajmal Kasab. However, a special court in Mumbai acquitted the duo in 2010 and their acquittal was later upheld by the Supreme Court. Later, both were transferred to jail of Lucknow and Bareilly in Uttar Pradesh.The court held Sabauddin guilty for attack on CRPF camp and has been charged with murder and also under the Arms Act and Explosive Act. However, Ansari was not found guilty in the attack but has been “found guilty for holding a fake Pakistani passport and also under the Arms Act”.
