Punjab records 4,741 farm fire incidents on Wednesday

STUBBLE BURNING continued unabated in Punjab with 4741 farm fire incidents being recorded Wednesday. On the same day in 2018, a total of 2983 incidents had happened and in 2017, only 165 incidents had been recorded.

Sarpanches of various villages, meanwhile, rued the recent orders by DCs that in stubble burning incidents concerned village sarpanch will be held responsible.

Jarnail Singh, sarpanch of village Ranghrial in Mansa, said, “Now most of the stubble has been burnt, what is the point of issuing such an order. Also, when the government cannot control it, why are they involving sarpanches in this matter. How can we stop an entire village?”

Preet Pal Singh Brar, sarpanch of village Bargari in district Faridkot, said,”We are the elected representatives, hence why are we being involved? We will be questioned by voters. We can only request the villagers, but we cannot force them. Holding us responsible is not justified. Moreover, most of the crop residue has been burnt by now and hence there is no point issuing such instructions.”

Veerpal Singh, from Rattoke village of Sangrur whose wife is village sarpanch, said,”Villagers start protesting and they even gherao officials. So how can a sarpanch stop them. Moreover, such instructions should have been issued long back. Now, most stubble has been burnt. Hence such instructions can be thought about in the coming year.”

The Air Quality Index of Punjab over all was rated as ‘unhealthy’ at 184. Jalandhar was the most polluted at 256. followed by Amritsar at 208 AQI. Ludhiana was at 204.

Ferozepur DC to cycle to work

Concerned over rising air pollution, Ferozepur DC Chander Giand Sharma has decided to go to his office on a bicycle till the time stubble burning continues in the state. Talking with The Indian Express he said,”I along with my team of around 10 persons will be going to office on bicycle Thursday morning. This is our bit to reduce air pollution as cars and two-wheelers also increase pollutants in the air.” He added: “Till the time stubble burning continues, I will be riding a bicycle along with my team. I am not forcing any other staff member to do this, but it will be their own choice to follow it if they want to.”
