Karnataka woman allegedly kills her 3-month-old baby, dumps body in Bhadra river

Karnataka woman allegedly kills her 3-month-old baby, dumps body in Bhadra river

The woman may have mental health issues and a medical examination will be conducted.

news Crime

The Karnataka police on Wednesday arrested a 28-year-old woman from Chikkamagaluru district for allegedly throwing her three-month-old baby into a canal. The incident came to light when the baby's body was found floating in the Bhadra River on Wednesday.

Tavarakere Police, who are investigating the case, says that the woman may have mental health issues and that a medical examination would be conducted to determine the same.

Early on Wednesday morning, residents of Bettatavarakere village in Karnataka's Chikkamagaluru district, noticed the body of a baby floating in the water. The village residents immediately informed the Tavarakere Police, who arrived at the spot to recover the child, named Tejas.

The investigating officers contacted Tejas' mother Kamala about her son's death. "The baby's mother came to the police station after we called her and confessed to killing the baby. She had also chopped off his tongue, she said," the Tavarakere Police said.

According to the investigating officials, Kamala and her mother-in-law had taken Tejas to a private hospital in Tavarakere when he fell sick three days ago. The baby was admitted to the hospital and was undergoing treatment. On Tuesday night, Tejas allegedly began to cry and was inconsolable.

"The mother, Kamala, tried to pacify the baby and she told her mother-in-law, who was asleep at that time, that she would take the baby out of the ward for a while to pacify him. She says that the baby did not stop crying and so she cut off his tongue," the Tavarakere Police added.

Kamala allegedly took Tejas to Haliyur, which was 4 km away from the hospital and allegedly threw the baby into the canal (Upper Bhadra project), which is currently under construction. Police say that Kamala then went back to the hospital and slept in the visitor's area. On Wednesday morning, Kamala allegedly called the Tavarakere police and informed them that her baby was missing from the hospital.

"When we got a call that a baby's body was found in the water, we called the woman, so she could come and identify the body. She confessed when she came to the station," the police added.

Tejas' body has been sent for an autopsy as the police are uncertain whether the baby was dead or alive before he was thrown into the canal. The Tavarakere Police have arrested Kamala and have booked her under section 302 (murder) of the IPC. She was produced before the magistrate and has been remanded to 14-day judicial custody.

In August 2017, a Bengaluru woman allegedly flung her daughter off the terrace twice, ultimately killing the child. It was later reported that the woman was ‘mentally unstable.’

In many cases like this, the accused have been found to have postpartum depression, which if left untreated, can manifest as postpartum psychosis. Postpartum depression is a condition caused after childbirth where a mother experiences symptoms of severe depression - which may be attributed to many reasons like post-delivery stress or hormonal changes. If left unchecked, postpartum depression may escalate into an episode of psychosis.
