SC dismisses review plea of man sent to death in Coimbatore siblings murder case

On August 1, the apex court upheld the death penalty awarded to Manoharan by a 2:1 judgment, saying the “crime was cold blooded” and “it is unlikely that the Appellant, if set free, would not be capable of committing such a crime yet again”.

The Supreme Court Thursday dismissed the review plea filed by a man convicted in the in the rape and murder of a 10-year-old girl in Tamil Nadu’s Coimbatore district in 2010. He also killed her seven-year-old brother.

On August 1, the apex court upheld the death penalty awarded to Manoharan by a 2:1 judgment, saying the “crime was cold blooded” and “it is unlikely that the Appellant, if set free, would not be capable of committing such a crime yet again”.

On October 29, 2010, former school truck driver Mohanraj aka Mohanakrishnan, kidnapped the children of a merchant from Coimbatore. The children were picked by Mohanraj in a private van borrowed from his friend. Since the children knew Mohanraj for quite some time they boarded the van assuming they are heading to school.

On the way, Mohanraj picked up his accomplice Manoharan, a resident of Angalkurichi near Pollachi, and headed to a remote area near the Gopalasamy temple hills. The convicts then sexually assaulted the girl child and made both the children drink milk with a poisonous substance added to it. The perpetrators then threw the children in the Parambikulam-Aliyar Project canal near Pollachi in Coimbatore district and fled the spot.

The police recovered the bodies of the children and arrested both the accused. Both were booked for abduction, sexual assault, and murder.

During the custody period, Mohanakrishnan was killed in an encounter by the Coimbatore police. Then Coimbatore City police commissioner C Sylendra Babu who nabbed the criminals in quick time said the police opened fire to stop the accused from killing a police official. He called the encounter an act of self-defense.

On November 7, 2012, the trial court sentenced Manoharan to death which was later confirmed by the Madras High Court on March 24, 2014. Manoharan filed an appeal in the Supreme Court challenging the judgment. The appeal was heard by a bench of justices comprising Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman, Justice Surya Kant and Justice Sanjeev Khanna.

The bench confirmed the death sentence and said the persons who are committing the heinous crimes must be dealt with severely.
