Cops vs lawyers: Supreme Court rejects lawyers petition seeking ban on media coverage

Supreme Court

Key Highlights In their plea, the lawyers had alleged that the media was defaming them by calling them ‘goondas’ The court further said that its November 2 order is "self-explanatory and needs no clarification" Tension between the Delhi Police and lawyers escalated after a cop allegedly opened fire at a lawyer after an argument broke out over parking

New Delhi: In a setback for the lawyers, the Supreme Court has refused to put a gag order on the media. Few lawyers from Saket, Tis Hazari and Karkardooma had approached the Supreme Court seeking a ban on the media for reporting the ongoing clashes between them and the police.

In their plea, the lawyers had alleged that the media was defaming them by calling them ‘goondas’ and further claimed that many fake videos CCTV footages videos were doing rounds on TV channels and newspapers in a deliberate bid to malign them at the behest of Delhi Police.

Yesterday, the Delhi High Court dismissed the application filed by Delhi Police and denied them permission to lodge FIRs against the lawyers for clashes which broke out at Tis Hazari Court.

The Ministry of Home Affairs, which directly controls Delhi Police, had moved the court seeking clarification on the previous order in which the court had directed the Delhi Police not to take coercive action against lawyers on whom FIRs were filed after clashes broke out at Tis Hazari Court.

The court further said that its November 2 order is "self-explanatory and needs no clarification".

Meanwhile, Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik issued a statement to police personnel about the developments in the high court saying "we have got relief from the high court after we filed a review petition."

He further asked the police personnel not to get provoked and to maintain the police service integrity.

The high court order was passed by a division bench presided over by Chief Justice DN Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar.

After hearing both the applications, the bench clarified, "The observations given by the court on November 3 will not have any bearing on the ongoing judicial inquiry. Both the applications by MHA and Delhi Police stand disposed of."

Earlier, the Delhi High Court had turned down a similar plea by Bar Council of India (BCI) to ban media reporting of all incidents of violence.

The tension between the Delhi Police and lawyers escalated after a cop allegedly opened fire at a lawyer after an argument broke out over parking in the court complex on November 2.

Taking suo motu cognisance of the matter, the Delhi court ordered a judicial inquiry headed by retired Justice SP Garg and also granted protection from coercive action against the lawyers in connection with the FIRs registered against them by Delhi Police, reported news agency IANS.

Many cops were attacked by the lawyers and in one of the videos which surfaced on Twitter, a lawyer was seen slapping a policeman outside the Saket court.
