Tis Hazari turmoil

New Delhi: Lawyers stage a protest against the police over the recent Tis Hazari Court clashes, at Saket Court Complex in New Delhi | Photo Credit: PTI

The prestigious Tis Hazari Courts witnessed violent clashes between advocates and police personnel on duty there on Saturday. The ugly incident was totally avoidable if the mature and experienced on both the sides had stepped in and intervened emphatically. This would have ensured that the problem was nipped in the bud and it would not have assumed alarming proportions. Violence and vandalism went out of hand, and there was a free-for-all for hours together, till reinforcements arrived and brought the situation under control after herculean efforts.

Now there are allegations and counter-allegations.

Clashes and differences between advocates and the police are not uncommon. However, the chain of events here is unprecedented. It is alleged that an advocate went to the lock-up area of Tis Hazari Courts and parked his vehicle unauthorisedly in the no-parking zone. Tis Hazari Courts premises are sensitive in nature because of the numerous intelligence inputs regarding attacks from various quarters, therefore the police cannot be faulted for checking this particular lawyer and asking him to remove his vehicle, parked close to the lock-up, that must have had hazardous undertrials, too. The altercation and physical assault on each other followed, leading to widespread disturbances. It is alleged that the advocate tried to break open the gates of the lock-up and had that happened it would have been a calamity of unimaginable proportions.

The advocates allege that the police was extremely violent and trigger-happy and used disproportionate force against them which included firing on vital parts. Allegedly, an advocate was shot on the chest and is recovering in the ICU. The police side accuses the advocate community of indiscriminate violence, elderly officers were pinned to the ground and beaten black and blue and kicked mercilessly, uniforms desecrated, service weapon looted, and large-scale arsoning followed. It is also alleged that there was shameless molestation of lady police officers.

The Delhi High Court took suo moto cognisance of the incident and ordered a judicial inquiry by a retired high court judge, Justice SP Garg, The report has to be submitted within six weeks and they will be assisted by director CBI and director IB.

Ex gratia grant has been announced for the injured advocates. On the basis of prima facie evidence, some police officers on the spot have been suspended and transferred. The police allege that this action is one-sided, and their version was not considered.

It is, however, debatable, if the response of the police was professional or it left much to be desired. I am of the opinion, and I have said on several TV channels, that had I been on the spot at that point of time, I would have done what the Delhi Police did, in the right of exercise of my private difference as also the defence of all those near me, which is sanctioned by law. By no stretch of imagination can it be said that the use of force by Delhi Police was disproportionate, as it happened, in the face of this extreme threat to life and property and provocation by the advocates. There were fresh clashes on Monday, in Karkardooma and Saket courts, leading to fresh acrimonious exchange of accusations.

Unfortunately, some police personnel and their families staged dharna and protest near the Police Headquarters, which should never have happened. The Police are a uniformed disciplined force and any form of agitation is uncalled for and unacceptable. I would also find it condemnable that some veterans of the force went to the agitation site and provoked the police personnel and their families to continue their agitation, and in a way, added fuel to fire, inflicting an irreparable blow to the police cause.

There is too much of politics in the atmosphere and there is also no dearth of devious politicians fishing in troubled waters. The central IPS association has demanded that the licence of the guilty advocates be cancelled by the Bar Council of India. It remains to be seen if that is done.

The most illustrious of the legal fraternity, like veteran Soli Sorabjee, respected Mahesh Jethmalani, widely acclaimed Prashant Bhushan and learned Aryan Sundaram were unanimous in their condemnation of this conduct of the lawyers. This act of the lawyers was uncalled for and they strongly condemned the violence in court premises. This is a very welcome signal and can be the starting point for a dialogue between the top police leadership and the advocates, instead of adding fuel to the fire. It is time that honest and sincere efforts are made to extinguish the fires and assuage feelings of all sections, on the basis of time-tested, well-established procedures and strategies. There are far too many people, political parties, organisations and vested interests who are trying to make hay while the sun shines, more so in the backdrop of the forthcoming Delhi elections.

Police in general and police leadership, in particular, need to reinforce their traditions that have existed for more than 150 years. The junior colleagues are not our subordinates, they are a part of the proud extended police family and there should be a clear unambiguous signal that the top leadership is by the side of the juniors as an all-weather sincere friend. A strong and well-structured defence must be prepared to be placed before Justice Garg Committee, to give deterrent punishment to those who assaulted police officers on duty and desecrated their uniform. But for the moment, both the parties need to remember that the advocates have a very lofty ideal of serving the cause of justice and mitigants.

The police are expected to be the faithful instruments for the implementation of the rule of law. There has always been a mechanism to ensure a vibrant functional relationship and synergy between the two; why this has become dysfunctional and fallen into disuse, is a matter of concern. This is a loss, not only for these two organisations but for the society and the nation as a whole. The absurd and the frivolous demand from the agitating police side to withdraw the security of judges and courts is not only childish but irresponsible, to say the least. It does not serve the purpose of the police to take part in agitations and sloganeering. This has brought disrepute to the disciplined uniformed organisation. This may have happened once, but should never be repeated. The message from the police leadership should be very clear that such an ugly display of public protest and agitation are unacceptable when there are official departmental channels available to voice their concerns on a legal platform.

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
