What is operation Kayla Mueller? All you need to know

What is operation Kayla Mueller? All you need to know

After the death of ISIS leader Baghdadi, the transnational terrorist group that brutalized and killed civilians still poses a threat in Syria and Iraq. Baghdadi always threatened to reorganise the map of Middle east by waging jihad in Iraq and Syria. His death might have given a symbolic blow to ISIS but not a death blow.

Operation Kayla Mueller

The stealth US military operation which resulted in the death of the ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was named after Kayla Mueller. Mueller, a 26 year old former humanitarian aid worker from Prescott, Arizona, was kidnapped and killed by the extremist group in 2015.

The operation involved twin-rotor CH47 'Chinook' helicopters designed for troop and cargo transport-and US fighter jets.

Brief history of ISIS

Islamic state previously known as the Islamic state of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), has declared its aim to establish an "Islamic state based on Sharia law or Islamic Caliphate". This organisation was led by Abu Bakr-al-Baghdadi. The real name of Baghdadi was Ibrahim Awad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri.

Abu Bakr was the first caliph after the Prophet's death and is credited with the expansion of Islamic territories hence is the reason for embracing the new name.

Islamic State burst on to the international scene in 2014 when it seized large swathes of territory in Syria and Iraq. It became notorious for its brutality, including mass killings, abductions and beheadings. India has banned this terrorist body in December 2016.

ISIS took present shape when the leader of AQI (al-Qaeda Iraq), Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was killed by the U.S in 2006, it was a major setback to the organisation. After his death, Sunnis in northern Iraq rose against AQI. Along with surge in US troops, they pushed the group to retreat but cannot finish the AQI off. Later, under Baghdadi's leadership it became a more dangerous organisation-ISIS.

After Operation Kayla Mueller, the situation of ISIS is similar to what happened to AQI then. We witnessed it resurrecting and moulding into a bigger terrorist organisation.

They must be ready to prove resilience with their huge cadres announcing new caliph attaining support from all the wilayas.

Why India

India is a major target for ISIS and Al Qaeda because it has a very large Muslim Diaspora, regular conflicts with a Muslim country and experiences violent clashes between Hindus and Muslims on a regular basis. ISIS propaganda has called for jihad resting on sentiments around Kashmir and has specifically called for attacks on Indian interests in the Arabian Peninsula.

Way forward

It is very important to give a direction and meaning to Baghdadi's death in the fight against global terrorism. Global leaders should come together to stabilise the situation in Iraq and Syria as well.

For India a comprehensive strategy should be adopted of early prevention, which involves government and non-governmental actors. Prominent Muslim leaders should take a lead to counter the influence of the dreaded terrorist group over community youth.

Baghdadi's death was a major blow against ISIS but the fight continues to finally defeat this terrorist organisation and to bring an end to the murderous, barbaric activities once and for all.

Authored article by Vironika Sharma, leading educator at Study IQ, one of India's largest education platform for various competitive exams.

Read: List of Bills passed by the Parliament in 2019

Read: Interesting facts about Europe as a continent
