A month after fire brigade officer kills self: Family and colleagues wait for Mumbai Police to book two senior officers

On October 7, 126 employees of the Khargar fire brigade had written to the City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) and the police to book the two senior officers.

OVER A month after a 56-year-old fire brigade officer allegedly committed suicide at his residence, his family is still waiting for a criminal case to be registered against two senior officers, who they claim forced the deceased to take the extreme step.

Ramesh Shinde, posted at the Khargar fire brigade office since September 2015, was found dead in his residential quarters on September 30. Police had lodged an accidental death report into the matter. “My father was forced to commit suicide by the two senior officers. They were extremely rude to him and would bully him,” said Chetan Shinde (33), a private sector employee.

He added that his father, who had undergone a bypass surgery recently, was overworked and was not allowed leave for health check-ups. “He was scolded, ridiculed and shouted at for small instances in front of my younger brother and me as well.” For months, Ramesh had told his family that he was being “driven to kill himself”, Chetan said.

On October 7, 126 employees of the Khargar fire brigade had written to the City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) and the police to book the two senior officers. “They should be booked for abetment to suicide. We have been boycotting them at work,” a firefighter said.

Another added that the two seniors neglected their duties and pulled up junior officers for their own mistakes. In the letter to CIDCO, the employees have alleged that the officers have attended only 11 per cent of the calls received by the fire brigade since September. “They are directly responsible for driving Ramesh Shinde to commit suicide,” the letter added.

A CIDCO spokesperson said: “We are looking into the matter and the allegations.” The police, too, said its probe was on.
