Breaking gender stereotypes, mother of 2-year-old is first woman firefighter at Chennai airport

After clearing her exam in 2018, Reemya decided to take rigorous physical training at her home city of Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala for four months | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Mother of a two-year-old girl is the latest entrant in the Chennai airport's firefighting team Reemya told a media person that she truly felt proud to be the first woman firefighter of the airport Reemya Sreekantan had quit her job as an Assistant Professor at a technology college

Chennai: Debunking myths that women cannot be firefighters and challenging the extremely thin presence of women in the profession, mother of a two-year-old girl is the latest entrant in Chennai airport's firefighting team. Reemya Sreekantan had quit her job as an Assistant Professor at a technology college for women to pursue her dream.

The Airport Authority of India (AAI) proudly announced, 28-year-old Sreekantan's joining at the Chennai International Aiport as its first woman firefighter. According to a report, Reemya is only the third woman firefighter of the AAI across the Indian airports. Reemya told a media person that she truly felt proud to be the first woman firefighter of the airport here. She added that it’s a challenging job and comes with a huge responsibility.

Emphasising the importance of the profession she said that everyone has to put in best efforts all the time since no one cannot afford to slip in this field where there aren’t many women. After clearing her exam in 2018, Reemya decided to take rigorous physical training at her home city of Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala for four months. She ensured that she gets through the tough physical training for AAI recruitment in March 2019. Reportedly, she recalled that while she was training herself for the physical test, her child was with her.

She further told media that once she got selected and needed to go to Delhi for further training, she had to leave behind her family as the weather there did not suit her baby. Praising her husband's supportive nature she said he plays a significant role in her chase of pursuing her dream. Reemya is currently posted at the Chennai Airport.
