Cyber Security Course in India

Have data breaches become a new normal? The technology news of popular media channels across the world is filled with headlines reporting major cyber attacks compromising the data of billions of people. The recent one is, as reported by ZDNet, over 1.3 million payment card details of Indian cardholders were put on sale at an online marketplace (dark web) used by criminal groups. You can imagine the situation that if the bank details, which are supposed to be most secure for the customers, are leaked online, then how easy it must be for the hackers to track all your general data!

According to Fran O’Brien, who is the division president of Chubb North America Personal Risk Services, many companies are aware of the potential risks involved with their data. But, merely concern isn’t enough. In the company’s Third Annual Cyber Report, it was pointed out that 43% of cyberattacks target small companies. Also, while 70 percent of the surveyed companies followed good cyber security practices, only 31 percent of them focused on employee training. This explains the need for professionals to upgrade themselves with cyber security courses and prepare for a great career in this domain. This article lets you explore the world of cyber security, why a career in this domain is beneficial for you, why you should consider taking cyber security training, and which is the best cyber security course in Bangalore.

What is Cyber Security?

Cyber security, or more commonly known as IT security, refers to the techniques used by individuals to secure a company’s networks and devices from unauthorized access or data intrusion. Companies adopt the best practices related to cyber security to increase their productivity by encrypting their data so as to avoid cyberattacks that can occur in the form of phishing, malware, trojans, ransomware, etc.

Cyber security has become an important aspect to consider as there is an alarming growth rate of cyber attacks happening all over the world. These cyber-attacks are carried out by individuals who are called black-hat hackers or malicious hackers. They find vulnerabilities in a system to carry out information theft and manipulate the confidential data for their personal gains.

So, companies rely on white hat hackers to deal with these cyberattacks. White hat hackers or ethical hackers are responsible for identifying loopholes in the system, conducting penetration testing, reverse engineering, using firewalls, etc to prevent hackers from gaining access to it.

Cyber Security as a Career

A career in cyber security is a promising one. The role of a cyber security expert is really challenging and one has to keep himself updated as technology is advancing with every passing day and so are the strategies and tools used by hackers. There are different fields in cyber security where one can explore his skills that align with his interests. Some of those fields are architecture, audit and compliance, access management, penetration testing, incident response, and forensic analysis. Based on these fields, companies hire professionals to fill the job roles of IT auditor, IT consultant, Computer Network Defence (CND) Analyst, Penetration tester, IT Security Architect, Security Manager, Security consultant, network and system administrators, and others.

You can prepare to achieve any of the above-mentioned positions if you have the relevant skills. As hackers are becoming efficient with their hacking tricks, companies are ready to spend a huge amount of money to get proficient cyber security professionals who can deal with them. As such, you can expect to get higher wages in this domain.

However, gaining cyber security skills isn’t easy. You have to match certain standards to prove your capabilities in securing a network system. There are some highly reputed institutes or certification bodies like ISACA, (ISC)2, and EC-Council that offer certifications in different areas of cyber security to establish that an individual possesses a comprehensive view of information systems and their relationship to enterprise success.

Some of the renowned certifications that you can get you industry-recognized skills are:

Certified Information Security Manager – CISM

Certified Ethical Hacker – CEH

Certified Information Systems Security Professional – CISSP

CompTIA Security+

Certified Information Systems Auditor – CISA

Do you Need a Cyber Security Course?

Well, now that you know how is cyber security as a career, the next question to consider is, “How to start a career in cyber security?” It is important to first understand that the candidates should have prior knowledge of network systems and their working in order to protect them. So, an experience of 1-2 years in the IT field is always beneficial to get a foothold on the IT security career ladder.

To start off, you can read blogs related to cyber security industry and clear your career-oriented queries. There are many resources available on the internet to guide you regarding the topics that you need to study. While self-study is a good option, you can also consider taking online training to become a cyber security expert.

Simplilearn can be your one-stop solution if you are looking for the best cyber security course in India. It offers the Cyber Security Master’s Program that covers all the concepts from basic to advanced level and equips you with everything that you need to become a cyber security expert.

Some of the course highlights are:

Over 64 hours of e-learning content

Live online classes taken by industry experts

Prepares you for achieving certifications like CEH, CISM, CISSP, and CompTIA Security+

The syllabus covers all the important topics like penetration testing, reverse engineering, designing security architecture, performing disaster recovery, framing cloud data storage architectures, etc

Working on industry-oriented projects, ethical hacking tools, simulations, as well as case studies

With such benefits, your journey to a successful cyber security engineer will become much easier. That said, you can also go through the course curriculum of other training providers and decide which is the best one for you. There are some post graduations programs offered by universities as well that you can go for if time is not a major concern. So, get ahead with a career in cyber security today!

Promotional content
