Pakistan Continues Kartarpur Provocation, Cooks Up Pathetic Bomb Tale

Republic TV on Thursday accessed exclusive visuals from Kartarpur which exposes Pakistan’s dirty propaganda tactics. The Pakistani authorities have displayed an alleged ‘bomb’ to the people and written about it on a board in three languages- Punjabi, Urdu, and English. It has been claimed that the Indian Air Force had dropped the ‘bomb’ at the Darbar Sahib Gurudwara in Kartarpur with an aim to destroy it. Moreover, the board states that the ‘bomb’ fell in a sacred well due to the blessings of Guru Nanak. The Imran Khan-led government’s shameless ploy to push a divide on religious lines comes at a juncture when it is battling the opposition’s Azadi March.

Read: Kartarpur Corridor: Booking, How To Apply And Online Registration

Read: Amit Shah: 'Generations Will Remember Kartarpur Corridor Achievement'

Pakistan's propaganda video

Yet another controversy emerged earlier this week when Pakistan released an official video for the Kartarpur corridor which featured the photos of the Khalistan separatists Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, Amrik Singh Khalsa and Major General Shabeg Singh in the background. The video which shows pilgrims heading to Pakistan to visit the Nankana Sahib Gurudwara also features the posters of the aforesaid leaders pinned to the side of a building. Pakistan has also released two other videos featuring clips of devotees, with the 'Khalistan 2020' poster in the background.

Read: Posters Crediting Sidhu For Kartarpur Corridor Appear In Amritsar

MEA condemns attempt

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) spokesperson Raveesh Kumar reacted to Pakistan’s official video and condemned Pakistan’s attempt in this regard. He contended that this violated the spirit under which the pilgrimage was going to be undertaken, moreover, stated that New Delhi had approached the opening of the Kartarpur corridor with an open mind as this involved the sentiments of the Sikh community. The MEA spokesperson noted that Pakistan had assured the Indian side that it would not allow the proliferation of anti-India elements and propaganda during the pilgrimage. Kumar called upon Pakistan to stick to the spirit of the agreement. Furthermore, he demanded the removal of the objectionable video and other printed material, which was promoting anti-India propaganda.

Read: Akali Dal Leader Claims Navjot Singh Sidhu Has A 'right' To Visit Pak
