Tis Hazari violence: Woman DCP chased by mob during court clash, shows viral CCTV video | Watch

In the video, lawyers were seen purportedly harassing the DCP.

A fresh video from the violent clash that took place at the Tis Hazari Court has emerged on social media showing the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), North District, Monika Bhardwaj, being chased by lawyers.

The video shows Bhardwaj facing a tough situation when the group of lawyers charged at her. Bhardwaj was roughed up and was escorted by some men who helped her manage to escape the scuffle.

Sources said that her Personal Security Officer was also present at the spot. While he tried to save her in the process, lawyers reportedly tried to snatch his service revolver.

Along with the video, an audiotape was also viral on social media, wherein, a constable who was seriously injured in the clash, said that the DCP was in a bad shape after she was abused by the group. Sources said if they would not escaped on time, the mob could have lynched the DCP and her staff who were outnumbered.

#WATCH: CCTV footage of DCP North Monika Bhardwaj being roughed up on 2nd November when a clash between police and lawyers took place at Tis Hazari Court, in #Delhi pic.twitter.com/d3sCMWTBl9 ANI (@ANI) November 7, 2019

Several videos and CCTV footages have been found from the court complex and nearby areas that showed the violence.

The SIT is examining all the CCTV footages as part of the FIR registered following the violence and appropriate legal action will be taken in the matter after a thorough investigation, a senior officer said.

Two IPS officers were also transferred on Thursday on the Delhi High Court's direction in the aftermath of the court complex clashes.

Meanwhile, the Delhi Police personnel stationed at the Tis Hazari Court Complex called of duty after the clash took place on Saturday. The face-off resulted in the abstinence of the security personnel at the entry gates and the corridors of the court.

A parking dispute between an on-duty policeman and a lawyer had triggered the clash, leaving 20 police personnel and several advocates wounded on November 2.

(With inputs from agencies)
