Ayodhya alert issued to all states, Union Territories

All States and UTs have also been asked to ensure adequate security deployment at all sensitive places under their jurisdiction.

New Delhi: Ahead of the crucial Supreme Court verdict on the Ayodhya verdict related to the Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid title dispute, Union home ministry on Thursday has issued an advisory to all states and Union Territories to remain on high alert. All States and UTs have also been asked to ensure adequate security deployment at all sensitive places under their jurisdiction.

In addition, as a precautionary measure, home ministry has also dispatched more than 4,000 personnel of the Central para-military forces to Ayodhya and some other parts of Uttar Pradesh while the railway police cancelled leave of its force. The Central forces will be deployed in sensitive areas which are identified by the state police to deal with any untoward incident in wake of the Ayodhya verdict.

Supreme Court is expected to deliver order on the long standing Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute any time before November 17. Home ministry officials said they were closely monitoring the situation and were in constant touch with different States and UT administration.

“This advisory has been sent more as a precautionary measure to sensitise the local police so that they can be prepared and put in place all possible mechanism to deal with any incident, if at all, in view of developments in Supreme Court on the Ayodhya case,’’ a senior home ministry official said.

Even though more than 4,000 central para-military force personnel have been rushed to UP, sources said additional forces are being kept on standby. If required these forces will be rushed to different areas in case some states demand immediate reinforcements.

“Police force of states and UTs have been asked to remain alert in sensitive areas, both residential and places of worship, and have adequate presence on the ground. They have been advised to remain in touch with senior citizens from different communities to ensure no one tries to give a communal spin to the court order. All places which attract a high footfall like railway stations, bus terminals, markets and shopping malls will also have additional police deployment in the run up to the Supreme Court’s Ayodhya directive,’’ the official added. Home ministry sources said Centre has prepared a detailed plan and adequate measures in place to ensure that situation remains peaceful across the country in the coming days.
