Kartarpur: Pak peddles propaganda, plants blasphemous poster accusing India of bombing Gurdwara Darbar Sahib

The instigating poster inside the premises of Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Sri Kartarpur Sahib in Pakistan. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Pakistan has placed a signboard inside the premises of Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Kartarpur speaking ill of India and with an intent to instigate the Sikh community across the border The poster, spotted just a day before the historic event, shows the duplicity of Pakistan, when on one hand they talk about peace between the two countries, while on the other hand they propagate anti-India sentiments

New Delhi: Pakistan’s hate propaganda against India has been a footnote in all its gimmicks to portray peace initiatives with its neighbour, so much so that India’s estranged kin could not even keep faith away from it.

Barely days after showing posters of Khalistani terrorists in its promotional video ahead of the Kartarpur Corridor inauguration, the Islamic nation is at it yet again. Pakistan has placed a signboard inside the premises of Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Kartarpur speaking ill of India and with an intent to instigate the Sikh community across the border.

The poster, spotted just a day before the historic event, shows the duplicity of Pakistan, when on one hand they talk about peace between the two countries, while on the other hand they propagate anti-India sentiments.

The signboard falsely talks about an offensive India carried out during the 1971 Indo-Pak war when a ‘bomb’ was allegedly dropped by Indian forces with an intent to destroy the gurdwara.

“The Indian Air Force dropped this bomb during 1971 at Gurdwara Darbar Sahib Sri Kartarpur Sahib with the aim to destroy it. However, this evil design could not be materialised due to the blessings of Waheguru ji. The said bomb landed into Sri Kroo Sahib (Sacred Well) and this Darbar Sahib remain unhurt. It is pertinent to mention that this is the same sacred well from where Sri Guru Nanak Dev ji used to get water to irrigate his fields,” the spiteful signboard read, riddled with horrendous grammatical errors.

The Pakistan government had earlier this week put out a promotional video on the highly-anticipated Kartarpur Corridor inauguration which had posters showing Khalistani leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale.

The video, released by Pakistan's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, showed Khalistani leaders Bhindranwale, Major General Shabeg Singh and Amrik Singh Khalsa. All three militants were killed during Operation Blue Star carried out by the Indian Army at the Golden Temple in Amritsar in June 1984.
