How to go to Gurdwara Darbar Sahib via Kartarpur Corridor from Delhi

Ways to travel to Gurdwara Darbar Sahib from Delhi

Key Highlights To reach Kartarpur, you have to reach Gurdaspur and then follow the protocol in order to visit the holy shrine Devotees can travel to Gurdaspur from Delhi via air, rail and road Gurdaspur is nearly 462 kms away from Delhi From November 9, Indian Sikhs can travel to Gurdwara Darbar Singh without any visa

Kartarpur corridor holds immense importance for Sikhs, both in India and Pakistan. Gurdwara Darbar Sahib is situated on the Pakistani side of Punjab. The Kartarpur corridor is the only way to enter the Gurdwara and it acts as a bridge between the Dera Baba Nanak Sahib in Punjab, India, and Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Punjab, Pakistan.

After years of joint efforts from people of both the countries, Indian Sikhs can finally visit one of the holiest sites related to Sikhism, Gurdwara Darbar Sahib, without a visa. This decision came after 70 years of Independence.

Nearly 5000 devotees will be able to use the corridor to travel to the other side and visit Gurdwara Darbar Sahib. This place holds great significance for Sikhs as it is believed that this is the place where Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, lived and died in the 16th century.

Kartarpur is 4.1 kms away from the India-Pakistan border. To reach Kartarpur, you have to reach Gurdaspur and then follow the protocol in order to visit the holy shrine.

How to go to Gurdwara Darbar Sahib from Delhi via Kartarpur Corridor:

By air - To reach Gurdaspur, you have to fly to the Amritsar airport, which is well connected to other states through regular domestic flights. Delhi to Amritsar flight will take around 1 hour 5 minutes. Adampur airport in the city of Jalandhar is another airport that is close to Gurdaspur. However, it is mainly a military airport which is why the flights' operations are less here. By train - The nearest railway station to Gurdaspur is Gurdaspur Railway Station and it is well connected with other major railway stations in Punjab and Delhi. You can take a train from your city to Gurdaspur Railway Station. By road - Gurdaspur is nearly 462 kms away from Delhi and 75 kms away from Amritsar. The place is well connected through road and you can also enjoy the picturesque views on the way.

From Gurdaspur, you have to follow the protocol to enter the Pakistani side of Punjab and devotees can travel visa-free after November 9.

For more news and updates, stay connected to Zoomtv.com and follow us on Twitter, Instagram and Facebook at @Zoomtv.
