Fan asks Ayushmann Khurrana about his most challenging role. You will agree with his reply

Ayushmann Khurrana reveals the most challenging role of his career

From Dum Laga Ke Haisha to Dream Girl, Ayushmann Khurrana's films prove that we now have an actor who can masterfully balance between content-driven and commercial cinema. In each movie, Ayushmann has played a variety of roles in his career spanning seven years in Bollywood. He is known to pick unconventional storylines every time he signs a film. And the recently released Bala is also another out-of-the-box script.

Ayushmann, who is essaying the role of a man suffering from premature balding in Amar Kaushik's directorial venture Bala, recently organised an #AskAyushmann session on Twitter and a fan took the opportunity to ask him a question. In the session, the fan quizzed him about the most challenging role of his career.

And guess which film Ayushmann spoke about? No points for guessing. It is Bala.

Revealing why he chose Bala, Ayushmann said that he took two-and-a-half hours to get ready for the role, which required elaborate prosthetic make-up. The actor also shared that he shot the film in North India during summers, making it even more difficult for him to get ready.

#bala is the most challenging one. Took 2 and a half hours to get ready with prosthetics and shot in the north in the peak of summers. And secondly you need a lot of empathy to portray a complexed character. https://t.co/rEaV2FcfvY Ayushmann Khurrana (@ayushmannk) November 7, 2019

"#bala is the most challenging one. Took 2 and a half hours to get ready with prosthetics and shot in the north in the peak of summers. And secondly you need a lot of empathy to portray a complexed character," Ayushmann replied.

Before Bala, Ayushmann had to dress up as a woman in Raaj Shaandilyaa's Dream Girl, which also meant long hours at the make-up chair. He was seen as a police inspector in Article 15, a blind man in Andhadhun, a grown-up guy dealing with his mother's pregnancy in Badhaai Ho and a novelist in Bareilly Ki Barfi.

In Shubh Mangal Saavdhan he was seen as a man suffering from erectile dysfunction and in Dum Laga Ke Haisha as a guy trying to adjust with his overweight wife.

Coming back to Bala, India Today's reviewer Jyoti Kanyal gave the film 4 out of 5 stars. Apart from Ayushmann's acting, the reviewer also praised the writing in Amar Kaushik's Bala. She called it a "blockbuster" film.

"Bala is an amalgamation of great acting, writing and direction, which makes it one of the best movies of 2019," the reviewer said.

Talking about Ayushmann, she added, "Nowhere during the film does it appear that he is doing it extra. He knows where to put salt, where sugar is needed and how much quantity of the rest of the spices are required to make it a balanced experience."

Bala also stars Yami Gautam and Bhumi Pednekar in lead roles. After this film, Ayushmann now has Gulabo Sitabo and Shubh Mangal Zyada Saavdhan in his kitty.

Watch Bala trailer here:

ALSO READ | Bala Movie Review: King Midas Ayushmann Khurrana delivers another blockbuster

ALSO READ | BHU students gift Ayushmann Khurrana sketches of Bala. He is bowled over

ALSO READ | Bala trailer out: Ayushmann Khurrana film promises to be a hair-raising riot

ALSO READ | Why only Ayushmann Khurrana could play Bollywood's new Dream Girl
