Students join battle against plastics

Road between the Law College and Tsunami Colony relaid with plastic waste

About 2,000 students across classes at The Study L’ecole Internationale school in Kalapet have joined hands with local stakeholders, academia and industry to re-lay the road between the Law College, Kalapet and Tsunami Colony with plastic waste. The initiative is a lesson in participatory change spearheaded by students.

Revenue Minister M.O.H.F. Shahjahan inaugurated the project and expressed hope that this novel approach by the school would embolden more local communities to join hands with the government to augment existing infrastructure and to manage waste in a more thoughtful and mindful approach.

He also lauded that the initiative was funded entirely by the school founder and cardiologist, Dr. K.M. Cherian

According to a press note from the school, the innovative way to address the all-pervasive presence of plastics was spearheaded by the school principal Alice Abraham Chacko.

Virtually every student of the school contributed by collecting various single-use plastic items from their residential neighbourhood.

This also ensured the participation of their family members and prompted the community to reflect on alternative uses of plastics that would have otherwise ended up in a landfill or in a drain.

While students managed to collect over 900 kg of plastic, the All Pondicherry Plastic Traders and Manufacturers' Association president S. Babu and Murugan, proprietor and recycler at Sri Devi Plastics pitched in by collecting the remaining discarded plastic materials. They also helped shred the plastic to 4mm shards.

This collaborative effort resulted in 1,500 kilos of plastic being used to re-lay the road.

The school also reached out for technical support to Dr. Rajagopal Vasudevan, Dean of Chemistry at Thiagaraja College of Engineering, Madurai, who has patented a method of laying roads with shredded plastic and bitumen.

Substantial savings

The method is expected to double the durability and life span of the road and will result in substantial savings compared to a conventional project, the school noted.

Ramalinga Chandra Sekar and Sundarakannan of the college’s Environmental Information Centre came to the school to demonstrate the finer points of the innovative technology.

The ENVIS team noted that it was the first time they witnessed the collaboration of students in a project intended for public use.

Dr. Sanjay Cherian, vice chairman of the Dr. K.M. Cherian Educational Trust, placed on record the support from the Oulgaret Municipality.

In about a week, the residents of Tsunami Colony can traverse on a unique stretch of road that the school hopes will serve as a technology demonstrator and a conversation starter for other micro communities.

According to the press note, the plastic road laying project tied in with the school’s vision of attaining a holistic micro zone by engaging students and local stakeholders.
