Why Fahim Ansari, Mayawati-Mulayam cases call for urgent judicial reform

Fahim Ansari was sentenced to 10-year jail term by a UP court last week. By then he had spent 11 years in jail. A case lodged by BSP chief Mayawati against SP leader Mulayam Singh Yadav in 1995 guesthouse incident remains undecided for 24 years. (Photo: PTI file)

If you don't know Fahim Ansari and cannot recall the 1995 incident that embroiled former Uttar Pradesh chief ministers Mayawati and Mulayam Singh Yadav in a court case, hold on to your bliss a little longer. Having a look at their cases has become a distress call for judicial reform in India.

More than 3.14 crore cases are pending in Indian courts, 2.25 crore of which are criminal ones in which the accused are arrested and lodged in prison. Many of them end up spending more time in jail waiting for a closure of the case than the jail term that the Indian Penal Code prescribes for the offence.

Fahim Ansari's was one such case. He was arrested in February 2008 in connection with a terror attack on a CRPF camp in Rampur, Uttar Pradesh. Ten months later, when 10 Pakistani gunmen unleashed terror in Mumbai (the 26/11 terror attack), killing 166 people, Fahim Ansari was named as an accused who helped planning the carnage. He was later acquitted in the 26/11 case.

In the court Fahim Ansari said he was a calligrapher working in Dubai and had gone to Uttar Pradesh to buy some special dresses for his friends when he was arrested. Police said he was behind Rampur terror attack.

A Rampur court pronounced him guilty in CRPF camp case and sentenced him to 10-year jail. The judgment came last week. By then, Fahim Ansari had spent 11 years and nine months in prison. He was released. He had completed his sentence while he was still an undertrial.

Now let's turn to the Mayawati-Mulayam case, which is more commonly known as "the Lucknow guesthouse incident". This happened in 1995. Mulayam Singh Yadav, then the Samajwadi Party chief, was chief minister of Uttar Pradesh with support of the BSP.

Mayawati, then a protégé of late Dalit leader and BSP founder Kanshi Ram, had decided to withdraw support to the Mulayam Singh Yadav government. The decision had not been announced but information was leaked to Mulayam Singh Yadav when he was addressing a meeting of his MLAs. He abruptly ended the meeting telling party MLAs to prepare for election.

Mayawati, too, was holding a meeting with BSP leaders in a guesthouse in Lucknow when a band of SP supporters led by about a dozen MLAs attacked the guesthouse. BSP leaders were beaten up. Mayawati had to lock herself inside a room and was rescued by BJP leader Brahmdutt Dwivedi.

The incident took place on June 2, 1995. The government changed in Lucknow. A criminal case was lodged in connection with the attack on Mayawati and other BSP leaders at the guesthouse.

Now, Mayawati has decided to withdraw this case against Mulayam Singh and other SP leaders. Though, this is more a political decision than anything else. She had a tie-up with Mulayam Singh Yadav's son Akhilesh Yadav, the SP chief, in the Lok Sabha election.

The move to withdraw the case against Mulayam Singh Yadav is a natural outcome of the political compromise but it is a bold statement on how justice delivery system works in the country. Consider this hypothetical question: Could Mayawati have allied with the Yadav family had the case been disposed off by the judiciary in, say, one year, that is by 1996? Same logic could be applied to cases such as Babri Masjid demolition or 1984 anti-Sikh riots.

The Lucknow guesthouse case did not see a closure even 24 years after the incident happened. The case remained pending in the Supreme Court for 10 years. It was admitted in the Supreme Court in January 2009, when KG Balakrishnan was the chief justice of India. On November 17, Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi will become the 10th CJI (including Justice Balakrishnan) to retire from the Supreme Court since then.

What is agonising is that Fahim Ansari and Mayawati-Mulayam cases are not exceptions. According to the National Judicial Data Grid, about 25 lakh cases are pending for more than 10 years in different courts of the country. A huge majority of the cases constitutes of criminal trials. If the police and judiciary cannot fix culpability of accused for 10 years, this is bound to raise question over their capability and efficiency. This calls for an urgent reform in both judiciary and police systems.

The Economic Survey 2018-19 tabled in Parliament in July this year has a full chapter on judicial reform. It has proposed recruitment of 8,152 additional judges in the courts to clear the backlog of cases in next five years. It also prescribed a formula to improve case clearance rate (CCR) in the courts.

Left unaddressed, these cases would go on for decades in trial stage with lakhs of accused waiting for closure in jail.

There is more to the story. The Economic Survey's prescription is not new. It is on the same lines as recommended by the Law Commission in July 2014. But the Law Commission's report had been stonewalled by the National Court Management System (NCMS) that functions under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

This face-off and later junking of the National Judicial Appointment Committee (NJC) Bill were clear signals that the ball of judicial reform will roll only on the direction of the Supreme Court.
