Tis Hazari clash: Delhi Police vs lawyers: Who is to blame?

NEW DELHI: A verbal spat initially triggered over a parking issue changed into vandalism when Delhi Police – protector of law – and lawyers – who preserve law – clashed with one another.The scuffle escalated in such a manner that it resulted in the firing of bullets and arson which engulfed the Tis Hazari sky with a thick plume of smoke at a time when the city was already sparring with severe air pollution.It has not only brought a bad name to the institutions of law and justice but also put on display the fragile relationship of the two pillars of democracy. As both institutions were found to be breaking the rules, it raises a serious question of whether they are above the law? And, does entitlement run deep in both the institutions?According to former Uttar Pradesh top cop Prakash Singh, both the parties prima facie crossed the limits of the law. “Now who committed a greater transgression, who was more offensive, more aggressive and who took the law to a greater extent into his hands needs an inquiry. I won’t be able to comment more on that. The police should restrain themselves but they are also expected to enforce the law of the land and irrespective of the person committing the offence, they should register a complaint,” he said.Similar views were expressed by the constitutional expert Subhash Kashyap who said that both police and cops should have maintained the decorum of their professions and restrained themselves.“It is most unfortunate that those who are custodians of law and order violated it. I think it is setting a very poor example before the citizenry," Kashyap said.“Both, the lawyers and Delhi Police behaved as they should not have behaved. Now the matter is before the court and it will fix the responsibility and decide. Both the parties broke the law and they both need to learn to behave as responsible professionals. The ultimate sufferers are the people and the litigants,” Kashyap added.However, Bar Council of India chief Manan Mishra accepted that some lawyers have crossed the line and assured that they will be dealt strictly but he also pointed out the undisciplined behaviour of the Delhi Police while handling the situation in Tis Hazari followed by their protest at police headquarters.“It was a minor issue of wrong parking but the Delhi Police shot a lawyer point blank and nobody is talking about that. It has not been highlighted by the media. But rather, the issue of a policeman being manhandled by a lawyer in Saket district court took the centre stage. The media is calling us criminals and hooligans which is unfair.”“I can’t justify the action of the lawyers and we are taking action against them but look at the conduct of the police. Even after resorting to firing, lathicharge, they shamelessly sat on dharna. They are not obeying the command of their senior officers,” Mishra said.This was not the first time that lawyers and police came to blows publicly.In the year 1988, Kiran Bedi , the then deputy commissioner of police (north zone) had a similar showdown with the legal fraternity when a lawyer arrested for theft was brought to the Delhi's Tis Hazari court in handcuffs.It resulted in a two-month-long halt to the court proceedings. The lawyers stopped the courts from functioning in Delhi and neighbouring states, demanding Bedi's resignation.In February 2017, a Station House Officer (SHO) was assaulted by a lawyer at the Karkardooma Court complex in Shahdara. The lawyer had allegedly been arrested by the SHO earlier in connection with a case.In 2018, a lawyer practising in Karkardooma court was beaten up and his house was vandalised by the cops before arresting him. A bunch of lawyers then reached the police station and the issue was sorted.According to advocate Ashish Dixit, if cops have been at the receiving end then lawyers have also faced police heat but they have always backed each other in the times of severity.In 2015, the lawyers had come to the rescue of a policeman who was attacked by a few unidentified persons who had opened fire inside the premises of East Delhi's Karkardooma Court, Dixit recalled."The relationship of lawyers and police is that of a cat and mouse. Clashes happen but they get sorted. The clash at Tis Hazari erupted because of police firing. On top of that, the lawyer accused of wrong parking was locked up. If he has done illegal parking then he should have been issued a challan. How can you lock him up and that too in court?" Dixit questioned.Interestingly, in 2016, during the trial of JNU student leader Kanhaiya Kumar , lawyers had clashed with JNU students and journalists at Delhi's Patiala House court. At that point, the police were accused of remaining a mute spectator.“Police are generally disinclined to take on the lawyers because if you study the history of police-lawyer confrontation, wherever such confrontations have happened, irrespective of whether the police were right or wrong, it was the police which suffered. It has happened throughout from Kiran Bedi's time to this day it is happening,” Singh added.
