Supreme Court on lawyer-police clash: Nobody claps with one hand

Lawyers carry out security checking at Tis Hazari court. They have decided to call off the strike for 10 days. (Express photo by Abhinav Saha)

“Nobody claps with one hand,” the Supreme Court remarked Friday as it made evident its displeasure on the ongoing standoff between police and lawyers following the Tis Hazari court clash.A bench of Justice Sanjay Kishan K Kaul and Justice K M Joseph was clear that “there were problems from both sides”. It was hearing a plea related to the continuing strike by lawyers in Odisha High Court.

Appearing in the matter, Bar Council of India Chairman Manan Kumar Mishra sought to highlight alleged Delhi Police high-handedness but the bench did not seem impressed. The court had sought Mishra’s presence to assist it in the matter.

Attorney General K K Venugopal was critical of lawyers going on strike and said it affects people’s right to justice.

Mishra and senior advocate Vikas Singh, who appeared for the chairman of the Odisha Bar Council, raised questions on the police action and pointed out that firing had taken place. Justice Kaul replied: “It is better if we do not say anything. Sometimes our silence is good enough. There were problems from both sides. Nobody claps with one hand. We won’t speak much.”

Meanwhile, following a joint meeting with the BCI and Bar Council of Delhi, the Coordination Committee of the District Bar Associations have resolved to suspend their agitation for 10 days.

This comes after the BCI said it would pursue their primary demand, that the officer responsible for shooting an advocate at Tis Hazari be arrested.

Mahavir Sharma, chairman of the coordination committee, said, “The BCI assured us that the policemen would be arrested in 10 days, so we have decided to suspend the strike. Litigants were allowed entry into courtrooms today as well; in the next week, peace and normalcy should return to the courts. However, if the demands are not met, we will call for an all-India strike.”
