UP: Five cops among seven sentenced to life in jail for 2004 triple murder

On Thursday, the court held all seven persons guilty after which the policemen, who were out on bail, were taken into custody. Anil Rathore was already in jail, he added. He said 18 prosecution witnesses were examined by the court. (Representational Image)

A court in Jalaun Friday sentenced five policemen, including a Deputy SP rank officer, to life imprisonment in a triple murder case in Jalaun that dates back to 2004. The murders took place on the premises of Konch police station. A retired sub-inspector, Lalmani Gauatam, was also sentenced to life imprisonment.

Apart from the policemen, 40-year-old Anil Rathore, the son of then station officer of Konch police station, Dev Dutt Singh Rathore, was sentenced to a life term. Dev Dutt was the main accused in the case and had died during the course of the trial.

The incident occurred when then Dev Dutt, his son Anil and policemen opened fire on a crowd that had gathered over the detention of a local businessman. The deceased were identified as Samajwadi Party worker Mahendra Singh, his younger brother Surendra Singh and one Daya Shankar. Four more persons were injured in the firing.

Five of the six cops, including Circle Officer Bhagwan Singh, are presently in service. Bhagwan Singh was posted as Karnalganj Circle Officer in Kanpur. The other four policemen are constables Akhilesh Kumar, Ram Naresh Tyagi, Satyaveer Singh and Rajesh Babu, said government counsel, Jalaun, Lakhan Lal Niranjan.

“Additional District and Session Judge Amit Pal Singh awarded life imprisonment to all seven persons. The court also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 on each convict,” said Niranjan.

On Thursday, the court held all seven persons guilty after which the policemen, who were out on bail, were taken into custody. Anil Rathore was already in jail, he added. He said 18 prosecution witnesses were examined by the court.

Mahendra Singh’s elder brother Amrendra Singh, a retired government school teacher, said, “We are not satisfied with the judgment and will move a higher court demanding death penalty for all accused.”

According to prosecution, the case dates back to February 1, 2004, when Mahendra Singh along with Surendra Singh and others reached Konch police station and questioned police personnel over the detention of his son-in-law, Shiv Kumar. Surendra Singh had a heated arguments with Dev Dutt and other cops. The situation took a violent turn and Dev Dutt and others opened fire, in which Mahendra Singh and Surendra Singh died.

Daya Shankar soon reached the spot along with his supporters and staged a protest. Dev Dutt and others fired at thme too, killing Daya Shankar and injuring four persons.

A district-wide protest took place in which public pelted stones at police and their vehicles. The situation was brought under control when senior police officers, who reached the spot on coming to know about the incident, assured the public that strict action would be taken.

An FIR was lodged against nine persons including Dev Dutt Singh Rathore and his son Anil Rathore on a complaint of Surendra’s relative Jabar Singh at the Konch police station. The police investigated and filed chargesheet in the case against all nine persons on murder, attempt to murder and other charges.

“Policemen fired using their service weapons. Dev Dutt Singh and constable Bhagwan Das Soni died during trial, said Lakhan Lal.

When contacted, Samajwadi Party worker and party’s former Jalaun district president, Veerpal Singh Yadav said, “Mahendra, Surendra and Daya Shankar were active workers of Samajwadi Party. Mahendra and Surendra had gone to police station after coming to know that cops had booked Shiv Kumar on charges of breach of peace. Shiv Kumar had gone to settle the dispute between his two neighbours at the police station.”
