Cops’ human rights and their right to protest

Rajbir Deswal

Rajbir Deswal

Former ADGP, Human Rights, Haryana

Iwas at Ryton Police Academy in the UK on an official assignment when I came across an officer who had his entire arm tattooed. To my query if the police officers were allowed such adornments, the chief constable of Midlands said, “Yes, it is their human right! And we don’t deny them.” Before addressing the human rights issue of the police, let me throw light on the genesis and causes of the lawyer-police clash that took place on Tuesday in the national capital.

Well, it was brewing for long. Although lawyer-police clashes keep happening in the country, what was unprecedented this time was the rising in revolt by the Delhi Police rank and file, nursing a feeling of having been ‘wronged, insulted, assaulted’ and ‘perpetually kept at bay’, with a triggering feel of ‘enough is enough.’ Conduct rules in any uniformed organisation do not entitle its men, or women, to go on strike, or protest. It’s not legal for such uniformed workers to form unions. Such a coming together is considered to be prejudicial to internal security, amounting to nothing less than a rebellion.

In West Bengal, police unions were allowed by the Communist regime, but Mamata Bannerjee disbanded and banned them. The term ‘union’ in itself sounds a tad rash, and harsh, for any assembly of uniformed people pressing for their rights.

In Haryana, too, the murmur of a police union had begun to be heard, when it was crushed in the early eighties. Bansi Lal, in a bid to regain power, made many announcements, including the recognition of the police union in the state. However, a Haryana police association was allowed to be formed. It is still working, though with nothing much to boast about insofar as addressing grievances of the police personnel, like shift system, exploitation, duty hours, working conditions, seniority, transfers and leave etc, are concerned.

The common grouse of policemen in this country is that compared to any other government department, or position, their status and recognition always takes a beating and that they are made scapegoats to broker peace under public pressure after an incident or an outcry. Even the brightest of the police officers have to bear the brunt of an appeasing offer of platitudes by the respective governments.

It’s a matter of record that the present DGP of Haryana, Manoj Yadav, was slapped with a murder case when he was an ASP at Rohtak, only to placate protesting fellow villagers of a couple of criminals who had died in an encounter with the police at Karahwad village. Another officer, Subhas Yadav, who took on a violent mob and opened fire during the Jat agitation at Mayyar village in Hisar district, was undeservedly placed under suspension to pacify the agitators. Yet another officer, Srikant Jadhav, was suspended after the February 2016 Jat agitation in Rohtak. Though these officers came clean later, the morale of the rank and file in the police plummeted to the lowest ebb.

It should be a matter of record that the maximum number of departmental action is taken in the police department. The issues include, interalia, indiscipline, misbehaviour, dishonesty, court strictures, incompetence, omission, commission, slackness, high-handedness, custodial crime, even to the extent of not wearing a proper uniform. Are such defaulters available only in the police force? In all such departmental actions, the principle to be followed is not that of hard proof, but “preponderance of probability”— this leaves scope for them not getting real and deserved justice.

In Western countries, all jobs, whether provided by the state or private enterprises, address issues of the employees’ health and safety. In my 34 years of service, I have seen police officials lifting, digging out, flushing out of waters, retrieving from fires, putrefied and decomposed bodies, with their bare hands, without even gloves, or other protective gear — a thankless and unpleasant task which is not their job, but that of para-medics, or other trained professionals. At such scenes, even the near and dear ones of the deceased stand at a distance with their nose covered.

I recall an incident of 1995 when a live bomb was detected at the Sandhal Kalan railway station in Sonepat district. Four serial blasts had taken place in Delhi and elsewhere that day and it was only in Sandhal Kalan that a live bomb was defused. Before we had arrived at the scene, a burly head constable had already lifted the bomb with his hands and kept it under sand bags. Does this police official not have a right against such risks? Human dignity in all its nuances has been recognised as one of the essential ingredients of human rights the world over, but for the Indian police, it eludes them in more ways than one.

The Army has done well to abolish the orderly system, recognising the dignity and esteem of their junior colleagues. Of course, now they call them ‘sevaks’ and this is not just a change of appellation, or calling, or nomenclature. The officers do behave well with them. But in the police, this is yet to be done. That is precisely why a police constable doesn’t take pride in his uniform.

Last but not the least important is the fact that there does exist a disconnect between senior officers and junior officials in the police force. The Delhi incident proved it in ample measures. In the Army, the institution of a subedar is roped in as an important link between the troops and officers. In the police, there is none who ensures that senior officers take good care of their subordinates.

Interestingly, the Delhi incident has shown that neither the police nor the lawyers found any support from the general public, there being a huge trust deficit on both sides.
