Murder of Ferozepur man: Police say culprits identified, old rivalry was reason behind murder

Inderjeet had an enmity with Bhuvnesh alias Ashish from their student time and the accused was among the people who fired bullets at him.

A day after a Ferozepur resident was shot dead at Kharar, police Friday said that they have identified all the accused involved in the murder and cited old rivalry as reason behind the murder.

Inderjeet Singh (27) was killed outside Darpan City, a housing society, at Kharar on Thursday afternoon. The assailants had fired 18 bullets at the victim out of which four hit him in the head, leaving him dead on the spot.

No arrests have been made in the case so far. Police said Inderjeet’s two friends Rohit and Ajay who were with him at the time of the incident, were too involved in the case. They were rounded up Thursday after the murder.

Police sources told Chandigarh Newsline that four persons who came to shoot Inderjeet were identified as Bhuvnesh Chopra alias Ashish, Happy Bhullar, Happy Mal and Money. Those who planned the murder were identified as Lalli, Gagan Judge and Baba Major, according to police sources.

The sources said that Inderjeet had an enmity with Bhuvnesh alias Ashish from their student time and the accused was among the people who fired bullets at Inderjeet.

A police officer privy to the investigation told Chandigarh Newsline that both Rohit and Ajay passed on the information that Inderjeet was staying with them following which the assailants had come to Kharar on Thursday and killed him.

Mohali Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kuldeep Singh Chahal said that they were close to arrest the accused. He added that the murder was the outcome of an old enmity but they were yet to arrest the accused following which they would be able to tell more about the murder motive.

The SSP said that Inderjeet was involved in some assault cases earlier.

Meanwhile, the post-mortem of Inderjeet Singh was conducted at Kharar civil hospital and the doctors found 11 bullets in his body. Inderjeet’s body was handed over to his family.

Inderjeet’s father Mahinder Singh said that his son had come to Chandigarh three days ago and also told him about the same. He added that when Inderjeet was student he had a tiff with Bhuvesh.

“We wanted all the culprits to be arrested soon. We are of the strong view that Bhuvnesh and his accomplices had killed my son,” Mahinder Singh added.

Inderjeet’s brother Balbir Singh said that police must also probe the role of Rohit and Ajay as they were the persons who passed on the information.
