Country High On Security Ahead of Ayodhya Verdict

Ahead of the Supreme court verdict in Ramjanmbhoomi-Babri Masjid land dispute case, Chief Justice of India T Ranjan Gogoi has reached the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has restricted the entry of persons in the court. The Public Relation Office has said that the entry passes for the junior lawyers is not being issued for today.

On the other side, Union Home Minister Amit Shah is holding a high-level security meeting in New Delhi while the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Yogi Adityanath is also holding a meeting with the Director-General of Police, Uttar Pradesh OP Singh.

Security beefed up across India. While forces are on high alert across the country, Eleobartate security arrangements have been put in place in Uttar Pradesh and especially Ayodhya in the wake of the verdict.

Security beefed up across the country

Heightened the security across the country in the wake of the verdict

Ayodhya on high alert

Ayodhya in Uttarpradesh has been put under high security and 4000 paramilitary forces and 30 bomb squads had been deployed and the non- local people were asked to leave the city.

Section 144 of CrPC imposed in Uttar Pradesh

To avoid chaos, Section 144 of CrPC, which prohibits the gathering of more than four people has been clamped in entire Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Goa.

Educational Institutions shut in Uttar Pradesh

Schools, colleges and other educational institutions will remain closed in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka and Delhi on Saturday. As a precautionary measure, the government has closed all schools, colleges, educational institutions till Monday in Uttar Pradesh.

Z plus security cover for CJI

The security outside the residences of the five judges on the Constitution Bench that will deliver the judgement has been beefed up in Delhi. Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi's security has been upgraded to Z-plus. Security has also been tightened in and around the Supreme Court.

A dry day in UP, J&K

All liquor shops will be closed across Uttar Pradesh on November 9 and 10 in view of the Ayodhya verdict. A liquor ban is also in place in Bengaluru and across Jammu and Kashmir for Saturday.

Police vigil on social media

Police bodies, across India, have announced close monitoring of social media networks for any objectionable post.

Mobile internet services suspended

All mobile internet services will remain suspended in UP's Aligarh till midnight. Meanwhile, UP DGP said internet services might get suspended in Ayodhya if required.

Cameras, drones to be used for monitoring situation in Mumbai

Over 5,000 cameras are in place for surveillance in Mumbai which the police will monitor with their control room feed. Mumbai Police will also deploy drone units as per the situation.
