Ayodhya Disputed Land To Be Given For Temple, Muslims To Get Alternate Plot

Ayodhya Disputed Land To Be Given For Temple, Muslims To Get Alternate Plot

NEW DELHI: The Supreme Court of Inda pronounced its verdict on the Ramjanambhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute case on Saturday putting the decades-old dispute to rest.

The top court directed the Centre to form an Ayodhya trust for building of the temple and announced a five-acre alternate land for the Muslims. Earlier Prime Minister Narendra Modi had appealed to people to maintain peace.

The verdict comes after the five-judge bench of the apex court headed by CJI Gogoi heard petitions challenging the 2010 Allahabad High Court judgement, which trifurcated the 2.77 acres of disputed land into three parts between Ram Lalla, Nirmohi Akhara and the Sunni Waqf Board.T

The temple town of Ayodhya has turned into a fortress. Prohibitory orders are in place in several parts of the country including Mumbai to prevent any outward incident. Social media has also been put under surveillance to maintain peace across the country.

11:29 Nov 9

“It is a historic judgment. With this judgment, the Supreme Court has given the message of unity in diversity,” says Varun Kumar Sinha, Lawyer of Hindu Mahasabha.

11:25 Nov 9

Varun Kumar Sinha, Lawyer of Hindu Mahasabha: It is a historic judgement. With this judgement, the Supreme Court has given the message of unity in diversity.

11:19 Nov 9

SC orders that Central Government within 3-4 months formulate scheme for setting up of trust and hand over the disputed site to it for construction of temple at the site and a suitable alternative plot of land measuring 5 acres at Ayodhya will be given to Sunni Wakf Board.

11:19 Nov 9

The right of Ram Lalla to the disputed property is subject to the maintenance of peace and law and order and tranquility. Government to take measures for maintaining peace and harmony and law and order.

11:14 Nov 9

SC rules possession of inner and outer courtyard to be handed over to the trust which will have a representative from Nirmohi Akhara.

11:12 Nov 9

Internet services temporarily suspended in Rajasthan’s Ajmer till 6 am tomorrow.

11:11 Nov 9

Centre given three months to set up a trust under Ayodhya Act. Possession of the land to be given to the trust, rules SC.

11:07 Nov 9

SC directs allotment of alternate land to Muslims.

11:06 Nov 9

Placing of idols inside mosque in 1949 amounts to desecration and demolition is against the court order, holds SC

11:05 Nov 9

Rajasthan: Section-144 of CrPC imposed in Sri Ganganagar, till 19th November 2019

11:02 Nov 9

Evidence of belief that Ram’s birthplace inside structure, says SC

Muslims could not prove possessory title. No evidence of offering namaz till British period: SC

11:01 Nov 9

Maharashtra: Section 144 of CrPC imposed in Mumbai city till 11 am tomorrow

11:00 Nov 9

Babri Masjid was never abandoned by the Muslims: SC

10:59 Nov 9 RAF deployed at Charminar in Hyderabad

10:59 Nov 9

Both Hindus and Muslims offered prayers inside the inner courtyard while the same was done by Hindus in the outer courtyard: CJI

10:56 Nov 9

SC holds the suit by Sunni Waqf Board to be within limitation but they can’t assert right to adverse possession: CJI

10:55 Nov 9

Mere evidence of structure not enough to lay claims: CJI

10:54 Nov 9

There is clear evidence the Hindus believed Ram was born in the disputed site: CJI

10:52 Nov 9

Title cannot be established on the basis of faith and belief: CJI

10:49 Nov 9

ASI report does not say, temple razed to build masjid: CJI

10:48 Nov 9

Babri Masjid was built on a temple structure. The underlying structure is not islamic origin. Title of the land must be decided as per the law, rules SC.

10:47 Nov 9

ASI report can’t be neglected and is credential beyond doubt: SC

10:44 Nov 9

Ramlalla Virajman is a juristic entity not Janamsthana (Ramjanmbhoomi), rules Supreme Court.

10:43 Nov 9

The claim of Nirmohi Akhara is only of management. Nirmohi Akhara is not a Shabait, rules Supreme Court.

10:41 Nov 9

Nirmohi Akhara suit is barred by limitation, rules SC.

Ramlalla Virajman suit is within limitation period.

10:39 Nov 9 Court must accept faith and belief of worshippers: CJI

Inapparopriate for court to enter into area of theology. This court must accept faith and belief of worshippers: CJI

10:36 Nov 9

CJI Gogoi is reading out the judgment, says it will take about half an hour to read out the judgment.

10:35 Nov 9 Babri mosque was built by Mir Baqi: CJI10:34 Nov 9

It’s an unanimous judgment. Shia Wakf board SLP rejected against Sunni board on claim to Babri Masjid.

10:31 Nov 9

The bench has assembled. Copy of judgements arrived. Judges are signing respective copies of the judgement now.

10:31 Nov 9 All eyes on the verdict now

Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath is personally monitering the security arrangements from the control room in the state.

10:30 Nov 9 Verdict to be out shortly

Copy of judgments and judges arrive in courtroom 1

10:29 Nov 9 One minute to the verdict

Media, lawyers and all stakeholders are currently presently in the courtroom.

10:25 Nov 9 Ayodhya verdict to be pronounced in courtroom 1 in five minutes

10:16 Nov 9 CJI Ranjan Gogoi arrives at SCThe Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi has arrived at the Supreme Court10:12 Nov 9 UP Helpline Number

UP launches WhatsApp helpline number for receiving complaints regarding provocative messages: 8874327341

10:10 Nov 9

Rapid action force and Tamilnadu police quick reaction force posted at athupulam and karumbukadai junction in Coimbatore City. (Photo | U Rakesh Kumar, EPS)

Rapid action force and Tamilnadu police quick reaction force posted at athupulam and karumbukadai junction in Coimbatore City. (Photo | U Rakesh Kumar, EPS)

10:03 Nov 9 It is imperative that we do not get carried away due to our religious affiliations: Chandrababu Naidu

Minutes away from final verdict: Ayodhya under lock



Ayodhya: A lockdown is underway in Ayodhya with all the roads leading to the temple town sealed and entry of media persons also banned in the city on Saturday.

As the time of pronouncement of Ayodhya verdict comes near, the administration locked down the temple town. All the entry points of Ayodhya have been restricted, traffics have been diverted.

Faizabad District Magistrate Anuj Kumar Jha said: “Entries in Ayodhya town have been restricted. Even media persons are not allowed to enter in the city.

“We have allowed ‘Ram Ki Pairi’ the western bank of river Saryu for reporting. Media debates are also not allowed.”

The Muslim community in Ayodhya has also cancelled its proposed programme of ‘Barawafaat’ procession on Saturday. Oragnised by the Milaads, people will be celebrating the birthday of prophet inside their houses.

All the roads leading to the disputed site have been sealed and there is huge security cover with extra forces called in to the temple town.

According to the information provided by Commissioner’s office by 9 a.m. 100 devotees have visited the disputed Ram Janambhoomi temple, where special pujas were expected to take place, as was told by the priest.
