Top 10 Weekly Current Affairs: 04 November to 09 November 2019

Ayodhya verdict: Ayodhya site belongs to the Hindu parties, 5 acres of alternate land for Muslims

Supreme Court has given its final judgment on Ayodhya dispute. Supreme Court said that five acres of alternate land will be given to the Muslim parties and Ayodhya site belongs to the Hindu parties. Nirmohi Akhara's claim to the land was dismissed but the court-mandated its representation in the trust to be set up by the centre. Apex court clearly said that the disputed land will be given to the Hindus for the construction of a Ram Temple and an alternate land of five acres will be provided to the Sunni Waqf Board for the construction of a Mosque.

PM Modi dedicates Kartarpur corridor to the public, flags off first batch of devotees

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has inaugurated much-awaited Kartarpur Corridor on November 9. He flagged off the first batch of devotees to the Kartarpur Sahib Gurudwara situated in Pakistan. This corridor has been opened for the first time after partition of India and 575 devotees from India visited Kartarpur Sahib. The first batch includes various VVIPS including former Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Chief Minister of Punjab Captain Amarinder Singh, besides MPs, Ministers, MLAs and one representative from each state of the country.

Odd-Even rule in Delhi 2019

Delhi Government launched the odd-even scheme on November 4 to combat the hazardous smog that has enveloped the national capital. This time the odd-even scheme has been launched for 12 days from November 4-15, 2019. However, it was announced by the government that the odd-even scheme will not be applicable on November 11 and November 12 because of the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev.

SPG protection withdrawn for Gandhi family

The Union Government on November 8, 2019 announced to withdrawn of the Special Protection Group (SPG) security cover provided to Gandhi family. These members include Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandh. Only PM Narendra Modi will be provided with the SPG security cover. Now, Gandhi family will get Z plus security cover.

Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis resigns

The Chief Minister of Maharashtra Devendra Fadnavis has resigned from his post on November 8, 2019. He submitted his resignation to the Maharashtra Governor BS Koshyari at Raj Bhavan. He resigned on the backdrop of the failure of the BJP-Shiv Sena alliance to form a government in the state. Now, it will take more time to form a new government in Maharashtra.

Panipat Movie controversy: Can Ahmad Shah Abdali’s portrayal impact Indo-Afghan ties?

Sanjay Dutt is playing the role of Ahmad Shah Abdali in Panipat movie. The trailer of Panipat created a controversy in Afghanistan over Sanjay Dutt’s portrayal. The movie is based on the third battle between Martha and Afghans. Former Afghan ambassador to India, Dr Shaida Abdali, tweeted to Sanjay Dutt saying that “hope Panipat kept Indo-Afghan ties in mind!”

Sahitya Academy winner Nabaneeta Dev Sen dies

Nabaneeta Dev Sen (81) was the first wife of economist Amartya Sen. She was a noted storyteller, poet and novelist. She was suffering from cancer for a long time. She had translated Bengali Ramayana of 16th century into English. She was awarded Sahitya Akademi Award, Padma Sri, Kalinga Literary Award etc. Nabaneeta’s stories are known for the combination of human concern and humour.

Joint assembly session of Haryana and Punjab assembly after 5 decades

A joint assembly session of Haryana and Punjab assembly was organized to mark 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev. It was for the first time, since 1966, when MLAs from both the states shared a house together. All Haryana MLAs were welcomed by the Punjab assembly for a joint session. Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh along with Haryana Governor Satyadeo Narain Arya, Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar and Punjab CM Amarinder Singh attended the session.

President approves Gujarat anti-terror bill

Gujarat Control of Terrorism and Organized Crime Bill (GCTOC) has finally got the president’s nod. This bill is also known as Gujarat anti-terror bill. The bill includes various activities under criminal offences like Fake Multi-Level Marketing Schemes, Ponzi Schemes and organized betting. Now, the state investigation agency can record a phone call and produce that in a court as evidence.

Scientists declare a global climate emergency

A report published in BioScience journal informed that 11,258 scientists from 153 countries signed a global climate emergency. As per the report, if humanity will not take timely steps any ‘untold suffering’ will emerge across the planet. Scientists have given six points to work and suggested to work on them to deal with global climate emergency.
