Kartarpur Corridor: PM Imran urges Modi to solve Kashmir crisis through talks

ISLAMABAD: A leader unites people and does not divide them, said Prime Minister Imran Khan on Saturday, as he welcomed thousands of Indian Sikh pilgrims as Pakistan opened the Kartarpur Corridor for Indian pilgrims and urged his Indian counterpart to solve the occupied Kashmir crisis through talks.



READ MORE: Follow Live Updates of the Kartarpur Corridor

Speaking at the inauguration ceremony, Prime Minister Imran welcomed thousands of Sikh pilgrims into Pakistan.

"There is humanity in the philosophy of Guru Nanak," he said. "Humanity is what separates human beings from animals. Our God also talks about humanity and our Holy Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was sent as a mercy for all mankind."

The prime minister congratulated his ministers for working hard on the corridor.

"The FWO and other ministries worked completed the project in 10 months' time," said the prime minister. "I never knew my government was so capable."

Prime Minister Imran said that a leader was one who brought people together and didn't divide them.

"When I was elected prime minister, I told Modi our biggest problem was poverty," he said. "I told him that if we open our borders then trade will eliminate poverty."

Give justice to the people of occupied Kashmir: PM Imran to Modi

In his speech, Prime Minister Imran urged his Indian counterpart, Narendra Modi, to give justice to the people of occupied Kashmir.

"Eight million people in occupied Kashmir are being treated like animals," he said. "They have been brought under forcible rule of 900,000 Indians."

The prime minister urged Modi to end injustice in India and warned him that such decisions bring about chaos.

"Give justice to the people of occupied Kashmir so the people in the sub-continent can live like human beings," he said.

Prime Minister Imran said that the issue of occupied Kashmir can be solved through talks between the two countries.

"The problem of occupied Kashmir is not about land, it is about human rights," he said.

The prime minister said that this was only the beginning as far as improving ties with India was concerned.

"One day, our relations with India will be like they should have been a long time ago," he said. "Look at Germany and France--both countries fought wars and killed thousands. Today, their borders are open and trade has brought progress to the region."
