“Bulbul” kills eight after making landfall in coastlines

DHAKA, Nov 10, 2019 (BSS) – At least eight people were killed in Bangladesh coasts as cyclone Bulbul described earlier as a “very serious storm” made its landfall in Bangladesh with weakened force after raving adjacent Indian coastlines.

Disaster management ministry confirmed eight deaths in six districts after the predawn landfall of the storm in Bangladesh coasts after more than two million people were forced to take refuge in makeshift shelters overnight.

“Eight people were killed in different coastal districts as cyclone ‘Bulbul’ lashed Bangladesh coastlines early today . . . most of them were victims of collapse of houses and tree falls, “disaster management secretary Md Shah Kamal told BSS.

He said among the victims, two were killed in Khulna, two in Bagerhat, one in Pirojpur, one Barishal, one in Patuakhali and one in Bagerhat.

“Cyclone “Bulbul” is gradually became weak but it caused heavy rainfall in the coastal districts . . . now the tropical cyclone has turned into deep depression,” met office spokesman Ruhul Quddus told BSS this afternoon.

“Bulbul”, he said, now was lying on southern region in the country particularly in Bhola, Barguna, Patuakhali, Barishal, Pirojpur, Jhalakathi.

“Under its influence these coastal districts are witnessing heavy rainfall and we are predicting that weather may be normal in the southern parts of Bangladesh.

But in the Chattogram region, it will take one more day to become weather condition normal, the meteorologists added.

As the cyclone has turned into a depression, it continues weakening for causing heavy downpour, he furthered predicted.

The deep depression over Bagerhat, Barishal And Patuakhali regions moved slightly east-northeastwards and lies over Barishal, Patuakhali and Bhola regions at 3.00 pm today, a weather bulletin of Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) said.

It is likely to move in a northeasterly direction further and weaken gradually by giving precipitation. Under its influence steep pressure gradient persists over north bay and southern part of Bangladesh. Maritime ports of Chattogram, Cox’s Bazar, Mongla, and Payra have been advised to keep hoisted local cautionary signal number three (r) three.

Under the influence of the deep depression, Khulna, Satkhira, Chattogram, Noakhali, Laxmipur, Feni, Chandpur, Borguna, Patuakhali, Barisal, Bhola, Pirozpur, Jhalokathi, Bagerhat, Faridpur, Madaripur and Cumilla are likely to experience wind of 50-60 kph in gusts/squalls with heavy to very heavy falls during the passage of the deep depression.

All fishing boats and trawlers over North Bay have been advised to remain in shelter till tomorrow morning, the bulletin added.

“As part of the immediate response for the first time in the country’s history, more than 21.6 lakh people were successfully evacuated and moved to 5,587 cyclone shelters in coastal districts as the cyclone hit the region,” State Minister for Disaster Management and Relief Dr Md Enamur Rahman told at a press briefing here today.

“Around four to five thousand houses were damaged partially and completely as “Bulbul” lashed the country’s coastlines early today”, he said.

Disaster management secretary said they initially planned to move 14 lakh people to 5,000 cyclone shelters but by midnight yesterday the figure rose to over 21 lakh. “People, who took shelters at cyclone centers and other safer places, now are returning home as there is no possibility of any disaster caused by the cyclone,” he said.

The Sundarbans has protected coastal districts of Bangladesh from the wrath of the tropical cyclone, “Dr Abul Kalam Mallik, an official of Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) told BSS.

“The mangrove forest has acted as a buffer to save coastlines of the country. Otherwise costal districts would have been severely affected by the cyclone Bulbul,” he added.

After crossing West Bengal-Khulna coast (near Sundarbans), the forward peripheral of the cyclone hit Bangladesh coastlines at around 5 am this morning, Mallik said.

The wind velocity of the cyclone varies in different coastal districts during its crossing, he said.
