Assam Muslim Outfit To Donate Rs 5 Lakhs For Ram Temple, Rajnath Hints At UCC And Other News

After the long-awaited Supreme Court judgment in the decades-old Ayodhya land dispute was delivered, both the concerned communities maintained calm and presented a brilliant image of a brotherhood.

Settling the issue once and for all, the five-member Supreme Court bench ruled that the land on which the Babri Masjid stood will be given to the Hindus and a temple will be built there. Muslims will be allocated five acres of land elsewhere in Ayodhya. Read more

After Article 370 And Ayodhya, Will Uniform Civil Code Be Next In The Agenda Of Modi Government?

Since Saturday there have been many speculations on what is next on the agenda of BJP, ranging from NRC to Uniform Civil Code to implementing a two-child policy. On Saturday, hours after the Ayodhya Verdict, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh gave an indication of the same.

“Aa gaya Samay (Time Has come),” Singh told reporters when asked about the Uniform Civil Code (UCC). Read more

Kaziranga Forest Guard Who Protected Rhinos For 30 Years Honoured With Earth Heroes Award

Dimbeswar Das, a guard with the Assam Forest Department has been honoured with the RBS Earth Heroes Award 2019, for his work towards saving the endangered white horn rhinos in Kaziranga National Park.

The award by the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) recognises his nearly three decades of “outstanding efforts towards the conservation of the Great Indian One Horned Rhinoceros” in the face of several adversities in one of the last remaining homes of the Rhinos. Read more

For The Riot Drill Post Ayodhya Verdict, UP Cops Used Their Batons As Fictitious Horses

In the bizarre anti-riot drill video that's going viral, the cops can be seen using their batons as 'pretend-horses' something that kids at primary school would do.

Many mocked the drill saying it was a poor remake of the Harry Potter's quidditch game where they ride on magical brooms. Read more

Depressed Over Low Internal Marks, 19-Year-Old IIT Madras Student Commits Suicide, Fourth Death In The Campus This Year

A female student of Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, was found dead, hanging from a ceiling fan inside her hostel room, in what appears to be a case of suicide.

The student, identified as Fatima Latif, a native of Kerala, was pursuing an integrated MA programme at the institute. Read more
