[GROUND REPORT] Bulwark against floods, Jasai wetland in Maharashtra's Uran faces existential threat

Over the last 12 months, Mirror Now has highlighted the gradually depleting green cover of Uran.

Key Highlights Jasai wetland in Maharashtra's Uran on the brink of extinction due to dumping of debris Activists say Uran wetland is being systematically destroyed for construction activities Jasai wetland is the fourth water body which is being systematically reclaimed

Mumbai: Jasai wetland in the Uran town of Navi Mumbai is the first line of defence against floods in the whole of Mumbai Metropolitan Region. But this wetland in Maharashtra is on the brink of extinction, thanks to continuous dumping of construction debris.

Jasai wetland in Uran is the fourth water body which is being systematically reclaimed over the last 12 months. For this purpose, mangroves are being cut down and illegal landfilling is being done continuously.

All the construction debris is being illegally dumped into this notified wetland. The wetland used to be home to some of the exotic species of birds. In the past few months, this wetland has become a victim of systematic reclamation of land.

Over the last 12 months, Mirror Now has highlighted the gradually depleting green cover of Uran. Earlier, it was the destruction of the 300-acre biodiversity hotspot of Dastan Phata in Uran itself. Also, over 4,500 mangroves were destroyed by cutting water supply along the National Highway 348.

Furious over rapid destruction, several activists and environmentalists have shot off letters to State Mangrove Conservation Cell, but there was no response from the authorities.

"The pattern is basically to kill all the water bodies, claim the land and do some kind of construction activities here. And if you go a little further down, a couple of bungalows have come up. We have complained to mangroves committee but nobody has taken it seriously," said activist BN Kumar.

Ironically, it is the government agencies themselves that are accused of violating coastal zone regulation norms by building concrete structures in the highly protected coastal zones.

The Coastal Zone Management Authority of Maharashtra (MCZMA) recently told the Bombay High Court that the two biggest wetlands in Uran - Karanje and Panje - have been categorised under CRZ-1, which means these two wetlands receive the highest level of protection under the Coastal Regulation Zone-1. This also means that no construction activity is carried out and no tourism is allowed.

Panje wetland has been at the centre of controversy following the construction of two holding ponds on the Panje wetlands. The holding pond is a flood control mechanism to manage water when there are floods or high tides. The sluice gates at Panje wetland are shut which means that the water is unable to flow from one side of the creek to the other. It means that the entire wetland is unable to get the natural flow of water because of which it has completely dried up.

"The sluice gates built by City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) are the main obstacle preventing the inflow of the water in Panje wetland during the high tide. And thus the Panje wetland is getting drier day by day," said environmentalist Nand Kumar Pawar.

"With the reclamation work in progress, villages are now being flooded with high tidewater. The officials are not doing it properly leading to severe environmental damage. And we are also losing on our fishing business," Uran resident Dilip Koli.

Recently, a report published by a US-based institute, Climate Central, suggested that by 2050, Mumbai runs the risk of being wiped out entirely by coastal flooding due to climate change. And so protecting the mangroves and wetlands that act as the first line of defence is extremely important.
