Temple of Justice

Vinod C Dixit

Kudos to the Supreme Court’s verdict on the decades-long Ayodhya-Babri Masjid dispute for reaffirming the independence, transparency, and farsightedness of our judiciary” and for increasing the citizens’ faith in the system. The Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi-led Bench of Justices Sharad Arvind Bobde, Dhananjaya Yeshwant Chandrachud, Ashok Bhushan and S. Abdul Nazeer and archaeologist K K Mohamed, a member of the first team who carried out excavation at the Babri site deserves big kudos for taking all necessary safety measures before articulating much awaited and sensitive verdict on Ram Janmabhoomi. The Supreme Court has rightly held the rights of Ram Lalla Virajman, the presiding deity of the disputed site. Ram Janmabhoomi has been the site of religious dissent and much bitterness all through history. In 1992, however, clashes between Hindus and Muslims escalated to unprecedented levels causing disturbances all over the country and affecting the lives of many hundreds. This Ayodhya land dispute had started in the way the way back 1853-1860. The controversy began in the year 1853 after the construction of the mosque and the Hindus alleged that the place where the mosque was built was earlier the temple of Lord Rama, which was demolished, and the mosque was constructed and Ayodhya dispute had affected almost all the sections of Indian society. It is very sad that so many lives have been lost for this and now the Indian people would finally realize that all religions should try to unite people and not divide. Hindus consider Ayodhya as the birthplace of Lord Ram. They have religious sentiments. Hindus have faith and belief that Lord Ram was born under the dome. The verdict has brought joy and relief to the people of both the communities. The way all have treated this judgment with balanced opinion keeping in view of national interests is highly appreciable.

Ram Janmabhoomi is one of the major pilgrimage centers for the Hindus of India. In Ramayana the mythical granth of Hindus, it is said that Ram’s birthplace is on the banks of the Sarayu River in Ayodhya town. Ayodhya has been in the midst of a dispute and controversy, since last many decades, which has only increased since late 1980s. The controversial issue of Ram Janambhoomi and Babri Masjid has always been a big influence on Indian politics for several decades. We all are aware of the fact that the disputed land at Ayodhya in Faizabad district of Uttar Pradesh has always played major role in disturbing the communal harmony of India. In a unanimous judgment, a five-judge Constitution bench of the Supreme Court gave a historic verdict in the decades-old Ayodhya’s Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid land dispute case, directing that Hindus will get the disputed land for the construction of a Ram temple while a suitable plot of land, measuring five acres, will be given to Sunni Waqf Board. In 1992, the demolition of Babri Masjid by Hindu nationalists gave birth to widespread Hindu-Muslim violence. Archaeological excavation has indicated the presence of a temple under the mosque’s debris. According to the reports from 2003, the Archeological Survey of India has found proof of the Ram temple’s existence predating the mosque at this site.

The Indian National Congress also deserves praise for respecting the verdict of the Supreme Court in the Ayodhya case and also for appealing to all the parties concerned and to all communities to abide by the secular values and spirit of fraternity enshrined in our Constitution and to maintain peace and harmony. This is the historic day for India – the largest secular democracy in the world that saw the end of a dispute spanning several centuries which had pitted the Hindu and Muslim communities against each other in the courts. History books clearly establish that there was a temple and it is the unshakeable faith of believers that this is the birthplace of Ram which itself is the greatest evidence. It is nice that at last the temple justice has resolved the decades old case amicably.

The verdict is good news for all, ultimately a controversial dispute ended peacefully. We both the Muslims & Hindus should obey the court verdict. The judgment of the Honorable Supreme Court is on equitable principles and acceptable one by all. The honest act of the judiciary on a sensitive issue pending since decades on silly pretexts deserves all praise and shows the backbone of Indian judicial systems. The verdict has awarded the land at the heart of the clash to a Hindu litigant over Muslim objections and represents a major victory PM Modi. Credit goes to Ramchandra Paramhans, engineered by Ashok Singhal and charioted by L K Advani the Ram Janmabhoomi movement which catapulted the BJP to the national limelight in the 1990s. Ayodhya and Advani gets justifiably equal space as he took lead on the ram chariot that traversed the entire country. Ashok Singhal was also a part who came to the forefront of the movement in 1984 when was VHP joint general secretary who organized the first “dharam sansad” and mobilized saints in support of the Ram temple issue.

Welcoming the Supreme Court verdict on the Ayodhya title dispute case, RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat has rightly said that the judgment should not be seen as anybody’s victory or loss. The Government had always did its best to persuade Vishwa Hindu Parishad to postpone the Shilanyas or the foundation stone lying ceremony till the court delivered its judgment. Alternatively it was suggested that the leaders of Babri Masjid Committee and VHP sit together to work out a compromise formula. Various ways suggested but to no avail. The Shilanyas was duly performed at a distance from the disputed territory with a clear and a firm declaration that Shri Ram Temple when constructed would cover the disputed territory and structure also. What we need is to give due respect to the law and the temple should come up where it is given permission to setup as it affects the belief of close to a billion people. PM Modi has praised 130 crore Indians for maintaining calm in the verdict and has expected that this very spirit of unity and togetherness power the development trajectory of our nation and every Indian be empowered. Let us hope that the verdict brings more peace and harmony to the country and strengthen the social fabric.
