Woman murdered, accused paramour on the run

Ludhiana: A 50-year-old woman was found murdered at a vacant plot in Prem Nagar area of Jamalpur on Sunday morning, while her 34-year-old paramour could not be tracked down.

It has been alleged that the crime was carried out by the paramour, Sethi Gujjar (34), possibly after an argument between the two. Both the accused and the victim live in the same area, and the plot in which Devi Sran’s body was found is located right behind Gujjar’s house.

A local saw the body in the morning and informed her husband, who then phoned the police.

Devi was married to Neem Bahadur, a native of Nepal, and the couple had four children. Two elder daughters of the couple, which shifted to Ludhiana in 2001, are married.

Bahadur has told the police that Devi never told him about her whereabouts and where she was headed to. He claimed that he last saw her on Friday and then was informed about her body being found on Sunday morning.

A team of the crime investigation agency (CIA) and Jamalpur police inspected the crime scene. Police said the woman had suffered injuries inflicted by a blunt weapon on her face, and there were bruises on her face, blood in her mouth and her clothes were torn. Police said they were suspecting that the woman, before she was allegedly done to death by her paramour, had scuffle with him.

Ludhiana assistant commissioner of police (detective) Surinder Mohan said the preliminary enquiry had revealed that the woman had illicit relations with Gujjar for more than a year. Bahadur has told the police that he came to know about his wife’s affiar last year. He said he had objected to her ties with Gujjar, but she did not listen to him. “Devi would often go to Sethi’s house and, at times, would stay there for two-three days. Since Friday, Devisra was at Sethi’s house. Locals had also seen them together. No one knows what happened. While the woman has been found dead, Gujjar is missing,” said the ACP.

The ACP added that the cause death would be confirmed only after he gets the autopsy repor. Meanwhile, a case has been registered against Gujjar and a hunt is on to arrest him.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
