Janhvi Kapoor’s birthday wish for ‘papa’ Boney Kapoor screams LOVE: You’re the best man I’ll ever know

Janhvi Kapoor, as we speak, is in Chandigarh to shoot for the sequel to Dostana titled Dostana 2 co-starring Kartik Aaryan and Lakshay, and since this Dhadak actress is away from her daddy, she took to social media to pen a heartwarming note for daddy Boney Kapoor to wish him on his birthday. Alongside a series of throwback photos, which had some solo photos of Boney to a photo with late actress and mother Sridevi to a group photo with Arjun Kapoor, Anshula and Khushi, Janhvi wrote, “Happy Birthday Papa you always ask me where I get my energy from papa and I get it from you. Seeing you wake up and doing what you love with more passion every single day, seeing you fall but get up even stronger, seeing you broken but giving us and everyone else strength when they need it. You’re the best man I’ll ever know. You inspire me, encourage me, you’ve always been the best dad but now you’re my best friend. I love you. I’m going to make you so proud. You deserve all the happiness in the world and I hope and pray this year is full of just that in abundance for you.”



Prior to shooting for Dostana 2 in Chandigarh, Janhvi Kapoor visited the Golden Temple in Amritsar with her team to seek blessings as she embarked on a new journey. From relishing lassi to gorging on some yummy food, Janhvi Kapoor did all things touristy before she gets busy with the shooting of Dostana 2. As we speak, Kartik Aaryan, too has joined Janhvi in Chandigarh as the actor took to social media to post a photo taking the blessings of Karan Johar before leaving for Chandigarh.



On the work front, Janhvi Kapoor made her Bollywood debut with Shashank Khaitan’s Dhadak opposite Ishaan Khatter. Post that, Janhvi started shooting for Rajkummar Rao starrer RoohiAfza and Sharan Sharma’s Kargil Girl. Also, Janhvi Kapoor will be seen in Karan Johar’s period drama Takht co-starring Kareena Kapoor Khan, Alia Bhatt, Ranveer Singh, Vicky Kaushal, Bhumi Pednekar and Anil Kapoor and the shooting of the film will start next year.

ALSO READ: Janhvi Kapoor is phenomenal, sincere and hard working, says her RoohiAfza co star Rajkummar Rao
