TN police recover gun that was used to kill 18-year-old youth in Kanchipuram

TN police recover gun that was used to kill 18-year-old youth in Kanchipuram

The incident happened on Tuesday in Venkatamangalam, Kanchipuram district.

news Crime

Days after an 18-year-old youth Mukesh was allegedly shot dead by his friend in Kanchipuram district, the police have recovered the gun that was used to shoot him.

According to reports, the police got information on the whereabouts of the gun after questioning the accused youth Vijay. Vijay and Mukesh were reportedly good friends. On Tuesday, Vijay allegedly shot at Mukesh using a gun when the latter visited Vijay’s house. Vijay then absconded with the weapon, as the police launched a search for him. On Wednesday, Vijay surrendered in a court in the district, but the weapon was nowhere to be seen.

Police have been questioning Vijay after he was taken into custody. Vijay initially told the police that he found the gun in a garbage bin and had also disposed it off in the sea after he ‘accidentally shot’ Mukesh. However, the police repeatedly grilled Vijay after which he stated that he had hidden the gun at a friend’s house on Chennai’s outskirts.

Based on the information given by Vijay, the police conducted a search in the said friend’s house and recovered the weapon, which was a country-made gun. Vijay, however, has not revealed the reason behind the shooting. As per preliminary information, Mukesh and Vijay allegedly had a disagreement over video games, which is said to be the motive behind Vijay’s act.

Vijay and Mukesh are reportedly friends since childhood. Vijay was working with an online food delivery company while Mukesh was a polytechnic student. On Tuesday, Mukesh visited Vijay’s house around 11.30 am when the incident happened.

Vijay’s two siblings and a sister-in-law were in the house when they heard a gunshot. As Vijay’s siblings rushed to trace the source of the sound, Vijay ran past them, leaving Mukesh lying in a pool of blood. They immediately rushed Mukesh to a hospital in Vandalur, from where he was referred to the government hospital in Chromepet. Since Mukesh suffered serious injuries to his head, the doctors there referred him to the Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital. However, he succumbed to his injuries on way to the hospital.
