JNU protest Live updates: JNUSU deliberately excluded from hostel manual meet, alleges students’ union

A dramatic protest by students broke out on Monday outside the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) campus over several issues including the recent fee hike. The protest was organised by the JNU Students' Union. During the protest, a scuffle broke out between the police and the protesting students as they moved towards the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), where Vice President Venkaiah Naidu was addressing the university's convocation at an auditorium.

Visuals from the spot show that police have set up barricades to prevent any aggravation. However, a major number of students were seen clashing with cops as they broke barricades to march towards the venue. A large number of students have participated in the protest with some holding big banners with messages against the fee hike. Some students were also seen protesting inside the campus.

Follow Live Updates:

19:40 PM:

JNUSU has claimed that the notice for a meeting on the hostel manual was sent to them 10 minutes before the meeting began. The students' union has claimed that the JNUSU was deliberately excluded from that discussion.

"It is mentioned that "unauthorized" individuals found in the room of a resident after 10.30 pm would be a matter of disciplinary action. The problem here is that the term unauthorized has been left open-ended and its discretion given to the warden. Again, this leads to a culture of intimidation and surveillance," the JNUSU said.

"Some Clauses seek to discipline students for carrying out any form of protests. The punishments range from denial of fellowships to eviction. Students argue in a functioning democracy, peaceful and democratic protests are the normal course, not an aberration."

16:55 PM: HRD minister Ramesh Pokhriyal spoke with the protesting students about their problems and assured them that their problems would be resolved.

Union Human Resource Development (HRD) Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' earlier today met the students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and assured them that a solution to their issues will be found soon.

16:42 PM: HRD minister stuck for 4.5 hours outside the campus

HRD minister stuck for almost 4.5 hours inside the JNU campus after the convocation program due to student protest outside the gate

15:55 PM: WATCH: Women police personnel push back girl students of JNU

#WATCH Delhi: Women police personnel push back girl students of JNU as the protest by Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union (JNUSU), over different issues including fee hike, continues outside the university campus. pic.twitter.com/FahM7wi8VV ANI (@ANI) November 11, 2019





15:50 PM: Scuffle breaks out between police and protesting students

A scuffle broke out between the police and the protesting students. The students have been protesting over different issues including fee hike, continues outside the university campus.

#WATCH Delhi: A scuffle between the police and protesting students breaks out, as the protest organised by Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union (JNUSU) over different issues including fee hike, continues outside the university campus. pic.twitter.com/yOlezY9Rjx ANI (@ANI) November 11, 2019





14:36 PM: Here is a video of police using water cannons to clear the protesters.

Wow! @DelhiPolice now comes out with Water Cannon to attack students protesting against 999% fee hike? Delhi police is in favour of fee hike? Sorry I forgot DP Comes under Amit Shah ji! Fee hike, sale of Public Education to foreign universities is new education policy of Modi 2.0 pic.twitter.com/bIg5U73ntn N Sai Balaji (@nsaibalaji) November 11, 2019

14:28 PM: As students continue to protest on and outside the campus, a convocation ceremony is underway where Vice-President Vekaiah Naidu is the chief guest.

14:06 PM: Vehicular traffic near the University was affected in the morning due to the ongoing demonstration by students against fee hike, curfew timings and dress code restrictions in the institute, the police said.

14:00 PM: Students have been protesting against a hostel fee hike for over 15 days. However, the situation blew out of proportion as more students stepped forward to join the massive protest outside JNU campus.

Students protesting outside JNU campus. (Photo: Nayanika Singhal)

01:50 PM: While police planned to use water cannons to disperse the protesters, at least 300-400 students climbed atop the water cannon vehicles and prevented any such action. However, police have now started using water cannons to clear the area.

A protester told news agency ANI that the protests have been going on for the last 15 days over a fee hike. "At least 40 per cent students come from poor background. How will they study here?" the protester added.

Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union organises protest over different issues including fee hike, outside university campus. pic.twitter.com/KGU8epEOwD ANI (@ANI) November 11, 2019

The JNU administration on Thursday appealed students to stop agitating against a draft hostel manual, which allegedly has provisions for fee hike and dress code. The administration added that protests were affecting academic activities.

Expressing concern, the administration said, "These agitations have affected the normal life of a large number of innocent students from across India who are unable to concentrate on their studies, complete academic assignments and prepare for their examinations."

"The administration appeals to the agitating students to stop their propaganda and falsehood campaigns, and spare the vast majority of innocent students who want to concentrate on their studies," it said.

The students' union has been on a strike against a draft hostel manual approved by the Inter-Hall administration, saying the manual has provisions for the fee hike, dress code and curfew timings.
