Maharashtra: Shiv Sena Leader Accuses Fadnavis of Propagating 'Politics of Fear'

New Delhi: Shiv Sena’s Sanjay Raut continued his attack on ally BJP, accusing Maharashtra caretakeer chief minister Devendra Fadnavis of propagating ‘politics of fear’ and likening him to Adolf Hitler. He, however, added that the party agrees with governor Bhaga Singh Koshyari’s invitation asking the BJP to form the government, while downplaying the chances of allying with opposition parties NCP or Congress.

Speaking at a press conference on Sunday, Raut, an MP, said that the party’s priority is to ensure a stable government in Maharashtra. He was responding to a question about the Congress possibly extending support to the Shiv Sena to form a government and said the Sonia Gandhi-led party is “not enemy of Maharashtra”. “If Congress leaders have taken any decision to ensure a stable government in Maharashtra, we welcome it,” he said.

He also said the Sena will declare its next strategy once no one else is able to form the government in Maharashtra. In an apparent reference to the BJP, he said that the party’s bubble of being “invincible” has burst and the arrogance of “buying” a politician to form the government will no longer work in the state.

The Shiv Sena “will step in” if no one forms government, Raut told reporters here.

“I welcome the governor’s decision to invite the BJP. The single largest party had to be called. We fail to understand why the BJP did not stake claim in 24 hours (after results) if it was confident that it had the majority,” the Rajya Sabha member said, according to PTI.

On the Sena’s future course of action, he said, “Let the picture be clear on the first step taken by the governor. The Shiv Sena will declare its strategy if no one else is able to form the government.”

The BJP won 105 seats in the October 21 elections, while the majority mark in the 288-member Assembly is 145. Its ally Shiv Sena won 56 seats, but the two parties are bickering over who will get the chief minister’s post.

‘Deal’ with NCP

Asked if the Shiv Sena has entered into a ‘deal’ with the Congress and NCP, Raut said, “We are not traders to make deals. Politics is not a trade for the Shiv Sena.”

He also dismissed the possibility of legislators switching sides. “I don’t think MLAs of any party would defect. If anyone tries to split another party for government formation, I don’t think it will work this time,” he said.

“The arrogance of buying any politician and form a government will no longer work in this state. The bubble of being invincible has burst,” Raut said.

On posters put up by Sena workers near Thackeray’s residence in Mumbai demanding that he be the chief minister, Raut said, “Uddhav Thackeray is the Shiv Sena leader and he will take an appropriate decision at the right time. He has already said he will make a Shiv Sainik the CM.”

When a reporter pointed out that the Sena was not criticising the opposition NCP in the wake of a possible alliance between the two parties, Raut said, “We have not criticised the BJP either. The election campaign is over and things said during the campaign are irrelevant.”

Every political party has differences with the other party, he said. The Sena and BJP differ on the issue of the border dispute between Maharashtra and Karnataka over the Belagavi (Belgaum) district, Raut said.

“We always expected a strong stand of the BJP on Belagavi district with its counterpart (BJP) in the Karnataka government. At the same time, there are some leaders in the Congress and NCP who identify themselves with the Sena’s stand on this border dispute issue,” he said.

Maharashtra claims Belgaum, part of the erstwhile Bombay Presidency but currently a district of Karnataka, on linguistic grounds.

Takes aim at Fadnavis

Raut hit out at Maharashtra’s caretaker chief minister Devendra Fadnavis and accused him of playing politics of fear, while making a reference to German dictator Adolf Hitler.

Without naming Fadnavis, Raut, in a fresh attack on the BJP leader, said, “When ways of threatening and seeking political support don’t work, it is time to accept that Hitler is dead and the looming clouds of slavery have disappeared.”

In his column ‘Rokhthok’ in Sena mouthpiece Saamana, he said Fadnavis, despite being blessed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to become chief minister for the second time, has not been able to assume the top post in Maharashtra.

“He could not take oath because BJP chief Amit Shah has remained aloof from developments in the state,” Raut said.

“The BJP’s biggest ally [Shiv Sena] is not ready to speak to the outgoing chief minister, which is the biggest defeat (of the BJP). This time, Sena president Uddhav Thackeray will decide the next chief minister of Maharashtra,” he said.

NCP president Sharad Pawar and many Congress leaders have communicated to their party chief Sonia Gandhi that their priority is to have a “non-BJP” chief minister in the state, the Rajya Sabha member said in the Marathi publication.

“Everyone wants to end the politics of revenge, subservience and playing dirty tricks,” Raut said.

“Those who used to threaten others with their power are now scared,” he said in remarks laced with sarcasm.
