10 Historically Significant Events That Led To The Demolition Of The Babri Masjid & Riots In 1992

In September 2010, the Allahabad High Court announced the seven-decade-old verdict based on the disputed land in Ayodhya. The land conflicted in every religious and communal sense had become a tangible divide between the Hindu and the Muslim community. Back in 2010, the three judge-committee at the Allahabad High Court ruled that the 2.77 acres of the Ayodhya land be divided into three parts with 1/3 going to the Ram Lalla or infant Ram, represented by the Hindu Maha Sabha, 1/3 going to the Sunni Waqf Board and the remaining 1/3 going to the Nirmohi Akhara.

The inner courtyard went to the deity, the Ram Chabutra and Sita Rasoi went to the Nirmohi Akahara, while the Muslim side got the remaining one third after several adjustments were made to the extra land, acquired by the government.

© BCCL

On December 1, 2017, 32 civil-rights activists filed a plea, challenging the 2010 verdict of the Allahabad High Court. On January 25, 2019, the Supreme Court set up a five-judge committee comprising Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and Justices S.A Bobde, D.Y. Chandrachud, Ashok Bhushan and S.A. Nazeer to hear the case; and in August this year the SC started holding a day-to-day hearing on the Ayodhya case before the final verdict came out in November.

The final verdict, that came out in November 2019, negated the verdict of 2010 and ruled that the land belonged to the government and that a trust would be established to build a Hindu temple there, while five acres of land would be allocated within city premises to build a mosque for the Muslims.

© The Pioneer

With decades of conflict for a piece of land, there has to be a lot of significance attached to it, for volatile protests and riots to take place in the past.

Here are five important historical facts you need to know to understand the importance of the disputed land in Ayodhya:

(1) Construction Of The Babri Masjid

In 1528, Babri Masjid was constructed in Ayodhya, by Mir Baqi, instructed by the then Mughal Emperor Babur. When the Mosque was built, there was no discussion about an already existing temple at that site, neither was anything demolished to construct the mosque, nor was there any proof or talk about the area being 'Ram Janmbhoomi' (birthplace of Lord Rama).

© Indian Express

(2) The Beginning Of Communal Tension

Later in 1855, a sudden conflict arose between the Sunni Muslims and the locals of the village Bairai, over the temple Hanumangarhi. The Sunni's believed a mosque was demolished to build a temple there, while the latter refused this claim. Fortunately, the then Nawab of Awadh, Nawab Wajid Ali Shah intervened in the conflict and mediated on behalf of the temple to hold the peace for the two communities.

© Shome Basu

(3) The 'Ram Janmbhoomi' Belief Is Born

In 1859, a local belief that Ayodhya is the birthplace of Lord Rama, the 7th Avatar of the Hindu deity Vishnu, started to take shape in the city. The belief that the Babri Masjid stood in the exact same spot of his birthplace and that a Hindu shrine was demolished to construct the mosque started spreading like wildfire. The British Colonial Administration erected a fence at the site and while the Muslims are given the inner court to pray, Hindu's are given the outer court.

© Youtube

(4) Second Round Of Disputes

In 1934, a second round of dispute broke out in the shape of riots between the Hindus and the Muslims on the same issue, which resulted in damages caused to the mosque and the dome, which were later rebuilt by the government back then.

(5) Lord Ram Idol Found Inside The Mosque

In 1949, a Ram Idol was mysteriously found inside the Mosque, believed to be the work of the Hindu Mahasabha activists. The mosque thereafter was locked down by the Jawaharlal Nehru government to avoid any protests or riots between the two communities. The idol stayed at the premise and magistrate K.K. Nayar refused to remove the idol from the mosque to avoid large scale disruption and violence. Worship at the site was thereon disallowed as well.

© Business Standard

(6) Mosque Reopens For Prayers

A petition is filed in the Faizabad court in 1950 to re-allow namaz in the premises. The Hindu committee too filed a petition to re-open the site so the idol placed there can be worshipped at the Janmbhoomi again. The site does open but only the outer courtyard was allowed prayers while the inner one remained locked.

(7) 4 Suits Filed To Claim The Disputed Ground

By 1961, at least four suits were filed to claim the disputed ground by Hashim Ansari, Gopal Singh Visharad and Mahant Paramhans Ramchandra Das, Nirmohi Akahara and The Sunni Central Waqf Board, asking for the Muslims' rights to pray at the mosque.

© India Today

(8) VHP Is Formed

In 1964, to protect the Hindu interest in the Ram Janbhoomi and safeguard its claim, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad was formed by M. S. Golwalkar and S. S. Apte, a tangible body that was actively fighting for the disputed site.

© Youtube

(9) BJP Leader LK Advani Leads The Movement

In 1984, the active Hindu groups formed a committee to oversee the construction of the Ram Temple, as the movement gathered momentum in the country. The then BJP ruler LK Advani took leadership of the rising Hindu movement.

© BCCL

(10) The Riots Of 1992

On December 6, 1992, heavy riots broke out when a crowd of almost 1,50,000 people gathered at the Babri Masjid to listen to speeches made by the 'Ram Mandir movement' leader LK Advani and Murli Manohar Joshi. The crowd, getting influenced by the speeches, stormed the mosque and eventually demolished it to pieces. The demolition took place despite promises made by the state government to the Supreme Court that the mosque wouldn't be harmed in any way.

Riots didn't stop there though. After the demolition, the Kar Sevaks attacked Muslim residents in Ayodhya, in their homes and their shops. Muslim families were killed in the hands of the Kar Sevaks. The riots caused a severe ripple effect throughout the country, and more riots broke out in different parts of the country, including Mumbai, where 2,000 people died, both from the Hindu and Muslim community.

© DailyO

One of the most deadliest communal riots took place in the country on religious grounds and while we're saddened by what happened back in history, we're glad that the dispute has finally been resolved after years of turmoil for both the Muslim and Hindu communities.

In the current verdict, the apex court has unanimously stated that even though the demolition of the masjid was unlawful, the masjid was still built over a Hindu shrine, according to the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).

While this important piece of conflict and its final resolution is going to go down in history, we mustn't forget that the verdict wasn't a win for a particular community but a way to ensure peace and equality between members of both the religions.

With inputs from thewire.in
