‘Disputed’ Kalapani territory in new Indian map : Why the territory is claimed by both India and Nepal

Nepal has claimed that India's new map shows Nepali sovereign territory as part of India. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Located at an altitude of approximately 3600m, Kalapani lies at the border of Uttarakhand and Nepal’s Sudurpashchim Pradesh Kalapani is one of only two disputed pieces of land between India and Nepal, with 97 per cent of boundary discrepancies resolved since 1981 Nepal has claimed that as per the terms of the Suguali Treaty, established between itself and the then East India Company in 1816, Palapani is included in its sovereign territory

In a move to allay Nepali fears of India seeking to appropriate its sovereign territory, Ministry of External Affairs spokesman Raveesh Kumar, issued a statement saying that there has been no revision to the Indo-Nepal boundary in the latest map of India, depicting Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh as Union territories. Kumar also asserted that bilateral talks over the disputed Kalapani territory are ongoing.

Located at an altitude of approximately 3600m, Kalapani lies at the border of Uttarakhand and Nepal’s Sudurpashchim Pradesh. India considers the region to be part of Uttarakhand’s Pithoragarh district, however, Nepal has also laid claim to the land, calling it part of its Darchula district. Since the 1962 war between India and China, the region has been occupied by the Indo-Tibetan Border Forces. The source of the dispute comes from the ambiguity around where the Mahakali river (which runs through the Kalapani region) originates. Although the two countries have pledged to resolve the dispute diplomatically, talks had stalled until Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s trip to Nepal in 2014, when he addressed the issue for the first time in seven years.





Kalapani is one of only two disputed pieces of land between India and Nepal, with 97 per cent of boundary discrepancies resolved since 1981. However, it was shortly after the signing of the Mahakali Treaty – an agreement to mutually cooperate in the development of the region – when the Communist Party of Nepal (CPN-UML) began staking a claim to Kalapani. Over the years, the boundary issue has been used as a key political tool in Nepali elections, especially by political parties in the Darchula district, who have much to lose, from India sealing its border points around Kalapani.

The territory also holds strategic military significance, serving as a meeting point for India, Nepal and China. Nepal has claimed that as per the terms of the Suguali Treaty, established between itself and the then East India Company in 1816, Kalapani is included in its sovereign territory. However, as per Article 5 of the treaty, Nepal had agreed to renounce any claim to land that lay to the west of the River Kali (now Mahakali). The first land surveys in the area were conducted in the 1860s, with further surveys conducted in the 1920s as well. In 1929, Kalapani’s designation as a part of India was reconfirmed by Nepal.


