[GROUND REPORT] JNU protests: Won't back down unless fee hike is revoked, say students

The students also tried to march towards All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), where Vice President Venkaiah Naidu was addressing JNU convocation at an auditorium.

Key Highlights Massive protests by JNU students over fee hike Students upset over 300 per cent fee hostel fee hike Students say they won't back down until their demands are met

New Delhi: There was high drama at Delhi's prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) as the students clashed with Delhi Police during protests over fee hike. The protests came on the day JNU held its convocation in the presence of Union Human Resource Development (HRD) Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal and Vice-President Venkaiah Naidu.

The clash took place as students tried to meet JNU Vice-Chancellor. Police charged the students with water cannons and batons after students pushed away barricades placed by the police.

The students have been angry over the 300 per cent hike in hostel fees. The students claimed they had been protesting for a week, but their pleas fell on deaf ears. Students have said that they won't back down from their demands unless the government revokes its fee hike decision.

The students also tried to march towards the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), where Vice President Venkaiah Naidu was addressing JNU convocation at an auditorium.

"We can't afford such a high fee. The administration should understand the problems of students. They have made a commodity of education. For 10 days, we had been demanding the Vice-Chancellor listen to our problem, to reject the fee hike proposal, but he wasn't listening," a student told Mirror Now.

Another JNU student claimed that the JNU record shows that 40 per cent students in the university are poor and if this fee hike proposal is pushed ahead then they won't be able to continue their education.

Earlier, JNU VC Jagadesh Kuma claimed that the proposal of the fee was was taken after meeting of a committee. However, students have claimed that there was no consultation with the students on the matter.

Till the last reports came in, the staff at the AICTE building was surrounded by the students and was not allowed to leave. Students say they will not leave the university campus unless the VC comes to meet them.

Meanwhile, students claimed that police misbehaved with them at the campus during their protest. The situation in the JNU remains tense with massive police deployment at the campus.

40% of the students will be directly affected by this proposal & maybe forced to drop out, that should concern us more than the students protesting: #JNU Alumni, @UmarKhalidJNU to MIRROR NOW#JNUProtest LIVE: https://t.co/EHuTvakRzG pic.twitter.com/xuujzjY6fJ — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) November 11, 2019

There are reports of traffic congestion in South Delhi areas like Vasant Kunj and Mehrauli due to students protest. In the morning, police had to resort to using mild force to disperse protesters when Vice President Venkaiah Naidu was on the campus.

Speaking to Mirror Now, former JNU student Umar Khalid expressed solidarity with the students.

"Students are fighting to their basic right to education. If the new manual is allowed to implement, it would directly affect 40 per cent of the students. Many students may be forced to drop out because they would not be able to pay their higher fees. What is more troubling is that the new administration has completely eroded any space for dialogue. The new VC does not involve any of the stakeholders while implementing the decisions," said Umar Khalid.
