JNU Hostel Fee Hike Protests - Timeline and events explained in 5 points

JNU Hostel Fee Hike Protests | Photo Credit: Times Now

Jawaharlal Nehru University, JNU students have been protesting over hostel fee hike and others issues for more than a week now. With each day, the protest got worse and students have become adamant who are not ready to bring an end to this protest anytime soon. Delhi Police, CRPF have been deployed to bring the situation under control.

The protest is due to hostel fee hike and other fees by nearly 300 percent. The hostel fee that has been revised in 19 years for the first time is not acceptable to students. Under new hostel charges, single room rent has been increased from Rs 20 to Rs 600 per month, double sharing room fees hike has been from Rs 10 to Rs 300. Along with this, the service charge has been Rs 1700/- per month. Also Read: JNU Protest: HRD Minister 'extracted' from university campus; protest continues [VIDEO]

Let’s take a look at the whole incident in the timelines given below.

October 28: The meeting on hostel fee hike was ongoing in the Convention Centre of JNU when protesters entered the venue and started with the protest. As per reports, Dean of Students, Professor Umesh Kadam fell sick in the "raucous atmosphere" with "alarmingly high blood pressure". Some students of JNU blocked an ambulance and stopped doctors from checking up an ailing dean on campus. October 29: The protest continued as students raised the slogan in front of the Inter Hostel Administration (IHA) meeting venue. The protest erupted when no representative from the JNU students was invited for the meeting. While speaking to the media, JNUSU president Aishe Ghosh has said that the administration’s decision to exclude students from the IHA Committee meeting was in direct violation of the High Court Order which stated that students should be involved in every matter which is related to student welfare. November 5: Students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) after protesting in front of the campus paved their way to the Vasant Kunj (North) police station. They protested in front of the police station after police stopped them from entering the police station. November 11 (morning): On the 3rd Convocation day at JNU, a massive protest broke outside when students blocked the roads near the campus and raised slogans amid heavy police presence. Vice President, Venkaiah Naidu and HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal were there to attend the convocation. November 11 (evening): The students blocked the gates of the University and did not permit the HRD Minister to leave the premises till their demands were met for around 6 hours. Later, with the help of Delhi Police, the minister was extracted from the university campus.

As for now, the student union is demanding the university to withdraw the hostel manual. The new hostel manual not only includes increase in fee hike but curfew and dress restrictions as well. The police officials are expected to hold a mediation meeting between VC Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar & students, to call off the protest.
