Katrina Kaif, Rohit Shetty are all smiles as they share a happy moment on Sooryavanshi sets

Katrina Kaif and Rohit Shetty are all smiles in this photo

Key Highlights Katrina Kaif recently shared a photo with her director Rohit Shetty on Instagram The duo was apparently playing with different coloured pens Directed by Rohit Shetty, Katrina Kaif will share screen space with Akshay Kumar in Sooryavanshi

Rohit Shetty's cop universe is getting bigger and better by the day and we are not complaining. It all started with the release of Ajay Devgn starrer Singham that turned out to be a massive hit, only to give a rocking start to his cop universe. Now, post the release of Singham 2 and Simmba, fans are eagerly waiting for the fourth installment Sooryavanshi, which will star the Khiladi of Bollywood, Akshay Kumar, and Katrina Kaif.

Katrina, who was last seen in Bharat, started shooting for Sooryavanshi on October 8 and will be seen sharing screen space with Akshay for the ninth time. Recently, the diva took to her social media and shared a photo in which she is seen sharing a happy moment with her director Rohit. While the duo was apparently playing with different coloured pens, Katrina looked gorgeous in the picture sporting a grey coloured kurti. She captioned the click, "#Sooryavanshi Diaries with @itsrohitshetty and @kaybykatrina #itskaytobeyou."

Check out the photo below:

Earlier, Katrina informed her followers about kickstarting Sooryavanshi shoot with a photo of a name badge with Veer Sooryavanshi written on it. While it seems Akshay’s character in the film is called Veer Sooryavanshi, Katrina shared the click with a caption that read, "Now Shooting".

According to reports, a massive climax has been planned for Sooryavanshi which was shot over a period of 20 days at the Ramoji Film City. For the power-packed final scene, a massive set was designed and the filmmaker and his writers have been working on the climax for months. Apparently, they have cracked a scenario that does justice to the three super cops.

In March, Akshay shared his look for the Rohit Shetty directorial on social media with a caption that read, “A bullet for a bullet! Get ready for #RohitShetty’s #Sooryavanshi on Eid 2020. Action-packed, masala intact!”

Sooryavanshi is slated for a March 27 release next year.


