75-year-old Bengaluru man arrested for allegedly shooting dog with air gun

75-year-old Bengaluru man arrested for allegedly shooting dog with air gun

The dog, which was lying in a pool of blood, was rushed to the hospital by Bengaluru residents.

news Animal Cruelty

A stray dog was shot at three times with an air gun in Bengaluru’s Jayanagar 5th block on Monday morning. The police have arrested a 75-year-old man in connection with the incident.

A group of citizens noticed the brown stray dog lying in a pool of blood. They called for help, and then rushed the dog to Jeeva Pet Hospital in JP Nagar in an auto.

The x-ray reports showed three air-gun pellets in three different places in the dog’s body. The images also showed that there was a long superficial cut on the dog’s body near the chest area.

Visuals of the dog show it lying on a stretcher, with an IV line connected to its paw, in a semi-conscious state. The dog is currently out of danger. However, the dog is on IV to maintain its fluid levels while it recovers from the shock.

Jayanagar MLA Soumya Reddy also visited the dog in hospital and promised that the offender would be brought to book.

The Jayanagar police have filed an FIR against a couple. Police said that the wife is a former military officer and is permitted service weapons.

The Jayanagar Police said that Dr C Shyamsundar allegedly shot the dog as it was dirtying the spot outside his house. "He told us that he shot the dog as it had been dirtying the spot right outside the gate to his house. We have arrested him and booked him under relevant sections of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act," the Jayanagar Police said.

In December 2017, an ex-army man in New Delhi allegedly shot dead a dog with his rifle. A video of the crime went viral on social media. The dog had allegedly bitten his prize buffalo and the man wanted to take revenge on it.

On Sunday, a pregnant cat was found hung to death in Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala.

Read: Pregnant cat found hanged to death, Kerala police register FIR
