Bengaluru doctor shoots stray dog for too much barking, gets arrested

The residents of Jayanagar took the dog to the Jeeva Pet Hospital. (Photo: India Today)

A Bengaluru doctor shot a stray dog outside his home using an airgun allegedly because he was fed up of its continuous barking. Residents in the area rushed to help the stray after they heard its cries and called an animal rescuer.

Praveen from WSA was the first to reach the spot and then shifted the injured stray to Jeeva Pet Hospital with the help of the local residents.

He told India Today TV that after an X-ray was done, the veterinarian found three metal pellets inside its body, one of which hit its spine. The stray, in fact, was bleeding when Praveen reached to save it.

Sowmya Reddy, Jayanagar MLA and an ardent animal lover, also reached the pet hospital in the morning to find out the condition of the dog. She spoke with the Jayanagar police to book the doctor who shot the dog.

Speaking to India Today TV, Sowmya Reddy said, "This man is supposed to be a doctor and he needs to be more sensible in what he does. This is just not done what if he had hit a human being while shooting at the stray?"

She wondered why anybody would do such a thing to an animal which according to the residents is "docile, friendly and sweet".

The pet hospital has stabilised the stray since it was in a state of shock. They have contacted the government-run vet hospital as to how to proceed with its operation.

The Jayanagar police detained the man who allegedly shot the stray and according to sources, an FIR has also been registered against him. The doctor has now been released. The police have demanded a certificate from a government hospital to proceed further with this case.

Sudha Narayanan, Founder Trustee of CARE, said the use of airguns has become rampant and people use these guns to harm animals.

Dylon, an animal rescuer, said, 'This is unacceptable and our laws are weak and hence people do whatever they want to do with the animals. The law needs to be changed."
