Rogue 'Bin Laden' elephant caught in India after killing 5 people

An elephant named after the late Al-Qaeda terror leader Osama bin Laden that killed five Indian villagers has been caught after a massive operation to hunt down the creature.

Wildlife officers tracked the pachyderm - dubbed 'Laden' by the locals it menaced in northeastern Assam state - through a forest for several days using drones and domesticated elephants.

The rogue animal killed five people, including three women, during a 24-hour rampage through Goalpara district in October.

Wildlife officers tracked the pachyderm through a forest for several days using drones and domesticated elephants

The elephant - named after Osama bin Laden - killed five villagers in a 24-hour rampage. He can be seen walking through the forest in a picture taken by a drone before his capture

Officials said they would take the elephant's welfare into account as well as the safety of people living nearby in deciding where it would be relocated.

'We started the final leg of the operation today... two darts were fired by experts which had tranquillised the male elephant', a senior forestry official said

'Now the work is on to shift the elephant to a forest where there is no human habitation nearby.'

Wildlife officials and rangers managed to track the beast through the Rongjuli forest before finally capturing it.

Forest officials rangers use drones to try and locate the rogue elephant which previously attacked villages and destroyed paddy fields in the state of Assam

Assam forest minister Parimal Shuklabaidya said an eight-person committee including wildlife experts would decide what to do.

Nearly 2,300 people have been killed by elephants in India over the last five years, according to official figures released in June, while 700 elephants have been killed since 2011 - figures resulting in part from shrinking natural habitats.

Elephants frequently migrate into Goalpara, resulting in high numbers of fatal encounters with humans amid rampant deforestation.

Some elephants there have been poisoned or shot by locals, while others have died on electric fences or on railways cutting through migration routes.
