Coimbatore woman grievously injured allegedly after AIADMK flagpole turns deathtrap

Coimbatore woman grievously injured allegedly after AIADMK flagpole turns deathtrap

Rajeswari was riding to work when an AIADMK flagpole allegedly fell onto the road. After falling from her bike onto the road, she was run over by a lorry.

news Accident

A 30-year-old woman, who is the sole breadwinner of her family in Coimbatore, was greviously injured after coming under the wheels of a lorry on Monday. This after falling onto the road from her two-wheeler while allegedly trying to maneuver around a flagpole. Flagpoles bearing the AIADMK flag were planted on the side of the road for a family event by a party cadre.

The incident happened at Avinashi Road around 8.30 am on Monday, when Rajeswari alias Anuradha was on her way to work at Gokulam Park, Coimbatore. A BBA graduate, Rajeswari was on her two-wheeler when a flag pole allegedly fell on her path, causing her to suddenly maneuver her bike to avoid being hit. Losing balance, she fell on to the road, placing her directly under the wheels of a lorry, which ran over her legs. Onlookers rushed Rajeswari to a private hospital and alerted her relatives who rushed to the hospital.

Rajeswari's family, however, alleges that the flagpole was the reason she got into the accident. “We got to know of the incident when Anuradha’s (Rajeswari's) co-worker called and told us. The injuries are severe. She has heavy fracture in one leg and the nerves have been cut in the other leg. She underwent a seven-hour surgery today just to partially redeem the nerves. The doctors have placed her on 48-hour observation to see if there is any infection. They have said that they will proceed with the next surgery to attempt to reconnect the nerves after ensuring there is no infection in the site,” Rajeswari’s relative told TNM. Adding that she is the sole earning member of her family and that her family depends on her for their livelihood, the relative demanded strict action be taken on whoever is responsible for the incident.

Speaking to TNM about the accident, a police officer from the Traffic Investigation Wing said that an FIR has been registered against the lorry driver for the accident under sections 279 (Rash driving), 337 (Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) and 338 (Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) of IPC. “We are however still investigating the incident. As of now we have registered an FIR for accident,” the officer said.

When TNM contacted the Peelamedu police station on whether permission was granted for erecting flags on the side of the road, a police officer in the station stated that flags were put up after getting permission from police.

On September 12, Subhasri, a 23-year-old engineer from Chennai, was killed when a hoarding erected for a family event of an AIADMK councilor on the centre median of a road fell on her causing her to lose balance of her vehicle. She fell onto the road and a lorry ran over her. The incident caused massive outrage in different quarters with people demanding the politician behind the hoardings be arrested.
