Gujarat: Man held for selling marijuana after info from duo arrested for attacking him

The Vadodara police on Monday arrested a 58-year-old man for allegedly selling marijuana from his residence in Harni road area, after two men accused of attacking him informed police of the same.

According to police, the man, identified as Sanjay Tank, complained late on Sunday that two people tried to attack him near the GSPC Circle on Mangal Pandey road when he stopped at a tea stall with his driver and helper. One of the alleged attackers, Ankur Thakor, was Tank’s former neighbour and the other one was Thakor’s friend, Ranchod Bharwad.

On seeing them approach with sharp edged weapons, he tried to flee the spot in his car, but the two accused followed him. After chasing Tank for a few kilometres, they rammed into his car and then got down and broke the window panes. The accused also attacked him with a knife and Tank sustained two stab wounds on the hand and stomach, he said in his complaint.

Police nabbed the two accused and Sanjay was moved to the hospital for treatment. He stated in his complaint that Thakor and his helper Namdev Morey had a brawl four days ago, following which they attacked him.

Both Thakor and Bharwad were booked under IPC sections 307 (attempt to murder), 324 (Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 427 (Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees), 294 (KH) (punishment for obscene acts or words), 114 (abettor present). However, during the investigation, Thakor and Bharwad told police that Tank supplies and sells illegal marijuana from his residence. Based on the information, police carried out a raid at his residence and recovered 1.1 kilogram of marijuana worth Rs 11,000. Tank was booked under relevant sections of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act.

“This is the first such case against Tank but he has been selling marijuana for a long time now. We carried out a raid after Thakor informed us about the same. He gets the illegal marijuana from Morey who brings it from Chhota Udepur. Morey is on the run right now. Four days ago, Morey and Thakor had a fight over some monetary transaction, following which Morey allegedly thrashed Thakor. We are also in the process of filing a case against Morey in the case,” said BR Rathod, ACP, H division.
