Revenue employees to resume duties

Govt. will address safety concerns, look into their other demands, assures KTR

Revenue employees will resume normal duties from Tuesday following an assurance by the State government that it will address their safety concerns in the wake of the killing of Tahsildar Ch. Vijaya Reddy at her office in Abdullahpurmet of Rangareddy district. The employees had been on warpath since her murder on November 4.

The assurance was given by Industries Minister K.T. Rama Rao to a delegation of Telangana Revenue Employees Joint Action Committee that called on him on Monday. Mr. Rama Rao, who spoke separately to leaders of individual associations within the committee, asked Special Chief Secretary, Revenue, Somesh Kumar to work out safety measures for the employees and look into their other demands.

Mr. Somesh Kumar held three rounds of talks with the committee leaders. Additional Director General of Police, Law and Order, Jitender, also met them twice where the assurance to the life of employees and safety of revenue offices was repeatedly stressed.

The Minister promised to take up other demands of the committee with Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao in the presence of its leaders within a fortnight, Telangana Revenue Employees Services Association president V. Ravinder Reddy and other leaders said.

They told mediapersons that Mr. Rama Rao had asked the employees to work fearlessly and assured that the government would extend all support to them. He sought 15 days to address problems in issue of pattadar passbooks with regard to disputed and encroached lands.

Meanwhile, the Revenue JAC, a separate body of revenue employees, gave a call for pen down strike by employees on November 13 and boycott of duties related to land issues on November 16.

Regional conferences of employees will be held on November 16, 19 and 22 which will be followed by a major congregation in Hyderabad later. The decisions were taken at a round table meeting attended by leaders of unions representing RTC and other government departments.
