Tropical cyclone Pabuk, Thailand: Tourists flee for safety

Tens of thousands of tourists in Thailand have fled popular resort islands as tropical storm Pabuk turns deadly.

Tens of thousands of tourists in Thailand have reportedly fled popular resort islands as tropical storm Pabuk approaches.

Ferry services and flights have been suspended and evacuations have begun in Thailand ahead of the storm which is expected to pound southern beach resorts.

One person was reported dead and another missing after a fishing boat with a crew of six capsized in high waves, but there were no reports of major damage by nightfall.

Thai people push a motorcycle through floodwater from Tropical Storm Pabuk in Pak Phanang, in the southern province of Nakhon Si Thammarat, southern Thailand. Picture: AP

The country’s Meteorological Department has warned residents to prepare for strong winds and rough seas and waves of up to 6.7 metres have been predicted for some areas.

Rain is already falling around the Gulf of Thailand and torrential downpours are expected in 16 provinces when Pabuk makes its expected landfall late on Friday.

Thai people sleep at an evacuation centre in Nakhon Si Thammarat province as Pabuk threatens. Picture: AP

There are fears the storm will be the worst to hit Thailand since 1989, when Typhoon Gay left more than 400 dead.

Pabuk is said to be the country’s first tropical storm to hit the southern shores in nearly 30 years.

Locals look at a fishing boat sinking because of high seas due to tropical storm Pabuk in the southern Thai province of Narathiwat. Picture: AFP

Tropical Storm Harriet is listed by the Thai Meteorological Department as the most deadly cyclone to hit Thailand, killing 935 people in October 1962.

Typhoon Gay hit in November 1989, the only typhoon to have ever hit Thailand. It made landfall in the south and killed 602 people.

Thai men push a fishing boat off the ocean to a safer location in Songkhla to prepare for the storm. Picture: AP

Tens of thousands of people have been evacuated in preparation for Pabuk. Picture: AP

Thailand claims for be “cyclone free” from January to March each year, even December is rare.

In the last 68 years no tropical cyclones have threatened the country at all in this period so Pabuk is considered a rarity.

Tens of thousands of tourists have reportedly fled popular resort islands ahead of Pabuk’s impact which is predicted to be about 7pm local time near Chumphon archipelago.

“We are still compiling the number of evacuees. I can say several thousand people for over 16 provinces,” Putthipong Punnakanta, a spokesman for the Thai government, told CNN.

Thai men walk close to a sandbank, which was built to protect properties of seaside communities in Songkhla. Picture: AP

“It is high season, there are many foreign tourists at popular destinations. We have informed them in advance since two days ago. I would say most of them have left islands and come to the mainland.”

A Russian tourist in Koh Samui died on Wednesday as he tried to rescue his daughter, who was struggling in strong surf.

Thailand’s Meteorological Department said the storm will lash southern Thailand’s east coast for the next few days, with the provinces Surat Thani and Nakhon Si Thammarat expected to be hardest hit.

Surat Thani is home to the popular tourist islands of Koh Samui, Koh Tao and Koh Phangan.

The Meteorological Department said the storm was moving west into the Gulf of Thailand with maximum winds of 65km/h and possible waves of 3-5m in the Gulf of Thailand, and 2-3m in the Andaman Sea.

The department warned of strong winds and storm surges on the gulf side.
