Jammu And Kashmir: Terrorist Killed In Ganderbal Encounter, Soldier Injured

New Delhi:

A terrorist was killed in an encounter that broke out on Tuesday in Gund area of Jammu and Kashmir’s Ganderbal district. Security forces launched a cordon-and-search operation in Kulan area of the central Kashmir district in the morning following inputs about the presence of militants. During the search, the hiding militants fired upon the security forces, who retaliated, according to an officer.

A militant was killed during the gunfight. An army soldier was also injured and rushed to a medical facility for treatment, the officer said.

The identity and group affiliation of the slain militant is yet to be ascertained. The operation is on and further details are awaited, the officer added.

The encounter comes just a day after two terrorists were killed in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir’s Bandipora district. The gunfight started when security forces launched a search operation in Lawdara village following specific information about the presence of some terrorists. Officials say, the hiding ultras opened fire on the security personnel who retaliated. Police claim to have recovered arms and ammunitions from the terrorists.

Last month, Abdul Hamid Lelhari, Al-Qaeda Kashmir unit chief and Zakir Musa's successor along with two other terrorists, were killed in an encounter with security forces in Anantnag district.

In June 2019, around two weeks after Zakir Musa was gunned down by security forces, al-Qaida affiliate Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind (AGH) had named Hamid Lelhari as its local commander. Lelhari was a native of Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

In July 2019, Lelhari had released a nearly six-minute-long video laying down principles for a proposed militant "shura". He had called for cooperation among various militant outfits operating in the state and a new representative militant council to take consensus decisions regarding military actions against India.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
