Hyundai Xcent successor to be called ‘Aura’

To share most of its exterior and interior design with the Grand i10 Nios, the Hyundai Aura compact sedan is the successor to the Xcent and is set to go on sale in India in the coming months.

A few months ago, we’d brought you first spy shots of Hyundai’s next-gen compact sedan being tested in India. Now, Hyundai has revealed that the successor to the Xcent will have a new name – the Hyundai Aura.

For now, Hyundai has refrained from sharing any more information, only stating the Aura name is inspired by the ‘vibrance of positivity’, and a reflection of the ‘state of being’ of the one driving it. But what we do know already and can tell you is Hyundai’s next-gen compact sedan will share most of its body panels with the new Grand i10 Nios. As is seen in the spy shots, Hyundai has worked on giving the sub-four-metre Aura a more harmonious silhouette than the Xcent.

In terms of design, the Aura will be in line with Hyundai’s sedan family, and could borrow some styling cues from the recently-launched Elantra facelift. The Aura’s face will feature Hyundai’s signature ‘cascading grille’ with a honeycomb mesh finish in place of the horizontal slats on the Grand i10 Nios. What the Aura will also have in common with the i10 Nios are the boomerang-shaped LED daytime running lamps flanking the grille. At the back, the number plate housing moves down from the boot lid to the rear bumper. Also present are LED strips below the wraparound LED tail-lights, and all in, the Hyundai Aura could be one of the most stylish compact sedans on sale.

What we also know is the Hyundai Aura will borrow most of its interior from the Grand i10 Nios, and elements such as the 8.0-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto will be carried over. Hyundai is also likely to offer wireless smartphone charging on higher-spec trims, and it’ll be interesting to see if it chooses to spec the Aura with its BlueLink connected car tech, which is missing on the Grand i10 Nios. However, the Hyundai Aura will likely have different colour options for the upholstery, along with a rear-seat armrest and adjustable headrests for rear seat passengers.

In terms of engine and gearbox options, the Hyundai Aura is expected to get BS6-compliant versions of the 1.2-litre Kappa petrol engine, as well as the U2 1.2-litre diesel motor, and in addition to a manual gearbox, will also come with an AMT option.

As is the case with the Grand i10 Nios and the previous-gen Grand i10, the current-gen Xcent is expected to continue alongside the Aura, and will continue to be available in lower trims for fleet operators.

When it is launched in the coming months, the Hyundai Aura will battle the Maruti Suzuki Dzire, Honda Amaze, Ford Aspire, Tata Tigor, and Renault’s upcoming LBA compact sedan.

What do you think of the Hyundai Aura name? What are the features you’d like to see on Hyundai’s new-gen compact sedan? Let us know in the comments.
