KBC 11: Amitabh Bachchan welcomes Infosys Foundation head Sudha Murty in Karamveer Special

Sudha Murty, Infosys Foundation chief shot for KBC 11 Karamveer Special on Monday, November 11. The writer and philanthropist was happy to be a part of the Karamveer Special and meet Amitabh Bachchan.

"I am movie buff so I am really happy that I got to meet a great actor like Amitabh Bachchan. Winning or not winning is not a big deal but our main motive is to reach out people about the work we do," said Sudha Murty.

"I have been working for the last 23 year for Infosys Foundation. We have worked for people affected by natural calamities like drought, flood, tsunami and earthquake. We also work for the mid-day meal. For children, we work a lot. For kids, we have made schools, hospitals, libraries and also arrange mid-day meals. We have made the largest kitchen in India near Hyderabad where we cook food for 1 lakh kids. Akshaypatra cooks the food but we have facilitated them," added Sudha Murty.

Amitabh Bachchan was not well for the past few days resumed his shoot on Monday and shot for three episodes at a go. He took to his blog and shared his experience of meeting Sudha Murty. He wrote,"Had the honour and privilege of being in the company of Sudha Narayan Murthy, the wife of Infosys Narayan Murthy and to hear and learn about her Foundation and the immense amount of work that she has done and is doing for the poor and underprivileged , in particular the succour and a fresh life she is giving to the ancient tradition of the Devdasis, and giving them a new beginning. What an amazing experience. What a lady... and what an immense learning for me and all that come under her care and influence." (sic)

Sudha Murty gifted a chadar made by the devadasis to Big B. "A chadar stitched by the women devdasis’ whom Sudha ji has given a new life to... away from the old tradition where they were relegated to discrimination... and a gift for me to ever remember and be in awe of her tremendous work."(sic)

Last week, actress Sakshi Tanwar was on KBC 11 along with social activist Shyam Sunder Paliwal. He has worked to change the mindset of the people of Piplantri village (Rajasthan) towards the girl child.

ALSO READ| KBC 11: This Rs 50 lakh question made Kharagpur crane operator quit. Can you answer?

ALSO READ| KBC 11 contestant praises Aishwarya's eyes. Amitabh Bachchan's reply wins the jackpot

ALSO READ | KBC 11 highlights: Mid-day meal cook Babita Tade wins Rs 1 crore

ALSO READ | KBC 11: Yuvraj Singh hails contestant Arti Kumari's fighting spirit against breast cancer
