Hyderabad train collision: Rescued loco pilot on ventilator, in critical condition

Hyderabad train collision: Rescued loco pilot on ventilator, in critical condition

The loco pilot, Chandrasekhar, has suffered fractured ribs, crush injuries and an injury to his kidney in Monday’s train accident.

news Train Collision

The condition of the loco pilot, L Chandrasekhar, who was injured in the train collision in Hyderabad on Tuesday, is critical, said doctors on Tuesday. Chandrasekhar was rescued from the mangled driver’s cabin of the Falaknuma - Lingampally MMTS (Multi-Modal Transport System) train after a rescue operation that lasted for eight hours.

Doctors say L Chandrasekhar has been put on ventilator and he has suffered crush injuries, has polytrauma (condition of a person who has been subjected to multiple traumatic injuries), sustained fractured ribs, besides injury to his kidney.

“He is in hemorrhagic shock for which we are giving him continuous renal replacement therapy. Blood flow in both his legs is low (lower limb ischemia neuro quora neurovascular bundle injury) - for this, we have given him vascular surgery. The treatment is going on, but his condition is critical,” said doctors of Care Hospital, Nampally.

The doctors also stated that Chandrasekhar also has internal bleeding. “His urine output has lowered. Probably due to suffocation and shock, he is in a state of acute tubular necrosis condition,” doctors said.

Chandrasekhar was rescued after an intense gruelling rescue operation carried out by the National Disaster Response Force and the railway staff which lasted for almost eight hours.

On Monday, the MMTS train driven by loco pilot Chandrasekhar collided with an oncoming Hundry Intercity Express (Kurnool-Secunderabad train) at around 10.30 am near Kacheguda railway station.

In the incident, 17 persons, including the loco pilot, suffered injuries. In addition to Chandrasekhar, another patient, identified as Shekar, is also reportedly critical. Both of them are availing treatment at Care Hospital.

According to the South Central Railway’s preliminary inquiry, the accident occurred due to the negligence of Chandrasekhar. They said that Chandrasekhar did not have the signal to move, but yet he proceeded, ignoring the signal.

A high-level inquiry has been ordered into the incident and Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) is probing the incident. The CRS will submit a detailed report with their findings by Wednesday.

Meanwhile, several trains have been cancelled in Kacheguda railway station owing to the restoration works underway. SCR authorities informed that they have restored the damaged railway tracks.

Watch: CCTV footage shows exact moment trains collided in Hyderabad's Kacheguda
