‘Kabadadaari’ to be made as a Tamil-Telugu bilingual

‘Kabadadaari’ to be made as a Tamil-Telugu bilingual

While Sibiraj plays the lead role in this Tamil remake of ‘Kavaludaari’, Sumanth has been roped in for the Telugu version.

Flix Kollywood

The Kannada film Kavaludaari which released earlier this year turned out to be a big hit, following which its remake rights were lapped up immediately. While it was reported earlier that Sibiraj would play the lead role in the Tamil version, titled Kabadadaari, Pradeep Krishnamoorthy is helming the project. Reports have now emerged that the film will be remade in Telugu with Sumanth in the lead. Both the Tamil and Telugu versions will be shot simultaneously.

Kabadadaari’s shooting is currently going on in Chennai. Nandita Swetha and Pooja Kumar have been signed up to play the female leads in this entertainer. Simon King is composing the tunes with Rasamathi wielding the camera. Kabadadaari is bankrolled under the banner Creative Entertainers and Distributors. The film also has Nasser, Sathyaraj, Pooja Kumar and Jayaprakash playing important roles. Plans are on to release the film in March next year.

It may be noted that the makers were initially planning to remake the film in Telugu separately with Dr Rajashekar in the lead. But later it was reported that the project had been shelved. Sources said that creative differences cropped up between the director and the actor following which they decided to part ways.

Written and directed by Hemanth M Rao, Kavaludaari’s star cast included Anant Nag, Rishi, Suman Ranganathan, Achyuth Kumar, Roshni Prakash, Siddharth Maadhyamika and Siri Ravikumar. While Anant Nag played the role of a retired police inspector, Rishi played a sub-inspector. Charan Raj is the music composer of this flick and Advaitha Gurumurthy is the cinematographer. Set in the 1970s, it is an investigative noir film that is about a couple who were involved in a crime, the repercussions of which are felt even today. Kannada star Puneeth Rajkumar bankrolled Kavaludaari under his banner PRK Productions.

Director Pradeep Krishnamoorthy’s last film release was the Tamil movie Sathya. It was produced by Maheshwari Sathyaraj under the banner Naathambal Film Factory. Featuring Sibiraj in the lead role, the film had Varalaxmi Sarathkumar and Remya Nambeesan playing the female leads.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
