Maharashtra woman held for fixing minor daughter's marriage for Rs 30,000; case registered

Such incidents highlight the grim reality of the country | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused was fixing her daughter's wedding with 20-year-old Santosh Yadav Acting on a tip-off, the local police raided Fulenagar area where the marriage was supposed to take place The accused offered her minor daughter to Yadav in return of Rs 30,000

Mumbai: Maharashtra Police arrested a woman and five others for fixing her nine-year-old daughter's wedding and demanding Rs 30,000 on Tuesday. The incident happened in the Majalgaon area of Aurangabad district.

The accused woman was identified as Ashamati Golap and she was fixing her daughter's wedding with 20-year-old Santosh Yadav. A police official told media outlets that Golap offered her minor daughter to Yadav in return of Rs 30,000. They had reportedly fixed the wedding on Sunday.

According to a report, acting on a tip-off, the local police raided Fulenagar area where the marriage was supposed to take place. The police apprehended six people from the wedding venue, who were identified as Urmila Dinkar Yadav, Ashamati Dilip Gholap, Santosh Barikrav Yadav, Mangalabai Rameshwar Shinde, Ajimoddin Gani Shaikh and Zafar Ismail Sayyed.

Police inspector Syed Suleman told media that a case under Prohibition of Child Marriage Act was registered on Monday. However, further probe in the matter is underway.

Meanwhile, in 2019, because of the timely interference by social activists and police officers, as many as 411 child marriages were prevented in Odisha. Reportedly, the prevalence of child marriages among girls in Odisha was reported to be 21.3%, against the national average of 26.8%, whereas for boys it is only 11% against the national average of 20.3%.

Such incidents highlight the grim reality of the country. In order to put an end to child marriages in the country, authorities need to form a strategic action plan and effectively enforce it across the country.
