Rajkot: Man found dead, wife, ‘paramour’ arrested

A team of Detection of Crime Branch (DCB) led by police inspector Hitesh Gadhvi arrested Mayur alias Maylo Chavadiya and Kiran (40), wife of Paresh alias Pavlo Gohel in connection with the alleged murder of Paresh. (Representational Image)

Three days after a man was found dead in Kothariya Solvant area of the city, the police arrested his wife and her “paramour” on Tuesday, claiming that the duo plotted the man’s murder as he was physically abusing the woman.

A team of Detection of Crime Branch (DCB) led by police inspector Hitesh Gadhvi arrested Mayur alias Maylo Chavadiya and Kiran (40), wife of Paresh alias Pavlo Gohel in connection with the alleged murder of Paresh.

Paresh, a resident of Machhonagar area of the city, was found dead in an open plot in Kothariya Solvant area in the wee hours of Saturday. The city police alleged that he was murdered by Chavadiya and that Paresh’s wife Kiran was also part of the murder conspiracy.

Jaydeepsinh Sarvaiya, Assistant Commissioner of Police (Crime) said that Kiran and Chavadiya came to know each other during a visit to Dwarka around two years ago and had exchanged contact numbers. The ACP said that Kiran had told Chavadiya that her husband used to beat her up and their children and would subject her to torture. She then asked Chavadiya to get rid of Paresh by murdering him. Having overcome by emotion, Chavadiya managed to trace Paresh in Rasulpara in Kothariya Solvant and set out to murder him on Saturday.

After befriending Paresh by introducing himself as belonging to same caste, Chavadiya took Paresh around on his motorcycle and eventually drove to a deserted section of the road connecting Kothariya Solvant with Kothariya village. Then, Chavadiya called Kiran, informing her that he had managed to lure her husband to a secluded place. In response, Kiran asked Chavadiya to murder her husband. Thereafter, Chavadiya pushed Paresh, dragged him away from the road and then strangled him with his hands,” Sarvaiya said.

Police said that 30-year-old Chavadiya is a businessman and resides in Prahlad Plot in Rajkot. The Aji Dam police registered a case of murder. The ACP further said that Chavadiya was booked in a case of physical assault last year.
