KEM hospital fire: Two-month-old baby's arm amputated after he suffered burn injuries

The distraught family has refused to pursue a case against the hospital authorities for the blaze in the ICU ward. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Doctors amputate 2-month-old baby's upper arm after he suffered burn injuries Baby suffered 22 per cent burns in the ICU ward of KEM Hospital Family of the baby has refused to file a case against hospital authorities

Mumbai: In a tragic development, the doctors at the Mumbai's KEM hospital had to amputate the upper arm of a two months old child, who had suffered burn injuries during a fire in the paediatric section of the hospital.

The doctors performed the surgery on Prince Rajbhar on Monday evening. A doctor said that amputation was the only option after the baby's distal nerves were cut off due to burns.

According to a report, the boy's father was informed about the surgery just an hour before the operation. Prince suffered around 22 per cent burn injuries when the ECG wires strapped to his body malfunctioned and caught fire on November 7.

The baby boy was brought to Mumbai from his native place in Varanasi for treatment for a congenital heart ailment.

"I did not have the heart to inform my wife about the fire in the hospital's ICU ward. When the fire broke out, we thought our baby will battle the injuries. But what will a boy do without a hand," the baby's father Pannelal said.

The child's father further said that he is worried about the boy's future. "I have a small farm in the village and now farming for our son is no longer an option," Pannelal added.

The distraught family has refused to pursue a case against the hospital authorities for the blaze in the ICU ward. The parents say they only want the hospital authorities to take care of the medical needs of the baby.

Without elaborating on the compensation, Dean of KEM hospital, Dr Hemant Deshmukh, said the hospital will provide every possible help to the baby. He said an inquiry has been ordered into the incident and the report will come by next week.

Dr Deshmukh also said that the doctors are now focusing on controlling chest infection in the baby. Terming the amputation an unfortunate event, the Dean said that they are finally waiting to conduct a heart surgery on the child.

Meanwhile, police have recorded the statements of the child's father, doctors, nurses and other staff.

According to Senior Inspector Vinod Kamble from Bhoiwada police station, the parents of the child have refused to file a case against the hospital. Police say they have asked Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) and fire department to file a report on the incident.


