Terrifying moment packed commuter trains crash headfirst into each other

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Horrifying CCTV has shown the moment two packed commuter trains crashed into each other —with 16 people taken to hospital.

Video captured the trains smashing into each other after one of the drivers allegedly "ignored railway signals", according to sources in Hyderabad, the Indian city where the travesty happened.

Carriages can be seen to buckle and derail as they violently collide at Kacheguda station at around 11.15am.

Terrified passengers could be seen jumping from the carriages and running to safety, while 16 were rushed to hospital after the crash.

A horrified witness said she saw blood as commuters were jolted forwards in the impact.

(Image: Twitter)

"Several passengers hit their heads and knees with the opposite seats resulting in bleeding," she said.

One person is understood to have been critically injured in the crash, and nine have already been discharged from Osmania General Hospital.

Initial investigations found the collision was caused by the "negligent" driver of one of the trains, a local source said.

South Central Railway officials said the driver of a train proceeded "without being given a signal".

The crash involved a train heading to Falaknuma and a passenger train called the Hundry Express.

The driver of one of the trains was trapped in his cabin for eight hours before he was rescued by the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF).

Senthil Kumar, NDRF assistant commandant, said: "We used electric cutters to cut open the cabin.

"If we had used gas cutters, the cabin would have probably caught fire as there were fiber and other inflammable material inside."

South Central Railway authorities said the Commission of Railway Safety, the body which investigates rail accidents, will conduct an inquiry.

Railway Minister Piyush Goyal tweeted: "Received the tragic news of the train accident in Hyderabad and immediate instructions have been given to the authorities for assistance and monitoring.

“Railway administration is extending assistance and have made arrangements for the treatment of the injured at the accident site."
