Ayodhya verdict: Mahasabha may file review over five acre land for mosque

The Hindu Mahasabha said they are studying the judgment to decide on filing a review petition against the order.

Days after the Supreme Court, deciding the title suit of Ramjanmabhoomi-Babri Masjid, ruled that the entire disputed land be handed over to a trust to be constituted for construction of a Ram temple and that Muslims be given five acres of either the acquired land near the site or at “a suitable prominent place in Ayodhya” for building a mosque, the Akhil Bharat Hindu Mahasabha (ABHM), one of the appellants in the apex court, has raised an objection over the direction to provide five-acre land to Sunni Waqf Board.

The Hindu Mahasabha said they are studying the judgment to decide on filing a review petition against the order.

“We have strong objections over the court direction to provide Sunni Waqf Board five acres of land near the site or a suitable prominent place in Ayodhya. If it has been proved that a temple was there, then why any land should be given to them. We are presently studying the Supreme Court judgment and will decide later on filing a review petition,” said advocate Shishir Chaturvedi, the present president of ABHM.

The ABHM appeal in the Supreme Court against the 2010 Allahabad High Court judgment was filed in 2011 by its then president Kamlesh Tiwari who was murdered at his residence in Lucknow last month.

Chaturvedi, who is now also a “pairokar” on behalf of Tiwari in the Supreme Court appeal, added that Tiwari got down from the ABHM president’s post over a year ago.

Ayodhya verdict: To review or not, Muslim Personal Law Board will discuss on Nov 17

“I had applied for a power of attorney on behalf of Kamlesh Tiwari in the Supreme Court in the title suit case,” said Chaturvedi.

The ABHM had formed a high-power committee and nominated Tiwari, the then president, to be an appellant in the title suit case on behalf of the outfit against the 2010 Allahabad High Court judgment.

Tiwari’s wife Kiran also told The Indian Express on Tuesday that they are not happy with the top court’s decision to give five acres to Muslims for building a mosque in Ayodhya. “We are happy with the Supreme Court judgment to form a trust to build a Ram temple at the disputed site because my husband fought for this throughout his life. We all are happy with the Supreme Court judgment, but have objection over its decision of giving five acres of land to the other (Muslim) side in Ayodhya. If the central or state government begins the process to give the land, we would start a protest against it,” said Kiran, who became the president of Hindu Samaj Party after her husband’s death. Tiwari had formed this party after resigning from the ABHM.

Read | Owaisi on Ayodhya verdict: Don’t need ‘khairat’, our fight was for Babri Masjid

Tiwari was murdered by two persons at his residence in Khurshed Bagh area of Lucknow on October 18. Kiran and her party worker Swaraj Singh were present in the house when the two men came to Tiwari’s residence on the pretext of meeting him and stabbed him 15 times, before shooting him on the left side of his face.

“Police showed photograph of both killers to me and Swaraj Singh and we have identified them,” said Kiran.

Police have arrested 12 accused, including the two killers, and all are lodged in Lucknow jail.

The motive behind the murder, according to the police, was to avenge Tiwari’s objectionable comments made against the Prophet in 2015.
