Major fire at Vadodara chemical firm, no injuries

A major fire was reported from the godown of National Chemical company in Navayard area of Vadodara on Tuesday morning. No injuries were reported. Officials said 18 fire tenders including nine foam-based fire tenders and 60 firefighters were deployed at the site to control the situation.

Fire department officials said they had first received a call regarding smoke billowing out of the three-storeyed building at 7:24 am. But by the time the fire fighting team reached the spot, the blaze had begun engulfing the building. It took more than an hour to control the fire, and the ventilation and cooling process was still underway in the afternoon. It took 15,000 litres of foam to douse the entire fire.

The chemical company supplies raw materials to pharmaceutical companies and had built its own laboratory-cum-godown on the ground floor of the building. While it’s unknown what exactly sparked the fire, fire officials claim that it was most likely a reaction between the chemicals. “There were more than 400 different types of chemicals were stacked up on the ground floor without proper segregation. Water reactive chemicals were stacked together with flammable materials that pose high risk for fire. No guidance in terms of keeping and segregating chemicals were followed by the company, Fire officer Om Jadeja said.

“There was also a wooden partition between two floors which caught fire. Our main goal was to douse the fire at the ground floor level itself and prevent it from reaching the other floors. After the fire was contained, the main challenge was to control the smoke and fumes,” Jadeja added. A fire tender is still in place, in case of a reignition due to solvent reactions.

Meanwhile, VMC councillor Ami Rawat alleged that the factory and its storage unit was not registered with the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB) and factory inspectorate. “Nobody knows what chemicals are stored in how much quantity, but it’s huge and poisonous. Immediately set up an inquiry and arrest owners, for health hazard and storing toxic chemicals illegally in a residential area,” she said in a brief letter addressed to the VMC Commissioner, GPCB regional officer, and Police Commissioner.

Regional officer of the GPCB however said that the factory had obtained the required licence from the VMC and that its pollution levels did not qualify it to come under the purview of the GPCB. “There are guidelines for hazardous chemicals but there were no such chemical at the godown as such,” GPCB regional officer RB Trivedi said. “We had reached the spot to assess the pollution levels as well, but the levels as measured do not qualify to be violating any norms of the pollution control board. It is a laboratory and the company supplies chemicals to pharmaceutical companies, hence they did not need a separate registration with us or the factory inspectorate,” he explained.
