81-year-old widow of Pakistan war veteran branded witch, tortured in Himachal Pradesh

The woman said the mob took revenge on her after she filed a complaint of vandalism against some people. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Pakistan war veteran's widow branded witch, tortured in Himachal Pradesh Woman was paraded in Samalah village of Mandi district The incident took place on November 6 and became public after video of the incident went viral

Chandigarh: In a shameful and shocking incident, an 81-year-old widow of a Pakistan war veteran was tortured after being branded as a witch in Mandi district of Himachal Pradesh. The incident took place on November 6 and became public after the video of the incident went viral.

The woman said the mob took revenge on her after she filed a complaint of vandalism against some people. The victim said a group of people attacked her house in Samalah village and burnt some items including the army uniform of her late husband on October 17.

According to a report, the woman said the mob attacked her house on the eve of Karva Chauth. After the vandalism, the woman had filed a police complaint which irked the attackers. The accused wanted the woman to take back the complaint.

As the victim refused, a group of people from the village took the woman out of her home, smeared her face with black polish and branded her a witch. The woman was also dragged to a local deity's chariot.

The mob also shot the video of the criminal act. In the video that went viral, the woman could be seen pulling by the youths with her dupatta. She was heard asking for water, but the accused did not pay heed to her.

The victim said her husband had fought during the 1971 India-Pakistan war and was seriously injured. He was discharged from the service early due to illness. The victim said her husband died at the young age of 26.

"My daughters were very young when their father passed away. I raised them on my own and got them married. My husband fought for the nation and sacrificed his life. But his countrymen repaid his sacrifice with this insult," the report quoted the woman as saying.

Fighting their tears, the two daughters of the victim said their mother did not inform them about both the incidents. The daughters demanded that the culprits who inflicted insults on their family should be hanged to death. The victim's daughters said they came to know about the incident after someone forwarded the viral video on their phones.

Meanwhile, police have arrested 24 accused, including nine women in connection with the incident. All the accused have been sent to 15-day judicial custody. Police have provided security to the woman, said Mandi Superintendent of Police (SP) Gurdev Chand Sharma.


