Students’ stir at JNU

harinder@tribunemail.com

The clash over fee hike between students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and the police in Delhi is symptomatic of the change confronting this venerated institution of learning. The protest began when Vice-President Venkaiah Naidu began his address and led to Union HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank getting stuck in the siege for six hours. The students alleged that hostel charges had been increased without consulting them, making the minister assure that their grievances would be looked into. The problems at JNU has two aspects. One is ideological, with the traditional view on the campus clashing with that of the university administration, seen as close to the present political dispensation. The other is academic. JNU has been dominated by humanities and social sciences, but there is a new emphasis on natural sciences, not surprising as the present VC is from IIT Delhi. Any coincidence then that the AICTE building was the venue for convocation?

The university might have increased the fee to weed out ‘non-serious’ students from hostels and instill discipline, but its intent has been clouded by controversies. Earlier, historian Romila Thapar was asked to review her position as professor emeritus. Students also questioned the online entrance exam system and compulsory attendance for MPhil and PhD courses. Teachers have seen the introduction of biometric system of attendance. In fact, most voted against the VC in a referendum last year, and opposed a Rs 500-crore loan to develop engineering and management schools, saying it would increase tuition fee. The sedition charge against Kanhaiya Kumar and the proposal to display Army tanks on the campus to ‘instill nationalism’ were links in the chain.

JNU has been a centre of excellence, fostering learning in an atmosphere of free spirit. Nobel laureate Abhijit Banerjee, among others, typifies its academic ideals. Britain, a small island-nation, with its Oxford, Cambridge, Eton and Harrow, churned out a class of men who took it forward. At JNU, too, while bringing in changes, care should be taken to retain its character, eminence and class.
