Delhi students in solidarity with JNU counterparts

Police attack on JNU students



Condemn police’s ‘brutal’ attack and intervention in ‘democratic’ protest by JNU students against fee hike and new hostel manual



NEW DELHI Scores of students from various institutions in the city on Tuesday protested against the “brutal” police attack on their JNU counterparts who demonstrated outside the AICTE office on Monday in the wake of the steep hike in their hostel fees.



The protesters raised slogans against the “commercialisation” of education and the police’s intervention in “democratic” protests of students and the fee hike. On Monday, thousands of Jawaharlal Nehru University students clashed with police as their protest over fee hike on the varsity’s convocation day escalated. Police lathi-charged the students and used water cannons to disperse them.



On Tuesday, the protesters demanded withdrawal of the draft hostel manual, which they claimed has provisions for fee hike, dress code and curfew timings.



Shreya Singh, secretary of All India Democratic Students’ Organisation (AIDSO), said the new hostel manual passed on October 28 will disrupt the financial life of around 50 per cent JNU students who belong to economically weaker sections and depend on a Rs 2,500 grant.



“The Delhi Police brutally attacked the protesting JNU students. Their intervention in the democratic protest was uncalled for,” she said.





JNU asks students to clear mess dues by Nov 14



#NEW DELHI The Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) has issued a notice asking the residents of hostels to pay their mess dues till November 14 failing which they will not be served food.



The notice, which was issued by the university’s office of the senior warden, came after the university proposed to raise hostel mess security deposit from Rs 5,500 to Rs 12,000. This had resulted in a massive backlash from the students.



“All residents are required to clear your outstanding mess dues till November 14 failing which food will be stopped on the same day without any further notice,” it stated. ANI


