Holt's Deadman's Hill, a callous reminder of a brutal crime, rededicated as John Taylor Memorial Park

HOLT – Delhi Township officials and residents took another step in righting a historic wrong Tuesday in dedicating the John Taylor Memorial Park.

The park, a popular winter sledding location, has been known, callously, as Deadman’s Hill since the 1940s, named after Taylor, Ingham County’s only known lynching victim in 1866. Taylor was born into slavery in Kentucky and freed by Union troops.

Now, instead of remembering Taylor for his death, he’ll be remembered for his full story, including his service as a Civil War soldier. The park’s dedication included the unveiling of a Michigan Historical Marker.

"We hope by renaming the park and unveiling the Michigan Historical Marker, we can erase the stigma of its former name and honor the contributions of soldiers like John Taylor," said Dale Copedge, president of the Lansing Branch NAACP.

Taylor was lynched after false rumors and newspaper accounts that he had murdered a girl and injured two others. He had been arrested for allegedly striking the women with an ax but they didn't die.

All three lived for many decades, said Jacob McCormick, president of the Holt-Delhi Historical Society. Taylor had gone to the farmhouse where he had worked seeking back wages when the alleged attack occurred.

After his arrest, a mob pulled him from the county jail in Mason and brutalized him.

McCormick called Taylor’s story “a hugely important piece of local history.”

Delia Fernandez, a member of the Michigan Historical Commission, said lynchings are usually associated with the South but they occurred elsewhere.

"A lynching in Michigan is not something we hear about in our history classes or textbooks. However, acknowledging what has happened is the first stop in healing form this historical trauma,” she said.

It was long thought that Taylor was murdered by a mob and buried at the site of the park, but records exist to place his murder in Mason. It’s not known where he was buried, though it’s not likely at the park, said McCormick, who led the research for the state marker.

Attending the ceremony was Bill Savage, a retired Holt history teacher. It was his memory that Deadman's Hill was connected to a lynching that stirred the name change.

Savage contacted me in the spring of 2018, just as the Equal Justice Initiative was set to open The National Memorial for Peace and Justice in Montgomery, Alabama. That memorial recalls the atrocities against black Americans, many in the South, as they were lynched by mobs.

Savage wanted to know if Taylor’s death would be included. But the project looked at later deaths, after Reconstruction. Still, the question triggered a soul searching in the township that led to the renaming of the park.

“I’m just happy it came together and the record got set straight,” Savage said.

Cynthia McCants, a Holt resident, said she will tell her two teens about it. It may take time for the name of Deadman’s Hill to fade.

“From now on, we have to tell the kids, ‘When you hear Deadman’s Hill, you correct it to John Taylor Park,’” she said.

It's a good start.

Related:

Holt's 'Deadman's Hill' holds memories of Ingham County's only lynching

Righting a 152-year-old wrong in Holt when former slave was lynched

Judy Putnam is a columnist with the Lansing State Journal. Contact her at (517) 267-1304 or at jputnam@lsj.com. Follow her on Twitter @judyputnam.

Putnam offers an independent voice about people and issues important to our community. Please support this work by subscribing.
