ZP to fund class V, VIII students for scholarship exams

The body’s move comes after a state dept directive



Responding to a directive issued a month ago by the two directors (primary and secondary) of the state education department, the Pune Zilla Parishad (ZP) has kicked off an initiative to enrol all the students in its schools to take the examinations for the scholarships offered by the government.



The state department had instructed each district officer to ensure many students appear for the exams, after it observed a drastic drop in enrolments . Prior to that students took the examination for seeking scholarship in Classes IV and VII and every year about 15-16 lakh students vied for the scholarship. This was changed to Classes V and VIII in 2017 and last year the numbers fell to little over 10 lakh.



In this bid to build numbers, the Pune Zilla Parishad is getting all the students studying in Classes V and VIII in its schools to appear for the exams. “Earlier it was understood that only the brighter students took the exam to avail the scholarship. But now all students in ZP schools will get a chance to sit for the exams to access the scholarship. We will pay the examination fee for them so they cannot avoid taking the test on the grounds of financial constraints,” informed Suresh Kurhade, education officer of the Zilla Parishad.



To further ensure that all students get a fair chance at netting the scholarship, the ZP officials have urged that the teachers put in equal effort to train every child taking the exams. “The teachers are dissuaded from focusing on only a handful of students who they see as sure-shot winners of the scholarships,” Kurhade added.



Squarely blaming the changed classes as the cause for depleted number of applicants, a senior officer with the state education department pointed out, “Prior to the change, both the classes — IV and VII — came under the primary school and the teachers having tracked the students from Class I were able to identify those with potential to get the scholarship. Once this was changed to Classes V and VIII, the latter grade of students were at the entry level of the secondary school and the teachers are new to them, making it difficult for them to spot the students with promise.”



The process of enrolment for the exams to be held in February 2020 began this month and district officials are under pressure to increase the numbers. In the first week of the enrolment drive about three lakh students have been recruited to take the exams.


