Faridabad police tracking gym trainer suspected of murdering doctor, 3 family members

Mourners gather outside the house where police found the four dead bodies | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Dr Mediratta ran a diagnostic centre from the same building as his residence Among those killed were his wife, daughter and son-in-law Kumar was the only one out of four suspects who did not show up when called in for questioning by the police

Faridabad: Four days have passed since the police found the bodies of a city-based doctor and three of his family members at his house in Sector 7A. At this time, six teams have been formed to nab gym trainer Mukesh Kumar who has been identified as the prime suspect in the case.

A note recovered from Kumar's home stated that he went to Dr Mediratta's house late on Friday night with the intention of robbing the family but ended up murdering everyone. "I will either commit suicide or surrender by Monday," Kumar had said in his note. His mother told investigators that Kumar left home on Saturday morning with three pairs of clothes in a bag and told her that he was going to Haridwar with friends.

Investigators zeroed in on Kumar after he turned out to be the only one out of four suspects who did not show up for questioning when summoned. He landed on the police radar after CCTV footage from the area captured his scooter outside the scene of the crime on Friday night. The note, along with blood-soaked clothes and a key chain was recovered from his residence during a police raid.

(Grief-stricken brother Pradeep Mediratta and kin at the house where his family members were found murdered) [Photo Credits: BCCL]

Alarmed by the sound of television running on high volume and the family dog barking constantly, neighbours informed police about suspicious activity in the Mendiratta household on the morning of October 9. A team of officers arrived at the spot and found the bodies of Dr Praveen Mendiratta (65), his wife Sudesh (61), daughter Priyanka (30) and son-in-law Saurabh (36). Dr Mediratta is survived by his son who lives and works in Gurugram. His son-in-law and daughter lived in Ghaziabad and arrived at their house in Faridabad's Sector 7A on Friday evening, hours before the murders.

While the doctor's body was found in the basement, the women were found murdered in two rooms and Saurabh lying in a pool of blood in one of the balconies. He was reportedly the only one who tried to escape. Dr Mendiratta ran a diagnostics centre in the same building as his residence. Police are still trying to establish a motive behind the murders since the house was not ransacking and nothing of value was missing as claimed by the prime suspect in the note he left behind.

A preliminary examination of the crime scene has led the police to believe that the lack of signs of a forced entry indicates that the culprit may have been someone known to the family. Investigators also suspect that the killer may have entered the house by citing a request for an emergency X-ray.
