Supreme Court upholds disqualification of 17 Karnataka MLAs but allows them to contest December 5 bypolls

Supreme Court verdict on disqualified Karnataka MLAs | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Wednesday upheld the disqualification of 17 Karnataka MLAs by the then Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar. Of the 17 MLAs, 14 belong to the Congress while three are from the Janata Dal-Secular.

"We are upholding the order of the Speaker," the Supreme Court said, ruling on the pleas of the 17 MLAs challenging their disqualification. "It is equally binding on the government and the Opposition," Justice NV Ramana said, reading out the verdict.

The court struck down the portion of the Speaker's order which said that the MLAs would be disqualified till the end of the tenure of the 15th Karnataka Assembly.

The Supreme Court further ruled that the MLAs will be able to contest the upcoming December 5 bypolls in the state. If elected in the bypolls, the disqualified MLAs will have the right to become ministers or hold public office, the court added.

The Supreme Court deprecated the manner in which the disqualified MLAs approached the highest court directly instead of first approaching the state high court. “We do not appreciate the manner in which the petitioners came to the court,” the bench said.

The court said its verdict in the matter is based on facts and circumstances of the particular case and does not interfere with the Speaker's right to disqualify MLAs. "Citizens are denied stable governments," the judge said, commenting on the growing trend of Speakers acting against the constitutional mandate.

The verdict was delivered by three-judge bench of Justices NV Ramana, Sanjiv Khanna and Krishna Murari – the bench had on October 25 reserved the order.

The 17 MLAs of then ruling Congress-JD(S) coalition government were disqualified by the Speaker ahead of a trust vote in July.

Post the trust vote which he lost, Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy quit paving the way for the BJP-led government to take charge under BS Yediyurappa.

The bypolls on December 5 are due in 15 of these 17 Assembly seats which had fallen vacant after the MLAs were disqualified.

The disqualified MLAs had knocked the door of the Supreme Court, pleading the court to issue a direction to the Election Commission to delay the bypolls for these 15 seats till the judgement in the matter.

Some of the MLAs had said in the apex court during the course of hearings that it was their "indefeasible right" to resign as members of the Assembly. They had challenged the order of the Speaker, calling it a case of "vengeance" and "mala fide".

Meanwhile, reacting to the Supreme Court judgement, disqualified MLA AH Vishwanath said: "I welcome the judgement of the Supreme Court. We should be happy because the apex court has awarded a judgement."

Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa also welcomed the verdict. "I welcome the decision of the Supreme Court which has given the verdict that all 17 MLAs can contest by-elections. Tomorrow onwards we are going to go to all Assembly constituencies. We are going to win all the 17 seats 101%," he said.

Responding to a question whether all 17 MLAs are joining the BJP, Yediyurappa said: "Just wait till the evening. I will discuss with them, I will discuss with the national leadership also. We will take an appropriate decision in the evening."

However, Deputy Chief Minister CN Ashwathnarayan said the disqualified MLAs will be joining the BJP on Thursday morning in Bengaluru.

Former CM and Congress leader Siddaramaiah also reacted: "I welcome the whole judgement, even that of the Supreme Court allowing them to contest by-elections. It is a lesson for the MLAs who wanted to join any other political party on whims and fancies or coercion by other parties."
