Delhi: Mother of two strangled to death during birthday celebration in Alipur hotel room

Delhi police have arrested the accused, identified as Vikki Mann (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Mann and the victim booked rooms at the hotel six-seven times in recent months Hotel staffers recalled that they checked in on Monday evening The accused has confessed to strangling her to death during the altercation, said police

New Delhi: A 21-year-old man was arrested by the Delhi Police in connection with the alleged murder of a 33-year-old girl who was found lying in a pool of blood inside a hotel room in the national capital. The matter came to light on Tuesday morning when the hotel staffers' attempts to procure a breakfast order from the room prompted no response by the guests.

According to inputs, the woman and the man regularly visited the OYO hotel room in outer Delhi's Alipur over the course of the last few months. She booked a room for Monday night which was presumably the eve of her birthday. They arrived at the hotel on the night of October 11 and were heard playing loud music after which the boy left abruptly and told hotel staffers that his friend was still in the room.

The next morning, housekeeping staff knocked on the door multiple times but no one answered. This is when the hotel manager used a master key to open the door and found the woman's body lying on the bed with a bloodied nose and mouth. Her body was taken to a government hospital where doctors declared her dead on arrival. The Delhi Police was alerted and a case was registered in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Their search for the culprit concluded with the arrest of one Vikki Mann.

Mann became friends with the victim about a year ago through social media, an official familiar with the investigation told media outlets. Aged 21, Mann has confessed to strangling the woman to death. Mann told the police that the victim and he were celebrating her birthday when she suddenly slapped him for no reason. This is when he slapped back and the woman responded by hurling a glass of alcohol towards him. The two got into a physical tussle during which Mann strangled her, said deputy commissioner of police (outer north) Gaurav Sharma.

The victim is reportedly married and a mother of two children. She lived with her family in Khera Kalan near Alipur. Her body has now been shifted to a government hospital mortuary for an autopsy that will help investigators specify a cause of death. It is also being reported that credentials shared by the couple with the hotel during their earlier visits helped police identify the victim and the culprit.

Her family was informed of her demise and chose to register a case of murder against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). In an official statement, a spokesperson from OYO addressed the incident by saying, "We are extremely saddened by the incident and offer our deepest condolences to the bereaved family. The safety and security of our guests are of paramount importance to us."
