India first: Amit Shah explains why PM Modi said no to RCEP

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Wednesday called India's decision to opt out of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) bold and praised Narendra Modi for maintaining "India first" stand.

New India reflects fresh self-confidence under the leadership of PM Modi, Shah opined in an article on The Economic Times.

Shah explained that PM Modi had already summed up in his own words why joining the RCEP would have not been in India's benefit.

PM Modi said, "Whenever I try and gauge India's interest in light of her joining RCEP, I do not get an answer in the affirmative; neither Gandhiji's policy of self-reliance nor my wisdom allows me to join RCEP."

PM MODI SAFEGUARDS FARMERS, MSMEs

Amit Shah said PM Modi's decision to back out of RCEP shows that he can "go to any extent" to safeguard the interest of farmers, small and medium enterprises, textile and many other industries.

"The PM didn't compromise on it since the agreement didn't seem to accommodate India's concerns on issues like trade losses and dumping. India should not be a party to any such international treaty that's one-sided and against the interests of our farmers and entrepreneurs," Shah wrote.

Attacking the previous Congress-led UPA government, Shah said the Sonia Gandhi-led party failed to safeguard India's interest in 2007 when it planned to engage with China for a regional trade agreement (RTA).

By saying no to RCEP, PM @narendramodi Modi has kept India first.https://t.co/63mMgjKfh0 Amit Shah (@AmitShah) November 13, 2019

"How this affected India's trade with China is borne out by the fact that during UPA's tenure, India's trade losses with China grew 23 times - from $1.9 billion in 2005 to $44.8 billion in 2014. This hit indigenous industries hard," Shah explained.

Blaming Congress for failing to deal with international treaties, he said Congress's lack of foresight had led to India agreeing to become a part of RCEP. He said if the move would have succeeded, it would have opened the "floodgates for Chinese goods" to enter India. Shah also highlighted that India did not share favourable terms of trade with other countries of the bloc.

"Congress had also compromised India's interests in the Asean free trade agreement (FTA). Even as countries like Indonesia and Vietnam decided to open only 50 per cent and 69 per cent of their market share for India, New Delhi decided to open 74 per cent of India's commodities for trade," Shah said.

He said decisions like these hurt India in terms of losses in trade with RCEP countries as deficit mounted from $7 billion in 2004 to $78 billion in 2014.

"In the context of current exchange rates, this translates into losses of Rs 5,46,000 crore (2014) from Rs 50,000 crore (2004)," he said.

RCEP WILL COME TO TERMS

Amit Shah further attacked the Congress for being eager to be a part of the RCEP without going through crucial details like the base rate.

"Congress was so eager to be a part of RCEP that it had conceded that the import duty as applicable on January 1, 2014, would be taken as the base rate, assuming the agreement would be operational by 2016," he wrote.

Shah said this could have caused havoc as the 2014 base rate would have led to "unhindered imports".

INDIA FIRST

The Union home minister again mentioned how PM Modi along with commerce minister Piyush Goyal put the interest of common Indians such as farmers, business owners and manufactures and requested amendments that were vital to India's interest.

Some of the demands were related to amendment in tariff differential, changes in base rate for customs duty, changes in the most favoured nation (MFN) rule and many more.

Shah went on to say that the Indian government has already begun evaluating ASEAN and the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with South Korea.

He said the government is also expanding trade ties with Japan, the US, EU countries and other developed nations - all of which will help India in becoming a $5 trillion economy by 2024-25.

Amit Shah said it would be really hard for RCEP members to keep India out of the equation for long and added that it will eventually agree to the terms fixed by the government.

He explained that the decision to not join the RCEP trade pact has protected the country's industries from any adverse effects and said, "For us, India remains first, and foremost."
