‘It's a big relief’: Karnataka disqualified MLAs on Supreme Court verdict

‘It's a big relief’: Karnataka disqualified MLAs on Supreme Court verdict

BJP state chief Nalin Kumar Kateel said the party will decide whether the disqualified MLAs can contest on a BJP ticket.

news Politics

It was a big relief for the 17 rebel legislators from Karnataka as the Supreme Court allowed them to contest the upcoming bye-polls. This even as the apex court upheld the Speaker’s order disqualifying them. The rebel leaders are now hoping to join the BJP and contest the bye-elections slated to be held on December 5. Their rebellion had not only ensured the JD(S)-Congress government to collapse in Karnataka but had also allowed the BJP to come to power.

Speaking to the media after the verdict, disqualified MLA from Hunsur and the then JD(S) state President Adagooru H Vishwanath said that the law has been upheld and he was confident that the Supreme Court would rule in favour of the rebel leaders as they “had not broken any laws”.

“It is a big relief. We did not break any laws. The Speaker, Congress and JD(S) had colluded to ensure that we (referring to the 17 rebel MLAs) cannot contest elections. Today, the Supreme Court has struck down the order and has allowed us to contest. People are watching the Supreme Court's judgment. The people will accept us once again when we contest elections. I have to discuss with my friends and workers and then decide whether I have to join BJP or not,” Vishwanath alleged.

One of the rebel leaders, R Shankar, known as Pendulum Shankar for his party-hopping ways, said that he has to consult with his lawyers and determine his next step. “Srimanth Patil (disqualified Congress MLA) and I did not tender our resignations. Ideally, both of us should not have been disqualified. I am happy that the court has allowed us to contest polls but I have to consult with my lawyers and see what has to be done next,” Pendulum Shankar said.

Soon after the judgment was announced, Nalin Kumar Kateel, the BJP Karnataka state President said that the party will decide whether or not the rebel leaders should be given tickets to contest polls as soon as possible.

"The Supreme Court has said that these leaders can contest elections. We respect the court's verdict. We have to decide whether these leaders can contest on a BJP ticket. I will speak with CM Yediyurappa and also discuss it with the BJP core committee, after which we will take a call on the issue," Nalin Kateel said.

Speaking to the media, Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa said, "We welcome the Supreme Court's verdict. All the disgruntled leaders are coming from New Delhi this evening. We will all sit and discuss together and we will announce the decision regarding inducting the rebels into the party this evening. I will consult with state and national leaders too," Yediyutrappa said. When asked about the BJP leader Sharath Bachche Gowda rebelling in Hoskote, Yediyurappa said that the party would only retain those who want to work for it. "Everyone is with us. We will retain only those who want to be with us and those who want to join us," he said.

Disqualified Congress MLA from KR Puram, Byrathi Basavaraj said that the rebels would also attend the BJP core committee meeting and decide whether they want to join the party. Corroborating Basavaraj’s statement, former MLA from Shivajinagar, Roshan Baig said, “The BJP has not been in touch with us. We are still in Delhi. We will go back and attend the core committee meeting and decide,” he said.

The Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee President Dinesh Gundu Rao took to Twitter to welcome the verdict. He alleged that the Supreme Court verdict "proved" the BJP's hand in the rebellion. “Supreme Court has upheld the disqualification of all the 17 MLA’s, who defected from Congress and JD(S). It also proves that the Karnataka BJP govt is an illegal govt. BJP had used unconstitutional means to fabricate a majority. It should be immediately dismissed. I welcome the Supreme Court verdict. The hand of BJP in toppling the coalition govt is now clear. The involvement of BS Yediyurappa and Amit Shah is now proved. If BJP has any morality left, they should not give tickets to these disqualified MLA’s to contest,” Dinesh Gundu Rao alleged.

Former Karnataka Chief Minister and Congress leader Siddaramaiah said, “The tenth schedule clearly states that a resignation can be accepted only if it is voluntary and genuine. They resigned with the intent to defect. The Supreme Court has upheld the Speaker’s order and this clearly proves that even the court does not believe that their resignations were not voluntary.”
