Hooch Tragedy: Death toll rises to 82 as Uttar Pradesh administration suspends 14 officials

A statewide probe has been launched to nab those responsible for the 'hooch tragedy' (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Lucknow: Two more people in Saharanpur district of Uttar Pradesh succumbed at a local hospital after consuming spurious liquor. As per the latest reports, a total of 82 people have fallen victim to this 'hooch tragedy' with over 40 being treated at a local hospital in Saharanpur for the same. The deaths have been reported from Saharanpur district in Uttar Pradesh and from neighbouring Haridwar district in Uttarakhand.

A preliminary police investigation had revealed that people from three to four villages on the border of Haridwar and Saharanpur got together earlier this week for a 'terahvi', which is the thirteenth day in the mourning cycle that follows the death of an individual as per Hindu culture. Director General (DG, law and order), Ashok Kumar had told media outlets yesterday that those affected consumed spurious liquor right after this ceremony. A report by Aaj Tak asserts that "18 of these deaths have been reported from Meerut, 36 from Saharanpur, 20 from Roorkee and 8 from Kushinagar". Out of these, post-mortems have been conducted for 46 of the deceased individuals. As many as 36 of them have died due to the consumption of spurious liquor as per the post-mortem reports, said a senior official.

Saharanpur District Magistrate Alok Pandey on deaths after consuming illicit liquor: There have been 46 postmortems so far out of which 36 deaths are clearly due to consumption of illicit liquor according to the doctors. Other cases are being ascertained. pic.twitter.com/ae9unsHlu6 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 9, 2019

Sources indicate that a majority of those affected are being treated either at AIIMS, Haridwar or the Meerut Medical College. Reports of the deaths began to emerge yesterday after those who consumed the spurious liquor returned to their villages. Since the maximum number of deaths have been reported from Saharanpur in Uttar Pradesh, the state government and police have swung into action leading to the suspension of a district excise officer, two excise inspectors, two excise constables along with three police sub-inspectors and six constables.

Banda: Police conducted raids at different locations in the district last night, in connection with sale of illicit liquor. ASP Banda Lal Bharat Kumar Pal says, "We've seized large quantity of country made&illicit liquor. It'll be done tomorrow too, 15 teams have been designated" pic.twitter.com/Ts9zlCMAk9 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 9, 2019

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Dinesh Kumar told news agency ANI that three teams of police personnel have been formed to probe the matter. He added that those responsible will not be spared and that local law enforcement is making all possible efforts to raise awareness in this regard. Latest developments indicate that the post-mortem of 11 people has been conducted as of yet. While 68 people have died in Uttar Pradesh, another 14 have been reported dead from neighbouring Haridwar district in Uttarakhand until now.

Saharanpur SSP: FIRs have been registered at 3 police stations. A crackdown was done by a joint team last night. At least 30 people were arrested, 25 FIRs registered. More than 400 litres illicit liquor was seized. The crackdown will continue until this is completely finished. pic.twitter.com/vjcddjBlq6 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 9, 2019

Must Read: WATCH - Celebrations turn into tragedy as elephant runs amok; 2 dead, 7 injured
