Amid Reports Of Amitabh Bachchan Taking A Break Due To Health Issues, The Megastar Pulls Off An 18-Hour Shift

Amitabh Bachchan who is currently shooting for Ayan Mukerji’s Brahmastra opposite Alia Bhatt, Ranbir Kapoor and Mouni Roy is not keeping well lately. Amid all his health rumours, he is still pulling off work like no a boss.

Advertisement

He recently missed Kolkata International Film Festival 2019 and Mamata Banerjee revealed that, “Amitabhji comes here every time. But he could not turn up. Since last night he is unwell. So doctors have restricted his movements. He is suffering a lot since last night.”

Despite health warnings by doctor, Amitabh is still working rigorously. He was hospitalised in October for a few days and had written a blog after that and mentioned that he had to shoot three episodes of the reality show in one day. “Yes, sir, I work. I work every day,” he wrote. “I worked yesterday, it lasted 18 hours. It gave me reassurance, love and blessings.”

Amitabh shared a health update on his Twitter account and wrote, “T 3544 – … the Fowler , the socks and the Premier League .. all day long .. in recouped state attempt ..”

T 3544 – … the Fowler , the socks and the Premier League .. all day long .. in recouped state attempt .. ? pic.twitter.com/uruPhDcLkT — Amitabh Bachchan (@SrBachchan) November 9, 2019

Advertisement

Amitabh mentioned earlier in his blog that doctors had warned him about cutting back on work, ‘or else’. “The tunnel at the NSSH .. indeed several tunnels and some more probing with the meter in hand that sonographs .. a few on the side injectables .. at various locations on this mine field of a body .. some venus strips punctured and the fluids dripped in .. a few hard core instructions to follow .. and back to the grind , despite the stethoscope dressed messengers from heaven giving strong warnings of work cut off .. or else.”

Amitabh recently hosted a Diwali party at Jalsa and Bollywood celebrities like Shah Rukh Khan, Karan Johar, Sidharth Malhotra and others attended it.

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
