Mumbai: 19-year-old woman refuses to have sex, strangulated to death

After investigating the case, the accused was arrested on Tuesday night. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused was 22-year-old neighbour of the victim After investigating the case, the accused was arrested on Tuesday night In a fit of rage, the accused strangulated the 19-year-old to death

Mumbai: A 19-year-old girl was killed by her 22-year-old neighbour for refusing to have sex with him in Mumbai's Dombivli area. The accused was identified as Deepak Bhange who resides in the same housing society.

The incident happened on Tuesday after the accused entered the woman's house saying that a squirrel had gone inside her house. Meanwhile, Bhange shut the door and began sexually harassing the girl. He claimed that he wanted to have sex with her while the woman resisted his attempts. In a fit of rage, the accused strangulated her to death. The incident came to light on Tuesday night when the victim's mother who works in Navi Mumbai came to her house and was shocked to see her daughter lying dead on the floor.

She lodged a murder complaint at the Dombivli police station. After investigating the case, the accused was arrested on Tuesday night. However, he has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway.

In another case of murder reported from Maharashtra's Nagpur area, five persons were arrested for killing a 33-year-old man in Shriram Nagar locality. The deceased was identified as Pankaj Narayan Kondalkar. Reportedly, the deceased and the accused used to drink liquor at the same outlet.

A news agency reported that Kondalkar had frequent quarrels with Vishal Tumde, one of the accused. He allegedly threatened to kill him on a few occasions. The accused were identified as Vishal and his friends 49-year-old Nitin Tule, 30-year-old Amol Kohale, 23-year-old Akash More and 25-year-old Amit Pal, all residents of Gargoti area of Narsala.

Reportedly, they hatched a plan to kill Kondalkar. Akash allegedly went to Kondalkar's house on Monday night, carrying a bottle of liquor. Later at his signal, Vishal, Nitin, Amol and Amit allegedly went in and attacked Kondalkar with sharp weapons.

The police soon arrested the five accused under section 302 of Indian Penal Code (murder) and further probe is on in the case.
