Fact Check: Food in Parliament dirt cheap? No, these are old rates

Amid the ongoing protest by Delhi’s Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students over hike in hostel fees, a food rate chart claiming to be of the Indian Parliament canteen is going viral on social media. The chart shows extremely low rates of food items if one compares them with the market price.

Netizens are sharing the chart, posted by journalist Prashant Kanojia, claiming that while food items in the Indian Parliament are available on profoundly low rates despite most MPs being crorepatis, JNU students are being criticised as freeloaders’.

On Monday, students of JNU clashed with police during a protest against steep hike in hostel charges. Fee for a single-seater room in JNU was increased from Rs 20 per month to Rs 600, while that for a double-seater room was revised to Rs 300 per month from Rs 10. Some new charges were also introduced.

On Wednesday, however, authorities of JNU announced partial rollback of the hike.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the viral rate chart of the Parliament canteen to be almost four years old. The prices were later revised, though they are comparatively cheaper than market rates.

The viral rate chart was tweeted by journalist Prashant Kanojia with the caption, Sansad ki canteen ka rate card. Aur muft khor chhatra hai? #jnuprotest (Rate card of Parliament canteen. And students are the freeloaders?)

Kanojia’s tweet received more than 3,000 likes and was retweeted over 1,500 times till the filing of this story.

The old rate chart of the Parliament canteen is also viral on Facebook.

AFWA probe

During investigation, we found that subsidised food rates as shown in the viral chart were revised in December 2015 after huge public outcry. Since January 1, 2016, food items in the Parliament canteen have been sold at higher prices.

Moreover, in an RTI reply to India Today journalist Ashok Upadhyay in 2018, the Lok Sabha Secretariat provided the present rate chart of each food item served in the Parliament canteen. The reply clearly shows the increased rates of food items.

Here is the comparison of old and new rates of a few food items served in the Parliament canteen.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim This is the rate chart of food items at the Indian Parliament canteen Conclusion The viral rate chart is almost four years old JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
