Rafale & Rahul to Sabarimala: Action-packed Thursday to cap busy Supreme Court week

An action-packed Thursday will cap a hectic week for the Supreme Court as Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi looks to clear all the cases in front of him before he retires from office. On Thursday, the Supreme Court will pronounce its verdict on review pleas challenging its Sabarimala judgment, pleas seeking a review of the court giving the Centre a clean chit in the Rafale deal, and a contempt plea filed against Congress MP Rahul Gandhi for his "chowkidar chor hai" remark.

CJI Ranjan Gogoi, who retires on November 17, is part of all these cases. Thursday's cases are among several other important cases that were before benches headed by CJI Gogoi. Verdicts in those other cases were pronounced in the last few days.

These included the Ayodhya case, in which the Supreme Court cleared the way for a temple at the disputed site while ordering the government to provide land for a mosque, the Karnataka MLAs' disqualification case, in which the court upheld the disqualifications but allowed the MLAs to contest the upcoming bypolls, and a case about judicial transparency in which the Supreme Court ruled that the office of the Chief Justice of India fell under the ambit of the Right to Information Act.

All eyes now are on Thursday as CJI Ranjan Gogoi looks to clear the remaining of the important cases in front of benches led by him.

SABARIMALA REVIEW

In September last year, a five-judge Constitution bench of the Supreme Court opened the doors of Kerala's Sabarimala Temple to women of all ages. Before the Supreme Court verdict, girls and women of menstruating age were barred entry to the temple as the deity there -- Ayyappa -- is believed to be celibate.

The days and weeks after the Supreme Court verdict saw sometimes violent protests. Female devotees as well as journalists were heckled and sometimes attacked near the Sabarimala Temple in Kerala. Two women did manage to enter the shrine and offer prayers -- but their homes were later attacked and they are believed to be in hiding.

On Thursday, the Supreme Court will pass its verdict on as many as 65 petitions that call for a rethink of its 2018 order. Of these petitions, 56 are review pleas.

The review and other pleas were heard by the same five-judge Constitution bench that last year held the centuries-old Hindu religious practice of barring women of menstruating age entry to the Sabarimala Temple illegal and unconstitutional.

The bench includes CJI Ranjan Gogoi and Justices RF Nariman, AM Khanwilkar, DY Chandrachud and Indu Malhotra. Last year, the bench had split 4:1 in its verdict allowing women of all ages entry to the Sabarimala Temple.

Justice Indu Malhotra had dissented, saying that issues with a deep religious connotation shouldn't be tinkered with and that it was not for the courts to determine which religious practices should be struck down -- except in issues of social evil such as Sati.

RAFALE ROW

In December last year, the Supreme Court had rejected pleas seeking a court-monitored probe into the controversial Rafale deal. Several pleas were later filed asking the Supreme Court to review its decision.

On Thursday, a Supreme Court bench of CJI Ranjan Gogoi and Justices SK Kaul and KM Joseph will deliver its verdict on the review pleas.

The Rafale deal pertains to a government-to-government agreement signed between India and France to purchase 36 Rafale fighter jets from the French aerospace giant Dassault. The deal was signed by PM Narendra Modi during his first term in office.

The deal became controversial over allegations that the Modi government had bypassed established norms of acquisition to sign the deal and that industrialist Anil Ambani received undue favours under the deal.

In December, the Supreme Court said it had not seen any evidence that could raise doubts over the government's decision-making process and so, it ruled to dismiss the pleas seeking a court-monitored probe into the deal.

'CHOWKIDAR CHOR HAI'

An offshoot of the larger Rafale controversy is a contempt plea against Congress MP Rahul Gandhi for a particular instance of him using the 'chowkidar chor hai' remark.

Generally, Gandhi used the remark several times in the run-up to the Lok Sabha election.

Rahul Gandhi's Congress party had made Rafale a high-profile election issue and his 'chowkidar chor hai' remark was used to attack PM Narendra Modi, who has in the past referred to himself as the country's "chowkidar" (watchman).

However, on April 10 Gandhi ended up attributing the remark to the Supreme Court while commenting on its order dismissing the Centre's objections over the admissibility of certain documents in support fo the Rafale review petitions.

BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi filed a contempt case against Rahul Gandhi for this.

During the hearings, Rahul Gandhi tendered an unconditional apology for wrongly attributing the 'chowkidar chor hai' remark to the court. Gandhi told the court he held it in the "highest esteem and respect" and any attributions to it were "entirely unintentional, non-wilful and inadvertent".

A three-judge bench of Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi and Justices SK Kaul and KM Joseph will deliver its verdict on the contempt plea on Thursday.

The Supreme Court will pronounce the verdict on the Sabarimala review petitions first, at 10:30 am. This will be followed by the Rafale review pleas and then the contempt plea against Rahul Gandhi.
