Prince Charles follows Meghan Markle's lead in surprise move to open his own fashion label

Prince Charles shows off cooking skills during visit to India

FREE now and never miss the top royal stories again SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up fornow and never miss the top royal stories again We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The collection for both men and women will see Prince Charles and the Yoox Net-a-Porter Group put out the line with all the profits to be donated to The Prince’s Foundation next year. Dubbed the Modern Artisan, the line is set to go on sale next summer on the company’s websites Net-a-Porter, Mr Porter, The Outnet and Yoox.com. The pieces in the collection will be the joint effort of 12 artisans - six Italian students from the Politecnico di Milano and six skilled artisans from Scotland.

All artisans included were found via an advert and intensively taught essential skills for four months at Dumfries House. where they were taught smocking, applique and needlework. The Duchess of Sussex launched her own fashion line earlier this year, in collaboration with John Lewis, Misha Nonoo, Marks & Spencer, and Jigsaw to create a selection of workwear essentials. For every item of the SmartSet capsule collection sold one piece was donated to the Smart Works charity, which aims to empower women entering the workforce by equipping them with a suitable wardrobe.

All the profits from the fashion line will go to The Prince's Foundation

Charles followed in the example of Meghan Markle

Meghan, who is the royal patron of Smart Works, revealed her inspiration for the campaign came after she visited the charity and saw that while the was an abundance of donated clothes, not many were suitable for wearing to an interview. The Duchess unveiled the collection in September which included a blazer, top, trousers, dress and handbag which were sold by John Lewis, Misha Nonoo, Marks & Spencer, and Jigsaw. Since its launch, more than 10,000 items have been purchased and now the Duchess has revealed 200 people have been dressed with donations from the SmartSet collection. The announcement of Prince Charles’ new fashion line comes as Prince Charles launched into his three-day charm offensive to India while Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall stayed at home. JUST IN: How Meghan Markle and Prince Harry’s ‘festive headache’ led to

Camilla has had to stay home due to ill-health

Charles in India on a diplomatic visit

Prince Charles is leading a charm offensive prior to Brexit to strengthen ties

Whilst there he will be meeting with Indian President Ram Nath Kovind to hold talks on climate change and sustainable markets after attending a discussion with Indian meteorological experts on Tuesday evening to learn about India's cyclone early warning systems. Charles’ tenth trip to the country and the first since 2017, whilst there he will spend his birthday alone as Camilla Duchess of Cornwall stayed in the UK due to ill-health. The couple will be reunited later in the week as Camilla is expected to meet the Prince of Wales in New Zealand for another short visit between November 17 and 23. The tour will mark Camilla and Charles’s third visit to New Zealand in recent years.

Prince Charles lays wreath at Cenotaph on Remembrance Day

The Duchess of Cornwall will continue to focus on women’s issues in the region, according to Clarence House. A statement from Clarence House read: “The Duchess will continue her focus on key themes including domestic violence and literacy.” Before leaving for India, Charles issued the Sikh community a heartfelt message to celebrate the 550th Birth anniversary of the religion's founder, Guru Nanak. The message read: “As I depart for India, on my tenth official visit, I did just want to convey my warmest best wishes to all of you in the Sikh Community in the United Kingdom, and across the Commonwealth, on the 550th Birth Anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev Ji.

This is Charles 10th trip to India

Trending
