Priest injured in suspected leopard attack near Khadakwasla reservoir

PUNE: A 66-year-old temple priest suffered serious injuries in a suspected leopard attack at Osade village located in the backwaters of Khadakwasla reservoir, about 35km from the city, on Wednesday night.The priest, Chaban Mahadev Jorkar (66), is undergoing treatment at a hospital in Khadakwasla. “The patient was brought to the hospital around 11am. There are injuries on his face and head, particularly upper lip, nose and jaws. We have performed suturing and his condition is stable now. We will keep him under observation for two to three days,” Pratap Thube of Thube Nursing Home said.He added that going by the injury, it looked as if he was attacked by a wild animal.The alleged incident occurred when Jorkar was sleeping outside his house near the temple. “Suddenly, his family members heard him shouting ‘bibtya bibtya’ (leopard, leopard). When they reached near the spot, they saw a leopard, which ranaway after seeing them,” Uddhav Lohakare, a villager, said.When contacted, IG Mulani, range forest officer, Velhe, said, “We have received an information about a wild animal attacking a person in Osade village. A team of forest department officials and employees inspected the spot and found pugmarks, which are not clear. This is a hilly area and we find wild animals like hyenas here. We will be able to confirm if the person was indeed attacked by a leopard after proper investigation.”He added that their team has laid a trap in the village to catch the animal. “Our men are also looking for a leopard in different areas of the city, including Khadakwasla, Uttamnagar, National Defence Academy (NDA) and Warje, where people have claimed of spotting the wild animal,” Mulani said. The residents of adjoining villages, including Nigade, Gorhe and Khadakwasla, said they had spotted a leopard roaming in the fields and along the Mutha river on Thursday morning. All these villages are located on the Mutha river banks, which are covered by trees.About seven persons, including an elderly woman, were injured in a leopard attack at an under-construction site at Keshavnagar in Mundhwa on Monday morning. The leopard had entered into the Vertical Infra Society. It was captured after three hours of the attack.
