BJP’s mosquito-protest mayhem stalls north Kolkata traffic for three hours

KOLKATA: A blockade of Central Avenue by BJP workers on Wednesday afternoon over KMC’s inaction in curbing the spread of dengue left commuters in the lurch. As BJP workers fought a pitched battle with cops, who used water cannon and batons to disperse protesters, traffic came to a standstill on arterial roads, like BB Ganguly Street, Ganesh Chandra Avenue, Prafulla Sarkar Street and Chandni Chowk, for about two to three hours.Normal movement of traffic on CR Avenue could only be restored after 5pm.The cops arrested 42 people, while actor Rimjhim Mitra was detained. Four police personnel had to be hospitalized and several protesters were spotted running for safety after the water canons were charged. Many of them were taken to a safe spot by officers.“Legal action will be taken against those who disrupted traffic movement, broke the law and clashed with the police. Water canons were used to disperse protesters, but no tear gas shells were used,” said an officer.The protest march organised by BJP Yuva Morcha — and led by senior leaders like state president Dilip Ghosh — started from the party’s Murlidhar Sen Lane office around 2pm and headed to the KMC headquarters on SN Banerjee Road. Several new faces that have recently joined the party, including actor Rimjhim Mitra, were spotted walking in the rally. The supporters were armed with placards, giant replicas of mosquitoes and mosquito nets. They were protesting against the civic body’s “inaction” in curbing the spread of dengue and alleged “fudging of figures” of those affected by the vectorborne disease.“The state has been deliberately trying to hush up the figures of those killed and affected by dengue. The government and the KMC are more keen on hiding the actual numbers rather than taking steps to tackle the menace. The government tried to act clever and it has only led to the spread of the disease. Even a KMC official has died from the disease. People are in panic,” Ghosh said.Mayor Firhad Hakim denied all allegations and stated that the civic body was well prepared to combat the dengue menace. He added that the BJP was “doing politics over dengue”.“We are doing our best to restrict the spread of dengue. Some cases have been reported because the weather conditions are conducive to the spread of the disease, but our health centres and testing centres are working round the clock to serve the people. BJP is trying to do politics over it, but they will not succeed because KMC is doing its best,” said Hakim.But it was commuters who bore the brunt of the agitation that brought central Kolkata to a standstill for the entire afternoon. A school bus ferrying students to north Kolkata was diverted through Bentinck Street and got stuck on New CIT road for over 45 minutes. “There are 22 children on the bus who stay in different areas in north Kolkata. We have been stuck for 45 minutes and don’t know for how long we will be here. The children are hungry. It will be very late by the time they reach home,” said the driver of the bus.
