Celebratory firing in Madhya Pradesh kills groom's father

The doctors at the hospital have said that Anjana also had an injury on his arm (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man died at a wedding in Ujjain after being hit by a bullet Vikram Singh Anjana died allegedly after a bullet hit him on his chest during his son's wedding The police have registered a case and further investigation is underway

Indore: Panic ensued at a wedding in Ujjain's Jagoti village after the groom's father died. The groom's father died after a bullet hit him during the pre-wedding celebratory firing. Identified as Vikram Singh Anjana, the man was rushed to a local hospital and was declared brought dead.

According to the villagers, the bullets were fired from a 12-bore rifle. Anjana died after a bullet hit him on his chest. Antar Singh Kanesh, additional superintendent of police (ASP) said that out of the three shots that were fired, one hit Anjana and he died. The eyewitnesses have said that Anjana was firing the shots. The police, however, are yet to confirm the same.

The doctors at the hospital have said that Anjana also had an injury on his arm. The cause of the injury will be ascertained after the post-mortem is conducted. Antar Singh Kanesh said that an X-ray will be conducted during the post-mortem to ascertain the cause of the injury.

The X-ray will also help in finding out the number of bullets that hit the deceased. A case has been registered in relation to the incident.

Two people arrested for celebratory firing at wedding

A similar incident came to light from the national capital in October this year where two people were arrested for participating in celebratory firing during the wedding of Shoaib Malik in Kardam Puri. The accused were identified as Salman and Shavaj Malik.

Allegedly, Salman and Shavaj used a country-made pistol to fire shots during Shoaib's wedding. The police reached the spot after they saw a video of the incident on social media. Following this, the accused were identified and arrested by the Jyoti Nagar police. Shoaib and Shavaj were booked under section 336 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and section 27 of the Arms Act.
