DeepVeer: Here Are The Best Travel Destinations Visited By The Couple

One of the most loved and adored couples in Bollywood, actors Deepika Padukone and Ranveer Singh, celebrate their first wedding anniversary on November 14, 2019. The couple, affectionately known as DeepVeer, are known for their adorable display of affection on their social media handles and for their exceptional individual talents. For their first wedding anniversary, DeepVeer travelled to the holy temple of Tirupati to seek divine blessings.

Read Deepveer: Deepika And Ranveer’s Diwali Photo Missing For This Reason?

Here are DeepVeer's best travel destinations

1. Lake Como, Italy

Lake Como is an upscale resort area in Northern Italy's Lombardy region. It is well-known for its dramatic scenery. This was the place Deepika and Ranveer got married at exactly a year back. Since then, the place has become a popular tourist destination amongst Indians.

2. Maldives

After their wedding, the couple jettisoned to the country of Maldives for their honeymoon. The Maldives is a small country located in the Indian Ocean. It is one of the most preferred holiday destinations of Bollywood celebrities. DeepVeer spent their honeymoon during the 2019 New Year and Deepika's birthday, which falls on January 5. The couple also had a stopover in Sri Lanka on their way to the Maldives.

Read DeepVeer Anniversary: Deepika Padukone And Ranveer Singh’s Mushy Social Media PDA

3. Kuala Lumpur

Kuala Lumpur is the capital of Malaysia, and amongst the various tourist attractions, it is well known for the Petronas Twin Towers. It is one of the most visited cities in the world. Last year, Deepika Padukone visited the city and posted the picture of the Petronas Twin Towers, which remains as the tallest twin towers in the world.

Read DeepVeer Anniversary: Is Deepika Wearing The Saree Given By Her In-laws For Her Wedding?

4. Switzerland

Switzerland is one of the most visited countries on Earth. In India, the country is hugely popular as a tourist destination, thanks to the huge amount of Bollywood films shot in various parts of Switzerland. Last year, Ranveer Singh was appointed as the brand ambassador for Switzerland Tourism.

Read Deepveer Wedding Anniversary: Throwback Pictures Of The Couple From Their Big Day

Get the latest entertainment news from India & around the world. Now follow your favourite television celebs and telly updates. Republic World is your one-stop destination for trending Bollywood news. Tune in today to stay updated with all the latest news and headlines from the world of entertainment.
