Hyundai Xcent successor named Hyundai Aura

The Hyundai Xcent successor has been caught getting tested on the Indian roads several times in the past. In the latest development, it's name is officially out - Hyundai Aura. As known already, it will be nothing but a three-box version of the Hyundai Grand i10 Nios. It should be launched in December this year.

Apart from the name, Hyundai has remained tight-lipped about the Aura. The company says that it gets its name from ‘vibrance of positivity’ and a reflection of the ‘state of being’ of the one sitting behind the wheel.

We have already decoded the outer looks of the Aura thanks to the numerous sightings of the vehicle. Speaking of which, it will share the front fascia with the Hyundai Grand i10 Nios. Both the cars will basically be differentiated at the front with a contrasting honeycomb pattern of its Cascading grille. It may even carry some design cues from the latest Hyundai Elantra facelift which was recently launched in India.

On the sides, the sedan will have a greenhouse very similar to that of the Grand i10 Nios. Also, it will sport more alluring machine-finished alloy wheels which will further set its design and looks apart. At the rear, it will feature a completely new boot lid. Furthermore, it will sport new edgier combination lamps comprising C-shaped LED tail lights.

On the inside, the Hyundai Aura will carry over most of its cabin elements from the Grand i10 Nios. Features such as 8.0-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto will certainly be carried over from its hatchback counterpart. Also, it is expected to offer wireless smartphone charging in the higher-spec trims. What remains to be seen is that if it is offered with BlueLink connected car tech or not. The interior colour scheme will be different from that of the Hyundai Grand i10 Nios.

Also Read: Next-gen 2020 Hyundai i20 spied up close in India

As for the mehcanicals, the the Hyundai Aura will be sold with a 81 PS 1.2L Kappa petrol engine and a 74 PS U2 1.2L diesel engine. Both the engines will be BS-VI compliant and will come mated to either a 5-speed manual or 5-speed automated manual transmission option. The Hyundai Aura will battle with the Maruti Dzire, Honda Amaze, Ford Aspire, Tata Tigor and Renault’s upcoming LBA sub-4 metre sedan.
