Noida Police arrest 2 for allegedly slaughtering calf; 2 absconding

Slaughtering of cow and its progeny is prohibited in the state under the Uttar Pradesh Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The Noida Police arrested two men after an exchange of gunfire Police during patrolling noticed some suspicious activity being carried out in an open ground The incident happened around 3.45 am when the two of the accused also got injured in retaliatory firing

Noida: The Noida Police arrested two men after an exchange of gunfire on Thursday when the accused and two of their partners were allegedly slaughtering a calf.

The police officials told a news agency that officials at the Sector 39 police station during patrolling noticed some suspicious activity being carried out in an open ground near a cemetery in Sector 38A. When the police team inquired about their presence along with a calf, the men opened fire at the officials and tried to escape.

The incident happened around 3.45 am when the two of the accused also got injured in retaliatory firing by the police. The Superintendent of Police, Noida, Vineet Jaiswal told media that two other accused managed to escape. The police officials told media that they recovered the carcass of the calf and was found strewn on the ground.

The police recovered a butcher's chopper from the spot and two illegal firearms were also seized from the injured duo. The injured accused were identified as 35-year-old Nazim and 21-year-old Farman. Both were admitted at the district hospital for treatment. The absconding accused were identified as Naushad and Kaamil.

Reportedly, the accused hailed from Amroha district in Uttar Pradesh but were staying in Delhi's Jamia Nagar area. They had picked up the calf straying on road, said police. However, an FIR in the matter has been registered under relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code against the accused. Meanwhile, the Noida Police has contacted their counterparts in Amroha and Delhi for details of their criminal history.

Slaughtering of cow and its progeny is prohibited in the state under the Uttar Pradesh Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955.
