Filmmaking is hard enough, I don't let public expectation affect my work says Abhishek Chaubey

Director Abhishek Chaubey gearing up for ' Sonchiraiya ' says he doesn't let his previous work and public expectations overshow his current work.

Abhishek interacted with media at a press conference for Sonchiraiya's cast and crew in Mumbai on Friday. He was accompanied by lead actors Bhumi Pednekar, Sushant Singh Rajput, Ranvir Shorey, Manjoh Bajpayee, Ashutosh Rana, and producer Ronnie Screwvala.

Chaubey has given audience films memorable films Udta Punjab, Ishqiya, Kaminey, when asked if public expectation for good release adds pressure to the next film he said, "Yes that kind of pressure must be there but I don't consciously think about it because filmmaking by itself is so tough that all your energy needs to be focused on getting is right.

I think I have a very good set of friends and colleagues around me who are honest enough to be critical of my work. So if I impress them then I basically get it right. what the world at large thinks of me, does play some sort of a role but I don't dwell on it too much."

When Bandit Queen release, the Censor board had opposed to the cuss words used in the film, and Sonchiraiya trailer shows the actors using such words too.

Asked if the makers had any issues on the same, Abhishek said, "We didn't have any problem with the CBFC. The film is already censored, has been cleared and will release with an Adult certificate. We didn't have any trouble we won't have to go to the court or anything. As compared to the last movie this was a very easy ride, thankfully."

Abhishek's previous release Udta Punjab had been issued many cuts by the censor board in 2016.

Talking about the film's title, 'Sonchiraiya' and its reference to the story, he added, "There are many reasons to the title. In the film specifically these really rough looking bandits and policemen, are stumbling into these Chambal ravines trying to fight with each other but what are they really looking for. And that, what they are really looking for is a Sonchiraiya."

Starring Sushant Singh Rajput, Bhumi Pednekar, Manoj Bajpayee, Ranvir Shorey, and Ashutosh Rana the film will release on 1st March 2019.
