Understated Mathematics legend Vashishta Narayan Singh dies at 74; was India's very own 'Beautiful Mind'

Mathematics legend Vashishta Narayan Singh will be cremated with full state honours. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Singh was born to a poverty-stricken family in the small village of Vasantpur in Bihar, in 1942 Singh graduated from UCB ‘summa cum laude’ (with highest honours) in 1969, before taking on an assignment with NASA in the United States In 1989, en-route to Ranchi for a scheduled check-up, Singh disappeared It was four years later, that he was spotted in the village of Doriganj wearing rags

One of India’s lesser-known academics, Vashishta Narayan Singh passed away in Patna on Thursday following a four-decade-long battle with schizophrenia. The mathematician, who is sometimes labelled Índia’s Einstein, had only recently been discharged from Patna Medical College but had to be rushed back due to his worsening condition. According to reports, several political leaders, including Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, visited Singh at the hospital.

Singh was born to a poverty-stricken family in the small village of Vasantpur in Bihar, in 1942. After completing his primary schooling, he enrolled at the Netarhat Residential School near Ranchi, widely regarded at the time as one of the leading government schools. It was here that Singh’s gift for mathematics was unearthed, as he went on to top both the matriculation exams in 1957 and the intermediate exams in 1961. He then went on to study Mathematics at an honours level at Patna Social College.

During a maths conference at the then Bihar College of Engineering (now National Institute of Technology) sometime in the 1960s, Singh met Professor John L. Kelley, a renowned mathematician from the University of California Berkeley. Kelley is said to have proposed five mathematics problems to Singh, who swiftly solved them all, and in multiple ways as well. Impressed with the young man, Kelley enrolled Singh into UCB’s Mathematics PhD program. Singh graduated from UCB ‘summa cum laude’ (with highest honours) in 1969, before taking on an assignment with NASA in the United States.

According to some reports, he was offered a full-time position at NASA but turned it down, choosing instead, to return to India. During his tenure as a professor, Singh taught at IIT-Kanpur, the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research – Mumbai as well as the Indian Statistical Institute – Kolkata.





However, it was when Singh was at the very peak of his powers, that he began exhibiting irrational behaviour and the first signs of a mental condition. He married in 1974 to the daughter of a government doctor but shaken by Singh’s condition, his wife soon left him. According to a statement from his family, the incident left a lasting impact on Singh, as he stopped eating, becoming more withdrawn. Yet, it was only after his bouts of violence that his family decided to admit him into the Kanke Mental Asylum (now Central Institute of Psychiatry). Here, Singh was diagnosed with schizophrenia but discharged from the institution in 1985.

After the death of his father, Singh stayed with his brother, Ayodhya Prasad in Pune, while Ayodhya worked in the Army. But in 1989, en-route to Ranchi for a scheduled check-up, Singh disappeared. It was only four whole years later, that he was spotted in the village of Doriganj wearing rags. Little has been revealed of how Singh survived during this period.

Since his return, he had stayed at his ancestral home, under the watchful eyes of his family. In 2013, Dr Basu Dev, a doctor at Ranchi's Central Institute of Psychiatry had stated that treating Singh’s condition was possible with proper medication and a healthy environment. Nitish Kumar has confirmed that Singh’s body will be cremated with full state honours.
