Sabarimala verdict: Woman can have darshan, but will they go?

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: By all indications, Thursday’s Supreme Court verdict allowing women of all ages a darshan will remain on paper. The LDF government was proactive in encouraging women to have darshan at the temple following the historic September 28, 2018 verdict. But with the final verdict now deferred to a larger SC bench, the state government’s interest has waned in what it sees as potentially a ‘lost cause’.It is learnt that there is an understanding in the top echelons of the government not to encourage young women to trek to Sabarimala this season. Though such a stand won’t be overtly announced for obvious reasons, the police will be given a clear directive to dissuade women pilgrims at entry points itself.The verdict has put the law and order machinery in Kerala on its toes as it comes just three days ahead of the main pilgrimage season. While several right wing organisations are threatening to stop any woman aged between 10 and 50 years from going to Lord Ayyappa’s shrine, the Kerala government appears determined to avoid a confrontation.The annual Mandala pilgrimage season lasting for two months - the longest period when the shrine is open – begins in the early hours of Sunday. In contrast, pilgrims can only visit the shrine during the first five days of a Malayalam calendar month in the remaining year.Police have already made elaborate arrangements in Sabarimala with 10,017 officials deployed for security at the hill shrine in five phases. Sabarimala and surrounding regions have been declared as special security zones and the government has warned that any attempt to create trouble will be dealt with sternly. However, unlike the pilgrimage season last year, prohibitory orders may not be issued this time as that would trouble genuine groups of pilgrims.Given the confrontation between pro- and anti-women groups in the last season after SC’s verdict last year, the government is understandably taking no chances. This time, in anticipation of more trouble, the government is already monitoring social media closely, which was where the conflict was kindled last time round. The government has activated its special 'Cyberdome' initiative and special cyber-police stations to combat dangerous rumour-mongering and hate speech.Last year, in just three months of confrontation post-September between those supporting the verdict and those opposing it, 2,280 cases were registered and 16,700 persons charged with disturbing law & order and rioting.Sabarimala and areas in its vicinity have been declared special security zones and the state government has warned that any bid to create trouble will be dealt with sternly.
