Both BJP, Cong. find themselves on shaky ground in Belagavi

Disqualified MLAs are contesting in the three seats in the border district

Both the ruling BJP and the Opposition Congress are in a tough spot in the three seats where disqualified MLAs are fighting bypolls in the border district of Belagavi.

In all of them, the BJP is up against disgruntled ticket contenders. While one leader has already switched to the Congress, the party is waiting to see if more unhappy BJP leaders will join it. Activities in the JD(S) camp are not obvious, but insiders say the party may look out for leaders who want to move away from both the major political parties.

Dy.CM’s domain

Athani, Deputy Chief Minister Laxman S. Savadi’s constituency, is arguably one of the most important among the 15 seats going to the polls. Mr. Savadi lost his Assembly election in 2018 and is also not a member of the Legislative Council. Disqualified MLA Mahesh Kumthalli is the BJP nominee for Athani. An unhappy Mr. Savadi is expected to be accommodated in the Upper House by asking one of the party’s MLCs to resign.

It is also possible that Mr. Savadi will continue as a non-legislator Minister for six months, till February, said a leader.

After losing Mr. Kumthalli, the Congress is not sure who to pick in Athani. There are claimants such as former MLA Shahajahan Dongargaon and businessman Gajanan Mangasuli.

Jarkiholi territory

Mr. Kumthalli is a long-time follower of former Minister Ramesh Jarkiholi, who is now set to fight his sixth poll from Gokak. Mr. Ramesh Jarkiholi, who has won five straight Assembly elections as a Congress representative, will now test his luck as a BJP nominee. He announced in Bengaluru on Thursday that the people of Gokak had voted for his personality and not his party affiliation.

Congress is facing some discontent among its cadre in Gokak. His younger brother Lakhan Jarkiholi is seen as the natural choice of the party in Gokak and has already begun an informal campaign.

He has fought off rumours that BJP leader Ashok Pujari, who is upset with his party, would join the Congress to claim the ticket. Mr. Pujari told The Hindu on Thursday he was undecided about his next political move. “I may not stay in the BJP. But I am not sure where I will go,” he said.

Roles reversed

At Kagwad, Raju Kage, three-time BJP MLA, will now fight on Congress ticket. He was eased out by the party to welcome Srimanthagouda Patil, who defeated Mr. Kage in 2018 from Kagwad on Congress ticket.

The Lingayat leader has considerable clout and his presence in the polls could affect Mr. Patil’s chances, BJP leaders say.
