Royal Navy foils Arabian Sea gang's doomed narcotic drugs plot

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the stories that matter to our community straight to your inbox with our Daily Newsletter

Hero drug-busters on-board Royal Navy Type 23 frigate HMS Montrose have lifted the lid on a cheeky Arabian Sea gang's doomed attempts at hiding £800,000 worth of highly potent Class A drugs.

The Gulf-based Plymouth vessel sprung into action to snare sea pirates carting a massive haul of heroin and crystal meth last month.

The naval crew - made up of sailors and marines - seized a whopping 170kg of narcotics from a fishing boat in a daring raid.

Now the boarding party who led the tense operation have revealed how the culprits staged a fake engine breakdown in their attempts to lie about their expensive drug pile - destined for UK shores.

Little did the gang know, the navy had interpreters on board who knew exactly what was going on.

Speaking to The News, Leading Engineering Technician Ricky Waterhouse, who was second in command on the day of the maritime siege, said: "They were very misleading. We had interpreters on board and they were saying to them; "oh, that's it now, you've caught us."

It didn't take long Montrose to find the drugs - stashed away in the steering gear.

(Image: Steve Parsons/PA Wire)

"They faked a breakdown hoping that we would leave that compartment," LET Ricky said.

"But we knew it was a bit iffy that while we were searching the steering gear compartment, there was a steering gear breakdown.

"So that's when we chose to go on with the search and found a large amount of narcotics."

Royal Navy HMS Montrose - and her 'mighty' Gulf mission

Mighty Montrose - the fifth of the frigate fleet - was acting in her role for the multinational Combined Task Force 150 - part of a wider Combined Maritime Forces group of 33 nations responsible for counter terrorism and counter narcotics out in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean.

How the Arabian Sea drug raid unfolded

The suspicious dhow Arabian lateen-rigged ship was first clocked by a chopper from French frigate FS Jean Bart.

The French, suspecting something was up, sent a boarding party to secure the vessel.

They were then relieved by Plymouth-based HMS Montrose who led a search of the boat.

The sailors spent hours combing every nook and cranny for a whiff of illegal drugs.

They initially came up trumps having found small stashes in bulkheads around a cooker.

But it wasn't until eagle-eyed sailors and marines began scouting the steering gear compartment did they uncover their biggest haul - two-thirds of the entire drugs pile.

LET Waterhouse, who normally by day maintain's HMS Montrose's gas turbine engines, said: "We laid it all out on our flight deck.

"We were surprised at how much they could hide in such a small place.

"It was scary really. They had a lot bigger spaces they could have hidden it in, but they chose not to."

Montrose is somewhat of a specialist when it comes to complex sea ops.

Back in July, she was forced to position herself between three Iranian vessels and British Heritage - a commercial vessel which the foreign pact was blocking as it attempted to travel through the Strait of Hormuz.

Montrose issued verbal warnings to the stubborn Iranian vessels, which then turned away.

As reported by Plymouth Live, the altercation came a day after Iran spoke out against Britain due to the interception of a supertanker believed to be breaching EU sanctions by carrying a shipment of crude oil to Syria.

Have you got a story to tell? Contact Plymouth Live Current Affairs reporter Miles O'Leary on 01752 293 066 or email miles.oleary@reachplc.com
