Gujjars miffed at Rajasthan government’s bid to include Muslim nomadic tribes in MBC category

Ashok Gehlot | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Ashok Gehlot government in Rajasthan has started a survey of Muslim nomadic castes Himmat Singh Gujjar has said that any reservation to Muslim castes is un-Islamic Vijay Bainsla says that government can give reservation to anyone but not from 5 per cent of MBC

Jaipur: Gujjars in Rajasthan are again on warpath with the Ashok Gehlot-led Congress government. This time, they are trying to save their 5 per cent reservation as Most Backward Classes (MBC). Ashok Gehlot government in Rajasthan has started a survey of Muslim nomadic castes with an intention to include them in MBC. However, the Gujjars have vehemently opposed this move.

Himmat Singh Gujjar has said that any reservation to Muslim castes is un-Islamic. Vijay Bainsla son of Col Kirori Singh Bainsla who led the Gujjar agitation movement says that government can give reservation to anyone but not from 5 per cent of MBC.

Meanwhile, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot is trying to hit two birds with one stone by winning the Muslim vote bank by giving them reservation while on the other hand, this move will put Deputy Chief Minister Sachin Pilot under pressure from his own Gujjar community.

The Muslim Mirasi, Manganiar, Langha, Dadhi, Nagarchi and Rana are some of the Muslim castes set to get a reservation.

Taking to his Twitter handle Vijay Bainsla said that the MBC society will not tolerate any tampering with MBC 5 per cent reservation.

“If the reservation is to be given to any other caste or society then the government should provide reservation from any other class/type. We won’t tolerate any tampering with MBC 5 per cent. Unity is strength,” he tweeted.

A massive Gujjar agitation in February led to a complete breakdown of transport services in Rajasthan after all the major railway tracks and highways in the state were blocked.

Facing intense pressure from all corners, the Rajasthan assembly passed a bill granting five per cent reservation in government colleges and jobs to five communities, including Gujjars, Gadia Lohars, Banjaras, Raikas and Rewaris. The bill was introduced on the sixth day of Gujjar agitation.

After the passage of the bill, Kirori Singh Bainsla, who led the Gujjar agitation for over a decade, welcomed the move saying that members of his community will examine the bill for its legality before celebrating the government’s decision.

In 2007, five people including a policeman were killed in violence that erupted during Gujjar agitation in Patoli village. In May 2008, police fired upon 16 agitators during the ‘rail roko’ stir in Peelupura. Later, twenty more protestors were killed in police firing at Sikandra in Dausa district.
