Rafale row: BJP takes on Rahul Gandhi, fact checks 10 claims made by him

The BJP kept posting claims made by Rahul Gandhi regarding the Rafale deal and performed a fact-check on them. (Photo: PTI)

A day after the Rafale row was kicked up once again, the Bharatiya Janata Party has now launched another attack on Congress chief Rahul Gandhi. The saffron party took to Twitter to list out '10 lies' that Rahul Gandhi had said about the Rafale deal, rebutting each point tweet by tweet.

"It's difficult to track all his lies, but we've tried to track major lies peddled by him on Rafale. A heads up before his today's quota," the BJP said before beginning their counter-offensive. The party kept posting claims made by Rahul Gandhi regarding the Rafale deal and performed a fact-check on them.

Each 'lie' was punctuated with documents, memes and videos in a bid to tackle #LiarRahul, a hashtag that the party used with each tweet. At the time of filing this report, the tag was trending on Twitter India.

Here are the 10 'lies' Rahul Gandhi has said according to the BJP:

1. Rahul Gandhi claimed making Reliance an offset partner was a tradeoff for Dassault to get the deal with India.

Lie No.1: #LiarRahul tried to twist some report in a French media house to say making Reliance an offsets partner was a tradeoff for Dassault to get the deal with India.



Fact: Both Supreme Court & Dassault CEO said Indian govt had nothing to do with choosing of offsets partners. pic.twitter.com/C4vlTEFUAT February 9, 2019

2. Rahul Gandhi Supreme Court found grave irregularities in the Rafale deal.

Lie No.2: #LiarRahul tried to create false impression that SC has found grave irregularities with the deal. Indulged in third grade level propaganda on a sub judice matter.



Fact: The Supreme Court dismissed the petitions filed by Congress proxies and held govt has done no wrong. pic.twitter.com/o70qaoyGEP BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

3. He claimed that a Ministry of Defence official was punished for submitting a dissent note on the deal.

Lie No.3: #LiarRahul claimed that a senior officer at MoD was punished’ by Modi govt for submitting a dissent note on Rafale deal.



Fact: #LiarRahul’s lies were shattered when the officer in question spoke to media and denied any kind of punishment’. https://t.co/6yJjuSr0tE BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

4. That according to Rahul Gandhi, former French president Fracois Hollande, Dassault was told to take on Reliance as an offset partner by the Indian government.

Lie No.4: #LiarRahul said ex-French President Hollande called PM Modi a thief and that Indian government had asked to include Reliance as offset partner.



Fact: Hollande denied all such allegations. The French government issued an official statement. https://t.co/Hq80DjUNHH pic.twitter.com/lUJlJEROu2 BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

5. Rahul Gandhi said current French President Emmanuel Macron personally told him there is no secrecy clause in the Rafale deal.

Lie No.5: #LiarRahul lied even to Parliament and said he personally confirmed from French President Mr. Macron that there is no non disclosure clause.



Fact: French govt issued statement refuting liar's claim & said agreement prohibits parties from sharing classified information. pic.twitter.com/HJaKHcBCN4 BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

6. That Rahul Gandhi has stated multiple prices for the Rafale jets in the UPA deal.

Lie No.6: #LiarRahul quotes multiple numbers at multiple places for supposed price of aircraft in UPA deal

Parliament, he said 520 crore

Karnataka, he said 526 crore

Rajasthan, he said 540 crore

Delhi, he said 700 crore



Analysis: He deserves Nobel for lying. pic.twitter.com/RoNpNjP0Db BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019



7. Rahul Gandhi alleged that defence procurement procedures had been flouted in the Rafale deal

Lie No.7: #LiarRahul said that the processes and procedures laid down for military acquisitions were flouted by PM Modi’s government.



Fact: Hon’ble SC in its judgment held: We are SATISFIED that there is no occasion to really doubt the process. pic.twitter.com/IESjpLaIfx February 9, 2019

8. Rahul Gandhi said UPA negotiated price of Rs 526/520/540 crore per aircraft, while NDA settled for Rs 1,600 crore.

Lie No.8: #LiarRahul said UPA negotiated price of Rs. 526/520/540 (one place, one price) crore per aircraft, while NDA settled for Rs.1,600 cr.



Analysis: Liar is comparing apples & oranges. Price negotiated by NDA is for a complete operational package; including Rafale aircraft. BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

9. That the deal signified crony capitalism.

Lie No.9: #LiarRahul said decision to procure 36 aircraft was made to benefit political cronies and has harmed Air Force.



Fact: Hon SC held the decision was made in interest of defense preparedness in face of our adversaries’ ramping up their capabilities and IAF is happy. pic.twitter.com/jhBjLitRJr BJP (@BJP4India) February 9, 2019

10. Rahul Gandhi shared a cropped image of a MoD note that indicated government had held "parallel negotiations" with the French.

Lie No.10: Yesterday, #LiarRahul found a partner in crime - The Hindu. Using a conveniently cropped photo, they tried to lie again.



Fact: We always knew Congressis were photoshoppers. But yesterday they learnt, the hard way, that Satyamev Jayate’ :) pic.twitter.com/ZxeR52e6Uf February 9, 2019



The BJP ended its onslaught saying, "We have tried to document most of Rahul Gandhi’s Rafale Lies. But given his superhuman capabilities of lying, we realized it's humanly impossible to document it all."

The attack came a day after a report in an English newspaper claimed that the Defence Ministry had raised strong objections to "parallel discussions" conducted by the PMO during the negotiations over the Rs 59,000 crore Rafale deal between India and France.

Stepping up his offensive on Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Rahul Gandhi demanded answers to questions raised in the media report, saying it is now crystal clear that the "watchman" is the "thief", an apparent reference to Modi’s alleged cronyism in the Rafale deal.

Rahul Gandhi's offensive drew a counter-attack from Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman who dismissed the report. Nirmala Sitharaman criticised the news report for raising issues "selectively" and ignoring the then defence minister Manohar Parrikar's reply to file notings of officials.

She said Manohar Parrikar had made a note asking officials to remain "calm" as everything was "alright".
