‘Will explore legal options for Kerala students held under UAPA charges’: Yechury

‘Will explore legal options for Kerala students held under UAPA charges’: Yechury

CPI(M) General Secretary Yechury said that the party will look into how it can fight for the students within the framework of law.

news Controversy

CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury who visited Kerala on Thursday said that the party would explore legal options to bring relief to Alan Suhaib and Thaha Fazal, the two students and party workers, who have been charged with Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) for allegedly distributing pro-Maoist posters.

He said that the party will look into how it can fight for the students within the framework of law.

Alan and Thaha, were arrested on November 1 by police for allegedly distributing pamphlets criticising the alleged encounter killing of Maoists in Palakkad.

Saying that the CPI(M) had opposed the Unlawful Activities(Prevention) Act (UAPA) amendment when it came up in Parliament, maintaining that it was a draconian law, he added that but at present, this is the law of the country. And further, we cannot oppose the law unless one wants to violate it, he said. He said that they are exploring the options within the framework of the law through which the students can be given relief, according to The Hindu report.

As per reports, he also said that the UAPA was an attack on the rights of the state government by the Centre. Yechury further stated that in the case of UAPA law, state governments have limited power because the Centre has already stated that they can go into any state and pick up anyone through the law. The state governments can only give appeal in such cases, he added, as per a Times of India report.

Alan Suhaib is the branch member of Kallai Thiruvannur branch of the party in Kozhikode, while Thaha Fazal is the DYFI unit secretary of Pantheerankavu.

The duo was sent to police custody by Kozhikode District Sessions Court and their custody period will end on Friday.

Read:

Opinion: UAPA against Kerala students is a shocking instance of thought policing

Kerala High Court orders inquiry by crime branch into killings of 2 suspected Maoists
