Simmering Anger Against ‘Rising’ Cattle Thefts: The Farmer Protests No One Cares About

Open regional newspapers and reports of such protests are a routine sight, especially in dairy-rich states such as Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. In most cases, protesters accuse the police of not registering FIRs, investigating the thefts or carrying out night patrols – in short, the police’s total failure to curb the menace. The farmers threaten to either stage a massive protest or take matters into their own hands.

Loss of cattle is a major setback for the farmers. A buffalo or a cow usually costs more than Rs 50,000 and is bought as an investment. When thieves strike, they wipe out the entire cattle sheds in a go. This correspondent reported a spate of such thefts from Rajasthan’s Alwar district earlier this year. Shafi Khan, a farmer from Mandla Kala village in Alwar’s Ramgarh tehsil, had five of his buffaloes taken away on a night – a loss he pegged at more than Rs 2.5 lakh.

His mother Laduli said the family is forced to buy milk for their grandchildren that they can barely afford. "Hum majdoor log hain [we are labour class]. It's hard on us. We don't have money to buy more cattle," she says.

Increasingly, it is not just the fear of getting economically crushed but also the fear of getting killed at the hands of the deadly cattle-smuggling mafia that is making farmers hit the streets. Frequently. Angrily.

A tally by Swarajya based on new reports in regional media shows that at least 22 people have been killed by cattle thieves since the beginning of 2018.

Also read Swarajya’s ground report on two such murders in Haryana: Killed For Owning Cattle: Meet The Victims Of Illegal Beef Industry.

In UP’s Jarcha, a farmer was shot dead in his cattle shed in April. Eye-witnesses said three thieves, who had entered the village in dead of the night on a motorcycle, tried to escape with cattle when 59-year-old Ratan Singh nabbed one of them. The thief’s accomplice fired shots at Singh. One of the bullets accidentally hit the thief. Both Singh and the thief died.

The incident had preceded a spate of cattle thefts in the village. Later, probe revealed that the murder was carried out by contract killers at the behest of one of Singh’s relatives. The relatives had decided to use cattle thefts as cover for the murder. They hoped that the police would fail to reach the killers as they were failing to catch the cattle thieves. Murder of one of the thieves, however, ruined the plan.
