Day after SC verdict, Bhushan, Shourie ask CBI to file FIR in Rafale case

A day after the Supreme Court gave the government a clean chit in the Rafale fighter jet deal, senior advocate Prashant Bhushan and former BJP leader Arun Shourie Friday said that CBI must register an FIR in the case.

Bhushan and Shourie held a press conference in this regard today. Their statement comes a day after the judgment of Justice K M Joseph, one of the three judges of the bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi that gave the verdict. In his separate but concurring judgment on Wednesday, Joseph said the CBI, the country’s premier probe agency, is expected to act “completely independent” of the government of the day and professionalism of “highest quality”, uncompromising independence and neutrality is expected of it.

On Thursday, the apex court had rejected pleas, including one by Bhushan, Shourie and former BJP leader Yashwant Sinha, for a review of its judgment that gave a clean chit to the Modi government on the purchase of 36 Rafale fighter jets from France. It also said there is no ground to order an FIR by the CBI or a roving inquiry into allegations of irregularities in the controversial deal.

At the press conference today, Bhushan said it is binding on the CBI to probe their complaint despite the ruling by the three-judge apex court bench. If the CBI fails to do so, it will again approach the Supreme Court, Bhushan told reporters at a press conference also addressed by Shourie. Sinha was not there. He also referred to the judgment of Justice Joseph to buttress his point.

“The CBI has to seek the permission of the government for probing the case and it has three months to do so,” Bhushan said. If the CBI does not do so, it has to cite reasons for not probing the case.

In October last year, Sinha, Shourie and Bhushan had moved the Supreme Court, seeking registration of an FIR into Rafale fighter jet deal. In its December 14, 2018 verdict, the top court had said that there was no occasion to doubt the decision-making process in the procurement of 36 Rafale fighter jets. In January, the three moved the apex court seeking review of its December 14 judgement.

-With PTI inputs
