Manoj Bajpayee Starrer 'Bhonsle' Wins Two Awards At The Asian Film Festival Barcelona

Manoj Bajpayee is simply one of the finest actors we have in the industry currently -- who has carved his own path without having any background in the film industry. The actor who made his debut on the digital platform recently with The Family Man is already basking in the praises for it. And now, he has another reason to be happy.

indiatvnews.com

Manoj Bajpayee starrer critically accalimed movie Bhonsle has bagged two prestigious awards at the Asian Film Festival Barcelona. Directed by Devashish Makhija, the movie has won Best Screenplay and Best Director awards at the festival.

wordpress.com

"To not only be recognised as an Asian film but to be awarded as one is an honour. The migrant issue explored in Bhonsle is one that is relevant to all of Asia if not the world. And it is a matter of hope and joy that this story of outsiders resonated this way. Any award a film like this wins is an award to the courageous team that collectively made the film," the filmmaker said on being fecilitated with the award.

india.com

For the unversed, Bhonsle revolves around a police constable played by Manoj Bajpayee, who tries to help in the struggles of migrants and their battles with the local politicians. The movie also addresses the concerns of various ethnic groups and highlights the issues that they face in order to survive in a city like Mumbai, away from their home.

news18.com

Bhonsle was premiered in the A Window on Asian Cinema section of the 2018 Busan International Film Festival. It was also screened at renowned film festivals including the MAMI Film Festival, 2018 Dharamshala Film Festival, the 2019 International Film Festival Rotterdam, the Bengaluru International Film Festival and the Singapore South Asian International film festival.

Twitter

On work front, Manoj Bajpayee will be seen in Hollywood movie Dhaka, which is directed by Sam Hargarve. The movie also stars Chris Hemsworth, Pankaj Tripathi and Randeep Hooda in pivotal roles. Dhaka was also shot in Mumbai. The release date of the movie hasn't been announced as of yet.
