The Power Bloc

The Indian political landscape in 2019 began with a promise. In the last month of the previous year, the country's main opposition party, the Congress, wrested control of three heartland states-Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh-from the BJP. Suddenly, the battle for the Lok Sabha looked wide open with a loose swathe of opp­osition parties sniffing a chance to dethrone the Narendra Modi-led BJP with some unimaginable alliances. Such dreams bit the dust in May, reaffirming that PM Modi remains the most powerful person in the country, backed by incredible public goodwill that no other politician has enjoyed in the post-Indira Gandhi era. When that popularity combines with the election management skills of his deputy Amit Shah and the deep-rooted organisational network of the RSS, the result is an almost-invincible political machinery entrenched at the Centre and in 13 states. This marauding machinery has not only decimated India's Grand Old Party-twice in five years-but has shaken the bases of several personality- or family-controlled regional parties. The SP, BSP, TMC, for instance. What's heartening is that legacy is a dead coin in this ruthless and all-encompassing political structure. The BJP's pattern of gambling with unconventional choices has given us several surprising power personalities, from Yogi Adityanath to Devendra Fadnavis and Nirmala Sitharaman to Prakash Javadekar. There's not a great deal of variety in the power list, however: everyone wears the same colour-saffron.



1. Narendra Modi

68, Prime Minister of India

The Supreme Leader



Because he is the undisputed leader of the country, far ahead of other politicians in terms of public perception; he is projected as a strong, assertive and quick-footed prime minister with an incorruptible image

Because he single-handedly shaped two consecutive and comprehensive wins in the Lok Sabha elections, turning it into a presidential-style contest; the candidates became immaterial, Modi became his party's symbol in 543 constituencies

Because his governance model-despite questions about growth and joblessness-has proved to be a potent model for elimination of poverty by drastically improving last-mile delivery of schemes through a marked commitment to good governance based on transparency and use of technology



Because he has put India on a pedestal globally with his skilful, bold and wise diplomacy

Famous word

'A PM cannot change the nation's destiny by merely changing the names of roads"

-Modi on the demand in some quarters to rechristen Delhi's roads named after Mughal emperors

2. Amit Shah

54, Union Minister for Home Affairs



The Giant Slayer

Photo: Bandeep Singh



Because by dint of his hard work, political instincts and talent for implementation, he has turned the BJP into an election-winning machine

Because he is the most-trusted lieutenant of the country's most-powerful personality-PM Narendra Modi. He is widely tipped to be Modi's successor because of his understanding of politics, his strong grip over the party's organisation and administrative abilities.

Because he is seen as a decisive Union home minister who has displayed a firm position on issues related to the country's security and sovereignty-from Jammu and Kashmir to the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam to empowering the National Investigation Agency (NIA) to tackling terror more effectively

The Patriot

A Guru Dutt movie buff in his formative years, he now prefers to watch films on nationalistic themes. One of his favourites is the 2015 Akshay Kumar-starrer Baby

3. Mohan Bhagwat

68, RSS Sarsanghchalak



The Opinion-Maker

Photo: Rajwant Rawat



Because he heads the RSS, the ideological home of the BJP's foot-soldiers, and has been playing a crucial role in framing the country's social and political discourses in recent times

Because the RSS was majorly instrumental in the BJP's emphatic Lok Sabha poll win

Because by appealing to Muslims to see the construction of a Ram temple in Ayodhya as an issue of national reconciliation, along with the efforts of the Modi government and spiritual leader Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, he has created an atmosphere where many Muslim leaders are more inclined to finding a resolution to the issue through a compromise



The Big Shift

Bhagwat publicly moved away from RSS icon M.S. Golwalkar's uncharitable views about Muslims and said that the RSS has to keep evolving through its experiences

4. Rajnath Singh

68, Union Minister of Defence



Old Guard

Photo: Chandradeep Kumar

Because the home minister from the Narendra Modi government's first term took over as defence minister in the second term, with no apparent loss of power. He continues to be a pivotal figure in the government-a remarkable feat given the dominance of the Modi-Amit Shah power combine

Because of the clout he has demonstrated by forcing the government to revise the composition of the cabinet committees within hours of releasing the list. Singh, who initially was in only two cabinet committees-home minister Amit Shah was in eight-was put in six committees in the revised list

Because as a three-term Lok Sabha MP, he understands the pulse of the people. He personally intervened to restore the rations of military officers in peace-time postings, a facility withdrawn by the Modi government during its previous term

Mind & Body

A fitness enthusiast, Singh begins his day with a half-hour session of push-ups and sit-ups. Relies on Vedic maths puzzles to maintain his mental agility

5. Nitin Gadkari

62, Union Minister for Road Transport & Highways; MSMEs

The Performer

Photo: Rachit Goswami



Because he is still seen as one of PM Modi's most efficient ministers, under whom, it is claimed, 40,000 km of highways have been constructed since 2014-against 28,000 km during the UPA-2 rule

Because he draws his influence from his proximity to the RSS top brass

Because he's perceived as a mensch with friends across parties and often plays ice-breaker between the Modi government and the opposition. Several non-BJP chief ministers have publicly acknowledged his cooperation in the completion of development projects



Scoop of Fun

Whenever home in Nagpur, he takes time out to treat his nephews and nieces to ice-cream

6. Nirmala Sitharaman

59, Union Minister of Finance & Corporate Affairs



The Sithayana

Photo: Raj K Raj/Getty Images



Because she's part of the big four club-the most powerful ministries in the country. And while her meteoric rise may have ruffled a few feathers within the BJP, her no-nonsense attitude has even the prime minister cheering for her. Her journey from party spokesperson to holding two crucial portfolios-she held the defence portfolio in Modi's first term-in such a short span of time has put her in the league of political legends

Because she has presented the economic vision of the second term of the Modi government with her maiden budget, which her team put together in less than five weeks. Amidst great expectations, she had the tough task of maintaining fiscal prudence while also rewarding Indians for overwhelmingly voting for the Modi government. So while big business was left high and dry, small traders and businesses were given tax breaks. She now holds the purse strings of the nation and will have to withstand pressure from within her own party and from state chief ministers, who are bound to haggle for more funds

Because she has the onerous task of steering the economy at a time when it is under intense pressure domestically and globally. With falling exports, falling investments and consumption and, to top it all, an increasingly protectionist world, she has the toughest task of all among Modi's ministers

Business Sense

Of all her portfolios, she has enjoyed her stint as commerce minister the most

7. Piyush Goyal

55, Union Minister of Railways; Commerce & Industry



The Revivalist

Photo: Chandradeep Kumar

Because he is handling two ministries that are critical to India's economic revival and employment generation

Because he is anchoring the biggest reforms at the railways, not only pushing for greater corporate-style accountability, but making space for private investment in it

Because as commerce minister, he will have to balance out trade ties with the US and China as well as navigate India's path at the WTO and the forthcoming Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement



Rejuvenation Mantra

Goyal never calls it a day without his mandatory hour of mediation

8. Yogi Adityanath

47, Chief Minister, Uttar Pradesh



Monk on a Mission

Photo: Bandeep Singh



Because he is the mascot of the BJP's Hindutva politics. He was one of the party's star Lok Sabha campaigners, attending the third highest number of rallies after the PM and the BJP president

Because he heads the politically most significant state; despite two key opposition parties, the SP and BSP, joining hands, Modi's leadership and Adityanath's political acumen won the BJP 62 out of 80 Lok Sabha seats in UP

Because of his controversial but seemingly popular crackdown against corr­uption, which has sent more than 100 UP officials into compulsory retirement, and the offensive against organised crime. Over 10,000 criminals have been arrested and 81 'hardcore criminals' shot dead in 'encounters' over the past two years



Bookworm

Reads for an hour every night before bed-he's fond of autobiographies

9. Devendra Fadnavis

49, Chief Minister, Maharashtra



Against All Odds

Because he cut political opponents to size and completed his term as Maharashtra CM, steering the BJP to victory in all major elections, except one Lok Sabha bypoll. He won a major political battle when the Bombay High Court approved his government's reservation for Marathas in education and government jobs

Because he has maintained Maharashtra's top rank in FDIs, with the state attracting 38 per cent of the inflows to India in 2018-19. The thrust on the MumbaiNagpur highway and metro lines in Mumbai, Nagpur and Pune has given a boost to infrastructure

Because he effectively tackled the Shiv Sena's fiery criticism and brought the ally back on board with the BJP

Fast Mover

Does not take more than three days to clear any file put up for his consideration

10. Prakash Javadekar

68, Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; I&B

The Trouble-Shooter

Photo: Vikram Sharma



Because given PM Modi's development push, his environment ministry will play a key role in balancing infrastructure projects with the demands of the green lobby

Because he is the BJP's go-to man for floor management in the Rajya Sabha, thanks to his rapport with opposition leaders; his friendly ties with YSRCP chief Jagan Mohan Reddy and TRS chief K. Chandrashekar Rao may prove crucial during the passage of contentious bills in the Upper House

Because he worked behind the scenes to salvage BJP-Shiv Sena ties and seal a pre-Lok Sabha poll tie-up. As the BJP in-charge for Rajasthan, he secured a clean sweep for the party in the Lok Sabha election



Movie Buff

Loves watching films with his family at theatres when he is Pune. Badlapur (2015) and Uri: The Surgical Strike (2019) are two of his favourites
