Tis Hazari clash: Finding lawyer to represent them no easy task for police

Advocates at Tis Hazari court in New Delhi on Wednesday . (EXPRESS PHOTO BY Amit Mehra)

For the last 10 days, a special team of Delhi Police had been tasked with looking for an advocate to represent the two suspended assistant sub-inspectors who got some respite from the High Court Friday.

The team approached several senior lawyers but in vain. Their search ended just two days ago, after a standing counsel for the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Rajdipa Behura, agreed to appear for them.

Behura has been an additional standing counsel for the Delhi Police in the past as well.

A source close to her said, “She was approached and she took it up as everyone deserves a fair hearing and can’t be denied their rights… whether other lawyers before her refused to take up the case is not known to her.”

The two assistant sub-inspectors (ASIs) were suspended after the High Court, on November 3, sought action against them and ordered a judicial enquiry.

On November 7, the special team was formed by Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik.

“A team of two additional DCPs and several inspectors was formed to look for an advocate to appear on their behalf,” a senior officer said.

The team members met several lawyers, including former public prosecutors of Delhi Police, but no one agreed to come on board since the lawyer fraternity is pitted against police over this incident.

“Some of them initially said yes, but backed out later due to pressure,” an officer said.

Sources said that two days ago, a senior officer recommended the name of Behura, daughter of a retired Supreme Court judge.

“She agreed and the team promptly handed over all files. On Thursday evening, a security plan was made for her and a team of crime branch was asked to escort her from her house in Noida to the court on Friday morning. She reached the High Court at around 9 am, where another team of New Delhi district was already stationed to escort her. After the hearing, a team accompanied her home. Security has been tightened outside her home as well as at her office in South Delhi,” the officer said.
