Delhi: ‘Family murder in Faridabad was robbery gone wrong’

According to police, Mediratta felt suspicious but took Mukesh to his basement where the clinic is.(Representational)

Police in Faridabad have concluded that a 29-year-old gym trainer allegedly killed a doctor and three members of his family in a robbery gone wrong. This, despite initial scepticism from investigators on his motive since he had carried a knife and change of clothes to the victims’ home.

On Friday, police said Mukesh had confessed to killing the family because he had run into a Rs 5 lakh debt due to online gambling.

The victim, doctor Praveen Mediratta (65), ran an X-ray diagnostic clinic from his house. According to police, Mukesh, who knew the family since he was their son’s gym trainer, went to the house around 10:30 pm thinking the doctor and his wife would be asleep.

Anil Kumar, ACP, Crime, said: “Mukesh knew their son works the night shift and the couple would be alone. But on the day of the incident, Mediratta’s daughter and son-in-law had come to visit him. When Mukesh went to the house, he saw Mediratta in the living room.” Police said the accused told the doctor he needed to get an X-ray done.

According to police, Mediratta felt suspicious but took Mukesh to his basement where the clinic is. As the doctor realised Mukesh hadn’t come for an X-ray, the accused stabbed him with a knife he was carrying, said police.

Police said he then went to the doctor’s bedroom, where his wife was sleeping. “He took a gold chain, earrings and ornaments worth Rs 2 lakh, but at one point the doctor’s wife woke up. He told us she started screaming for help, so he slit her throat. Hearing the woman, her daughter stepped out of her room and went to check on her. Mukesh slit her throat as well and then went inside her room and killed her husband,” said ACP Kumar.

Mukesh told police he carried the knife for safety inside his gym bag, where he always carried an extra pair of clothes.

“We weren’t sure the house had been robbed but he told us he had taken some jewellery,” an officer said.
