Popular '90s villain Mahesh Anand found dead at his Mumbai residence

Popular '90s villain Mahesh Anand was found dead at his home in Andheri’s Yaari road area on February 9, as per ANI. He was 57. The actor's body has been taken to Cooper Hospital for a post-mortem. Police has not ruled out suicide in the actor’s death, even though no note has been recovered from his home.

Yesteryear Bollywood Actor Mahesh Anand was found dead at his residence in Mumbai earlier today. The reason behind his death is yet to be ascertained; the body has been sent to Cooper Hospital for postmortem. — ANI (@ANI) February 9, 2019

Known for his many negative roles in Bollywood, Mahesh was last seen in Govinda's 'Rangeela Raja', which released on January 18, 2019. The film marked his comeback on the silver screen after 18 years. Ahead of its release, Mahesh in a Facebook post had written that he had only six minutes of screen time, but was excited to be back at work.

The actor reportedly lived alone in Versova, was known to have drinking problems and was estranged from his wife who lives in Moscow. When PeepingMoon.com contacted his ex-wife, she said that she was not aware of his death. “We are not in touch since 2002,” she said.

In an earlier interview to Cinestaan, he had revealed that he had been through financial difficulties during his time away from the industry. “Nobody signed me for 18 years. But god came in the form of a human being and offered me a small role. It’s a stepping stone back into the industry. Actually it has not hit me till now because for 18 years I have lived alone, with no work and no money,” he had said.

Mahesh said that when producer Pahlaj Nihalani called him to his office, he didn’t even have money for the autorickshaw fare. “I have worked with some big people, but nobody remembered me,” he had said.

The actor had worked with some big names in Bollywood including Dharmendra, Sunny Deol, Sanjay Dutt, Govinda, Amitabh Bachchan among others. He had appeared in films like Shahenshah (1988), Majboor (1989), Swarg (1990), Thanedaar (1990), Vishwatma (1992), Gumrah (1993), Khuddar (1994), Betaaj Badshah (1994), Vijeta (1996) and Kurukshetra (2000).
