After Cauvery, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu in a new river dispute

Karnataka

Cauvery river waters

Tamil Nadu

Supreme Court

Tribunal

.

.

Inter State River Water Disputes Tribunal

SC refuses to stay ongoing projects on Dakshina Pinakini inWhile the 122-year-old dispute over sharing of theis more or less settled, Karnataka andare bracing for another long legal battle over the Dakshina Pinakini (South Pennar, Pennaiyar) river. After Tamil Nadu approached theto prevent five ongoing water projects on the river in Karnataka, the apex court directed it to approach the Central Government to have an Inter-State River Waters DisputesThe Supreme Court in its judgement refused to stay the ongoing projects in Karnataka stating “it is prima facie evident that the project in question was undertaken after receiving all requisite sanctions and permissions. The issue was engaging the attention of the authorities for a while; the construction work began few years back; and as of now 75 per cent work is complete. Therefore, in our prima facie view, no case is made out for granting any interim relief.”Among the five projects in Karnataka objected to by Tamil Nadu includes the diversion of surplus waters of Varthur lake in Bengaluru to Narsapur tank in Kolar district. Tamil Nadu cited the 1892 Madras-Mysore Agreement according to which the latter had to take consent of the former to take up any new irrigation works on 15 inter-state rivers.Tamil Nadu’s biggest concern is the construction of the check dam on the Markandeya river, a tributary of Pennaiyar near Yargol village. The project would provide drinking water to Kolar, Bangarpet and Malur towns. TN contended that flow of water to it would be completely cut off and its farmers in Krishnagiri, Dharmapuri, Thiruvannamali, Villupuram and Cuddalore districts would be affected.Karnataka contended that all necessary permissions for the check dam were in place and 75 per cent of the work was already completed. It submitted that since 3/4th of the catchment area of the river was in Tamil Nadu, any construction upstream would not affect the river’s flow in TN. The water was being used for drinking purposes. The 1933 agreement between the predecessor states does not cover drinking water projects it was contended.The Supreme Court also wondered why Tamil Nadu had not approached the Central Government for the constitution of an Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal. It said that in some cases a State may not want a Tribunal to be constituted and try to avoid making a request for it. It said there could be a variety of reasons and it did not want to infer such an idea in the current situation.But it gave the liberty to TN to “make an appropriate application invoking the powers of the Central Government in terms of the provisions of the Act and seek constitution of an.”
