Milkman killed by 2 masked men, cops reveal illicit affair

Ludhiana: Khanna police on Friday arrested two persons for the murder of a small farmer-cum-milkman on Khanna-Malerkotla road late on Thursday evening. The accused were identified as Jagtar Singh and his nephew Attar Singh of Rasoolra, who were arrested from Rasoolra village on Friday. Police officials said the deceased Sandeep Singh Golu (26) of Rasoolra belonged to a small farming family, and would supply milk in households as well. They added that on Thursday evening, Sandeep had gone to Khanna to supply milk on a motorcycle, along with another person — Jagjit Singh.

Cops said after delivering milk in a house on Malerkotla Road, Golu was coming out, when two masked men on a motorcycle arrived there, and armed with a sharp-edged weapon, they stabbed Golu on the neck and injured him seriously. Police officials said the miscreants then continued checking whether Golu had died or was alive, before fleeing from the spot. They added that surprisingly, the miscreants did not attack Jagjit Singh.

Cops said Sandeep alais Golu was rushed to the civil hospital in Khanna where doctors declared him dead. They added that after the incident, police got information about the incident, after which Khanna DSP Rajan Parminder Singh and other police officers reached the spot. Khanna police later registered a case under sections 302 (murder) and 34 of the IPC against the accused on the statement of Sandeep’s father Lachan Singh.

The Khanna DSP said the accused had an enmity with Sandeep, as they had fought over some issue about five months ago. Cops said Sandeep was the only son of his parents (who also had two daughters), who got married four years ago, and had a daughter.

Police officials said during investigation, they found he had illicit relations with Jagtar’s wife, because of which the duo had fought before as well around two months ago, after which the panchayat had worked out a compromise between them. They added that since Jagtar nursed a feeling of revenge against Sandeep, he and his nephew had murdered him. Cops said the police cracked the murder using technical evidence, CCTV footage, and information from sources in the village.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
