Top 10 Weekly Current Affairs: 11 November to 16 November

National Education Day 2019: All you need to know

India observed the National Education Day on November 11, 2019 with an aim to commemorate the birth anniversary of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, who once served as the Education Minister of India. Azad established the University Grants Commission (UGC) post independence. The Commission came into existence on December 28, 1953.

President’s rule in Maharashtra: Know all about it

The entire state of Maharashtra came under the President’s rule on November 12, 2019 after the recommendation of Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyar. The move came after the BJP and Shiv Sena failed to form government in the state within the given time frame. Saffron party Shiv Sena had earlier approached the Supreme Court challenging the Governor’s rejection of its request of extra time to prove the majority.

Israel under attack: Explained

Israel came under heavy attack on November 12, 2019, after the death of the top Islamic Jihad leader, Bahaa Abu al-Ata by Israeli air raid. On the early morning of November 12, Islamic Jihad terrorists launched around 200 rockets from Gaza strip into Israeli cities and towns.

Chief Justice of India's office comes under RTI Act: Supreme Court

The Supreme Court recently ruled that the office of Chief Justice of India will now be covered under the Right to Information (RTI) Act of 2005, stating that the CJI Office is a public authority and its secrecy has to be maintained during the filing of RTI. The CJI office was kept out of the purview of RTI Act earlier.

Supreme Court refers Sabarimala review petitions to larger 7-judge bench

The Supreme Court's 5-judge bench recently referred the Sabarimala review petitions to a larger bench of 7 judges. The verdict was pronounced in 3:2 majority with 3 judges voting in favour of the ruling including the CJI Gogoi and Justices AM Khanwilkar and Indu Malhotra, while Justices DY Chandrachud and RF Nariman voted against referring review petitions to a larger bench.

Supreme Court dismisses Rafale review petitions

The Supreme Court dismissed the Rafale review petitions stating that the petitions lacked merit. The apex court declined an independent probe into corruption allegations in the Rafale deal of Union Government.

Chandrayaan-3: ISRO’s another bid to land on Moon

ISRO recently announced the launch of Chandrayaan-3, India's third mission to the moon. The Chandrayaan-3 mission would just include a lander and a rover. ISRO will begin the work on the programme by November 2020.

Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s President, to be the chief guest at Republic Day 2020

Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro would be attending the Republic Day 2020 celebrations in India as the Chief Guest. Prime Minister Narendra Modi extended the invitation to President Bolsonaro.

11th BRICS summit 2019: PM Modi held bilateral talks with Russia and China

The 11th BRICS Summit was attended by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Brazil. On the sidelines of the BRICS Summit 2019, PM Modi met world leaders including Chinese President Xi Jinping, Russian President Vladimir Putin and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro.
