This man’s cleanliness mission is music to errant residents’ ears

PMC’s garbage collector slips into versions of popular songs as he shames citizens who dump unsegregated garbage in public



This is not the first time Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) has used music to shame errant citizens. Only, this is the first time the job has fallen on a single pair of shoulders. Unlike the band-bajaa the civic body used to unleash on its property tax defaulters, it is now deploying the mellifluous voice of a Class IV worker engaged with the solid waste department to drive home the message of swachhata and call out the names of those who fail to fall in line.



Last week 57-year-old Mahadeo Jeevraj Jadhav, a resident of Yeolewadi, was moved into Kasba-Vishrambaugwada ward to tackle its escalating problem of residents and commercial establishments dumping unsegregated garbage in public places. In the six days that he has been around the place, civic officials claim the volume of such littering has reduced by a quarter.



Son of a dholaki (his father) and a keertankar (his mother), Jadhav, who hails from Solapur, breaks into songs with impromptu lyrics wherever he works, to keep up the cheer.



Now, his skill is being steered to deliver songs with social messages dripping in sarcasm, particularly on swachhata abhiyan. “I like to compose songs and sing them in simple language.



These days my theme is centered around ‘Swachh Pune Abhiyan’ as I’ve been assigned. I don’t put my words down on paper but work my lyrics as I go along. Music is a gift I inherited from my parents and I put it to use that is appreciated by people,” Jadhav told Mirror. These days he reaches his ward early in the morning and immediately hits the road, inspecting known sites for garbage dumping.



Once he finds them he starts his musical rendition, using a portable public address system so that his voice is carried to the ears it is meant for. He sings of the need to practice cleanliness and then lists out names of commercial establishments and housing societies suspected of defiling the area. Interestingly, people have started to heed him and actually stopped dumping their garbage, the way they did earlier. They’ve also taken to the man, choosing to take selfies with him instead.



Jadhav, who is part of PMC’s Shramik Kalapathak (art troupe) has become an ad hoc brand ambassador for the department he works with. “Jadhav composes songs with social messages. At times he borrows popular music from Hindi and Marathi films or from folk songs to weave his sardonic lyrics to berate the offenders. He is able to spread awareness in a positive manner, engaging with the people fruitfully. In this endeavour, he is our only option and we are proud to have him onboard; and given his dedication success is assured,” observed Dnyaneshwar Molak, who helms PMC’s solid waste management department.



The results are already showing, he added. “People are responding well to him and have reduced their garbage dumping. Even corporators are impressed by his work,” Molak pointed out. In full humility Jadhav demurred, “I try hard to convince people without hurting their sentiments. But there can be no compromise on hygiene so I do not hesitate to call out the offenders openly, exposing their act.” Jadhav’s work has earned him respect from his colleagues too. “Jadhav is the pride of our department. He is very dedicated to his duty, which helps us to keep the ward clean. We are convinced his efforts will pay off in improving our city’s Swachh ranking,” vouched Vaijinath Gaikwad, a co-worker.




