Goa: MiG-29K fighter aircraft crashes shortly after takeoff; pilots eject safely

Representational Image of MiG 29K

Key Highlights The aircraft involved in the crash was a trainer version of the fighter jet Both the pilots have managed to eject safely from the aircraft India had ordered 45 MiG-29K aircraft along with equipment worth USD 2.2 billion in 2004 and 2010 from Russia

Panaji: A MiG-29K fighter aircraft crashed in Goa soon after it took off for a training mission. Both the pilots have managed to eject safely. The aircraft involved in the crash was a trainer version of the fighter jet.

Navy Spokesperson Commander Vivek Madhwal said that the trainer aircraft suffered an engine fire and pilots Captain M Sheokhand and Lt Commander Deepak Yadav ejected safely. The right engine of the fighter jet caught fire when it hit the flock of birds. The aircraft crashed in open area and no casualties were reported.

MiG-29K is the primary fighter of the Indian Naval Air Arm of the Indian Navy. It currently operates from the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya, formerly known as Admiral Gorshkov.

According to a 2016 report by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) the fighter jet faces multiple operational deficiencies like defects in engines, airframes and fly-by-wire systems. The report further observed that the "aircraft MiG-29K is being technically accepted despite having discrepancies and anomalies."

Spoke to the pilots, Capt Mrigank and Deepak Yadav of the MiG-29K which crashed after the take-off from Goa today.



It is a matter of great satisfaction that they managed to eject in time and both of them are safe. I pray for their good health and well-being. — Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) November 16, 2019

India had ordered 45 MiG-29K aircraft along with equipment worth USD 2.2 billion in 2004 and 2010 from Russia as a replacement for the ageing Sea Harriers.

The auditor further said that ever since its induction in 2010, as many as 40 engines had to be withdrawn because of "design-related defects or deficiencies". The CAG also questioned the overall reliability of its electronic flight control system.

The other matter of concern raised by the CAG in its report was the "serviceability" of MiG 29K.

“The MiG29K, which is a carrier-borne multi-role aircraft and the mainstay of integral fleet air defence, is riddled with problems relating to the airframe, RD MK-33 engine and fly-by-wire 4 system. Aircraft were being technically accepted despite having discrepancies/anomalies. Serviceability of MiG29K was low, ranging from 15.93 per cent to 37.63 per cent and that of MiG29KUB ranging from 21.30 per cent to 47.14 per cent,” the report read.

The MiG-29K aircraft are also expected to serve on the indigenously built INS Vikrant, which is currently under construction.

In June 2011, a MiG-29KUB crashed while undergoing testing in Russia leading to the death of its two pilots. The test was being carried out prior to its delivery to India.

Last year in January, a MiG-29K aircraft overshot the runway and caught fire during takeoff at INS Hansa naval airbase in Goa, India. The pilot of the aircraft, which was engulfed in flames, was safe.
