Wikipedia's Co-Founder Is Offering A Facebook Alternative, Social Media That's More Reliable

Two years ago, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales launched Wikitribune. It was meant to be an online publication with volunteer journalists, to combat fake news.

That never really worked out, so they're now instead trying to tackle the problem from the social media side.

Images courtesy: Reuters

It seems if you can't clean up fake news from social media, just make new social media.

The Wikipedia foundation is now relaunching Wikitribune as WT:Social. It's essentially a social networking site focused on news sharing. What it seems like is that the vision is something like Facebook and Twitter, but without unverified news links from every corner of the Internet.

Instead of advertising though, WT:Social will apparently be funded by donations. "The business model of social media companies, of pure advertising, is problematic," Wales told Financial Times. "It turns out the huge winner is low-quality content."

Additionally, the group says it won't use algorithms like Facebook and Twitter to bump up posts with the most comments or likes. Rather, newest links will appear first, though they are considering adding an "upvote" button in future.

"We will foster an environment where bad actors are removed because it is right, not because it suddenly affects our bottom-line." Now that sounds good in theory, but in practice this is exactly the kind of closed-off approach that leads to festering pools of hate. Maybe not always, but sometimes. Have you heard of the social network 'Gab'? Yeah...

Either way, WT:Social will be free to join eventually. Right now though, it involves signing up for a wait list. If you want to jump that queue, you can go ahead and "donate", which just sounds like a paid membership Mark Zuckerberg has been pondering for Facebook, but with extra steps.

Still, in just a month it already has 50,000 users, but no one can say for sure where exactly this train is going.
