Facetime gangster 'The Turk' feared to be the new Kirk Bradley

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest crime reports and stories from Liverpool Echo straight to your inbox

There are claims that a well known Liverpool criminal who was recently jailed for a firearms offence has a growing profile and influence on Merseyside.

Toxteth man Ciaran McHale was linked by police to hollow point bullets found in a Smith and Wesson handgun during a massive operation against two organised crime groups in south Liverpool.

Liverpool Crown court heard that McHale was a close associate of Anthony Tierney, who was a leading member of a Dingle based gang behind gun running and explosives.

The gang, headed up by Christopher Wallace, turned a back street garage into an armoury. Police found pipe bombs at the scene which had the potential to cause 'mass casualties.'

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

The court also heard how McHale, nicknamed The Turk, had a smart phone while on remand at Strangeways jail.

Ian Unsworth QC said that McHale arrived at the jail with a bottle of chilli sauce. Guards were suspicious and when they scanned the sauce found a smart phone had been secreted inside it.

The phone was handed over to police who found that McHale had used it to access a Facetime account and communicate with his partner.

The account was in an assumed identity and the phone was used the night before his re-trial was set to begin.

Barrister Carmel Wilde, defending McHale, said that her client admitted using the phone but that he did not set up the Facetime account. McHale's partner was arrested by police in relation to the Facetime activity. She was later released and remains under investigation.

The ECHO understand that McHale is now spoken of as a criminal who is able to exert influence across Merseyside. Legal reasons prevent the ECHO from providing more information about how McHale allegedly used that influence during his trial.

McHale has been compared by some law enforcement officials to Huyton criminal Kirk Bradley, who is serving out a life sentence for organising a gang war on Merseyside.

Detectives welcomed the prison sentence handed down to McHale.

A Liverpool criminal who has met McHale in prison told the ECHO he was a criminal with a sense of independence. He said: "Ciaran does not need lots of people around him all the time. He is happy on his own.

"He has upset a lot of young drug dealers in south Liverpool over recent years and that did cause issues. Ciaran faced what came at him and gave a bit back too.

"But that put him on the radar with the police. That is how it works in Liverpool. Once you start to cause issues in the city the police will look at you. And that normally leads to a prison sentence."

Judge Denis Watson said that McHale supplied the rounds of ammunition for the Smith and Wesson. Judge Watson pointed out that the ammunition was of the type that expands.

He said that although McHale was linked to three bullets, he was aware of the broader conspiracy concerning Tierney and the Dingle gang.

The young offender

In 2011 McHale, then 18, was a member of a street gang what carried out 24 burglaries in just a month across south Liverpool. The four strong team raided upto three homes a night, and often made off with a high end motors.

They stole 15 cars during the crime spree, including a Jaguar, two Audi’s, a soft-top BMW and a Mini.

McHale was sent to a young offenders' centre for four years.

A wanted man

In December 2017 Merseyside Police said they wished to speak to McHale after a 21-year-old man was shot in the stomach. The shooting is believed to have happened on Pomfret Street on the evening of December 30.

The victim later recovered. McHale was not charged in relation to the shooting.

Gang injunction

In 2018 McHale was handed a gang injunction which banned him from associating with certian people.

McHale was later jailed for to 168 days for breaching the order by associating with someone he was banned from contacting. The gang injunction handed to McHale and four others came after a wave of violence across the Toxteth area.

Operation Bombay

In February 2018 McHale soon came to the attention of a police surveillance team due to his association with a group of Dingle based criminals including Anthony Tierney.

On March 8 2018 police recovered a loaded Smith and Wesson revolver from a store cupboard outside Neil Huyton's house. Huyton was an associate of the gang.

McHale's DNA was found on three bullets inside the gun. Police continued to pick up telephone contact between McHale and Tierney after the seizure of the gun.

Tierney was sentenced to 20 years, three months. Huyton was sentenced to 14 years, three months in prison.

After the sentencing a police spokesman said: "Ciaran McHale, 26 years, of Alexandra Park, Aigburth , played a part in acquiring guns and ammunition to protect the supply of illegal drugs by this crime group.

"His DNA was found on ammunition in a Smith and Wesson revolver that was found hidden in Neil Huyton's address.

"He also pleaded guilty to two counts of possession of a mobile phone whilst in prison. He has been sentenced to five years, nine months in prison."
