Disgraced doctor pressured patient into breast enlargement and laughed off grope complaint

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up for free to get the latest North East news and updates delivered straight to your inbox

A disgraced doctor famous for offering lunchtime liposuction could be struck off after laughing off a patient's complaint she was groped.

Ashish Dutta operates the Aesthetic Beauty Centre chain, with sites in Newcastle and Sunderland, as well as on London's Harley Street.

His website brands him a "visionary" but he's previously been suspended for his role in a botched breast enhancement when a watchdog branded his actions a “risk to patients”.

Now a tribunal has heard a string of fresh of allegations against him during a month long hearing.

The hearing prompted when police investigated 2016 claims from a patient into another doctor's conduct.

The Medical Practitioners' Tribunal heard the woman told Dr Dutta that another staff member had "cupped her breasts" and "touched her through her clothes" while requesting a different doctor for an operation.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

In a telephone call played to the three-person panel, Dr Dutta was heard relaying those claims - which were not proven - to the clinic's part-owner, while the patient was present.

"During that telephone call, Dr Dutta minimises alleged behaviour by stating that it would be commonplace in other countries," reads a report.

"Whilst making this point he can be heard to laugh. This was wholly inappropriate and undermining to the dignity of (the) patient."

The panel also ruled that he had "inappropriately pressurised" a patient into undergoing breast enhancement after knocking £600 off the price tag - if she agreed to go under the knife the next week.

The woman accused him of giving her the "hard sell", waiting until she was on the stairwell following a consultation before making the offer.

"Dr Dutta argued that her account that she was offered a discount if she were to have the procedure the next week cannot be correct as the initial consultation took place on 5th March 2009, yet the procedure was not undertaken until 11th April 2009, and therefore not the following week," states the report.

However the woman's evidence was said to be "emphatic and assured" by the Manchester panel, who felt it was unlikely she would know the reason for the offer -specifically to make savings on hospital theatre booking fees - unless that had been provided by Dr Dutta.

Records show Dr Dutta studied in Calcutta in the 1980s before continuing his training in London.

He later moved to the North East with roles at Hartlepool General Hospital and Gateshead's Queen Elizabeth Hospital, before moving into private cosmetic work.

He also worked at the private NU Clinic, in Liverpool and Newcastle, which closed after a court removed its registration following a failed Care Quality Commission inspection.

In 2012, he was suspended for a year after businesswoman Andrea Scott suffered horrific scarring when she went under the knife at his Tyneside surgery.

The operation was carried out by a different surgeon and afterwards, stitches on her left breast burst open and her implants began gaping from the wound.

Dr Dutta carried out a string of follow-up procedures on her - despite being suspended from practicing.

The doctor was slammed for putting “own interests above those of his patient”.

Andrea, who needed four operations to fix the damage, later told the Sunday Sun: "He should never be allowed to do anything ever again."

His registration with the General Medical Council is currently subject to conditions which stipulate he must not carry out any cosmetic procedures without supervision.

However, he could now be struck off the medical register when the panel imposes its sanction when the hearing is due to end next week.

ChronicleLive attempted to contact Dr Dutta via his clinics. However, there has been no reply.
