Vikrant Massey: My approach as actor same for film, TV & OTT

Mumbai, Nov 16 : Actor Vikrant Massey, who will soon be seen in season two of the web series "Broken But Beautiful", says he does not differentiate between working in films, television and OTT Platforms. Apart from his current digital platform assignment, Vikrant will soon be seen in Meghna Gulzar's film "Chhapaak", starring Deepika Padukone. He has also been a part of several successful television shows.

"I keep it simple. I have a narrowed-down approach. My output does not differentiate between television, films and OTT platforms," said Vikrant, while interacting with the media at the trailer launch of "Broken But Beautiful Season 2", along with co-actor Harleen Sethi and producer Ekta Kapoor.

He added: "I am happy coming on sets and doing my job and collaborating with wonderful people like Ekta (Kapoor), who recognise these things." Asked how handling pressure in films is different from OTT platforms, he said: "I don't think about the pressure. I have worked in television for almost a decade. As an actor, television has taught me everything that I have today, and I am trying to retain it as long as I can. In television, you have to shoot every day for 20 minutes of one episode so, I don't think much about future. Luckily for me, I haven't done a commercial film where I felt the pressure of box-office." The first season of ALT Balaji's "Broken But Beautiful" ended with the lead protagonists Veer (Vikrant Massey) and Sameera (Harleen Sethi) choosing separate paths to discover themselves.

The trailer of "Broken But Beautiful 2" shows Veer and Sameera's character moving ahead in life.

"It is truly an honour to be associated with this project. I am born and brought up in Mumbai. I think we don't see the complexities of inter-personal relationships in films. We read about it sometimes in books but very rarely we see it on screen," Vikrant said.

He added: "I would like to give credit to the writers of the show. As actors, we get an entire script and the director guides us. But for writers and musicians, to create something out of thin air is absolutely commendable. I hope the audience enjoys the second season as much as we enjoyed while working on this project." The series streams on ZEE5 and ALTBalaji on November 27.

- IANS iv/vnc

-- Except for the title, this story has not been edited by Prokerala team and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed
