Relief for 9,300 homebuyers: SC receiver asks NBCC to complete 8 more stuck projects of Amrapali Group

Representative image

New Delhi: In a relief for nearly 9,300 homebuyers in Noida and Greater Noida, the Supreme Court-appointed receiver has asked NBCC (India) to start work on eight more stuck projects of the Amrapali Group located in Noida and Greater Noida.

Last year, the top court had asked the state-run builder to complete 16 stuck projects of the troubled builder. Worth mentioning here is that NBCC has also completed two of those projects, which will be handed over soon to the court receiver.

“The court receiver has asked NBCC to proceed with tenders in order to commence the work by the end of January 2020. He has also asked the firm to furnish with him the details of the tender processes, to facilitate the working of the payment schedule,” a leading business daily quoted an unnamed source as saying.

As per the publication, the SC-appointed receiver has given a list of eight projects having 9,306 flats to NBCC. The cost of the current package, including towards project management consultancy and GST, is about Rs 570 crore. The projects are Zodiac, Sapphire One and Two, Silicon City Phase One and Two, Centurian Park, Centurian Park Valley and Princely Estate.

“A meeting was held on November 11 and a day after the receiver wrote to the CMD (chairman and managing director of NBCC) to start work on these projects as part of phase one. Rest of the projects will be taken up later,” the business daily quoted another person as saying.

It may be noted that the Supreme Court had appointed R Venkataramani as the receiver to establish coordination among all the stakeholders and ensure completion of the projects for homebuyers.

The projects that the apex court asked NBCC to take over at Noida and Greater Noida are expected to cost Rs 8,361 crore to complete.

The first two projects that NBCC took over, Eden Park and Castle, will soon be ready for handing over to the receiver. Work on firefighting equipment, sewage treatment plant, waste treatment plant and the final paint work in some of the flats of these two are nearing completion. The flat owners are expected to start registration from next month, almost six years after they moved into the flats, the publication mentioned.

They have so far been living there without some of the basic facilities.


