Resident doctor found dead next to IV syringe at Mumbai's KEM hospital

KEM Hospital in Mumbai's Parel area (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Dr Pranay Jaiswal hailed from Amravati in Maharashtra No suicide note was recovered from the spot where staffers found his body Police are waiting for a post-mortem report to ascertain cause of death

Mumbai: Staffers of the King Edward Memorial (KEM) Hospital in Mumbai's Parel area on Saturday morning discovered the body of a senior resident doctor. Dr Pranay Rajkumar Jaiswal's body was found on the terrace of one of the hostel buildings inside the hospital compound. The circumstances surrounding his death are still unclear.

An IV syringe was found lying near his body, said an official familiar with the investigation. While preliminary inputs suggest that this could have been a case of suicide, the police have sent the body for post-mortem and are waiting for the report to ascertain the cause of death. No suicide note was recovered from the spot where his body was found.

Saurabh Tripathy, deputy commissioner of police (Zone IV) told media outlets that staffers found Jaiswal's body at around 11 am on Saturday morning. He further added that the senior resident in the general surgery ward was last seen at 9 pm on Friday night. His cell phone had been switched off and no one saw him since, added the DCP. Going by the most recent reports, Bhoiwada police have registered an accidental death report (ADR) into the incident and further investigation is underway.

Originally from Amravati in Maharashtra, Dr Jaiswal had been battling clinical depression for the last 5-6 months due to certain family issues, his room-mate told media persons. However, the police are yet to rule out foul play with respect to the circumstances surrounding his death.

On May 22 of this year, a junior doctor hung herself inside her hostel room at Mumbai's BYL Nair Hospital. Evidence gathered by police pointed out to the fact that Dr Payal Tadvi took the extreme step after being constantly harassed by three senior doctors because of her caste. The three accused were arrested and the case is still in trial. In its chargesheet, the Mumbai police crime branch established that the accused doctors hurled casteist slurs at Dr Tadvi and even denied her mandatory medical leave. The deceased was made to suffer mental torture and harassment which led to a medicolegal incident added investigators.

Similarly, a 24-year-old female resident doctor committed suicide by hanging herself from the ceiling fan of her hostel in Rajasthan's Jaipur in July of this year. Police registered a case against five doctors for allegedly harassing the deceased identified as one Sakshi Gupta who was a resident of Fazilka in Punjab and has taken admission in the postgraduate degree programme in the gynaecology department in May.
