Muslim scholar Salman Nadwi not allowed to enter Ayodhya; says Muslims should accept 5-acre land

Salman Nadawi turned back from Ayodhya | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Salman Nadwi was not allowed to enter Ayodhya earlier today and turned back to Lucknow Nadwi hailed the SC verdict and said he wanted to meet the people of the two communities and tell them importance of maintaining peace Nadwi was expelled from AIMPLB in February 2018 after he met members of Ayodhya mediation panel

Ayodhya: Prominent Muslim scholar Salman Nadwi said he is in favour of Muslims accepting the 5-acre land at Ayodhya which the Supreme Court awarded to Muslim parties.

A former member of the All India Muslim Personal Law Board (AIMPLB), Nadwi earlier today was stopped from entering Ayodhya and turned back.

The SC in its historic verdict in the decades-old Ram Janmabhoomi Babri Masjid title suit case ruled in favour of constructing a Ram temple at the disputed 2.77-acre land.

While decreeing the lawsuit in favour of deity "Ram Lalla Virajman", the apex court had exercised its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution and directed the Centre to allot five acres of land to the Sunni Central Waqf Board for construction of the mosque.

The scholar was sent back to Lucknow from Raunahi toll plaza, the entry point of Ayodhya district, since the situation in the city has remained sensitive after the verdict.

Nadwi told media that he only wanted to meet people from both communities to establish peace in the backdrop of Ram Temple verdict. He said it’s important to establish peace and harmony between the two communities and the focus should be on the implementation of the verdict.

Nadwi who was in news for supporting the mediation process on Ram Temple along with Sri Sri Ravishankar was stopped from visiting Ayodhya today.

The All India Muslim Personal Law Board (AIMPLB) in February 2018 expelled Nadawi allegedly over his meeting with spiritual guru Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, who is also acting as a mediator in the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid dispute.

It is to be noted that the verdict saw opposition from some quarters in the Muslim community. AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi slammed the judgement saying the Supreme Court is “not infallible” in its judgement and endorsed the view of the All India Muslim Personal Law Board’s (AIMPLB) which said it is “not satisfied” with the ruling.

“Those who demolished the Babri Masjid in December 1992... the Supreme Court today is telling the same people to form a trust and start temple construction,” the AIMIM chief said.He also said Muslims were fighting for legal right and not “begging for 5-acre of land”.

AIMPLB said the decision to seek review of the verdict will be taken on November 17, senior advocate Zafaryab Jilani told PTI earlier. Jilani was responding to a question whether the Muslim parties were contemplating to seek a review of the verdict in view of the dissatisfaction in certain sections of the community.


