Watch: Karthi-Jyotika's 'Thambi' teaser promises a gripping thriller

Watch: Karthi-Jyotika's 'Thambi' teaser promises a gripping thriller

The teaser was released on Saturday.

Flix Kollywood

The first look and title of Karthi and Jyotika's next directed by Jeethu Joseph were released on Friday. While the Tamil version is titled Thambi, the Telugu version has been titled Donga.

Following the first look and title, the makers on Saturday released the teaser of the film and is going viral among the netizens. The teaser was released by Karthi's brother Suriya who tweeted saying," I'm very happy that Jo & Karthi are sharing screen space! Here’s my #Thambi @Karthi_offl ‘s #ThambiTeaser".

The teaser suggests that Karthi's character is named Saravanan (which is incidentally Suriya's real name) and he indulges in petty crimes. Jyotika plays his older sister Parvathi who's protective of him.

While the Tamil title Thambi is the title of Madhavan's previous hit film, the Telugu title Donga happens to be the title of Chiranjeevi’s blockbuster hit film. Directed by A. Kodandarami Reddy, the film starred Chiranjeevi and Radha in the lead roles.

Touted to be a thriller, Thambi is the first time that Karthi and Jyotika are sharing screen space in a feature film. The film also stars Sathyaraj, Nikhila Vimal, and Anson Paul. While Jyotika will be seen playing Karthi's sister, Sathyaraj will be seen as their father in the film. The film is scripted by Jeethu Joseph along with Rensil D’Silva and Manikandan.

Bankrolled by Parallel Minds Productions, along with Viacom18 Studios, the film has music by Govind Vasantha and cinematography by RD Rajasekhar.

Karthi will start shooting for Mani Ratnam's epic historical drama Ponniyin Selvan soon. The shooting of the film is expected to kickstart in December and the first schedule has been planned in Thailand. The cast so far includes Vikram, Jayam Ravi, Karthi, Keerthy Suresh, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, Parthiban and Jyotika among a few others. Apparently, most of the actors have already started prepping for the project.

Karthi's recent release Kaithi has been declared a blockbuster hit. During a recent media interaction, Karthi confirmed that a sequel is in the offing. Kaithi is the story of a prisoner, Dilli, who is released and is out to see his daughter. He gets embroiled in a face-off between cops and drug lords. The entire story unfolds in the span of a single night within four hours. The film was highly praised for not having unnecessary romance or songs. Kaithi also featured Narain and Harish Uthaman in key roles. Narain played an injured cop who seeks Dilli's help to save his colleagues from being killed by drug lords.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
