South African man murders father in cold-blood, dumps his body on street

Provincial police confirmed that Phalane has admitted to the crime (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Shadrack Mampa's body was found in Maake area of Mogopeng village His son Marupeng Phalane later admitted to the crime and has been charged with murder The accused killed the victim in a fit of rage following a heated argument, said police

New Delhi: A man in the South African province of Limpopo has confessed to murdering his father and dumping the body on the street of his native village. The accused, 30-year-old Marupeng Phalane appeared in the Namakgale Magistrate's Court on Friday and pleaded guilty for the gruesome killing of his elderly father.

The matter came to light on Wednesday when residents of Maake area in Mogopeng village discovered the body of 69-year-old Shadrack Mampa dumped on the street. Local police were alerted and a case of murder was registered in this regard. Not far from where his father's body was found, Phalane was picked up by local law enforcement from his residence and questioned in connection with the crime.

He eventually caved into the pressure and admitted to killing Mampa following a heated argument. According to a report, Phalane picked up his father from the home of his estranged wife in Kgopo village on Tuesday night. They were driving in the accused's car to Gravellote when an argument broke out between the two of them. The accused halted the car at a farm where he stabbed his father to death in a fit of rage.

Mampa died instantly and the accused then loaded his body into his car and drove all the wat to his home village where he dumped it on the street. Provincial police spokesperson Motlafela Mojapelo told mediapersons that the victim ad stab wounds which led police to immediately file a case of murder and launch an investigation in this regard. Phalane turned himself over to the police in Gravelotte and was charged with murder. His bail plea has been postponed to November 20 pending further investigation into the matter. It is still unclear what the argument was about or why the accused took the extreme step. More details are awaited as police continue to investigate the cold-blooded crime.

The case brings back memories of a similar incident that came to light from Durban in South Africa earlier this month where a man murdered three of his minor children after their mother sent him final divorce papers. The incident had shaken the third-most populous city in South-Africa. In her statement to the police, the mother of the children claimed that she suspected that something was off when he started acting strange. The accused was later arrested in Kwadabeka and charged with the murders of his four children.
