Wanted! women cops in capital: Shortage of female officers in traffic police a big problem for Delhi

According to surveys, women driving in an inebriated condition is on the rise in Delhi and shortage of women officers in traffic police might be a significant cause behind that. (Photo: Mail Today)

Ramesh Mohan (name changed), a Head Constable posted at the Aurbindo Marg Red light signal near Indian Oil Petrol Pump, says he feels helpless. Despite knowing that there are many female drivers who return from the Hauz Khas Village in an inebriated condition he cannot stop them for a routine checking.

"I cannot stop a female driver and ask her to undergo breathe analyser test. We need a female traffic cop to assist us and we do not have one, unfortunately," Mohan said. He is not the only traffic cop who is helpless while catching drunken female drivers.

Stopping a woman, especially who is under the influence of alcohol, is not less than risking our job. We don't stop them unless we have a female cop accompanying us," said Mahesh Verma, a 49-year-old Head Constable posted near Janpath, New Delhi.

Mail Today has learnt that due to shortage of female traffic police personnel on field, women drivers under the influence of alcohol get a free run. According to the Delhi Traffic Police, there are only 200 female cops out of the total 3,000 traffic cops posted on field.

Between 2012 and 2017, not even a single female driver was booked for driving in an inebriated condition, whereas the number went up to four in 2018. Under the present law, policemen cannot pull up female motorists for inspection in the absence of female cops. Male officers posted at the traffic pickets have no authority to stop a vehicle with a female driver.

According to the newlyamended Motor Vehicles Act that came into force last month, a person found driving under influence of alcohol can be fined `10,000 along with imprisonment of up to six months (for the firsttime offenders). Earlier the fine was `2,000.

Surveys have proved time and again that alcohol consumption among women is on the rise. According to a recent survey conducted by the Community Against Drunken Driving (CADD), for example, nearly 37.8 percent women in the age group of 18-30 years believed that driving their own vehicle (when they are drunk) was much safer than public transport, especially in the Capital.

"The survey primarily established that more women are drinking nowadays. Even after being traditionally non-drinkers, the alcohol consumption among women is expected to grow by 25 percent over the next five years, as per the government's Centre for Alcohol Studies," said Prince Singhal, the CADD founder.

"Do we have safe public transportation in Delhi? I doubt. So we are left with no other option than using our own cars," said a woman, who works with a private firm and commutes between Delhi and Gurugram five days a week. On September 2, 2019 a woman under the influence of alcohol allegedly tried to hit a woman and her toddler with her Maruti Swift Dzire car in East Delhi's Jagatpuri.

When the police reached and took her for examination, a high dose of alcohol was found in her blood. In July, when a woman was stopped for not wearing helmet as a pillion rider she misbehaved with the traffic police officer in Mayapuri area.

It was found that the woman was in an inebriated condition and started shoving a police officer, repeatedly smashing her phone on his hand. The locals, however, captured the incident in their cellphones. In November last year, a 38-year-old woman died, and her 13-year-old daughter was seriously wounded after their vehicle was hit by a car in Punjabi Bagh, allegedly being driven by a 22-year-old DU student who was in an inebriated condition. The accused and three of her friends were out for a joyride to Gurugram after a night out in Connaught Place.

A report compiled last week by a group of sectoral experts, ranging from human rights groups to legal policy groups, shows that women account for seven per cent of the country's 2.4 million police personnel across India. The India Justice Report 2019, commissioned by Tata Trusts, was prepared by groups like the Centre for Social Justice, the Common Cause, the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, the DAKSH, the Tata Institute of Social Sciences - Prayas and Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy among others.

The findings of the report also revealed that only six per cent of female cops among all police personnel in India are at the officer level. As per the Delhi Traffic Police data, this year till August, a total of 29,835 persons were caught for drunk driving. "We don't maintain a segregated data based on the gender," said Taj Hassan, the Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic). However, another senior official, requesting anonymity, said that only two to three percent females were prosecuted for driving while drunk.

During the 10th meeting of the 'Task Force on Women Safety Issues' at Raj Niwas in September, the Lieutenant Governor, Anil Baijal, emphasised that all the stakeholders must have a focused and coordinated strategy to make the Capital a safe city for women. Stressing on the need for a change in mindset as well, he directed the departments to keep up their efforts for generating awareness and sensitisation.

Ms Randhawa, the Deputy Commissioner of Police (central) and Delhi Police spokesperson, said, "We have one allwomen SWAT team where women commandos have been trained. This is the only 'All-Women SWAT Team' in India. The team is dedicated to tackle hardened criminals and to combat terrorist activities."
