Traffic statistics don’t tell us about our EI

BENGALURU: Bengaluru’s traffic crawls at 15.5km per hour, says a recent study. In September we heard that people here spend an average of seven per cent of the day commuting to office. There are other assessments of average time spent looking for parking and the influx of ride-hailing cabs that’s choking road space. At seminars and panel discussions, experts and stakeholders recommend congestion pricing like in London and Singapore and steep vehicle tax. They also suggest setting up hi-tech traffic management systems and offering more public transit options.All very ho-hum. The next batch of cars hits the streets, followed by another burst of memes and WhatsApp jokes: a friend planning to sell the 3rd, 4th and 5th gears of his car –‘all unused and in showroom condition’ and another friend walking to work but politely refusing a lift, “because he’s in a hurry”. Silk Board junction, the KR Puram cable-stayed bridge and Majestic continue to be the humourist’s favourite targets.British author Jeffrey Archer too couldn’t resist a wisecrack. He told a gathering in the city three years ago: “A woman walking on the pavement overtook my car eight times and my car overtook her eight times. Two more times and we would have been engaged.” A fan put in his two bits to say, “Bangalore keeps me indoors all the time. I spend ten hours in office, ten hours at home and four hours in my car.”It’s all part of city lore now. At every public event, the organisers apologize for the tardy pace of proceedings with a reference to the rush hour. The little schoolgirl in the neighbourhood who rides pillion on her mom’s scooter every day can almost tell the time, “when the Santro aunty races past the first signal” and the “Bullet Uncle comes down the one-way street”.In a city where the pothole has slowed you down before you reach the zebra crossing, the colours red, yellow and green are mere triggers of your emotional state. The moods vary. Deadpan faces can change colour if a road hog gets in the way; someone immersed in a Paulo Coelho book or a David Bowie Buddhist song can bristle with rage if a motorbike comes kisses the bumper of his car; youngsters on their way to a restobar might take no notice of traffic signs and a home-bound businessman with a growling belly might honk at every vehicle in sight. Not always that the condition of roads or the modes of commute kindles stress and anxiety.A traffic policeman put it succinctly some years ago: “Jams are more about people, less about machines.” He likened a pile-up to a mass of tangled wire. “It’s easy in theory, but dealing with restless motorists is a different ballgame. As you loosen and unfasten one set of loops, there’s another that emerges,” he said. As for those who show their anger by screaming out from their window or tailgating another, he said: “Most people at the wheel feel the rage, but very few get down to a fight. Thank God for that.”‘Road moods’ are in the realm of literature or film, more than newspapers and TV channels. Argentine writer Julio Cortazar’s memorable story, “The Southern Thruway”, deals with motorists returning to Paris on a Sunday afternoon after a weekend outing, and caught in a massive highway snarl. The pile-up stretches over days and week and months, as the passengers and drivers swelter in the summer heat. Nobody knows what has tied the traffic up. Winter sets in and in what seems like a weird ensemble, they start living in their lives in the new situation – sharing, caring, fighting and falling in love. Cortazar names the car models but not the people. The opening line reads: “At first the girl in the Dauphine had insisted on keeping track of time, but the engineer in the Peugeot 404 didn’t care anymore.” Finally one day, the cars stutter into life and the motorists drive out of the surreal world. And then the mad race with unknown cars begins to “where no one knew anything about the others, where everyone looked straight ahead, only ahead.” Cortazar makes his point about dehumanization in the modern world.Jean Luc-Godard, avant garde French film-maker, drew inspiration from the Cortazar story for his 1967 film “Weekend”, which has a long tracking shot of a hellish traffic jam accentuated by ceaseless honking. Godard’s film, though, is more a political statement and the pile-up is a sign of social anarchy.So does the best test of our emotional intelligence (EI) lie in the way we behave in a clog of traffic? When we drive without betraying any irritation, do we show we’re masters of the great Bangalore gridlock? Small mercies if we can still make way for the ambulance carrying a sniffling woman.— Jayanth Kodkani
