2 men kill woman in Khanna village; villagers nab one, beat him up before cops reach

Ludhiana: Khanna police on Saturday arrested a miscreant whereas his accomplice managed to escape after they shot dead a woman and injured her neighbour at Bhamadi village near Khanna in the morning hours. One of the accused has been identified as Jasvir Singh of Miyanpur village in Amloh area, who works as a combine driver. His accomplice is yet to be identified.

Villagers said the deceased, Jasvir Kaur (37), used to work as a labourer to raise her 17-year-old daughter Parneet Kaur, who is doing computer course, and her son Jaspreet Singh, Class XI student, who studies at Sirhind, after her husband Avtar Singh had allegedly committed suicide on November 8 last year. They added that on Saturday morning, she and her daughter were at home when someone knocked at the door. Swaran Singh, an eyewitness, said after Parneet opened the door, the duo went to her mother’s room. They claimed that they wanted to buy her husband’s motorcycle and started asking about his death.

“As she was showing them the motorcycle, one of the accused took out his pistol and shot at her head. The bullet pierced apparently from right side of the head and came out of the left side. As her daughter Parneet raised an alarm, the accused ran towards their motorcycle they had parked at the gate. However, after hearing the cries of Parneet, their neighbors Avtar Singh and his son Gurpreet Singh, who was brushing his teeth outside, ran after them and caught hold of the pillion rider,” said another villager Preetam Singh. “The miscreants fired two gun shots at Gurpreet, one of which hit him in his chest. In the melee the other miscreant, who was driving the motorcycle sped away towards the highway.” He added that the miscreants hadn’t covered their faces.

The villagers beat up the accomplice after tying him up. A villager said the accused had come to inquire about the motorcycle belonging to the deceased on Friday as well. After the incident, the villagers called up the police after which cops from Sadar Police station reached the spot and started a probe into the matter. The police took the accused caught by villagers into custody. Meanwhile, Sadar Khanna police has booked the accused for murder of the deceased.

Khanna DSP Rajan Parminder Singh said one of the two accused Jasvir Singh had been arrested and a manhunt had been launched to arrest the other accused whose identity is yet to be ascertained. He added that the motive behind the incident was yet to be ascertained but things would be clear after arrest of the other accused. The police officer said the condition of injured Gurpreet Singh was stable. He added that the police had seized a .32-bore illegal weapon used by the accused in the crime.

Randhir Singh, uncle of injured Gurpreet, said the deceased used to do labour job and the family didn’t have enmity with anyone in the village. He added that his nephew who got injured was shot at from a distance and was out of danger.

The TOI found that the door of room where the incident had occurred was locked as the daughter of the deceased had gone with police to record her statement. Village women had gathered at the house to mourn the demise of Jasvir. There were blood stains in the house.

‘First incident of it’s kind in village’

Darshan Singh (56), another neighbour of the victim, said the incident had spread panic in the area as this was the first incident and he couldn’t remember if such an incident had happened in the village earlier. He added that there was a village common place in front of the house of the deceased and people used to sit there since morning and discuss their lives and going-ons.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
