No Difference Between Asaduddin Owaisi And Baghdadi Today, Says Shia Waqf Board Chief

New Delhi:

ISIS leader Abu Bakr-al Baghdadi was the most wanted terrorist in the world before his death in US special forces raid in October. However, according to Shia Waqf Board chief Wasim Rizvi, All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) MP Asaduddin Owaisi is as dangerous as the slain ISIS leader. This is not first controversial figure Owaisi has been compared to in last few days. Just before Rizvi's comment, Union Minister Babul Supriyo has compared the AIMIM leader to controversial Islamic preacher Zakir Naik.

"There is no difference between Abu Bakr-al Baghdadi and Asaduddin Owaisi. Baghdadi had an army and arms and ammunition which he used to spread terror, Owaisi through his 'zabaan' (speeches) is creating terror through it. He is pushing the Muslims towards acts of terror and bloodshed. It is high time that there should be a ban on him and the Muslim Personal Law Board," Rizvi said to news agency ANI on Saturday.

Wasim Rizvi was talking in reference to the speeches made by the AIMIM leader after the Supreme Court verdict on the Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid title dispute. Earlier on November 11, a complaint was filed against AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi for allegedly making inciting statements following the Supreme Court verdict on Ayodhya dispute case. Following the pronouncement of the verdict, Owaisi said that the "Supreme Court is indeed supreme but not infallible".

"I am not satisfied with the verdict. We have full faith in the Constitution. We were fighting for our legal rights. We do not need five-acre land as a donation," he had said.

Later, in an interview to Outlook magazine, Asaduddin Owaisi said he will oppose anything that is against India's Constitution and pluralism. "For me, the Constitution is supreme and it gives me the right to disagree respectfully with any SC judgment. I will oppose anything that is against the Constitution," he said.

Asaduddin Owaisi said, "Our fight was not for a piece of land. It was to ensure that my legal rights are realised. The SC also ­categorically said that no temple was ­demolished to construct a mosque. I want my masjid back."

Rizvi also slammed the All India Muslim Personal Law Board (AIMPLB) for its stance on the verdict. "This was a great decision by the Supreme Court, the likes of which I have not seen in my life. It satisfied all the parties but there are some parties like the Muslim Personal Law Board and Asaduddin Owaisi which are fuelling the orthodox mindset. There should be a ban on them too," Rizvi said.

On November 15, Rizvi had donated Rs 51,000 to the Shri Ram Janmabhumi Nyas in Ayodhya for the construction of the temple. The Supreme Court on November 9 directed the Central government to hand over the disputed site at Ayodhya for the construction of a temple and set up a trust for the same. The top court also directed the government to give a suitable plot of five acres to the Sunni Waqf Board for a new mosque.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
