Cops, farmers clash over smart city project on disputed land in Unnao

Protesters torched a construction vehicle in Unnao | Photo Credit: ANI

Unnao: Major clashes broke out between farmers and Uttar Pradesh Police on Saturday after the farmers staged a protest against the state government in Unnao demanding compensation for their land acquired by the government for residential projects in the district. A vehicle of crusher plant was torched by the agitated farmers, however, no loss of life was reported from the site.

According to reports, the farmers claim that the Yogi Adityanath government had "forcibly" taken their agricultural land for the Trans-Ganga City project, some 40 km away from Lucknow, a few years ago. They further claim that they have not been compensated at all for their land in all these years.

Unnao: A vehicle of crusher plant was set ablaze today. Dist Magistrate (DM) says "Some miscreants are doing this. We will go to villages&appeal to people to maintain peace. This is a deed of miscreants. We'll maintain peace & the work (Trans Ganga City project) will also go on." pic.twitter.com/5AfLWq6t8Z — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) November 17, 2019

In order to mark their protest, the farmers gathered around the smart city project which is being developed by the Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Development Authority. After the police reached the site to contain the situation, they were met with stone-pelting which later turned into violent clashes.

One of the protesting farmers told the media, "We have been promised that we will get compensation. We have held several meetings with the police and officials but nothing has been done so far in the matter."

After a vehicle of crushed plant was set ablaze by protesters in Unnao, District Magistrate Devendra Pandey said, "Some miscreants are doing this. We will go to villages and appeal to people to maintain peace. This is a deed of miscreants. We'll maintain peace and the work (Trans-Ganga City project) will go on."

In the wake of the incident, a heavy force has been deployed around the smart city project in order to avoid any further untoward incident in the future. According to the latest reports, the situation has returned to normal in the region.
