President's Rule should end, decision on Maharashtra govt formation on Tuesday: NCP

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader and chief spokesperson Nawab Malik said on Sunday that the President's rule in Maharashtra should end and an alternate government in the state should be formed.

Speaking to the reporters after a meeting of the NCP's core committee at party chief Sharad Pawar's residence in Pune, Nawab Malik said the final decision on the government formation would be taken on Tuesday when leaders of both the parties meet.

Nawab Malik said, "After the meeting, we have arrived at a conclusion that President's Rule should end in Maharashtra and an alternate government should be formed. NCP chief Sharad Pawar will meet Sonia Gandhi on Monday and then on Tuesday, leaders of NCP and Cong will finalise everything."

"We have decided that the next decision will be taken only after a discussion with Congress. Tomorrow [Monday] Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi and [Sharad] Pawar Sahab will hold a meeting and day after tomorrow [Tuesday], leaders of both the parties will meet," he said.

Nawab Malik, NCP: We have decided that next decision will be taken only after discussion with Congress. Tomorrow Congress President Sonia Gandhi and Pawar Sahab will hold a meeting and day after tomorrow leaders of both the parties will meet. https://t.co/TQ1ib7FMAg ANI (@ANI) November 17, 2019





Speaking to India Today TV, former Maharashtra Chief Minister Prithviraj Chavan said that Congress is trying to figure whether Shiv Sena, Congress and NCP can together or not.

"We are trying to figure out whether Shiv Sena, Congress and NCP can come together. There is a meeting tomorrow between the leaders of Shiv Sena and leaders of the Congress. We will find out on Monday if we can go ahead or not," Prithviraj Chavan said.

The Congress leader said, "People have defeated the Bharatiya Janata Party due to this misrule in the last five years. Also together [with Shiv Sena] they got the majority. There is a grave agricultural crisis in Maharashtra we are trying to form an alternative government."

Out of power, BJP afraid turncoat MLAs may defect: Nawab Malik

The Maharashtra BJP is bedevilled by the trepidation that politicians who joined the party ahead of the October 21 Assembly polls will defect and, hence, its leaders are claiming they will form government in the state, Nawab Malik said on Saturday.

Nawab Malik made the remarks a day after Maharashtra BJP chief Chandrakant Patil said his party will soon form the government and claimed it can count on the support of 119 MLAs, including Independents, in the 288-member Assembly.

Malik also attacked former Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis over his recent remark that a non-BJP government will not last for more than six months, saying the latter spoke, like the general of a defeated army, to boost the morale of his party men.

"The former chief minister is trying to boost the morale of his party workers like the general of a defeated army. We think they have been defeated and they will have to accept this. They are not ready to accept defeat, but one takes time," the NCP leader said.

(With inputs from Gopal Harne)
