The dilemma of Uddhav Thackeray | India Today Insight

Uddhav Thackeray was not alone when he bowed before a makeshift memorial to Bal Thackeray at the Shivaji Park on November 17. His wife Rashmi Thackeray and their children, Aaditya and Tejas, accompanied him as they visited the memorial built to commemorate his father. It was the seventh death anniversary of the Shiv Sena's founder.

As he headed towards the mayor's bungalow that is to be converted into the memorial for Bal Thackeray, there was little hint of the storm he might be shielding within. He appeared calm and spoke to a few visitors.

This is the biggest challenge the Sena chief is facing after his cousin Raj Thackeray split the party to form the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena in 2005. Having parted ways with the BJP after fighting the assembly election in an alliance, Thackeray, 59, has staked his credibility, reputation and respect among party workers to fulfill his ambition of making "a Shiv Sainik the chief minister" of India's richest state.

The chief minister's office, on the sixth floor of Mantralaya, the seat of power in Mumbai, has always eluded his grasp. The Sena-BJP coalition suffered defeats in the 2004 and 2009 state elections. In 2014, he parted ways with the BJP, but returned to support a Devendra Fadnavis-led government.

This time, the BJP-Sena pre-poll alliance secured a clear majority, winning 161 seats (BJP 105, Sena 56) collectively in the 288-member House. But sensing that the BJP could not form the government without him, Thackeray chose to dig in his heels over the chief minister's post for the Sena for half the term. But with the BJP refusing to play along, Thackeray had no choice but to approach his arch-rivals, the Nationalist Congress Party and the Congress.

Except that the NCP-Congress too have chosen to play hardball, refusing to give his party letters of support within the stipulated time and paving the way for President's rule. And this is when, with the NCP's 54 MLAs and the Congress's 44, the three parties between them have a clear majority of 154 seats.

Back in 2011, the BJP had criticized the Sena chief for not meeting then BJP president Nitin Gadkari for seven long months. Before the 2019 Lok Sabha election, it was only after BJP president Amit Shah visited him at Matoshree, his residence, that he agreed to join hands with the BJP. Now, however, it is Thackeray who steps out of Matoshree every day to meet the Congress-NCP leaders. He is also likely to call on Congress president Sonia Gandhi in Delhi to seek her support in forming the government.

According to the rough formula the three parties are working out, the Congress will retain the post of deputy CM and Speaker of the assembly for the full term. The NCP and the Sena will rotate the chief minister's post for two-and-a-half years each, with the Sena getting the first shot at office.

That is Uddhav's next dilemma. Who does he appoint chief minister?

The buzz within the party is that Rashmi Thackeray is pushing her son Aaditya's candidature for the job. The Sena chief's wife reportedly urged Shiv Sena MLAs, corralled by Uddhav into a resort in Mumbai, to back her son Aaditya, 29, to become the state's youngest CM.

That Rashmi's words carry weight in the Thackeray family is no secret. A senior BJP leader claims Rashmi was the reason why Shah refused to talk to Thackeray. "Main kitchen mein baat karoon kya? (You want me to have a conversation in the kitchen)," Shah reportedly told state BJP leaders.

Aaditya is clearly Uddhav's chosen successor and became the first family member to join electoral politics when he won the Worli seat on October 24. Thackeray Sr, however, is unwilling to take the gamble. He reportedly told close aides that an inexperienced and immature Aaditya would not be able to stand up to seasoned NCP-Congress politicians like Ajit Pawar, Chhagan Bhujbal, Jayant Patil, Prithviraj Chavan and Ashok Chavan. In addition, he will have a fiery Opposition leader in Fadnavis.

Thackeray is believed to be pushing the candidature of his most trusted aide, Subhash Desai. Desai, 77, is a seasoned politician but has no grassroots support for him to become a threat to the family. Other partymen, however, think Desai's candidature might be opposed by the party's rising star, Eknath Shinde, 54. Hence, Uddhav himself might emerge as the consensus candidate for CM.



Meanwhile, Sena-NCP-Congress are working on a common minimum programme to ensure they complete five years in office. Thackeray has not relented on his demand for waiving loans of all farmers and giving them an annual dole of Rs 10,000. But he has softened his stand on other issues such as the Bharat Ratna for Hindutva icon Veer Savarkar and granting five per cent reservation to Muslims in government jobs, something he had opposed five years ago.

For the moment, though, NCP chief Sharad Pawar has kept Thackeray on hold. Pawar is likely to discuss the permutations and combinations with Sonia Gandhi on November 19 in Delhi.

The other dilemma Uddhav Thackeray has is explaining to the Sena cadre why the party is deviating from its stated ideology. Protecting the rights of the Marathi manoos, sons of the soil who were perceived to be neglected because of the influx of the outsiders, has been the Sena's brief for a few decades now. And it was a shared vision of Hindutva that made Sena and the BJP such natural allies. Under Uddhav Thackeray and his son, the party seems to be exploring a more middle-of-the-road political ideology. How will it sit with the Sena rank and file?

Thackeray's team of advisors--Desai, Rajya Sabha MPs Sanjay Raut and Anil Desai and the Lok Sabha Sena leader Vinayak Raut--believe the party can leave its imprint on the state if its CM delivers on farmers' problems and infrastructure development and help it overcome ideological departures. Except that it the ordinary Sena worker my not be willing to buy the argument. "I have spent all my life fighting the Congress. It will be hard for me to be friends with them now," says Mahesh Sawant, a Sena worker from Lalbaug. As of now, therefore, Thackeray remains stuck between a rock and a hard place.

Also read | Pawar play: Sena or BJP, which way will NCP chief tilt?

Also read | The Maharashtra deadlock: Who will blink first?
