Ex-Karnataka Min Tanveer Sait attacked by knife-wielding man in Mysuru

Ex-Karnataka Min Tanveer Sait attacked by knife-wielding man in Mysuru

The minister is reportedly stable after undergoing surgery

news Crime

Former Karnataka Minister and Congress MLA from Mysuru district, Tanveer Sait, was attacked with a knife by a man in his 20s late on Sunday night.

The incident which took place around 11:45 pm in the night when the former minister was attending a wedding ceremony at Bal Bhavan in Bannimantap.

According to reports, the surgery at Columbia Asia Hospital went on until the early hours of Monday and the minister was hurt near his neck

The Times of India cited sources as saying that the minister walked to a vehicle as he was bleeding to reach the Columbia Hospital which was a kilometre away. The report cited doctors as saying that he had sustained “major injuries”.

The assailant has been identified as 24-year-old Farhaan Pasha. The incident has also been reportedly captured by wedding photographers present at the venue.

The Hindu reported police sources as saying that the minister’s condition was stable following the surgery.

Soon after the incident, Farhaan tried to flee but was cauht by the ex-minister’s supporters and thrashed, before he was handed over to the police.

Mysuru City Police Commissioner KT Balakrishna said the assailant was a resident of Udaygiri and was working as a handicraft artisan.

Apparently, he was upset that Tanveer Sait did not arrange a job for him even though he had approached him several times.

The Hindu said Narasimharaja Police booked Farhaan under section 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code. The accused is being questioned further.

Following the incident, police increased security in sensitive areas of the city, including the vicinity of the hospital.

Sait had served as the Primary and Secondary Education Minister during the chief ministership of Siddaramaiah and is a five-time MLA from Narasimharaja seat. His father Azeez was also an MLA from the same seat since 1967.
