JNU students stage march to Parliament, HRD ministry forms panel to look into demands

JNU students stage march to Parliament, HRD ministry forms panel to look into demands

The government has set up a high-level committee to hold a discussion with students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and resolve all issues peacefully.

news Education

The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) has set up a high-level committee to hold a discussion with students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) and resolve all issues peacefully. The committee comprises of Prof VS Chauhan (former Chairman, University Grants Commission), Prof Anil Sahasrabudhe (Chairman, All India Council for Technical Education) and Prof Rajnish Jain (Secretary, UGC). This came a day before the students planned a march to the Parliament, seeking that issues that they are facing are addressed in the winter session, currently underway.

“With a view to restoring the normal functioning of the Jawaharlal Nehru University through dialogue with all the stakeholders and to advise the university administration for resolution of contentious issues, Government has appointed a High Power Committee...The said Committee is requested to initiate dialogue with the students and the university administration immediately and submit recommendations on the action to be taken. The UGC will provide the required support for the functioning of the Committee,” the notice from the HRD Ministry said.

This comes even as protests by students continues over the hike in hostel fees on the campus. Following massive protests, the University scaled down the hike in hostel charges. However, the students have demanded a complete rollback and complete withdrawal of the decision of the university with regard to the hostel charges and other measures proposed. On Monday, Section 144 of the CrPC was imposed outside the JNU campus but the students reportedly went past the police barricades and began their march towards Parliament.

With posters in hand and chanting anti-fee hike slogans, hundreds of students marched on the streets of Delhi in defiance of Section 144 that was slapped in the morning to prevent the protests. The protest march, however, was stopped 1 kilometre away from the main gate of the Parliament. Dramatic visuals showed students being lifted up by the police and removed from the area. JNUSU President Aishe Ghosh was also detained by the police.

According to reports, a student was also injured in clashes with the police and fell unconscious. JNUSU President N Sai Balaji and other students rushed him to hospital.

JNU Students Union President had earlier claimed that the new National Education Policy has been formulated with the aim of generating profits, and institutions like JNU are being targeted.

Ghosh had also stated that the question was not why JNU students are paying Rs 200 as hostel fee but that it was about why the other universities are paying lakhs of rupees for education. She said the JNU students are ready for a dialogue with the Vice Chancellor and demand a complete rollback of the hike in hostel fees.

As the protests on campuses continued, JNU Vice Chancellor M Jagadesh Kumar had asked the students to return to their classes. "JNU Administration appeals to the JNU students to return to the classes and labs and resume their academic and research work so that the losses incurred already on these counts may be compensated. This will help in completing the academic programmes without any further obstacles,” he tweeted.

The protests had begun after the JNU administration massively hiked the hostel, mess and security fees reportedly by 400 per cent. It also limited the hostel timings.

With IANS inputs
