Al-Shabaab in Somalia praised by Al-Qaeda

On 13th October 2019, mortar fire on the zone around Mogadishu airport wounded nine people. The attack targeted the Halene compound that houses the main mission offices of the United Nations (UN) and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The perimeter fence also houses several embassies.

The Special Representative of the U.N. Secretary-General for Somalia, James Swan, confirmed that the mortars landed inside the U.N. and AMISOM facilities. “I am appalled by this blatant act of terrorism against our personnel, who work together with the Somali people on humanitarian, peacebuilding, and development issues,” Swan said in a statement. “There is no justification for such despicable acts of violence, and the United Nations remains determined to support Somalia on its path to peace, stability and development.”

The attack drew the immediate condemnation by the United Nations. A statement issues on behalf of UN Secretary-General António Guterres strongly condemned the mortar attack of 13 October against the Aden Adde International Airport that hit the compounds of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United Nations” and reaffirmed that “ the United Nations remains determined to support the Federal Government of Somalia and all Somalis in their pursuit of peace and stability”.

On 15 October Somali militant Islamist group Harakat al-Shabaab al-Mujahideen claimed the responsibility for the attack and said that these attacks were targeted at what it referred to as “Western crusaders”.

In a development that alarmed the security experts, the senior leadership of Al-Qaeda and fellow affiliate Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) lauded the actions of Al-Shabaab. The statement penned by Al Qaeda’s general command begins thus: “Western Crusader occupying forces have for long sought to conceal their sinister role in Somalia. However, the valiant men of Shabaab have demonstrated that they are even more keen to expose this hidden role by inflicting humiliating blows on Western interests.” The statement then commends Al- Shabaab for targeting Italian troops in Mogadishu on the same day as the assault on the American base. “We congratulate our brothers in Shabaab and fully support their leadership in their noble endeavours,” it reads.

The statement also makes references to activities of Al-Qaeda and its affiliates in other parts of the world. With reference to the US troop deployment in Saudi Arabia, a warning is issued that “if you [the US] do not desist, you shall be made to forget the nightmare of 9/11 and everything that followed. Your coming war with the sons of the Arabian Peninsula shall be fiercer and way too painful for you to bear.”. The statement then urges al Qaeda’s men in Yemen to “hold on to patience, ribaat [defensive fortifications], and mutual exhortation. Build strong determination amongst yourselves to offer and sacrifice for the sake of this religion.”

AQAP also released an audio message from one of its senior leaders, Ibrahim al Qosi in which Al-Shabaab is urged for continuing the war against “Crusaders” and “African apostates” inside Somalia.

These developments and the series of messages point out to ideological linkages between Al Shabaab and Al-Qaeda. Al-Shabaab continues to draw its allegiance to Al-Qaeda.

Like this: Like Loading...
