Top stories of the day: Justice S.A. Bobde takes oath as next CJI; JNU students defy Section 144, march to Parliament, and more

The major news headlines of the day, and more.

Justice Sharad Arvind Bobde takes oath as next CJI

Justice Sharad Arvind Bobde, who has decided several key cases and was part of the recent historic Ayodhya verdict, was on Monday administered oath as the 47th Chief Justice of India by President Ram Nath Kovind.

Updates | Winter session of parliament begins

Monday marked the 250th session of Rajya Sabha. The Chit Funds (Amendment) Bill is under consideration in Lok Sabha.

JNU students defy Section 144, march to Parliament

Demanding a complete rollback of the hostel fee hike, hundreds of JNU students on Monday started their protest march from the university campus towards the Parliament amid heavy police deployment. The varsity’s students have been protesting for nearly three weeks against the draft hostel manual, which has provisions for hostel fee hike, dress code and curfew timings.

Vodafone Idea to raise mobile services rates from December 1

Debt-ridden telecom operator Vodafone Idea on Monday said it will raise mobile services rates from December 1 in the wake of ongoing financial stress. The company, however, did not disclose the range or details of the proposed tariff hike.

Maharashtra govt formation: Further talks will be held, says Sharad Pawar after meeting Sonia Gandhi

After holding talks with Congress president Sonia Gandhi, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar on November 18 said the two parties will hold talks with their allies in Maharashtra before taking a decision on government formation in the State.

Rajnath Singh hits out at countries using terrorism for political gains

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Monday hit out at countries using terrorism to pursue political goals and pitched for a strong global action against terrorist safe havens and steps to choke terror financing.

Northeast erupts in protests against Citizenship Bill move

Students’ organisations across the northeastern States took to the streets to protest against the Centre’s move to introduce the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill during the winter session of Parliament.

Uddhav Thackeray defers Nov 24 Ayodhya visit

A day after the NCP core committee resolved to form an alternative government in Maharashtra, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has put off his November 24 visit to Ayodhya, a Sena leader said on Monday.

ED seeks rectification of ‘inadvertent error’ in Chidambaram’s bail order

The Enforcement Directorate on Monday approached the Delhi High Court seeking rectification of an “inadvertent” error in the order denying bail to former Union finance minister P. Chidambaram in the INX Media money laundering case.

Cartosat-3 slated for November 25 launch with 13 U.S. nanosatellites

The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) returns to launching operational satellites this month after a hiatus of six months.

MLA Tanveer Sait attacked at a wedding, condition critical

Congress MLA and former Minister Tanveer Sait, who was attacked by a disgruntled youth with a lethal weapon at a wedding ceremony in the late hours of Sunday, underwent a surgery at a private hospital in the city. Mr. Sait was at Bal Bhavan in Bannimantap when the youth, identified as Farhaan Pasha (24) walked close to Mr. Sait, assaulted him with a knife and tried to escape.
