M.P. Congress MLA demands SIT in cow slaughter row

Demands Collector’s transfer, says invoking NSA unjustified

A Congress MLA has written to Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath demanding setting up of a SIT and transfer of the Khandwa District Collector for invoking the National Security Act on three persons accused of cow slaughter.

Bhopal Central MLA Arif Masood, in his letter sent on Friday, termed the NSA move “one-sided”, adding that the kin of the three accused had met him and had alleged that the Collector had not heard their side.

‘Slaughter shameful’

He said cow slaughter was “shameful” but reiterated that the Collector’s move to invoke the stringent NSA was unjustified.

He demanded constitution of a Special Investigation Team to probe the case and the Collector’s transfer in order to have a “fair” probe.

Mr. Masood said on Saturday, “I have written to the Chief Minister and urged him to intervene in the matter. The action taken by the police and district officials was on the basis of information given by an informer. The side of the accused should have been heard before invoking NSA.”

He claimed the minority community leaders from different parts of the country have also spoken to Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in this regard.

Earlier last week, the authorities had slapped NSA on three accused, identified as Shakeel, Nadeem and Azam, for allegedly killing a cow in Khandwa, and jailed.

Justifying the action, Khandwa Superintendent of Police Siddharth Bahuguna had said Nadeem, alias Raju, was a habitual offender and had been held earlier in a cow slaughter case as well as other criminal cases.

Communally sensitive

Khandwa is a communally sensitive area and such an incident might affect its peace and harmony and therefore, he had said, such a move was made against the three.

According to Moghat Police Station in-charge Mohan Singore, acting on a tip-off that a few persons were involved in cow slaughter, a team raided Kharkali village near here on February 1. While the accused fled from the spot, a large knife and beef was seized from there, he said.

The three were arrested on February 2 and Khandwa Collector Vishesh Gadpale later invoked NSA against them, Mr. Singore had informed.
