Punjabi horror film featuring devil worshipper set to be shot in Swadlincote

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Guarantee you'll never miss another big story by signing up for our free email updates

South Derbyshire has become an unusual destination for the location of a Punjabi horror film.

Demons and the undead may have been spotted around Willington already as filming has started.

But Amar Bolla, who is heading up a four-man film crew, is searching for more locations to complete his feature length scare-fest.

School teacher Mr Bolla, who taught at Hartshorne Primary School in 2008 and 2009, has shot the majority of his film in India.

And he has now brought the crew back to South Derbyshire, where he lives, as he believes it provides the perfect location.

The 37-year-old, from Stenson Fields, is hoping to find older-looking indoor locations for scenes set in the 1980s.

The as-yet unnamed film will be the first Punjabi horror shot by a western director, Mr Bolla claims.

He said: "Being a resident here I wanted to keep it local. I refused to go to places like Birmingham

"We filmed in Willington but there are only certain sections we can replicate. We are waiting for the floods to vanish to film outside.

"We are looking for locations around South Derbyshire, maybe an interior and possibly old that we can dress up for six weeks and we only shoot on Sundays.

"The scenes will be flashbacks set in the 1980s."

(Image: Amar Bolla)

Much of the storyline is being kept under wraps, but it includes a character who becomes possessed and a mother becoming obsessed with the devil.

Mr Bolla said: "It looks at social issues and sexism in India.

"I don't want to give much away, but it looks at sheer superstition of demons and taking advantage of the vulnerable, as well as the divide of people who are poor."

The film is being produced by Mr Bolla's Stallion's Oath film company.

Filming began a year ago in India after two years of planning, with the last few scenes to be shot in England.

While he is a primary school teacher by day Mr Bolla has also produced incidental music for television.

Anyone who thinks they may be able to provide a location for the film can email Mr Bolla at Amarjeetbolla@hotmail.com
