Route obstructed, tipsy elephant herds raid sugarcane fields in Uttarakhand

HARIDWAR: Every year between September and November, herds of elephants migrate from Rajaji National Park to Nepal via Corbett Tiger Reserve. However, this year, their stay has been prolonged.Owing to mining and unprecedented human habitation, tuskers are facing hurdles in crossing Western Circle of Kumaon region corridors, which comprise Terai East, Terai West, Terai Central, Ramnagar and Haldwani forest divisions, and are getting attracted to the sugarcane fields.The presence of “illicit liquor” is making things scary for the forest department as it is driving the pachyderms crazy and the sloshed animals are raiding sugarcane fields.Forest officials of Bajpur area said that elephants raiding crops is unusual in the Maholi region. It is rather for the first time that they are noticing elephants going berserk and ravaging crops just like they do in Chhattisgarh. In Chhattisgarh, elephants are infamous for raiding houses in search of mahua liquor and ravaging fields.RK Gautam, forest range officer of Bajpur, Central Terai forest, said, “It is true that elephants are getting high on lahan, a local drink made out of jaggery, and are raiding sugarcane fields. Lahan is stored in polythene bags and is dug deep inside the ground for fermentation. The elephants are digging the packets out and consuming it. We have also spotted polythene in their dung.” He added that villagers have told us that the sloshed jumbos are running behind them and spreading panic.Elaborating on the reason behind the animal’s prolonged stay in the Terai region, DFO of Terai Central RK Singh said that the mining season started recently. “Mining is rampant in Gola and Lalkuan areas and constructions are going on near the Nangal corridor. Tuskers are, therefore, finding it difficult to cross these belts and are stuck in the forests of Halduchaur.”He added that the devastation is much higher than the previous years. “Villagers around Maholi forest area have already suffered losses of around Rs 5 lakh is just three months,” the DFO added.Explaining pachyderm behaviour, Parag Madhukar Dhakate, conservator of forests, Western Circle, said that if access to food is easy, elephants prefer staying back in the area. “They also keep returning to these places again and again. Hence, easy availability of sugarcane has also prolonged their stay. Elephants migrate between September and November and around this time, monsoon has just retreated and the Terai region is loaded with crops,” said Dhakate, who has studied the Terai region.Bivash Pandav, senior scientist of Wildlife Institute of India who has also worked on inebriated tuskers of Chhattisgarh, said that access to illicit liquor is a clear invitation to trouble. “Elephants are very fond of liquor, and with their strong sense of smell, they can locate it from far. Their love for liquor is so much that marula tree in Africa, which is used to make Amarula liquor, is locally called elephant tree.”Ramesh Singh, 53, a villager said, “This is becoming a big worry as my family has already suffered crop loss worth over a lakh. Also, in 2012, a tusker died after consuming large quantity of hooch. So, if not controlled the menace can pose threat to both humans and animals.”
