Authorities bust 2 men for smuggling fake notes into India via West Bengal

This is the first instance when an Andhra link of FICN smugglers has been established | REUTERS image for representation

Police from Farakka police station arrested two persons on Friday (February 8) in fake currency case.

Arrested persons are residents of Chittoor district in Andhra Pradesh. The police seized high quality fake Indian currency notes (FICN) from them. Case under relevant sections have been registered against the accused

The police nabbed Raghunand Naidu and Rajesh Deval after they raided a hotel along a highway in the Farakka town of West Bengal. The arrest of persons dealing in fake currency has stirred many intelligence circles in the country.

According to the reports, many FICN rackets from Bangladesh have been trying to find new routes and methods to smuggle counterfeit Indian currency notes into India and kick-off its distribution.

Officials are of the view that the rackets had recruited truckers from Andhra Pradesh. These truckers transport stones and fish to West Bengal.

THE RAID AND ARREST

In-charge of Farakka police station -- Udaishankar Ghosh -- led a raid team after receiving a tip off on a hotel along NH 34.

During the raid Raghunand Naidu and Rajesh Deval were detained from a hotel.

When their belongings were searched, it was revealed that they were in possession of 350 pieces of high quality FICN. These 350 notes were of Rs 2,000 denomination.

INTERROGATION

Interrogation of the arrested persons revealed Rajesh, who is a truck driver, and Naidu travelled to Howrah. They then took a train to Farakka.

Interrogation also revealed involvement of a businessman who played a handler in the case. The businessman for Baishnabnagar, Malda, came over to the hotel room and handed out the consignment of the fake notes to the accused persons. The accused have claimed they paid a sum of Rs 1 lakh to the businessman.

The accused had planned to circulate fake Indian notes across Andhra Pradesh markets.

FAKE INDIAN CURRENCY IN THE DISTRICT

FICN around Rs 1.24 crore have been seized in the district where the authorities nabbed 84 persons in the related cases.

Many of the arrested persons were often found to be daily wage labourers from Malda and Murshidabad, a few were from Bihar and Jharkhand as well.

This is the first instance when an Andhra link of FICN smugglers has been established.
