Ahead of Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior trailer release, here's all you need to know about Tanaji Malusare

Here's all you need to know about Tanaji Malusare | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Directed by Om Raut, Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior starring Ajay Devgn, Saif Ali Khan and Kajol is based on the life of Tanaji Malusare, the commander in chief in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj's army While the movie is slated for a January 10, 2020 release, the trailer of the film is all set to be out today Ahead of its trailer release, here's all you need to know about bravery and valour of Tanaji Malusare

Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior is an upcoming period drama film starring Ajay Devgn, Saif Ali Khan and Kajol. Directed by Om Raut, the film is based on the life of legendary Tanaji Malusare. The posters of the film have been loved and the movie is highly anticipated. While most of us know Tanaji as the person who fought alongside Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, but there was more to him apart from this. Let’s take a look at the man who challenged the Mughal Empire.

Born in the 1600s in Godavli, Javali Taluka (Satara, Maharashtra, India) Tanaji was a brave and fierce warrior. He was the commander of Maratha ruler Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. The legendary warrior fought alongside Maratha leader Shivaji Maharaj in various battles throughout the years. In 1670 when Shivaji Maharaj summoned him for a meeting, Tanaji put the wedding plan of his son Rayaba on hold and went to meet him. On hearing Shivaji Maharaj's plan to recapture Kondhana fort near Pune from the Mughals, Tanaji took the uphill charge of the campaign and started his preparations.

At that time, the Kondana fort was controlled by Udaybhan Rathod, a Rajput officer appointed by Mughal general Jai Singh I. With the will to recapture the fort under any circumstance, Tanaji with an army of 800 people marched on to conquer Kondana fort. The ace strategist, along with a troop of 300, was said to have scaled the fort from the western side on a dark night with the help of a domesticated Bengal monitor lizard (called Ghorpad in Marathi) named Yashwanti to which they were said to have tied ropes and sent crawling up top to the precipice of the fort.

After two failed attempts, Tanaji and his men successfully scaled the steep hill fortress. Once they were inside and after opening the Kalyan Darwaza, Tanaji, his men and another detachment of 500 troops headed by Suryaji (his younger brother) attacked the army holding down the fort. Fierce combat took place between the forces of Tanaji and Udaybhan. During the battle, Tanaji broke his shield but he continued fighting by tying his upper garment over his defending hand in order to ward off Udaybhan's blows.

After a lengthy fight, Tanaji Malusare lost his life, Shelar Mama avenged Tanaji by killing Udaybhan. Suryaji defeated the remaining garrison and took over the Kondana fort, now known as Sinhagad. When Shivaji Maharaj heard about the valour and demise of his close friend and

commander Tanaji, the Maratha chief’s said, "Gad alaa pan sinha gelaa", which translates to "The fort is captured but the lion (Tanaji Malusare) has died".

Shivaji Maharaj then renamed the fort from Kondhana fort to Sinhagad in the name of his former commander and as a testimony of his sacrifice, his statue stands tall at the fort.

Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior official trailer

Such was the valour of Tanaji that Ajay Devgn decided to produce and star in a film on the brave Maratha warrior whose story needs to be told to generations.

Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior is slated for a January 10, 2020 release.
