4 soldiers, 2 porters die in Siachen avalanche: Why are Indian troops at the world’s highest battleground?

Since 1984, thousands of Indian soldiers have lost their lives to the extreme weather conditions at the Siachen Glacier | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights According to some reports, India spends somewhere between Rs 5 to Rs 7 crore daily towards maintaining its presence on the glacier The ambiguity in the wording of the Karachi Agreement was originally not anticipated to be a point of contention owing to the region’s general inhabitability, and sheer lack of resources in its vicinity Since 1984, the Siachen Glacier has been the site of several encounters between Indian and Pakistani forces

An avalanche at the Siachen Glacier claimed the lives of four Indian Army personnel and two porters on Monday, once again throwing into sharp focus the enduring debate around the heavy cost in terms of men and resources India incurs to protect one of the most desolate and inhabitable regions in the world. At a height of 20,000 feet, the Siachen Glacier is, reportedly, the highest militarised region across the world, with soldiers stationed there, burdened with the Herculean challenge of balancing the threat of perilous natural conditions with that of Pakistani insurgents.

According to some reports, India spends somewhere between Rs 5 to Rs 7 crore daily towards maintaining its presence on the glacier. As of February 2016, there were some 3000 soldiers stationed at a location where temperatures have been known to fall below negative 60 degrees Celsius. It is also believed that between India's first deployment of troops at Siachen in 1984, and 2016, over 8,000 soldiers have lost their lives, the majority due to the region’s treacherous weather and dangerous topography.

So why is it that India continues to invest in keeping a presence in Siachen? The answer lies in an Indo-Pakistan conflict that has its roots in the 1949 Karachi Agreement inked between the two nations, that described a Ceasefire Line. According to the agreement, the Ceasefire Line ran up to a coordinate labelled NJ 9842, and “…thence north to the glaciers.” The ambiguity in the wording of the agreement was originally not anticipated to be a point of contention owing to the region’s general inhospitableness, and its lack of resources. The 1972 Shimla Agreement, which delineated the Line of Control, also did not address this boundary issue.





However, it was only years after the Shimla Agreement that India came to realise that the territory was being appropriated by Pakistan. Accusing Pakistan of “cartographic invasion”, India also soon learnt of Pakistan's intentions to invest in high-altitude fighting equipment and gear. Pre-empting a Pakistani occupation, India airlifted two large platoons of soldiers onto two key passes along the Saltoro Ridge. In doing so, it not only managed to cut off Pakistan’s incursion but take control of other key tributary glaciers and passes.

Since 1984, the Siachen Glacier has been the site of several encounters between Indian and Pakistani forces, but according to some commentators, India’s strategic presence acts as a “wedge” between Baltistan in PoK, and the Chinese-occupied Shaksgam Valley, thereby preventing a “military link-up” between two nations that India has had seemingly unending border disputes with. However, others have contended that if Pakistan and China were to mull a joint offensive to invade Ladakh, it is highly unlikely they would risk doing so via Siachen’s mountainous terrain. As such, they believe that India’s continued military presence may be more political, than strategic.

The reality is though, that any demilitarisation in the region would require guarantees from both nations, and perhaps even international ratification.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
