Minor girl out for morning walk in Mumbai, abducted in broad daylight; gang-raped for 12 hours

Mumbai police are carrying out raids to nab the remaining accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The survivor was out on a morning walk when she was abducted She was taken to an under-construction building in Malad Mumbai police have arrested three of the four accused

Mumbai: Police in Nalasopara area of Mumbai city have arrested three men in connection with the alleged abduction and gang-rape of a minor girl earlier this month. Meanwhile, a manhunt is underway to nab the fourth accused who remains to be at large. All of those identified by name in the FIR have been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

In her complaint, the 17-year-old girl stated that she was out on a morning walk with a group of her friends on Friday when an autorickshaw blocked their way. Three men from inside the autorickshaw threatened her with knives and demanded that she accompanies them. When her friends objected, the accused used violence to intimidate and scare them before fleeing with the kidnapped minor.

She was then taken to an under-construction building in the Evershine Nagar area of Malad where another man joined the three accused. The four men then took turns raping the minor girl. Police officials familiar with the case said that the survivor was gang-raped for 12 hours before the accused dropped her off at the same point where they had abducted her from a day earlier.

On Saturday evening, the girl approached the Mumbai police and registered an official complaint in this regard. It is also being reported that she knew one of the accused. Footage from CCTV cameras was examined and all of the four accused were identified. Raids were carried out to nab them and three have been arrested while one is still on the run. More details are awaited as this is a developing story. However, the heinous nature of the crime, the brazen abduction in broad daylight suggests either a breakdown of law and order or a depreciating fear of it.

A similar incident was reported from the city of Mumbai in Maharashtra earlier this year when a 19-year-old girl was gang-raped during her birthday celebrations in Chunabhatti area of the city. The incident, which took place in July, shocked even city police officials tasked with investigating the case. The survivor, a resident of Aurangabad, arrived in Mumbai on July 7 of this year. A group of her friends took her to a home in Chunabhatti area where they cut a cake for her before taking turns to rape her. The matter was brought to the attention of police and a case registered in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of gang-rape.
