Married Indian Uncle Shoots Niece & Himself in ‘Suicide Pact’

He took out a gun and shot his niece in the back.

An Indian uncle shot his niece before turning the gun on himself on Sunday, November 17, 2019. The incident happened in the city of Batala, Punjab, India.

According to police, the double shooting was the result of a suicide pact.

However, while the married man died in hospital, his niece survived but is in a critical condition.

The deceased was identified as Major Singh, a married man who was an official in the army. His niece was identified as Rupinder Kaur.

Following the shooting, police launched an investigation to find out why Singh shot his niece before shooting himself.

They found out that Rupinder worked at a beauty parlour. Her landlord, Rajwant Kaur, confirmed that Major Singh was her uncle.

The apparent suicide pact happened on the terrace at Rupinder’s apartment on the night of November 17.

Reportedly, Singh had met with Rupinder but the meeting led to confusion as Rupinder did not know what it was about.

The matter resulted in the Indian uncle becoming enraged. He took out a gun and shot his niece in the back.

Assuming that she was dead, Singh turned the gun on himself and fired it.

Rajwant had heard a gunshot and immediately alerted police. Another gunshot was heard shortly after.

Officers arrived at the scene and went to the terrace of Rupinder’s home where they found the bloodshed bodies of Singh and Rupinder.

The uncle and niece were rushed to Civil Hospital Batala.

However, doctors declared the army official dead, stating that a gunshot wound to the head was the cause.

Meanwhile, Rupinder was transferred to a hospital in Amritsar where she remains in a critical condition.

DSP Krishna Singla explained that Singh’s body has been kept in the hospital’s mortuary while investigations are ongoing.

Both sets of families have also been informed. Officers are working to find out what the conversation between Singh and his niece was about prior to the shooting.

Police officers have also come up with two possibilities as to what led to the shooting.

One theory is that the uncle was either having an affair or was infatuated with his niece. His feelings were so strong that he wanted to create a suicide pact, by shooting her and then himself.

Another possibility is that they were having an affair and their relatives found out. The only way out was to commit suicide.

But the real reason will only be known once Rupinder Kaur recovers.
