Ram Lalla counsel Parasaran to visit Ayodhya, offer prayer at makeshift temple

Ninety-two-year-old K Parasaran was the lead counsel for Ram Lalla in the Supreme Court in the Ayodhya title suit.

Following the favourable verdict from the Supreme Court in the Ayodhya title suit, lawyers representing Ram Lalla Virajman -- including 92-year-old K Parasaran - are set to pay a visit to the Uttar Pradesh city. Parasaran and other lawyers of his team will visit Ayodhya on November 23 to offer prayer at the makeshift Ram temple.

Speaking to India Today, Triloki Nath Pandey, a key Hindu litigant said, "We congratulate legal luminary K Parasaran for successfully arguing for possession of the land in the top court in favour of the deity Ram Lalla Virajmaan."

Family members of the lawyers will also accompany them on their visit to Ayodhya. "We will be welcoming the lawyers at Karyasevakpuram, where prominent seers will also be present," Pandey said adding, "There could be more than 50 people visiting the temple. We will present shawls to them."

The Supreme Court on November 9 ruled the Babri Masjid-Ram Janmabhoomi title suit of Ayodhya in favour of Ram Lalla, the presiding deity of the place bringing an end to the seven-decade old legal battle over the ownership of 2.77 acre of land in the compound.

The Suprme Court used its special powers, under Article 142, to allocate a separate land of 5 acre to the Sunni Waqf Board holding the demolition of Babri Masjid an illegal act. Parasaran was the lead counsel for Ram Lalla in the Supreme Court.

Pandey said the Parasaran and his team's visit will be organised inside the Karyasevakpuram premises between 3-6 pm on November 22. "We will not hold any public event as Section 144 is imposed. The district administration has also been informed about the visit," said Pandey.

Parasaran will also be handing over a copy of the Ayodhya judgment to the divisional commissioner of the district.

The head priest of the makeshift Ram temple, Mahant Satyendra Das said, "The lawyers will be welcomed in Ayodhya. I have been informed that they will also be coming to offer prayers at the Ram Janmabhoomi (birthplace). K Parasaran and his team have played the most important role and we all must thank them."

Senior priest of Hanumangarhi temple, Mahant Raju Das said, "They are also expected to offer prayers at Hanumangarhi temple. We will be welcoming lawyers and their family members."

The Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) spokesperson Sharad Sharma said, "We are not organising any public rally and no speeches will be made due to the restrictions in the temple town. We will only be giving shawls to them to thank them. The conclusion of one of the oldest land dispute is very positive."

Babri Masjid litigant Iqbal Ansari said, "In Ayodhya, people belonging to every community are given love and respect. If the lawyers are coming then they should be welcomed. I personally have no objections."

Parasaran has served as Attorney General of India in the past. He also appeared in the Sabrimala case to defend the ban on entry of menstruating women in the Kerala temple. Many call him "Pitamah" (literally meaning grandfather) of the Indian bar.
