CPI(M) leader’s comments triggers a row

Mohanan alleged that Muslim extremist outfits were offering help to Maoists in State

A statement made by P. Mohanan, Kozhikode district secretary of the CPI (M), that Muslim extremist outfits were offering help to Maoists has sparked off a political storm in the State with the Indian Union Muslim League (IUML) and the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) accusing the ruling party of trying to save itself when its members were booked for Maoist links.

Speaking after inaugurating the valedictory session of the Kerala State Karshaka Thozhilali Union (KSKTU) district unit conference at Thamarassery, Mr. Mohanan had said that Muslim radical outfits were nurturing the growth of Maoists in the State.

Mr. Mohanan said that such forces were behind promoting the banned CPI (Maoists). The police should probe the bonhomie that exist between the Islamic fundamentalists and Maoists. Now all the controversy that erupted in Kozhikode pointed to this aspect, he said.

His statements comes at a time when the city police were investigating the case of two CPI (M) workers - Alan Suhaib and Thaha Fasal - booked under the UAPA for alleged Maoist links a fortnight ago.

IUML charge

However, IUML State general secretary K.P.A.Majeed said that Mr. Mohanan’s remark was borne out of guilt and to divert attention that his party members were arrested under the UAPA.

Since the two suspected Maoists arrested were Muslim youths, the party was trying to save its skin by squarely blaming Muslim extremism, he said.

He also said that the CPI(M) had employed a similar tactic by affixing two stickers in Arabic “Masha Allah” on the car used by the assailants in the T.P. Chandrasekharan murder case. Mr. Mohanan was also arraigned as an accused in the case then, Mr. Majeed said.

Asking Mr. Mohanan to name the organisation which he was referring to, Mr. Majeed also said the CPI(M) cannot evade responsibility when Maoists and extremists had sought refugee in the party.

PFI flays CPI(M)

Reacting to Mr. Mohanan’s comments, the Popular Front of India, said that CPI(M) was echoing the anti-Muslim posture of the Sangh Parivar to get political mileage in the State. The statement also showed how close the CPI(M) was with the BJP in adopting an anti-Muslim stand, PFI State secretary A. Abdul Sathar said.

P. Abdul Hammed, SDPI State general secretary, said that the statements only paved the way for strengthening Hindutva apologists. The party was aiming at the twin objectives of warding off criticism as well as appeasing the Hindu communal forces, he said.
