UP: Man held for ‘raping four-year-old girl, setting her house on fire’

A four-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a 35-year-old farmer from her locality in Lakhimpur Kheri district late on Sunday night. The accused also set a portion of the victim’s house on fire after her parents rejected his offer of Rs 200 for not lodging a police complaint. Police have arrested the accused.

Initially, the victim was rushed to the local Community Health Centre, from where she was shifted to the district hospital.

“On Sunday night, the accused lured the girl with a candy from outside her house, and took her to a secluded place nearby. There he raped the girl in an inebriated state and fled from the spot, leaving her injured. The victim, who was bleeding, somehow managed to walk back to her house. She was rushed to the local Community Health Centre from where she was referred to the district hospital,” said Dharamdas Siddharth, Station House Officer of Hyderabad police station.

“The victim’s parents came to know that the accused was seen taking the girl with him. They decided to go to the police. When the accused got to know this, he offered Rs 200 to the family to settle the matter. When the family members refused the offer, he set a portion of the victim’s house on fire using kerosene oil. The fire was immediately doused by the local residents. The accused, meanwhile, was caught by the people and was later arrested by the police,” said Siddharth.

An FIR against the accused has been registered under sections 376 (rape) and 436 (mischief by fire) of the Indian Penal Code along with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Police said the accused is married with three children. His wife and and children were at his in-laws’ place for nearly a month. The girl’s parents are farm labourers.

15-year-old rape victim commits suicide in Bijnor

Bijnor: A 15-year-old girl hanged herself from the ceiling of her room here on Tuesday, a day after she was allegedly raped by two men of her village, police said.

Her mother alleged that the girl was raped on Monday and she narrated the incident to her sister on Tuesday morning and later hanged herself, they said.

Station House Officer Ashutosh Kumar said the body has been sent for post-mortem and the matter is being investigated.

The SHO said police are trying to trace the accused, who are absconding.
