Passenger dies, cop hurt as pvt bus turns turtle after hitting barricades, PCR car

Ludhiana: A passenger was killed and a cop injured after a speeding private bus turned turtle after hitting police barricades and a PCR car in Ishwar Colony on GT Road late on Monday night.

Police said the driver of the Chandigarh-Ludhiana bus was drunk and escaped from the spot after the accident.

The deceased has been identified as Rajesh Verma, 50, a resident of Uttar Pradesh, and the injured as assistant sub-inspector Jaswinder Singh.

Assistant sub-inspector Jagjeet Singh, who along with Jaswinder and other cops was deputed at the spot, said in his police complaint, “Around 10.30pm, we had established a check-post outside Ishwar Colony police post. Minutes later, we saw a speeding private bus coming from Chandigarh side. We signalled it to stop. But instead of jamming on the brakes, its driver crashed into the barricades and the police van before turning over. Nearly 10 passengers were inside the bus.”

The cops deployed at the checkpost ran to save their lives, but Jaswinder was injured.

“When the bus turned turtle, Rajesh fell out of its window and was mowed down by its wheels. We took Rajesh and Jaswinder to a hospital, where the former succumbed during treatment. Rajesh was travelling to Ludhiana to visit his relatives,” Jagjeet added.

The passengers told police that the bus driver was drinking while driving. “He paid no heed to our numerous objections,” said a passenger.

Ishwar Colony police post in-charge assistant sub-inspector Surjeet Singh said, “The driver fled when the cops were busy rescuing passengers. But he has been identified as Shingara Singh of Katani, Ludhiana. He has been booked under sections 308 (attempt to commit culpable homicide), 279 (rash driving), 337 (causing hurt by act endangering life or person safety of others), 338 (causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) and 427 (mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees) of the IPC. We are trying to trace him.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
