Dhan Dhana Dhan Done: After Vodafone-Airtel, Reliance Jio Will Increase Monthly Charges Too

It is not a great time for telecom operators in our country. While leading companies like Vodafone-Idea and Airtel trying to survive in the cut-throat market by increasing their tariffs starting next month.

Reliance Jio has now decided to join this bandwagon.

Reuters

The brand that created this chaos in the first place, with its aggressive pricing strategy and claims to be the most affordable in the competition, has also announced that it will be increasing it's tariffs.

The statement came just a day after Airtel and Vodafone-Idea's announcement, stating: "Like other operators, we will also work with the government and comply with the regulatory regime to strengthen the industry to benefit Indian consumers and take measures, including appropriate increase in tariffs in next few weeks,"

However, in case you were wondering that the prices would go exponentially high, you'd be somewhat pleased to hear that Jio will do it in a manner that doesn't impact data consumption or growth in digital adoption.

Jio also wants to shift the customers on 2G to a 4G environment. It further added in the statement, " There are still over 40 crore Indian consumers who have not benefited from the advent of the latest technologies. We believe that the ambitious objectives of the 'Digital India' mission can be achieved only if India is made "2G-mukt" in the shortest time-frame possible... This requires continued investment at an industry level."

Reuters

Recently, reports revealed that Bharti Airtel and Vodafone reported a loss of around 74,000 crores (Vodafone Idea: 50,921 crores/ Airtel: Rs 23,045 crores) in the previous quarter after statutory dues arose out of the September quarter.

The Supreme court upheld a demand from the telecoms department for $13 billion in overdue levies and interest last month, hitting the shares of both Vodafone Idea and rival Bharti Airtel. Vodafone has clashed with Indian authorities over tax and regulatory issues ever since it entered the country.
