Mysuru: 5 more arrested for attack on MLA Tanveer Sait

2

4x7 security for legislator

Recovering MLA meets family

MYSURU: Five more people were arrested on Tuesday for making a bid on former Congress minister and Narasimharaja MLA Tanveer Sait on Sunday.Investigators said Akram alias Don Akram, Abid Pasha, Noor Khan, Muheeb and Muzzamil, had hatched a plot to kill Sait and provided logistical support for the attacker.One of the five was waiting on a bike outside the venue, where the five-time MLA was attending a music performance, to help the assailant, Farhan Pasha alias Maqbool, 24, make an escape. Police produced the suspects — members of a political outfit — in a court that sent them to judicial custody.Investigators suspect the attack on the MLA, who has held the Narasimharaja seat since a byelection to the constituency in 2002, was politically motivated. Police are questioning other suspects with links to Farhan, who is now in police custody. Farhan, who worked as an assistant to his craftsman-father, appeared at the venue of the mushaira, held late Sunday night as part of a wedding reception, and swung a butcher’s knife at Sait’s neck, before attempting to flee. Sait’s supporters caught Farhan and handed him over to police.Police on Tuesday provided Sait with 24×7 security, assigning two gunmen to ensure his safety. They have been detailed about possible threats to the MLA, City Armed Reserve DCP Channaiah said. The department has suspended Sait’s gunman, Fairoz, who was on duty when he was attacked, for dereliction of duty, said police commissioner KT Balakrishna. CAR will evaluate fitness and efficiency of all gunmen.Thirty hours after undergoing a surgery, Sait met his family. Dr Upendra Shenoy, chief of medical services, Columbia Asia Hospital, said his condition had improved significantly. “The wounds have started to heal, and his kidney function has returned to normal, but he will remain in the ICU for some time,” Shenoy said. “We conducted a four-hour operation on damaged nerves and veins in his neck and have sewn back in place part of an earlobe that had been severed,” he said. Sources said the MLA is likely to be shifted to a Hyderabad hospital.
