Enchanted in Egypt, by Bring Me Somewhere Nice

clientIdentifier : TDdKeStQcDNTT0w5ZlBpVG81eVRDQ0t1N3dPanRsM3M2YVlTUWNybm1vT3NYUkVVR04wMWNseHM1SzlLVUFKOUFkVTN1dVVtSGxJRVpRenhnTmhWYlAwZjJySE8vL1JYYThGYnVKLzJrcWVFRS9YdCtldGg4eDFWay9RbDN4UWI=

posts : Array ( [0] => 69664 )

Ever been to Cairo? According to Berlin-based photographer Dani Rodriguez of Bring Me Somewhere Nice, it’s “an insane, tumultuous, heaving realm of chaos. But it’s also majestic and proud, evocative and mysterious.”

All Photos © Bring Me Somewhere Nice

Photographing a wedding in Egypt, says Rodriguez, wasn’t easy. “You are always surrounded by tons of people moving from one place to another and it can take ages to get anywhere. And every wedding at the end is always late.”

Despite the challenges, though, Rodriguez still fell in love with this wedding between couple Gabriela and Adam, and with Egypt in general. “The simultaneous crowding and expanse can be felt everywhere,” he says. “Driving from one place to another can take ages—traffic is dense, very dense, but in one way it dances like a waltz. For all of its craziness, Cairo somehow still feels right…and in my opinion it is its warm people who make this place even more attractive.”

Rodriguez adds that he particularly enjoyed shooting in Old Cairo. “It was like a journey to the past,” he explains. “We just walked around and spontaneously found some interesting places to shoot in. We needed more than one hour to arrive to Old Cairo from where we were staying, so initially I forgot about golden light. Sometimes I could find some places indoors, or little streets where the light was more gentle.”

Traveling to the pyramids caused the memories to really flood for both Rodriguez and bride Gabriela, whose calling for Egypt, says the photographer, started at a young age. And for Rodriguez himself, he says images came to my mind of his childhood back when he watched documentaries about Egypt with his father.

“I just could not believe where I was,” he says. “Of course, to get to the pyramids you need to go through many check points, ask for permission, there’s tons of people, tour guides asking for commissions, police…but then I realized I am in Egypt and the splendor of the pyramids themselves made it all worth it.”

One of the most special moments for Rodriguez was the Zaffa. “Zaffa is an ancient Egyptian tradition, a traditional wedding procession leading the couple and the entire wedding party to the reception. Dozens of musicians with drums, horns, bagpipes. I still can’t get that sound out of my head. It was so impressive.”

At the end of it all, Rodriguez says the wedding was a great experience for him, not only for the photos he took but, “also for what I felt inside all those days. I can’t be grateful enough for all the experiences my work allows me and for all the great people I have met and will meet on this path.”

GEAR OF THE DAY

Cameras: Canon 5D Mark III and Canon 5D Mark IV

Lenses: Canon EF 35mm f/1.4l II USM, Canon EF 50mm f/1.8, Canon EF 24mm f/1.4 and Canon EF 85mm f/1.8

Lighting: Canon Speedlight 580 EX

VENDOR CREDITS

Venues: Marriot Mena House and Maison Bleue

Dress: Designed by Laudae, bought at Heart Alfutter Bridal

Shoes:– Kurt Geiger

Hairpiece: Lizeron Paris

Veil: Heart Aflutter Bridal

Earrings: Bespoke, made in India

Make up artist: Kiki Beautique

Hair: Richard El Boustany

Wedding rings: Bespoke, made and engraved in Egypt

Wedding Planner: Rustique Events

Suit – Ahmed Hamdy

DJ: Dan Healy aus London

Check out more Weddings of the Week, and email Jacqueline Tobin with submissions.


