Jharkhand: Tribal professor jailed for beef comment in Potka fray

JAMSHEDPUR: Tribal activist and college professor Jeetrai Hansda , who was jailed earlier this year over his social media post on beef consumption, has jumped into the poll fray. Hansda (42) filed his nomination papers from Potka constituency on a Jharkhand People's Party (JPP) ticket. The seat is currently represented by BJP's Maneka Sardar and polling will take place here in the second phase on December 7.Hansda was arrested on May 25, two days after the results of the general elections were declared, on the basis of a complaint filed against him in June 2017. He is currently out on bail. A lawyer handling Hansda's case had said he suspects the arrest was after the polls as BJP did not want to upset the adivasi communities before the polls. The saffron party won 11 of 13 Lok Sabha seats it contested while its ally Ajsu Party won one.According to the FIR lodged by saffron outfits at Sakchi police station in Jamshedpur in June 2017, Hansda had posted about spoke of tribals' tradition of eating beef and conducting ceremonial cow sacrifice. He also wrote that it was the their democratic and cultural right to consume beef. After his arrest, Hansda lost his job as guest faculty member at the Graduate School College for Women. Jharkhand had passed a law banning cow slaughter in 2005.A native of Bagbera locality, Hansda has a Masters degree in political science and a diploma in technical designing from National School of Drama. Speaking to TOI, Hansda on Monday said, said, "We eat what we sacrifice to our forefathers and the community god while offering prayers. Hence, the government should not impose regulations on the choice of our food habits and traditional practices. Law will take its own course on my post but I am confident that tribal people in my constituency will do justice to me."He said education and healthcare will be his key agenda for the polls. Citing the ongoing protest by students of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) in Delhi over hostel fee hikes, He accused the BJP government at Centre of ignoring the the poor and marginalised people's aspirations to pursue higher education. "The hostel fee hike will prevent several youths from studying at JNU. The government is trying to create obstacles for poor youngsters from backward classes to pursue higher education. For, SC, ST and OBC students, education should be free from kindergarten till post-graduation. Most families in Potka hail from low-income families. In my campaign, I will raise the issue of JNU students' protest to explain the BJP government's anti-backward class stance."He added, "If I win, the first thing I will work for is to make sure that educated youths from ST, SC and OBC communities get unemployment allowance till they get jobs. Like the Sikh community, who are allowed to carry kripan in public places, tribals should also be allowed to carry bows and arrows without restriction," he said.
