Dancer Gayatri Raguram's Twitter account suspended after remarks on Thirumavalavan

Dancer Gayatri Raguram's Twitter account suspended after remarks on Thirumavalavan

The choreographer and VCK supporters have been engaged in an online feud over the past week.

news Controversy

Dancer and actor Gayathri Raguram’s Twitter account was suspended on Tuesday after her remarks on VCK chief Thol Thirumavalavan. The actor has been engaged in an online feud with supporters of the Dalit political leader after a video emerged of Thirumavalavan describing the structure of Hindu temples along with those of other religious structures. Gayathri’s account was suspended for violating Twitter rules, according to the social media website. She had issued an ‘open challenge’ to the political leader, asking him to meet her at 10 am at Marina beach in Chennai.

The actor, who was last seen in the reality television show Bigg Boss Tamil has reportedly said that the mobile number of her assistant was being circulated and alleged harassment. Stating that the MP was speaking ill of Hindus, she asked Thirumavalavan to be present at 10 am on the morning of November 27 to 'talk human rights'. The Kollywood choreographer, with over 300,000 followers on the social networking site also said that she would be filing a police complaint. Further, the actor called upon PMK, a party that is conventionally at odds with the VCK, and PMK chief S Ramadoss, stating, “Right leader to control such people is #DrRamadoss aiya who believes in god. I hope he stands by me and support my condemnation on VCK. support Hindus and women and me. We seek your support to Control the atrocities and harassment by VCK.”

Supporters of VCK, on the other hand, took to Twitter to retaliate against the actor's comments. While some were seen asking her not to use abusive words against their leader, many took to slut-shaming Gayathri in sexist language. A group of VCK cadres reportedly undertook a protest on Monday after Gayathri had condemned the speech given by Thirumavalavan. The VCK leader was expressing displeasure at the Ayodhya verdict at a meeting on November 9. In a video that has gone viral across social media he can be heard saying that temples have 'dirty dolls' referring to statues and carvings.
