NCP MLA Jitendra Awhad threatens makers of Tanhaji, says 'stop wrong depiction of history'

NCP MLA Jitendra Awhad with party chief Sharad Pawar | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Sambhaji Brigade has also sought clarification from the director of the film about certain scenes Tanhaji is known for the role he played in the Battle of Sinhagad in 1670 The fort was renamed by Shivaji Maharaj as Sinhagad to honour the sacrifice of Tanaji

Mumbai: The Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) has threatened makers of film Tanhaji, based on the life of Maratha warrior Tanhaji Malusare, to desist from depicting history wrongly.

NCP legislator Jitendra Awhad, who represents Mumbra-Kalwa constituency, issued a threat to film director, writer and producer Om Raut. Taking to his Twitter handle, Awhad said that that he has watched the trailer of his film telling him to make immediate changes. He further said that he will take action if all the required changes are not made, adding that if the director considers his demand as a threat then he is free to do so.

Earlier, the Sambhaji Brigade sought clarification from the director of the film about certain scenes.

In the letter, the organisation has alleged that the movie has made a deliberate attempt to stamp out Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj's secular image by showing Om on the saffron flag.

Tanaji Malusare, a military leader in the Maratha empire had fought alongside Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj in many battles but was most famously known for the role he played in the Battle of Sinhagad in 1670.

The fort was in control of Udaybhan Rathod, a Rajput officer who had been appointed by Mughal general Jai Singh I. A fierce battle broke out between both the forces and Udaybhan was defeated. However, Tanaji lost his life while fighting. Upon hearing the news of his friend and trusted aide Tanaji’s death, Shivaji Maharaj is believed to have said, “Gad ala pan Sinha gela (We have gained the fort, but lost a lion.)”

The fort was renamed by Shivaji Maharaj as Sinhagad (Lion Fort) to honour the sacrifice of Tanaji.

Another Bollywood period drama Panipat is at the centre of a diplomatic controversy. According to reports, the Afghanistan embassy feels that the film might portray Abdali’s character in a bad light. The embassy has also written to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and has aired their concern.

In a letter to Prakash Javadekar, the embassy said that the movie has distorted the image of the Afghan ruler which might hurt the sentiments of Afghan citizens and can also affect bilateral ties between the two countries.

Taking to his Twitter account, former Afghanistan Ambassador to India Shaida Abdali said, “Dear @duttsanjay Ji: Historically, the Indian cinema has been extremely instrumental in strengthening the Indo-Afghan ties - I very much hope that the film 'Panipat' has kept that fact in mind while dealing with this important episode of our shared history.”

Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior, starring Ajay Devgn, Saif Ali Khan, and Kajol will be released on 10 January 2020.
