KBC 11 Contestant Tells Big B How He Sang A 'Sooryavansham' Song To Pacify A Kid But Failed!

There can never be a host better than Amitabh Bachchan for KBC. Come on! His banter with his fans and the contestants of the show is so priceless! Be it comforting them with his sheer niceness or diving deeper into their personal life and digging out anecdotes, Big B knows it all.

Big B is again making headlines, thanks to a recent episode that was aired on November 19. Contestant Jitender Singh, who is an aspiring chartered accountant from Delhi confessed to Big B that once he tried to pacify a baby by singing a song from Amitabh Bachchan's Sooryavansham but failed. The conversation began when contestant Jitender mentioned that he believed that having a girlfriend was a waste of time.

Amitabh further mentioned that that many of the viewers of KBC were women and that they wouldn’t like what he said. To which, Jitender corrected himself and said that he wouldn’t do it again as Amitabh had asked him not to.

Jitender asked Amitabh if singing a song to pacify a child helped, to which Amitabh replied that it does. Big B decided to pull his leg further by saying that if he found women a waste of time, why was he thinking of having children.

Jitendar burst out laughing and Big B further asked him if he had tried the trick on any child, to which the contestant had replied saying that he had, but only whistled. Sadly, it hadn’t worked for him.

As per the report, the contestant went home with a prize money of Rs 3,20,000.

According to reports, Big B recently did an 18-hour shift for KBC. Big B had taken ill and reportedly had a makeshift hospital bed put up at his home. Post that, he went back to work and shot three episodes of KBC.

In a recent blog post, Amitabh had mentioned that he is doing 18-hour shifts at work. In it, he mentioned that owing to the backlog that piled up when he was in hospital, he shot three episodes of Kaun Banega Crorepati, in one day.

“Yes, sir, I work. I work every day. I worked yesterday, it lasted 18 hours. It gave me reassurance, love and blessings,” read the post. Amitabh has also been inspiring fans to find joy in work. Recently, he posted a motivational quote with a photograph that shows him on the KBC set. “There is no work without work,” went the caption of the picture.

Because of his health issues, Big B had to cancel his trip to the 25th Kolkata International Film Festival. The veteran actor was scheduled to inaugurate the festival, where he has been a guest for the past six years.
