Punjab gangster admits to cold-blooded murder of man over 'old enmity' on Facebook

The picture put up by Sandhu on his Facebook timeline | Photo Credit: Facebook

Chandigarh: A gangster from the state of Punjab shocked the world after he admitted to the murder of a 26-year-old man in Amritsar district through a post on social media platform Facebook. Identified as Harwinder Singh Sandhu, the man posted a picture of himself and another male brandishing guns and took responsibility for the appalling crime that took place on Tuesday evening.

Police in Amritsar told media outlets that the victim, a resident of Pandori village, was returning home on a scooter when two men on a motorcycle blocked his way. Around 6 pm, the assailants opened fire at Mandeep Singh. As many as eight bullets entered Singh's body resulting in instant death at the scene of the crime.

Barely hours after committing the crime, Sandhu took to Facebook and claimed responsibility for Singh's murder. In his post, Sandhu said that his Batala-based gang carried out the attack. "We committed the murder in Pandori for honour. We had an old enmity with the man. If we can open 25 rounds, we can also fire 100 rounds and anybody who commits a similar mistake in the future will face the same fate," said Sandhu in his post. He also added that the police should act but "no innocent person should be booked in this case".

Senior superintendent of police, Amritsar (rural) Vikramjit Singh Duggal told mediapersons that local law enforcement has launched a manhunt for the assailants. When questioned about Sandhu's Facebook post, the SSP said that the police are "looking into this angle, too".

It is not uncommon for gangsters in Punjab to use social media to amass followers and gain a reputation. Police officials in Rajasthan went into a tizzy earlier this year after jailed gangster Lawrence Bishnoi took credit for the murder of a man in Chandigarh on Facebook. Bishnoi is currently lodged at the Bharatpur jail in Rajasthan.

Almost immediately after the post was brought to the attention of authorities, the jail warden checked Bishnoi's cell phone but no evidence of the post was recovered. Just this month, mobile phones were seized from inmates at the Bathinda Jail in Punjab during a surprise raid. A senior official said that two policemen deployed inside the prison to keep a track of inmates were caught supplying cell phones to the people they were supposed to guard. Similar reports of gangsters operating their gangs from inside prisons across the country have come to light in recent years but little has been done to crack down on the social media presence of criminals attempting to become internet sensations.
