Trinamool Congress blames BJP for MLA Satyajit Biswas' murder

Kolkata (West Bengal) [India], Feb 10 (ANI): Trinamool Congress has been blaming BJP for the murder of its MLA Satyajit Biswas in West Bengal's Nadia district.

Trinamool legislator from Krishnagunj in Nadia district, Satyajit Biswas was shot dead by unidentified assailants on Saturday evening at Phulbari in Jalpaiguri. The incident happened when Biswas was attending Saraswati Puja celebrations at Phulbari.

The accused managed to flee from the spot after killing Biswas. Police have initiated a probe and are looking for the accused.

According to reports, the lawmaker was shot multiple times from a close range when he was coming down the stage after attending the event.

Gauri Shankar Dutta, TMC’s district president alleged that BJP leaders conspired to kill Biswas as he defeated the BJP candidate twice by a huge margin.

“Satyajit Biswas was BJP's target for a very long time. He had been a preventive wall of the attempts of Mukul Roy and Soumitra Thakur for movement of 'Matua' votes to BJP. The murder of Biswas is the handiwork of Mukul Roy. He is touring these days across the area to strengthen the BJP. He is the conspirator. Roy had earlier lashed out at Satyajit. We will fight it (the murder case) and ensure that justice is served."

"BJP is playing politics of bloodshed in the state," Gauri Shankar Dutta said.

Mukul Roy is a former leader of Mamata Banerjee-led Trinamool Congress who left the party in 2017 and joined the BJP.

Nadia district Zila Parishad member, Santosh Kumar Guha said, "Satyajit Biswas was a good person. We doubt if he had any enemy. Political parties like BJP have always been thinking of removing Satyajit from here, so maybe someone from BJP must have killed him."

However, BJP denied all the allegations and said that the factional feud of the ruling party was behind the attack. BJP state president Dilip Ghosh said, “This is utterly tragic. This shows even lawmakers of the ruling party are not safe in the total lawlessness of Mamata Banerjee’s Bengal. In the last few months, each time a TMC leader or a supporter is killed, they blame our party. How can the BJP kill a TMC MLA? Our security itself is in question."

"We would like to tell the central government that this is the situation in Bengal that even a ruling party lawmaker is not safe. How will Trinamool Congress government protect the people of the state? People in the state are living at the behest of God," Ghosh posted a video on his Twitter handle. (ANI)






