Jaipur ‘princess’ is battle-ready

Lunch and politics found a common ground when BJP leader and erstwhile royal, Diya Kumari, threw a luncheon for who’s who of the political ilk, on Saturday.

Among attendance was former chief minister Vasundhara Raje who shared the space with Diya Kumari along with her MP son, Dushyant Singh.

Diya Kumari, who has been aggressively pursuing her ambition of contesting the upcoming Lok Sabha polls, is not the only one to taken the luncheon route. Former women’s commission chairperson, Suman Sharma, who is also seeking a ticket from Jaipur seat has also planned on throwing a dinner for her supporters to strengthen her claim and as a show of strength to senior leaders.

While the former Sawai Madhopur legislator organized a launch on Saturday for thousands of people on her Panchang Tithi (As per Hindu calender) birthday. Like her, former president of BJP women’s front Suman Sharma is inviting people over to dinner on February 12.

This is an old tradition of showcasing one’s strength through the birthday party before elections. Several BJP leaders had demonstrated their power by organizing a lunch-dinner for party leaders and party workers on their birthday day. The LS polls are scheduled in May this year. Therefore, leaders who wish to contest the upcoming Lok Sabha elections are leaving no stone unturned to get the party honchos to notice them.

Before the assembly elections, the birthdays of former Cabinet minister Kalicharan Saraf, Rajendra Rathore, Arun Chaturvedi, MP Ram Charan Bohra, Jaipur city president Sanjay Jain, state spokesperson Satish Poonia and former BJP state president Ashok Parnami were celebrated on a big scale.

All these leaders were demanding tickets for the assembly elections. Apart from this, BJP leader Dinesh Saini and Govind Agarwal also held a dinner for the workers in the Civil Lines assembly constituency. These two leaders were the ticket contenders from the Civil Lines.

Many leaders and workers of BJP and Congress joined the former royal Diya Kumari’s event. People of Sawai Madhopur and Jaipur city came to congratulate Diya Kumari on a large scale.

Former Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje also congratulated Diya Kumari and came to greet her at her residence 16 Civil Lines on this occasion.

This event is being considered as a power show by Diya Kumari. She is claiming the ticket from Jaipur Lok Sabha constituency. On the other hand, Suman Sharma, who is keen to contest the Lok Sabha elections from Jaipur, will be organising Sawamani Prasadi on February 12. Sharma has created a Whatsapp group. Several senior BJP leaders, party workers and media personalities have been added to this group. Sharma is inviting them through this Whatsapp group for the Sawamani. Sharma had in past also sought a ticket from Jaipur Lok Sabha but didn’t. Both their names have also featured on the preliminary list compiled after feedback from the party workers.
