Clip of bull mowed down with earthmover sparks outrage

Two booked; activists, politicians condemn insensitivity

A gruesome video of a bull being slaughtered by an earthmover in Pune’s Indapur tehsil has sparked outrage among animal activists and political leaders.

The Indapur police on Tuesday booked two people in connection with the October 27 incident. While villagers have claimed the bull was rabid, activists and political leaders have condemned the manner in which the animal was killed.

An FIR under Section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, and Section 429 of the Indian Penal Code has been registered against the accused, Rohit Atole and Bhausaheb Anna Khartode, said police inspector Riyaz Shaikh of the Bhigwan police station.

He said the accused were absconding and would be arrested soon.

The video clip, which surfaced recently, shows Mr. Atole at the wheel of the earthmover, trying to corner and mow down the animal. The bull, with its feet tied, is desperately attempting to escape the dragnet while the driver is seen landing lethal blows on it with the shovel of the machine. After bellowing in pain, the bull succumbs to the fatal blows on its back and head. While Mr. Atole was driving, Mr. Khartode filmed the incident, authorities said.

Pune-based animal rights activist Manoj Oswal said, “I am shocked by this gory incident. We got this video three days ago. Some villagers are claiming that the bull was aggressive and had to be killed as he could do harm. There is no evidence of this in the clip. The poor animal could not even understand until the last moment that it was being slaughtered.”

Mr. Oswal said they are exploring the possibility of whether the Maharashtra Animal Preservation Act can be added to the FIR.

Farmers’ leader and Swabhimani Paksha chief Raju Shetti said even if the animal was showing signs of aggression as the villagers claimed, the creature ought to have been sedated using humane methods. “If the bull was indeed sick as alleged, an authority from the health department ought to have been called in. Mowing the animal down with an earthmover and then recording a video of it reeks of insensitivity to animals,” Mr. Shetti said.

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader Nawab Malik termed the incident disturbing and reprehensible and urged that the accused be apprehended as soon as possible.

Sambhaji Brigade leader Santosh Shinde said, the incident spoke volumes of basic insensitivity towards animals. “First murdering the hapless animal and then recording the gruesome crime indicates that the perpetrators wanted to pull off a stunt on social media,” Mr. Shinde said, demanding a thorough investigation into the matter.
