FATAH: The alarming story of Ghazwa-e-Hind

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

FATAH: The alarming story of Ghazwa-e-Hind Photo by ARUN SANKAR / AFP via Getty Images

Article content While the rest of the world – from atheists to Catholics, Hindus to Jews, and millions in between – strive to make the most of the gift of life, too many Muslim children are indoctrinated to believe that life begins after death, and that the earth is a mere transit lounge where the eradication of Hindus is a sacred duty of the Muslims of the Indian Subcontinent as outlined in the prophesized “Ghazwa-e-Hind” (the duty to carry out the Prophet’s war on India).

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content To most people the idea of a war being fought with the sole aim of destroying a civilization – a literal worldwide suicide bombing on a humongous scale – is a preposterous if not laughable idea that needs no attention. Even Hitler’s Wehrmacht that launched a world war wanted total domination of the world, not its destruction. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or FATAH: The alarming story of Ghazwa-e-Hind Back to video Imperialism and colonialism at their heights did commit crimes against humanity and eradication of entire peoples, but none wanted their own demise as a reward. This is no laughing matter. If not confronted, the malady of Ghazwa-e-Hind is bound to erupt the way ISIS and al-Qaida did. And today even the most educated and liberal Islamic cleric dare not denounce this path as a medieval concoction that has no basis in Islam or the Quran.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content We ordinary Canadians may feel protected from the Baghdadis and Bin Ladens of the world, but it is worth noting that it’s difficult to find a single Islamic cleric or so-called scholar to reject let alone condemn either this doctrine of death or the notion of ‘armed jihad’ as a concept. Canadians need to know more about this insidious doctrine of Islam’s ‘end-of-times’ wars on India and Europe, which will be the precursor to the ‘final journey’ of all humankind into the afterlife. So, what exactly is Ghazwa-e-Hind? It is based on a supposed utterance of Prophet Muhammad, recorded at least a hundred years after his death. which calls on Muslims to rally behind Jesus after his resurrection in Jerusalem from where he will lead an attack on Rome and Christianity while destroying Europe, while sending an army towards India to destroy Hindus as a people and the eradication of Hinduism from Hindustan (India). This, the clerics claim, will be a precursor to the Islamic desire for the end of times.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Islamic clerics – you can find many of their speeches, in English, online – say this is a duty for Muslims. Sheikh Imran Hosien uses his lecture about ‘Ghazwa-e-Hind’ – available on YouTube – not only to spread hatred against Hindus, but also against Jews and Israel while provoking the Pakistan Army to be even more radical and anti-India than they already are, taunting them to go further.

Pakistani website ‘ParhLo’ claims : “Prophet Muhammad (Peace Be Upon Him) had prophesized a great battle (Ghazwa-e-Hind) between India and Pakistan or believers and non-believers centuries ago. Furthermore, these writings of Prophet Muhammad portray South Asia as the battlefield.” The website then lists the supposed utterances of Prophet Muhammad: “Two groups amongst my Ummah would be whom Allah has freed from fire; one group would fight against India and the second would be that who would accompany Isa Ibn-e-Maryam(A.S.) [resurrected Jesus ]” towards Rome. And while this desire for the eradication of others based goes unchallenged because of “freedom of religion” as well as white guilt and left-wing bankruptcy, it begs the question: Who stands on guard for thee? We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Your Midday Sun From our newsroom to your inbox at noon, the latest headlines, stories, opinion and photos from the Toronto Sun. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Your Midday Sun will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
