Matrix Announces Participation in IFSEC India 2019 to be held in New Delhi from 19th to 21st December 2019

[November 20, 2019] Matrix Announces Participation in IFSEC India 2019 to be held in New Delhi from 19th to 21st December 2019

Matrix is gearing up for participation in the 13th edition of The International Fire & Security Exhibition and Conference (IFSEC) India. We will be demonstrating our latest Time-Attendance and Access Control device COSEC ARGO along with People Mobility Management and Video Surveillance solutions.







At the event, we will be showcasing COSEC ARGO, our performance, design and engineering wonder, equipped with an enhanced IPS LCD touchscreen for a visually splendid experience. The addition of Gorilla glass ensures enhanced toughness. This device has higher processing speed, wall and flush mounting options, and increased fingerprint and event storage capacity. It is specifically designed for serious Time-Attendance and Access Control applications. Furthermore, this device offers connectivity options like Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, PoE, and USB. Last but not the least, IP65 and IK08 certifications make it suitable for challenging and outdoor installations.



Our solution experts will be demonstrating the Standalone Access Control solution and exhibiting the Aadhaar Enabled Biometric Attendance system as well. They will also elaborate our cloud based Time-Attendance solution. Our Video Surveillance solution experts will be talking about our Parking Management solution, which is known to easily solve parking woes faced by organizations. Our enterprise grade IP Cameras – NETRA will also be exhibited at the event. NVRX - PARAM, our Network Video Recorders, and SAMAS - Video Management System will be highlighted at the event too.





“IFSEC is South Asia’s largest security, civil protection and fire safety show, which in turn provides us with a platform to expand our ties with industry experts and system integrators. The event also serves as a great stage for highlighting our well-engineered solutions. We aim to use this opportunity to expand our network and spread the word about our technologically advanced Security solutions,” commented Vihar Soni, Marketing Manager, Matrix Comsec.



Talk to our solution experts, and learn more about our innovative solutions by visiting Matrix at Booth No E 36, HALL -14-15 India Expo Mart, Greater Noida, Delhi NCR, India from 19th to 21st December 2019.



About Matrix Established in 1991, Matrix is a leader in Security and Telecom solutions for modern businesses and enterprises. As an innovative, technology driven and customer focused organization, the company is committed to keeping pace with the revolutions in the Security and Telecom industries. With around 40% of its human resources dedicated to the development of new products, Matrix has launched cutting-edge products like Video Surveillance Systems - Video Management System, Network Video Recorder and IP Camera, Access Control and Time-Attendance Systems as well as Telecom Solutions such as Unified Communications, IP-PBX, Universal Gateways, VoIP and GSM Gateways and Communication Endpoints. These solutions are feature-rich, reliable and conform to international standards. Having global footprints in Asia, Europe, North America, South America, and Africa through an extensive network of more than 2,500 channel partners, Matrix ensures that the products serve the needs of its customers faster and longer. Matrix has gained trust and admiration of customers representing the entire spectrum of industries. Matrix has won many international awards for its innovative products.www.MatrixComSec.com For further information, please contact: 394-GIDC, Makarpura, Vadodara-390010, India Toll Free - 1800-258-7747 E-Mail: [email protected] Website: http://www.MatrixComSec.com As a community-building service, TMCnet allows user submitted content which is not always proofed by TMCnet editors. If you feel this entry is of inferior quality or wish to report it for some reason, please forward the URL to "webedit [AT] tmcnet [DOT] com" with your comments.

[ Back To TMCnet.com's Homepage ]
