Two try to extort cash from Jal Nigam official, held

GHAZIABAD: Two men, who were allegedly planning to extort Rs 5 lakh from a junior engineer with the irrigation department, were arrested on Wednesday following a gunfight in Modinagar area.The irrigation department official had gone to address where he was supposed to handover the money to the duo when the shootout took place.Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, SP (rural), Ghaziabad, said the police had information and laid a trap. A few Rs 2,000 notes were packed along with several white papers between them and when the duo came to take money, the police caught them.“The duo snatched the bag from the junior engineer and tried to flee the spot but the police surrounded them. They were asked to surrender but the men allegedly fired at the policemen and tried to run away. The policemen fired a few shots and the duo, identified as Akash (30), from Aligarh district, and Ravi Sharma (35), from Ghaziabad, suffered bullet injuries in their legs,” Jadaun said.Surajpal Singh, the Jal Nigam officials, told TOI: “On November 15, at 6.30 in the morning, a person called me and asked me if I was Surajpal Singh. When I said yes, he asked me to give him Rs 56 lakh. I refused to give him the money and threatened me saying that he will kill my family members,” he added.“After that, he kept calling me from several numbers and kept threatening me. On November 18, the man called me again and said if I did not pay up, he will kill me and my wife. I contacted the police and lodged a complaint. The police assured me and my family that we would be safe and then they made a plan to lay the trap. After that I just followed the instructions they gave me,” Singh said.“On November 19 morning, I received a phone call from a new number and a man asked me about the money. I told him I could only pay Rs 5 lakh. They agreed and I was asked to go to Modinagar junction on the night of November 20 to pay the amount,” he added.SP (rural) Singh said: “The accused men would call from stolen phones, public booths and from other people’s phones. More than 30 police officers were involved in the operation.”Two illegal pistols, live cartridges, three mobile phones and one motorcycle have been seized from the place, police said.The men have been sent to jail. They have been booked under sections 307 (attempt to murder) and 386 (extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt) of the Indian Penal Code.
