Nagarjuna portraying the role of an archaeologist in Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt starrer Brahmastra?

Nagarjuna playing an archaeologist in Brahmastra? | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights It was recently reported that Shah Rukh Khan has also joined the cast of Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra in a very special and important cameo And now another report has claimed that contrary to what was believed earlier, Nagarjuna is not playing the role of Lord Vishnu in the fantasy adventure Reportedly, the Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt starrer will see him play the role of an archaeologist

Brahmastra, the Ayan Mukerji magnum opus, which is the first part of the planned trilogy by Karan Johar's Dharma Production has been in the making for a long time now. The movie was earlier supposed to hit the screens on December 20, 2019, but was later moved to an undisclosed date of Summer 2020 owing to the extensive VFX works.

But, it looks like it was not just about the VFX work as recently it was reported that Shah Rukh Khan has shot for a very important cameo in the film against a green screen at a studio in Mumbai. The report of Shah Rukh Khan joining the cast of star-studded Brahmastra had everyone elated. The Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt starrer already features Amitabh Bachchan and Nagarjuna in pivotal roles.

While their roles are kept under wraps, it was long speculated that Amitabh Bachchan is playing the role of Lord Brahma in the film and Nagarjuna, who is making a comeback to Hindi cinema after more than a decade, will be seen playing Lord Vishnu. But if a report is to be believed then Nagarjuna is portraying the character of an archaeologist in the film.

According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, Nagarjuna shot for his role in Varanasi in June at Kashi Vishwanath Temple, the Chet Singh Fort and on the bank of river Ganga. "Nagarjuna’s character, along with his students, underertakes an expedition to restore an ancient temple along the banks of the Ganga", revealed a source.

The source further informed that an important event leads Shiva (Ranbir Kapoor) and Isha (Alia Bhatt) to Nagarjuna's character. And that, "The adventure kicks-off after all of them come face-to-face in Varanasi. A high-octane action sequence featuring them was shot earlier in the year", as Mouni Roy and Saurav Gurjar's antagonists also come into the picture due to Nagarjuna's character.

Well, these are all reports and there hasn't been any official confirmation about it by the makers. For all we know, it might turn out to be something completely different.
