Thane teen suspects uncle of practising black magic; beheads him after murder

During interrogation, Amit Nagre confessed to the crime (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 19-year-old from Thane allegedly murdered his uncle as he suspected him of using black magic on his father The accused murdered his uncle with the help of his friends The deceased's body was found in Pimpri village while his head was found in Thane's Diva

Thane: A teenager allegedly murdered his uncle with the help of his friends in Maharashtra's Thane. The accused allegedly beheaded the body and dumped it. The police nabbed the accused within six hours of being informed. The body was recovered from Pimpri village, Dahisar.

On Friday, the Shil Daighar police were informed about a beheaded body which was found near Pimpri village. The body appeared to be of a 40-45-year-old man. The police then informed the villagers about the body and learned that a local was missing.

The missing man was identified as Vishnu Nagre. The police then called Vishnu Nagre's family for the identification of the body. The family identified 45-year-old Vishnu with his clothes and confirmed that the body belonged to him. Meanwhile, Vishnu's head and valuables were found in Thane's Diva.

The police then collected evidence from the spot and rounded up around 50 persons for interrogation. During interrogation, Amit Nagre confessed to the crime. Amit told the police that his father passed away three years ago. He claimed that his uncle Vishnu Nagre had practised black magic on his father. According to Amit, his uncle was responsible for his father's death.

Amit Nagre told his friends about his suspicion and they hatched a plan to murder Vishnu Nagre. Amit Nagre, Amar Sharma, Nihal Handore, Avinash Wankhade and Shubham Dabale decided to murder Vishnu in a quarry. One day before the incident, the accused hid weapons in the quarry.

After this, the accused threw a small party. They invited Vishnu to the party and served him alcohol. After Vishnu got drunk, the accused stabbed him and beheaded him. Following this, the accused stuffed Vishnu's body in a sack and dumped it. They disposed of the head in Thane's Diva.

After Amit confessed, the police nabbed him along with his friends. A case was registered against the accused under section 302 (murder) and section 201 (causing disappearance of evidence) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
