Batala gang claims role in youth’s murder over rivalry

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, November 20

A day after the murder of a youth, Mandeep Singh in Pandori Waraich village here, a Batala-based gang of criminals has claimed the responsibility for the incident on a social platform.

It also claimed responsibility for another shooting incident that took place at Jijeyani village in Majitha.

Mandeep was a drug addict and the gang members claimed that they had an old enmity with him. The accused repeatedly fired at him, killing him on the spot.

Baldev Singh, father of the deceased, told the police that he came to know that some bike-borne youths shot multiple bullets at Mandeep.

Amritsar Rural SSP Vikramjit Singh Duggal said a youth, Harwinder Singh of Batala, posted a message on social media, claiming that they had killed Mandeep for ‘honour’. “The post has pictures of two youths holding weapons. They claimed themselves to be member of Pavitar group of Batala. They claimed that they had an old enmity with the deceased.”

According to the police, Mandeep had suffered bullet injuries in his chest, arms and legs. “We are in touch with the Batala police to find some clues about the gang. Nobody will be allowed to create law and order problem and go scot free. A manhunt has been launched and the accused gangsters will be nabbed soon,” he said.

Meanwhile, in the same post, the gang also claimed the responsibility for shooting another youth Triptpal Singh in Jijeyani village in Majitha here on Tuesday evening. The victim stated to the police that he was taking a stroll along with his pet dog, when three youths black-coloured Pulsar bike came there and fired at him. He suffered bullet injuries in his leg and arms and was immediately rushed to Guru Nanak Dev Hospital for treatment. The gangsters claimed that Triptpal had challenged their brother Harman and therefore, they shot at him.

Earlier, the police had booked unknown youths in the two cases.
