1997 Dalit massacre: Madras HC seeks explanation from govt on release of convicts

1997 Dalit massacre: Madras HC seeks explanation from govt on release of convicts

On November 9, 13 caste Hindu men convicted for the murder of six Dalit Panchayat officials in 1997 in Madurai, were released as part of the MGR centenary celebrations.

news Court

The Madurai bench of the Madras High Court on Wednesday demanded to know the basis under which the Tamil Nadu government decided to release 13 men convicted in the Melavalavu massacre in the state. The court remained unconvinced even after the Additional Public Prosecutor submitted the Government order issued for the release of the men jailed for murdering six Dalit panchayat officials in 1997.

According to DTNext, the bench noted that a status report must be given to the court with issues considered before the decision to release the convicts was made. The bench consisting of Justices S Vaidyanathan and N Anand Venkatesh further pointed out that the convicts didn't merely murder the Dalit men, but they also terrorised the entire community for standing in the Panchayat elections. The murder itself, the court pointed out, was carried out to prevent members of Schedules Castes from participating in elections.

The court further demanded to know if the petitioner in the Melavalavu case was consulted before the Government order was passed and what the criteria for the release itself was. The convicts were further suo motu made as respondents and the case was posted for further hearing on November 25.

On November 9, 13 of 17 caste Hindu men convicted for the murder of six Dalit Panchayat officials in 1997 in Madurai, were released as part of the MGR centenary celebrations. The men all belong to the dominant Thevar community and their release was approved by the Tamil Nadu government and signed by the Governor. While they beheaded the Panchayat chief Murugesan, they murdered the others in broad daylight. 44 men were initially accused in the case, but this was weaned down to 17 led by a man named Alagarsamy. They were sentenced to life imprisonment by a trial court, and the order was upheld by the Madras High Court and the Supreme Court in 2009. While one of the convicts died, three were given remission and released during Anna centenary celebrations in 2008 by the then DMK government.

Family members of the victims have sent a petition to the Tamil Nadu home secretary and chief secretary, demanding that the release of the men be withdrawn.

"They have done this just for their own vote bank and to get favour amongst the Thevar community," alleged Karuppiah, Murugesan's brother. "But this is all at the cost of human life. We Dalits, will have no peace here anymore. Every day we will wonder - is today the day they will strike back?"

Also Read: TN releases convicts behind 1997 Dalit massacre, families of victims live in fear
