PM dedicates first Scorpene-class submarines INS Kalvari to the nation

AMN / MUMBAI

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today dedicated to the nation the naval submarine INS Kalvari. Dedicating the first of the six Scorpene-class submarines, Mr Modi said it is a historic achievement for the country. Calling it a proud moment for 1.25 crore Indian citizens, Prime Minister congratulated the Indian Navy on behalf of the country.

Mr Modi said that this is a true example of the fast-growing strategic partnership between India and France. The Prime Minister also asserted that India is playing an important role in combating terrorism via sea, piracy, drug smuggling or illegal fishing. Calling the 21st century as “Asia’s century”, Mr Modi said that its development would have to go through India. Prime Minister coined the acronym SAGAR as “Security And Growth for All in the Region.”

Speaking on the occasion, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said, submarines are lethal, potent and cutting-edge platforms in modern-day warfare. Describing them as essential for peace and deterrence, she added that INS Kalvari will be an “invaluable asset” to the Indian Navy. She said Peace in the Indian Ocean, which is the lifeline of global trade is better off with INS Kalvari and her follow-on submarines.

INS Kalvari is a diesel-electric attack submarine that has been built for the Indian Navy by the Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited. The Submarine represents a significant success for the Make in India initiative. The project has been undertaken with French collaboration.

INS Kalvari underwent around 120 days of extensive sea trials and tests for various equipment and the vessel is expected to bolster India’s maritime prowess. The first Kalvari, commissioned on 8th December 1967, was also the first submarine of the Indian Navy. It was decommissioned on May 31, 1996, after nearly three decades of service.

The commissioning ceremony was held at the Naval Dockyard in Mumbai, which was attended by Governor of Maharashtra CH Vidyasagar Rao, MoS Defence Subhash Bhamre, Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadanvis, French Ambassador to India Alexandre Ziegler, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, Admiral Sunil Lanba and top defence officials.
