UP cop suspended for threatening to kill senior, department inquiry initiated

An inquiry was ordered and it came to light that the sub-inspector has also been involved in brawls with local people in the past. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The video where Dayal was threatening his senior Devendra Singh Yadav had gone viral on social media It came to light that the sub-inspector has also been involved in brawls with local people in the past Dayal has lodged a complaint stating that the CO had hurled casteist slurs at him

Lucknow: A sub-inspector in Uttar Pradesh's Moradabad district has been suspended for a threatening to shoot his Circle Officer (CO). The department has also initiated an inquiry against the accused.

The sub-inspector was identified as Sachin Dayal. The video where Dayal was threatening his senior Devendra Singh Yadav had gone viral on social media. The incident happened when Dayal's car hit Yadav's vehicle on Tuesday after which a scuffle broke out between two.

News agency reported that Dayal was posted at the Police Lines here around eight months ago. Superintendent of police (city) Amit Anand told a media person that the department has also started a probe into the matter.

Meanwhile, Inspector-general of police (IG), Moradabad range, Ramit Sharma told media outlets that after Dayal threatened to shoot the CO, which is an indecent behaviour, an inquiry was ordered and it came to light that the sub-inspector has also been involved in brawls with local people in the past.

He added that the accused had also misbehaved with a few women at a public place in the city. Reportedly, the accused has been booked for indiscipline and sending indecent messages to women on social media sites. However, after all these allegations against Dayal were confirmed the authorities decided to suspend him with immediate effect. Meanwhile, Dayal has lodged a complaint stating that the CO had hurled casteist slurs at him, even as he apologised for the accident.
