Take on our biggest Fabulous Challenge yet and raise money for CoppaFeel! and help beat breast cancer

OVER the last five years, our six Fabulous Challenges have seen more than 300 of you take on the Transylvanian Alps, dare to traverse the deserts of Oman, battle the snow-capped Icelandic peaks, scale the dizzying heights of Machu Picchu in Peru (twice!) and conquer the Great Wall of China.

And all of this was alongside celeb trek leaders including Ashley Roberts, Lisa Snowdon, Tom Fletcher and Vicky Pattison, to name just a few.

7 Giovanna Fletcher says she's thrilled to be lacing up her hiking boots again Credit: Lancton

Jeans, Topshop - buy now

Boots, Mountain Warehouse - buy now

7 Brooke Vincent will be stepping straight off the cobbles and into her hiking boots Credit: Lancton

Jeans, New Look - buy now

Boots, Mountain Warehouse - buy now

In the process, we’ve raised almost £850,000 for breast cancer charity CoppaFeel! – but we’re not stopping there. This year, to celebrate the charity’s 10-year anniversary, we’re hoping to hit the £1million mark by setting off on our biggest adventure to date. Which is why we need your help, as not only will we be taking four celebrity trek leaders, but also 100 lucky readers with us.

To celebrate such a huge milestone, this year blogger, author and human dynamo Giovanna Fletcher will be reclaiming her Fab Challenges crown from hubby Tom, who led a team last year, as she completes her second trek with us in her role as Fabulous Challenges Ambassador.

Plus, stepping straight off the cobbles and into her hiking boots will be none other than Coronation Street’s Brooke Vincent. And that’s not all – we also have two secret trek leaders we’re keeping under wraps for now…

So what’s the adventure we have in store for you this year? Over nine days from Friday October 25 until Saturday November 2, 2019, our 100 trekkers will fly to Delhi, India, then embark on an amazing 50-mile hike across the Himalayas up to 2,757m above sea level.

7 This year's Fabulous Challenge is our biggest yet and will trekkers fly to Delhi, India, then embark on a 50-mile hike across the Himalayas Credit: Getty Images

7 The bright and beautiful Palpung Sherabling monastery Credit: Shutterstock

Before the epic walk, you can test out your haggling skills in the country’s bustling capital, then jump on a sleeper train to the world’s highest mountain range in Dharamsala, where we will begin the trek.

En route, we’ll have the chance to marvel at the stunning three-storey gold-plated Buddha at the Palpung Sherabling monastery, while walking snow-capped peaks, ancient forests and the magnificent woodland trails of northern India. At the end of each day of hiking, weary feet will be greeted with a campfire, plenty of food and a night snuggled in a tent under the stars.

And once our trekkers cross the finish line in the village of Bir – blisters and all – we’ll celebrate in style with our very own festival of achievement, followed by an overnight sleeper train back to Delhi for a well-deserved shower in a local hotel before finally flying home.

Fabulous Challenges Ambassador, Gi, 34, says she can’t wait to see who’s on her team this time around. “Oman was such a huge challenge, but it was one of the best experiences of my life and I can’t wait for an even bigger adventure this time,” she says.

7 Giovanna Fletcher with her team in Oman in 2017 for Fabulous Challenge

Giovanna Fletcher plays Fabulous Challenges Discs ahead of CoppaFeel! Trek 2019

“Last year I was pregnant with Max, now five months, so I couldn’t go to Transylvania, but I sent Tom in my place. Saying goodbye to him at the airport was tough – I couldn’t help but feel jealous. I’m thrilled to be lacing up my hiking boots once again, and I’ve never been to India, so it’s going to be a whole new experience. We’ll also be celebrating CoppaFeel!’s 10-year anniversary while we are out there, which will be incredible, and fingers crossed we can hit that £1million fund-raising mark. It’s going to be an epic trip!”

As for Brooke, she can’t wait to get stuck in. “I’ve never personally been affected by breast cancer, but Sally Dynevor, 55, who plays my mum on Corrie, was diagnosed back in 2009,” says Brooke, 26.

“It really opened my eyes to the symptoms, because when you’re young you can naively presume that you’re invincible. CoppaFeel! is raising awareness for all women, whether they’re teenagers or in their 60s, about the importance of checking their breasts, which is amazing.

“I’m so honoured to be taking part in this trek, and I’m excited to meet everyone and hear their individual stories. I know it’s going to be an emotional journey, but whenever anyone gets tired or feels drained, I’ll make sure I’m there with a smile, a joke or a shoulder to cry on.”

7 Tom and Giovanna Fletcher have both taken on our Fabulous Challenge in the past Credit: Getty - Contributor

7 Brooke says 'I know it’s going to be an emotional journey, but whenever anyone gets tired or feels drained, I’ll make sure I’m there with a smile' Credit: Getty - Contributor

Not only will our four teams face the dizzying heights of the Himalayas, but there’ll also be some extra challenges thrown in along the way. In previous years there’s been a bug-eating contest, and in Transylvania some brave souls dared to enter Dracula’s castle!

Unsurprisingly, there’s already some friendly competition brewing between the team leaders.

But will Gi have the upper hand as a seasoned pro? “Definitely not,” insists Brooke.

“When I set my mind to do something, I throw myself into it. I may not look it, but I can be pretty tough when I need to be. I want to be prepared physically and mentally for the trek, so I’m embarking on a training regime. You’ll probably spot me stomping around Manchester dressed in my trekking gear. The only thing I’m a little nervous about is camping – I’ve never done it before!” And G has kick-started her training regime, too.

JOIN GI AND BROOKE IN THE HIMALAYAS To take part in the trek, you need to be physically fit and willing to raise at least £2,220 for CoppaFeel! To take part, you need to be physically fit and willing to raise at least £2,995 for CoppaFeel! Head to Coppafeel.org/fabulous now to fill in your details and read the T&Cs. But hurry – applications close at 11.59pm on Sunday February 24, 2019. If selected, you will need to pay a £375 registration fee to secure your place.

“Having been on a Fabulous Challenge trek before, I know how demanding they can be,” she says.

“I’m too competitive to sit back and relax! We’re covering such a huge distance so far from home this year – it really will be the challenge of a lifetime.”
