Narendra Dabholkar murder case: Who is Sanjeev Punalekar?

Sanjeev Punalekar

Narendra Dabholkar

Pune

Chargesheet against 2 for Dabholkar murder Till now, five accused have been booked in the high-profile case

Sanjeev Punalekar with the Shiv Sena

Shiv Sena

Sanjay Raut

Timeline



On Wednesday, the CBI filed a supplementary chargesheet against Vikram Bhave andin the murder case of. Allegedly, one of Dabholkar’s killer, Sharad Kalaskar, has confessed to the CBI that Punalekar instructed him and his associates to destroy the firearms used in the Dabholkar and journalist Gauri Lankesh case among others. The Bombay High Court is supervising the investigation of the Dabholkar and Govind Pansare murder case. According to Kalaskar’s statement, a conspiracy of destroying the weapons was planned in the Fort office (Mumbai) of the Hindu Vidhidnya Parishad (HVP) in June 2018.The CBI first made a crucial arrest of Dr Virendrasinh Tawde in 2016. Then, in October 2018, Dabholkar’s alleged killers Sachin Andure and Kalaskar were arrested. Post this, this is the third important arrest.While the Bombay HC was pulling the government during all the hearings for the slow pace of the investigation, Punalekar was representing Sanatan Santha’s accused members. Before the court proceedings started in, where the accused Tawde was presented, CBI lawyers shook hands with Punalekar. Punalekar always roamed with a group of lawyers of HVP.Advocate Virendra Ichalkarnjikar is considered to be Punalekar’s successor in the HVP. Speaking in a very aggressive fashion on TV channels debates as a spoke person of Sanatan Santha for years, Punalekar created a right wing extremist image. Until a year ago, Punalekar was very active on Twitter and other social media platforms, where he was accused of giving threats to people he ideologically disagreed with. In 2016, he advised Marathi litterateur Shripal Sabnis to start ‘morning walks’. Later on, Punalekar took a silent exit from social media. He and Sanatan Sanstha grew close from around 2008, when he represented the accused of the Panvel-Vashi-Thane bomb blast and continued since then.Along with Abhay Vartak of Sanatan Sanstha, Punalekar used to lead press conferences defending Sanatan Sanstha members who were accused in criminal acts. Sanatan Sanstha members Sarang Akolkar, Rudra Patil, Jaiprakash Anna and Pravin Limkar have been absconding since the 2009 Goa Madgaon blast. One of the Sanatan Sanstha members, Prashant Juvekar, had confessed to the Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) in 2010 that Punalekar harbored all of them at his office and told them to keep absconding in the future.Punalekar, himself, has told the media multiple times that he is helping the accused to remain absconding because he doesn’t believe the agencies of investigation, which he believes are anti-Hindu. Vikram Bhave, who is also arrested with Punalekar, always accompanied the latter. Bhave’s book on the Malegaon bomb blast was also distributed by Punalekar to the media.Sanatan Santha’s Vartak and other spokepersons were replaced, but for years, Punalekar’s place was unchanged in the right-wing group. Before representing the accused, who were Hindus, in criminal cases, he was known for his PILs against charitable trusts and subsequent orders. He used to call himself a person fighting for the cause of ‘human rights’. Punalekar also represented Hindu Rashtra Sena chief Dhananjay Desai in the 2014 Mohsin Shaikh murder case (the first mob lynching case after Narendra Modi came to power).In October 2018,leaderfelicitated Punalekar in Mumbai for his contribution towards Hindu dharma. Shiv Sena has been critical against Dr Dabholkar and his work for the anti-superstition bill, reducing it to anti-Hindu work for years before the law was passed. The Maharashtra government’s proposal to ban the Sanatan Sanstha is pending with the central government. Sanatan Sanstha representatives have been meeting Shiv Sena and BJP MPs and MLAs since 2018, posting supportive comments.Punalekar was leading HVP, which was formed in 2012. According to the HVP website, HVP is “an association of advocates who thrive to work for the cause of nation and Hindu Dharma. We can’t stop our legal battles fought using the current legal structures (rather situation of chaos) till we establish Hindu Rashtra and create a legal system of our own based on spiritual science”. HVP’s Hindu rashtra-spiritual world has startling similarities with Sanatan Sanstha’s idea of Hindu Rashtra. Before joining the legal field as a full-fledged career, Punalekar was working with Syndicate Bank.Hindu Vidhidnya Parishad was formed during the first Hindu Summit organised by Hindus held at Goa in 2012.According to their aims and objectives, the HVP wants to follow a different rule. It states, “HVP wants to establish the laws formulated by experimenting with eternal science of spirituality which are embedded in Sanatan Hindu Dharma.” HVP holds meetings across the nation, trying to spread the Hinduvta agenda.Human Rights activist lawyer Asim Sarode observed, “RSS has a legal cell called Akhil Bhartiy Adhivkta Parishad. HVP is formed on the similar lines.” He further added, “The Bar association should have taken cognizance of Punalekar’s notorious activities and his public speeches.”August 20, 2013 - Dr Narendra Dabholkar was killed in PuneFebruary 16, 2015- Left leader thinker Govind Pansare and his wife Uma were shot in Kolhapur. While Uma survived, Govind Pansare died on in Mumbai on February 20.August 30, 2015 – Writer, thinker MM Kalburgi was killed in DharwadJune 10, 2016 - Dr Virendrasinh Tawde was arrestedSeptember 5, 2017 – Journalist Gauri Lankesh was killed in BengaluruAugust 2018 – ATS carried out raids in Nalasopara and arrested right wing extremist Vaibhav Raut and his colleagues including Sharad Kalaskar, who also allegedly confessed shooting Dabholkar subsequently.October 2018 - Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar were arrestedMay 25, 2019 - CBI arrested Sanjeev Punalekar and Vikram BhaveJuly 6, 2019 - Punalekar was granted a bailNovember 20, 2019 - the CBI filed a charge against Punalekar and Vikram Bhave in Dr Narendra Dabholkar murder case.(The CBI, Kolhapur police SIT, and the Karnataka Police SIT are investigating the four murder cases. They believe that all four murders are connected.)
