Coming to Goa is like coming home: Bachchan

RAMNATH N PAI RAIKAR

Taking a nostalgic trip down the years, to be precise 50 years in the past, megastar Amitabh Bachchan said that “coming to Goa has always been like coming home,” as his very first film, ‘Saat Hindustani’ (1969) was shot in the state. Ever since then, he has had many opportunities to work “in this wonderful place,” and receive the hospitality of the Goan terrain, during various extensive shootings.

Bachchan, who was addressing an august gathering during the inauguration of the retrospective of his films as the winner of this year’s Dadasaheb Phalke Award, said that he felt deeply honoured and humbled to receive the highest award of the country in the field of cinema. “I always felt that I did not deserve such recognition, but I humbly receive this prestigious award with a lot of grace and affection,” he added. “It’s been 50 years of my journey in this film industry, which started in 1969, as also this is the 50th edition of the International Film Festival of India,” the megastar observed, maintaining that each year there is a growth in the number of delegates, who come to Goa to view the films, in turn receiving an opportunity to see the works and creativity from here as well as other parts of the world.

“I always felt that cinema is an universal medium; one that is beyond language and beyond all kinds of other factors, which keep coming into our social and moral lives,” he stated. “When we sit inside the darkened hall, we never ask the caste, creed, colour or religion of the person sitting next to us; we enjoy the same film, sing the same songs, laugh at the same jokes and cry at the same emotions.” He further stated that there are very few mediums left in this fast disintegrating world that can claim such integration.

“I hope we continue to make films that will bring people together and disintegrate this rather odd system of keeping alive the signs of colour, caste and religion, thus bringing us all into one community, making us hold hands together to appreciate our creativity, and take a step forward in making this world a more peaceful place,” Bachchan said.

Chief Minister, Pramod Sawant and Information and Broadcasting Secretary, Amit Khare felicitated Bachchan on the occasion by presenting him with a shawl, bouquets of flowers and an IFFI 2019 memento.
