2 yrs on, fire department waits for upgrade

Ludhiana: Two years have passed since the fire and building collapse incident took place in Sufian Chowk, where 16 people including nine firemen had died, the upgradation of the fire brigade is still awaited. A ray of hope had arisen with the planning to purchase advanced equipment under the Smart City Mission. The idea is to bring the latest technology in the fire brigade department, and for this purpose, a detailed project report is being prepared through a Delhi-based agency.

An estimated expenditure of Rs 40 crore has been proposed to purchase the required items, including robot firefighting and drones.

On November 20, 2017, a fire was reported in Amarsons Polymers, in which a building had collapsed, and 16 deaths were reported. Nine firemen had died, which had forced the state government to make an announcement regarding upgradation of the fire brigade, but due to paucity of funds, nothing could be done.

Fire officials are keeping their fingers crossed that it should happen under the Smart City Mission, because otherwise, there is no scope of upgradation. The officials claimed that in Mumbai, the fire brigade is equipped with robot firefighting and drones. Under this technique, the robot enters the place of fire with a water pipe, and controls the situation. Similarly, a drone can also carry a water pipe for controlling the fire where there is no access for a human being.

The plan is to purchase mini fire tenders, victim location camera with wireless life detector, breaching system, aluminised fire proximity suit, light weight stretcher, eye protection equipment, portable radio set, safety torches, and hydraulic aerial ladder platform (height 70 metres). Assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu said, “The upgradation of the fire brigade is much awaited, as the city has grown phenomenally, but as compared to that, the infrastructure with the fire brigade could not increase to the same level.” He said it would be better for the fire brigade if the proposal gets an approval.

Notably, the upgradation of the fire brigade has been pending for a long time. Since 2017, when the Congress government came to power, the fire directorate came into existence, but without upgrading the department, it cannot serve the purpose. The fire brigade has 18 fire tenders, out of which seven are new and 11 are old ones, but most of the fire tenders are large in size, and in narrow lanes, they cannot move. However, under this plan, small fire tenders are proposed.

Enquiry report not made public

Chief minister Amarinder Singh had visited the spot after the incident, and had marked an inquiry in this case, but even after two years, officials are still silent about the findings of that report. The kin and family members of firemen who died in the incident also claimed that the enquiry report should have been made public, so that they know whether or not anybody was responsible for the tragedy

Gallantry award still awaited

A gallantry award was announced for nine firemen who died in the incident, and also for four firemen who got injured in another fire incident in 2017. In October, they were asked to receive the award in Nagpur, but that function got postponed. The families are even waiting for the president’s gallantry award for fire service. Assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu said the function had to take place at the national level for giving a medal to brave people, so the date will be announced accordingly.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
