Unmanned, closed colony gates create nuisance for city residents

Ludhiana: Residents of many localities complained that the gates put up by a few residents in the colony remain closed even during the day time which causes inconvenience to them as well as commuters who pass from the internal roads.

Despite strict instructions to the resident welfare associations (RWAs) neither the Ludhiana civic body nor Ludhiana Improvement Trust (LIT) could bring any changes.

MC commissioner K P Brar even threatened to pull down the gates from colonies in case the residents do not keep them open during the day time, but to no avail.

Recent action against a locked gate in Kitchlu Nagar F block by the civic body officials has raised the demand from other areas as well that all locks should be removed so that people could easily pass through them. In some areas, the condition is even worse as the gates are locked in such a manner that even pedestrians cannot pass and are forced to take a long route.

A resident of SBS Nagar Arvind Sharma said, “I have been fighting against permanent closure of gates in the locality from a long time but it did not prove beneficial as the LIT did not act strictly against those persons who have taken control.” He said these gates are kept closed because in case welfare associations keep the gates open they will have to appoint security guards so they prefer to keep the gates locked.

Meanwhile a commuter Gurjeet Singh rued that it is the same situation in every colony be it Model Town Extension, Dugri, Tagore Nagar, Kitchlu Nagar, Haibowal and so on. He said in case the authorities cannot take action against the violators then they should avoid giving funds for the development in these areas because the residents in these areas have made their colonies private and they should be told to spend money from their own pockets for construction of roads and other civic works.

However, a resident of B Block of Rajguru Nagar professor Gurcharan Singh had to fight a long battle for forcing the welfare associations to keep the gates open during day time. He said, “Even now gates are opened turn wise as in one block it gets opened for 15 days then in the next block members of the residents welfare association keep the gates open.” He said he is unable to understand why some people have made gates a prestige issue for them and they hardly care about others.

MC Commissioner K P Brar said, “The residents are not allowed to encroach upon the streets and it is only for their convenience that they are allowed to install these gates but in case they do not follow the directions, we will be forced to take a strict action.”

LIT Chairman Raman Balasubramanium said, “It is not legal to install gate first of all and in case residents have got those gates installed then they should keep them open during the day.” He said they will take action against defaulters.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
