Prosecutor: Murdered woman recorded boyfriend’s threat

By: Brian Louwers | C&G Newspapers | Published November 21, 2019

Kevin Dixon

Advertisement

WARREN/EASTPOINTE — An 18-year-old Warren man faces murder and weapons charges after his girlfried suffered a fatal gunshot wound while the pair allegedly argued in a van parked in the driveway of his home near 10 Mile and Hayes roads.

According to Macomb County Prosecutor Eric Smith, events leading up to the shooting — the suspect pointing a black handgun at the victim, making threats and putting bullets in the gun — were captured on a short video recorded by the victim.

Warren police were dispatched to the 14800 block of Shirley Avenue at about 5:30 p.m. Nov. 19 after a resident reported hearing a gunshot. The caller also reportedly told police that a white van was seen leaving the area after the shot was heard.

The van was observed driving erratically near Nine Mile Road and Gratiot Avenue, and police from Eastpointe and Detroit made contact with the driver, later identified as the murder suspect, Kevin Antonio Dixon.

The 20-year-old shooting victim, India Elise Mackey, of Saginaw, was reportedly found by police seated in the front passenger seat of the van with a gunshot wound to her right side. Dixon allegedly told officers on the scene that Mackey shot herself at his home in Warren. She was declared dead at the scene at 5:51 p.m., and Dixon was taken into Warren police custody.

On Nov. 21, the Warren Police Department requested an arrest warrant for the charge of first-degree murder based on the investigation that had ensued. It is alleged that Mackey and Dixon were involved in an argument in the van while it was parked on Shirley. Mackey was reportedly in the driver’s seat of her van when she was allegedly shot once in the right side by Dixon, who allegedly had been armed with a 9 mm handgun.

Part of the argument was recorded by Mackey, according to a press release from Smith’s office. The video reportedly ended shortly before she was shot.

Dixon was arraigned Nov. 21 in the 37th District Court on first-degree murder and weapons charges. Judge John Chmura ordered him held without bond. Dixon requested a court-appointed attorney and remained held in the Macomb County Jail pending his next court appearance, a probable cause conference scheduled for Dec. 5 before Judge Matthew Sabaugh. A preliminary examination was set for Dec. 12 in Sabaugh’s courtroom.

Also, Dixon’s mother was arrested outside of the courtroom before the arraignment on a warrant related to the ongoing investigation.
