Your morning briefing: What you should know for Friday, November 22

Man guilty of murdering Grace Millane

A man has been found guilty of murdering British backpacker Grace Millane in New Zealand.

The killer stuffed her body in a suitcase, which was later found buried in bushland outside Auckland.

The 27-year-old had claimed Ms Millane, from Essex, died accidentally during "rough sex" after their Tinder date in December last year.

But jurors at Auckland's High Court today found the defendant guilty of her murder. The decision was unanimous.

Andrew 'forced to cancel Bahrain trip'

Prince Andrew has reportedly been forced to cancel a trip to Bahrain as the fallout over his relationship with Jeffrey Epstein continues.

Andrew quit his life as a working royal on Wednesday evening over his association with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

But he was to fly to the Middle East this weekend as part of his Pitch@Palace project for tech entrepreneurs.

The plans were scrapped at the last minute after being persuaded by his family, a source told the Mail.

Starmer: Britain won't go back to normal after a vote to Remain

Sir Keir Starmer has warned that Britain “won’t go back to normal” after Brexit or after a vote to remain in the EU.

The shadow Brexit secretary said the country will remain divided regardless of the decision made after his party's proposed second referendum.

Sir Keir said the only way to unite the country will be to take action to ensure people no longer feel disenfranchised.

Victoria's Secret Fashion Show officially cancelled

This year's Victoria’s Secret Fashion Show has officially been cancelled.

The lingerie brand's parent company L Brands confirmed the extravaganza would be not be going ahead, with its chief finance officer saying the firm needed to "evolve" its marketing strategy.

TV ratings had been gradually diminishing and last year’s show attracted the lowest viewership since its inception.

It had also faced increasing criticism over an alleged lack of diversity on the runway.

Tension breaks out in I'm A Celeb camp

Tensions broke out between Jacqueline Jossa and Andrew Maxwell in the I’m A Celebrity … Get Me Out Here camp.

During last night’s episode the camp mates clashed over who should join new arrivals, Andy Whyment and Cliff Parisi, in the jailhouse.

Andy and Cliff won eight stars for their camp in The Frontier of Fear and the other campers were left to decide whether to feed Andy and Cliff with their share of the food.

However, it meant that if they made a choice to share, they would have to send two celebs to join them as outlaws in the Jailhouse.

On this day....

1497: The Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope in his search for a route to India.

1718: Edward Teach, English pirate who sailed under the name of Blackbeard, was killed off the coast of North Carolina.

1830: Container transport was introduced by Pickfords, the carriers, in an agreement with the Liverpool & Manchester Railway Company.

1946: The first ballpoint pen went on sale, invented by Hungarian Laszlo Biro.

1963: John F Kennedy, president of the United States, was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, during the run-up to the 1964 presidential campaign.

1975: The monarchy was restored in Spain when Juan Carlos was sworn in as King in Madrid.


