More than 100 teachers disassociate from JNUTA, blame it of being rootcause behind deadlock in university

A total of 113 teachers of JNU have decided to dissociate themselves from the JNU Teachers' Association amid the ongoing JNU students' Union protest against the hostel fee hike and other issues.

Lashing out at JNU teachers' association, Dean of the international studies in JNU, Aswini Mohapatra has said JNUTA is the rootcause for the current deadlock in the university.

Taking it to Twitter, Mohapatra said, "We total of 113 concerned teachers of JNU decided to dissociate ourselves from the JNU Teachers' Association. We believe that JNUTA is the root cause of the current deadlock. Controlled by left-wing coterie, it has turned JNU into a hotbed of Azadi brigade."

We, total of 113, concerned teachers of JNU decided today to dissociate ourselves from the JNU Teachers’ Association. We believe that JNUTA is the root cause of current deadlock. Controlled by left-wing coterie, it has turned JNU into a hotbed of Azadi brigade. #SaveJNU — Aswini Mohapatra (@AswiniJNU) November 21, 2019

The move by 113 teachers to dissociate themselves from the JNUTA has come following indifference in opinion over the conduct by some protesting JNU students against university's teachers.

According to IANS, three JNU professors were held captive allegedly by students they teach. One of them was held captive for more than 24 hours.

Further in their statement, JNU teachers said, "Whereas the Jawaharlal Nehru University Teachers' Association is an association of the teachers, by the teachers, and for the teachers, JNUTA, as controlled by its current office bearers and their coterie, have in the most brazen manner refused to condemn the attack confinement and intimidation of teachers and their family members by a group of miscreants among the students, since October 28, 2019. This conspiratorial silence on the pan of JNUTA has only abetted further violent and aggressive targeting of the teachers."

JNU students have been protesting for over three weeks demanding a complete roll-back in the hostel fee hike and other decisions which they say were taken by the JNU administration without consultation with the students union.

On Wednesday, a delegation of JNU students reached the Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD) on Wednesday. The Ministry has appointed a high power committee for discussion with students and administration for peaceful resolution of all issues in the University.

"The meeting was between all the 4 office bearers of the JNUSU & counsellors. We briefed them about the crisis in JNU. We were told that our demands will be further recommended as soon as possible. Protest will continue inside campus until our demands are met," JNUSU General Secretary said.

Earlier, the JNU Visually Challenged Students’ Forum had called for a demonstration against Delhi Police on Wednesday to demand for justice.

"The JNU Visually Challenged Students’ Forum calls for a demonstration against the Brutal Lathi charge of Delhi Police and demand for justice for persons with disabilities. This is a clear cut violation of United Nation’s Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2006 and Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2016 act. Therefore, the forum demands for delegation-level talks with the Chief Commissioner of Delhi Police and demands for the full protection of Persons with Disabilities anywhere in the national capital of Delhi with an immediate effect. We urge people to gather in front of the Police Headquarter, Jaisingh Road, near parliament Thana at 10:30 AM onwards to show their solidarity for the larger disability cause", said a statement from the forum.

On Monday, a massive protest was held by JNU Students' Union (JNUSU) that also had the participation of visually impaired students was organised against the fee hike by the university. The students flouted Section 144 imposed outside the campus and in the area near the Parliament. The students also broke the barricades and clashed with the police. Water cannons were deployed in parts of the national capital to curb the protest.

The protestors alleged that they were lathi-charged by the police. At least 30 Delhi Police personnel and 15 JNU students were injured during the massive protest. As many as 100 JNU students were also detained by the police.
