Former VHP leader Pravin Togadia to contest 2019 Lok Sabha polls from Ayodhya

Former VHP leader Pravin Togadia has announced to contest Lok Sabha polls from Ayodhya. Togadia was in New Delhi on Saturday when he announced that he'd field contestants on each of LS seats in Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat from the political party Hindustan Nirmal Dal (HND) that he formed.

He floated a slongan “Ab ki baar, public ki sarkar”.

“If elected, we will start building the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya in no time. Uniform civil code, rehabilitation of Kashmiri Pundits, Population Control low and loan waivers to farmers will be our priorities,” Togadia said.

Togadia had strained relations with PM Narendra Modi for a long time, and had quit VHP in April 2017 and formed the new outfit of AHP against his parental organisation.

Meanwhile, Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and Pravin Togadia's Antar Rashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP) came face-to-face claiming their property rights on The premise is Vanikar Bhavan in Paldi area of Ahmedabad.

A ruckus between two workers took the political form and police had to rush to the spot to take the situation under control. The building is currently used by AHP as its office, but VHP workers and leaders flock there in the morning to take the possession.

“It is totally unlawful and VHP has been doing this with the political vendetta as I announced to contest polls. A huge crowd of 200 police personnel took control of Vanikar Bhavan at the behest of someone. They broke the lock and entered the room that I used as my office and ransacked it. Court order allows us to use this building as our office,” Togadia said. The VHP, however, claimed that building belonged to them.

“The AHP took unlawful possession of this office as it is the property of the trust in which 10 out of 15 members belong to VHP. Moreover, no political activity can be run in the premise as per the constitution of the trust and AHP is running political activity from this building. We have filed a complaint with charity commissioner also against AHP for this,” Secretary in VHP of Gujarat unit, Ashok Rawal said.

BUILDING CHARGES

“AHP took unlawful possession of this office as it is a property of the trust in which 10 out of 15 members belong to VHP. Moreover, no political activity can be run in the premise as per the constitution of the trust and AHP is running political activity from this building,” Secretary in VHP of Gujarat unit, Ashok Rawal said.
