SOS Survey 2019: The Champion States

Competitiveness is a universal and time-tested idea to promote growth. Competition among states, to outdo each other in economic development and social welfare, could well be the trigger our country desperately needs to rev up the slowing economy. The Narendra Modi government has often advocated a growth model that blends cooperation between the Centre and the states with inter-state competition. India Today outlined this concept of mapping the performance of states way back in 2003, with the State of the States (SOS) study.

Sixteen years on, the SOS study not only remains the most comprehensive and credible benchmark for assessing a state's socio-economic development, but it has also evolved in its scope and methodology. The study is based on objective data sourced from government bodies and credible agencies. To avoid giving undue advantage to states with a legacy of performance or under-achievement, the evaluation is done under two broad groups- best performing and most improved. The best performing category examines the absolute numbers for the latest year for which data is available. The most improved category examines states' progress over the past five years.

The SOS study has gradually altered perceptions about achievers and laggards. Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Gujarat are three of the best performing states that have traditionally been among India's high-growth achievers. In this year's SOS rankings, they found place among the top five in many of the 12 categories. Yet, in terms of improvement in the past five years, they were among the bottom five in four to six categories.

Bihar, Assam and Uttar Pradesh, which have a poor record, have hit the growth lane in the past five years. While the three are among the bottom five of the best performing states across several categories, they are among the five most improved in six to nine categories. For the second year in a row, Tamil Nadu, better known for vote-catching doles, has emerged as the best performing big state, indicating that performance and populism can go together. Assam topped the list of most improved big states again. Perhaps the BJP government's efforts to clean up the administration paid off.

Among the small states, Goa, aided by performance in economy, infrastructure, tourism and cleanliness, dethroned last year's winner Puducherry, which maintained its superlative performance in other categories, but saw a sharp fall in tourism and education. Tripura, which moved from 25 years of Left rule to the first BJP government in 2018, retained last year's position as the most improved small state.

The absence of Maharashtra, Karnataka and West Bengal, which together account for 28 per cent of India's GDP, from the list of major winners is a worry. Among the best performing big states, Maharashtra slipped in the overall, economy, health, governance and tourism categories. While Karnataka marginally improved in some categories, political instability seems to have hit its overall performance. West Bengal, the most improved big state in environment, is an encouraging story. Bogged down by poor performance in the past, it ranked 12th among the 20 best performing big states despite better rankings than last year in 10 categories. Among the most improved states, though, it jumped from 13th position to eighth- the kind of rise the SOS study seeks to map. India's march to a $5 trillion economy by 2025 could become a reality if such upward movements among states become the norm and not the exception.

How the states were ranked

The India Today State of the States (SOS) 2019 study was conducted by Marketing and Development Research Associates (MDRA), a Delhi-based premier research agency. The robust methodology is designed to rank the states on the basis of most relevant and exhaustive data, covering aspects crucial to foster inter-state competition and uphold the true spirit of India's federal structure.

The states were ranked under two broad groups:

Best-performing states

> Indicates latest performance of the state specific to the category

> Based on most recent data across multiple parameters

Most-improved states

> Indicates improvement of the state in the past five years

> Based on positive changes (outcome-based) in the past five years

The states were also divided into two broad groups based on geographical area and population- states with an area of over 35,000 sq. km and population of over 5 million were clubbed as the big states. Deliberations revealed that bigger states have their own advantages and disadvantages vis-à-vis the smaller states. So it was decided to have separate comparisons of the big and small states. Jammu & Kashmir was not considered due to the change in its status during the period of study.

Twelve categories were identified for comparing the performance of the states. In each category, several attributes, on which the states needed to be competitive, were fixed. Based on inputs from experts- academia, policymakers and policy influencers, such as representatives from the NITI Aayog, think-tanks, policy research organisations, sociologists and economists- 105 attributes were finalised for evaluating the best-performing states and 80 attributes for the most-improved states. The relative weights of the parameters and attributes were finalised in consultation with the experts, India Today editors and MDRA team.

To ensure fair comparisons, it was ensured that no state gets unfair advantage because of its size, population or any such aspect. Hence it was necessary to normalise the data based on population or geographical size, as the case required. Based on the weights determined for each attribute, sectoral rankings were arrived at. Parameter-level weights were used to arrive at overall best-performing and most-improved states.

A large MDRA team, led by Abhishek Agrawal (executive director), Abnish Jha (project director), Rajan Chauhan (senior research executive) and Manveer Singh (executive-EDP) and assisted by statisticians and econometricians, worked on this voluminous project from June to October 2019.

Parameters for Performance

For the best-performing state category, the latest available data for these indicators was considered; for the most-improved states, data from the past five years was examined.

FOR BEST-PERFORMING STATES:

Economy

Per capita income; % Above Poverty Line (APL); ratio of capital expenditure to population; GSDP for the services sector per population; GSDP for the manufacturing sector per population; Consumer Price Index (CPI); unemployment rate (%); no. of banks per 100,000 people; ratio of commercial bank credit per 100,000 people; urban labour force participation (15-59 years) (per 1,000 people); FDI inflow; actual IEM/ proposed IEM; proportion of state FDI inflow to total FDI in India; ratio of outstanding liabilities to population; ratio of gross capital formation to population.

Infrastructure

Ratio of (surfaced + unsurfaced) road length to total area; ratio of length of national highways and state highways to total area; ratio of vehicles to road length; % of households with electricity; households with access to drinking water/ piped water; ratio of length of railway lines to total area; no. of flights to population; no. of stadiums per 100,000 people; JNNURM-related variables (share of no. of projects completed to total no. of approved projects); no. of post offices per 100,000 people; no. of mobile subscribers per 1,000 people; no. of telephone connections (landline) per 1,000 people; state-wise per capita availability of power; no. of internet subscribers per 1,000 people; no. of smart cities to total districts.

Agriculture

Money spent on agriculture in the last budget compared with area of agriculture and population invested in agriculture; contribution of agriculture to GSDP; agriculture GSDP per rural population; % of area irrigated out of the total cultivated land; productivity- crop produced vs. land and population involved; loans extended to agriculture/ households cultivating land; % of cropped area. under cash crops

Education

Total expenditure of the education department per population (6-14 years); literacy rate (%); ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary and middle school; pupil-teacher ratio (all institutions); dropout rate in primary and middle education; no. of colleges per population in 15-19 age group; no. of schools per population in 10-14 age group; institutes with national importance per 100,000 people; central universities and national law universities per 100,000 people; higher educational institutions per 100,000 people.

Healthcare

Expenditure on health per person; Infant Mortality Rate (IMR); Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR); registered doctors per 100,000 people; government hospitals per 100,000 people; average patients served per government hospital; no. of beds per government hospital; life expectancy.

Law & Order

Civil policemen per 100,000 people; cases (under IPC) per 100,000 people; Murders per 100,000 people; kidnappings per 100,000 people; rapes per 100,000 people; molestation cases per 100,000 people; riots per 100,000 people; pending cases per 100,000 people.

Inclusive Development

% of Below Poverty Line (BPL) population; progress in poverty alleviation; accounts under Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana per population; ratio of domestic LPG consumers to total households; persons who benefitted from NREGA; progress of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana; % of households with any usual member covered by health scheme; % of PDS offtake; average days of wage provided per household; women in 20-24 age group married before 18 (%); % of children engaged in labour.

Governance

Criminal records of MLAs; % of women panchayat representatives; panchayat devolution index; e-services rolled out by states for citizens; operational common service centres per population; panchayats providing e-services to total panchayats; ease of doing business index (DIPP and World Bank); progress of Digital India

Entrepreneurship

Ease of doing business index (%); Startup India progress; Skill India progress; Mudra Bank credit fund progress; Start-ups (new companies registered) in the state per 1,000 people

Tourism

No. of domestic tourists; no. of foreign tourists; funds spent on tourism promotion to tourist population; airports per 100,000 people; railway stations per 100,000 people; crimes against tourists per 100,000 tourists; registered hotels per 100,000 tourists; five-star hotels per 100,000 tourists.

Environment

SO2 concentration (residential + industrial); NO2 (residential + industrial); PM10 (residential + industrial); PM2.5 (residential + industrial); tree cover to total area; forest cover to total area.

Cleanliness

% of households with improved sanitation facility; % of schools with separate toilets for girls; % of households using improved drinking water source; % of households using clean fuel for cooking; Individual Household Latrine (IHHL) coverage.

FOR MOST-IMPROVED STATES (DATA FROM PAST FIVE YEARS):

Economy

Per capita income; % APL; ratio of capital expenditure to population; GSDP for the services sector per population; GSDP for the manufacturing sector per population; CPI; unemployment rate (%); number of banks per 100,000 people; ratio of commercial bank credit per 100,000 people; FDI inflow; proportion of state FDI inflow to total FDI in India; actual IEM/ proposed IEM; ratio of outstanding liabilities to population; gross capital formation to population.

Infrastructure

Ratio of (surfaced + unsurfaced) road length to total area; ratio of length of national highways and state highways to total area; ratio of vehicles to road length; % of households with electricity; households with access to drinking water/ piped water; ratio of length of railway lines to total area; post offices per population; no. of mobile subscribers per 1,000 people; telephone connections (landline) per 1,000 people; state-wise per capita availability of power.

Agriculture

Money spent on agriculture in the last budget compared with area of agriculture and population invested in agriculture; contribution of agriculture to GSDP; agriculture GSDP per rural population; % of area irrigated out of the total cultivated land; productivity- crop produced vs. land and population involved; loans extended to agriculture/ households cultivating land; % of cropped area under cash crops.

Education

Total expenditure of the education department per population (6-14 years); literacy rate (%); ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary and middle school; pupil-teacher ratio (all institutions); dropout rate in primary and middle education; no. of colleges per population in 15-19 age group; no. of schools per population in 10-14 age group; no. of higher educational institutions per population.

Healthcare

IMR; MMR; registered doctors per 100,000 people; government hospitals per 100,000 people; average patients served per government hospital; no. of beds per government hospital; life expectancy.

Law & Order

Civil policemen per 100,000 people; total cases (under IPC) per 100,000 people; murders per 100,000 people; kidnappings per 100,000 people; rapes per 100,000 people; molestation cases per 100,000 people; riots per 100,000 people; pending court cases per 100,000 people.

Governance

% of women representatives in panchayats; panchayat devolution index; ease of doing business index BRAP (Business Reforms Action Plan) implementation (%) (DIPP and World Bank); progress on Digital India programme (online transactions done per 1,000 people).

Inclusive Development

% of BPL population; ratio of domestic LPG consumers to total households; persons who benefitted from NREGA (households provided work under NREGA per total households); progress in Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (target fixed by states/ completed).

Entrepreneurship

Ease of doing business index (%); progress on Startup India programme; number of start-ups (new companies registered) in the state per 1,000 people; state-wise details of candidates trained under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana- total training completed per population; amount disbursed under Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana/ no. of registered companies.

Tourism

No. of domestic tourists; no. of foreign tourists; funds spent on tourism promotion to tourist population; crimes against tourists per 100,000 tourists; no. of registered hotels per 100,000 tourists; no. of five-star hotels per 100,000 tourists.

Environment

SO2 concentration (residential + industrial); NO2 concentration (residential + industrial); PM10 concentration (residential + industrial); tree cover to total area; forest cover to total area.

Cleanliness

% of households with improved sanitation facility; % of households using improved source of drinking water; % of households using clean fuel for cooking; IHHL coverage; % of schools with separate toilets for girls.
