Lucknow: Gangster found in hotel with wife, sister

Sohrab, who is currently lodged at Tihar jail, had come to Lucknow for a court hearing in Kanpur and was accompanied by the six Delhi Police officers. (Representational Image)

A day after Lucknow gangster Sohrab, his wife, sister and six Delhi policemen were arrested from a Lucknow hotel, the criminal and his family members were sent to jail, while the policemen were released on bail Thursday.

Sohrab, who is currently lodged at Tihar jail, had come to Lucknow for a court hearing in Kanpur and was accompanied by the six Delhi Police officers. The policemen have been accused of helping the gangster stay in the Lucknow hotel illegally.

Police also arrested the hotel manager, Ankit Kumar Mishra, for giving the hotel room on rent without an identity proof document.

The six policemen, including assistant sub-inspector Ramkishan, had taken Sohrab to a hotel at Aishbagh locality in Naka police station area after reaching Lucknow where his wife Sanno Khan and sister Yasmeen had come to meet him on Wednesday.

Additional SP (West) Vikas Chandra Tripathi said, “Two separate FIRs were lodged at the Naka police station on Wednesday night. One against the policemen from Delhi under IPC section 221 (intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend), while another was lodged against Sohrab, his family members and the hotel manager. The FIR against Sohrab, his family members has been lodged under IPC sections 221 (intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) and 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty).”

“The arrested policemen will be travelling to Delhi with a team that has been sent by Delhi Police. The Delhi police will start an inquiry against these policemen,” added Tripathi.

In a statement, Lucknow SSP Kalanidhi Naithani said, “Police received information that a criminal has been staying at a hotel. We also had received information that six policemen had let him loose and were staying in two rooms in the same hotel and the criminal might execute some crime here or try to escape. A police team, led by Additional SP (West) Vikas Chandra Tripathi, raided the hotel room to find two women and a man, identified as Sohrab. The police team found a person who was keeping a watch outside the hotel room’s door. These people created a hurdle performing policemen their duties and also attacked them. The person found guarding the room has been identified as Ankit Kumar Mishra. In the adjoining rooms, six policemen were found staying who were from Delhi police.”

Sohrab, who belongs to Lucknow’s Cantonment area, has 25 criminal cases lodged against him at the Cantonment and other police stations of the state capital. He is also historysheeter of the Cantonment police station. “He has cases of murder, dacoity, attempt to murder and extortion at the police station,” said police.

DCP 3rd Battalion Harish HP said, “After we received information about the arrest, we have suspended the staff and withdrawn them from their duty immediately. We have also sent another team to accompany the accused.”
