Mentally unstable woman stabs another in Ohio church for wearing fur boots

Fairmount Presbyterian Church in Cleveland Heights (Picture Credits: Google Maps) | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Lowell stabbed a woman in 2018 and was acquitted but released after paying a bond of $5,000 A passerby subdued her and saved the victim's life, said police Lowell was also arrested in 2012 for seeking people to kill a person for wearing fur

New Delhi: An animal-rights activist in the American state of Ohio has been arrested for allegedly stabbing a woman who was wearing fur boots. The incident took place at the Fairmont Presbyterian Church in Cleveland Heights on Wednesday. Police have identified the assailant as 35-year-old Meredith Lowell.

Eyewitness accounts suggest that they heard a loud scream before the victim was seen falling to the ground. A passerby managed to subdue Lowell and others alerted local police. First responders arrived at the spot and found the victim lying in a pool of blood, clutching her left side. The victim was rushed to the nearest hospital where she was treated for non-threatening injuries.

According to a report, the victim works as a babysitter and was at the Church to drop off children for choir practice when Lowell attacked her. In an official statement, police officers familiar with the matter revealed that the accused stabbed the victim twice in her arm and once in her abdomen. She has been arrested with a bond of $1 million set for bail. Police officials also applauded quick thinking on the part of the civilian who subdued Lowell and saved the victim's life without caring about his own. In fact, church staff had even shifted the children inside the building to a separate block as part of a pre-existing emergency drill.

Shockingly enough, this is not the first time Lowell has been detained or arrested for a violent attack against someone using fur. In 2012, she allegedly sought the help of social media websites to look for people willing to kill a person wearing fur. She was arrested and sent for psychological evaluations which led the court to believe that she was unfit to stand trial.

An official deployed at the prison where Lowell was being held at the time had told the court that she passed a jail guard a note stating that she would contract another hitman to kill a person wearing fur if she were to be released. All of this evidence was sidelined by the report of a forensic evaluation which went on to say that she was neither competent to stand trial nor posed a risk to herself or to the general public. In 2018, she was arrested yet again for stabbing another woman. Charged with felonious assault, Lowell was transferred to the mental health court. She was indicted in Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas in January 2019 and later released on a $5,000.
