Meet The 10 POW-fect Girls of 2019, Who Have The Power To Change

Do you remember sitting in front of the TV at 5:30 every evening and singing along to ‘The Powerpuff Girls’ theme song? If you’re saying ‘Yes’ in unison, then welcome to the 90s club, my friend. Most of us 90’s kids literally worshipped Cartoon Network on TV; it was our bible, our gateway to love of harmless mischief that made every episode fun. The joy of cuddling up in bed with The Powerpuff Girls’ fighting big bullies and owning their individuality was a great precedent for us girls.

For once, it wasn’t about the men and their superhero abilities. This time, the girls took centre stage to save the world and that’s what makes this show a true #ChangeMaker. Made from ‘sugar, spice, and everything nice’ with a kiss of Chemical X, the iconic trio represented the #PowerToChange!

Last year, Cartoon Network in association with The Souled Store celebrated the 20th anniversary of Townsville’s Blossom, Buttercup and Bubbles and launched India’s first-ever POW-fect Girls List! The campaign saw the curation of powerful stories of 20 women across diverse fields, pan-India, featuring real-life superheroes who echo the spirit of the iconic trio!

The 2019 POW-fect edition presents 10 terrific women trailblazers who dared to challenge the status quo. The list continues to bring true accounts of inspirational experiences through a series of candid and fun video interviews on Cartoon Network India YouTube page, inspiring fans to save the day before bedtime, just like The Powerpuff Girls! This year it also emphasizes on the #PowerToChange. A nod to the changing times, revolutionary actions and fearlessness, the 2019 edition underscores what it takes to bring about real transformation.





Here are the 10 women who made it to the POW-fect Girls list 2019:

1. Tahira Kashyap Khurrana, Writer and Filmmaker –

This bold and powerful woman has not just carved a niche for herself in her domain but has also become a living example of strength and bravery as a cancer survivor.

2. Ayesha Billimoria, Track Athlete, Running & Movement Specialist -

A professional athlete and a leading force in India’s fitness brigade, she has won several medals. Her passion for making a change in the fitness milieu of Indian women led to the popular ‘FitGirl India’.

3. Faye D'Souza, Senior Journalist –

She has championed fearless journalism by calmly navigating the cluttered space of news and current happenings. Known for her feisty yet sensible demeanour, she has challenged popular opinions and people unflinchingly.

4. Kanchan Daniel, Musician, Clinical Psychologist and Psychology Lecturer –

Combining her story of cancer survival, natural talent for singing and teaching, Kanchan Daniel works towards the mental health awareness of fellow artists.

5. Natasha Noel, Yoga Instructor and Motivational Speaker –

This Body positive influencer and a fitness enthusiast shot to fame as a Yoga trainer. She is also an inspiring force that emerged victorious in the face of abuse and depression.

6. Kanika Tekriwal, Founder and CEO, JetSetGo –

She is the face of entrepreneurship in the Indian aviation industry. Founder of JetSetGo, Kanika is a prolific leader with a passion for flying and the courage to give her dream wings.

7. Anahita Dhondy, Chef-Partner at SodaBottleOpenerWala, CyberHub –

Making her mark as one of the few Indian female chefs, Anahita is a culinary whiz. Working her way into the male-dominated arena of high-pressure kitchens, she’s won The Young Chef award, Times Food Award, and the hospitality sector ‘Indian of the Year’ 2018 title.

8. Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari, Writer and Director–

As the director of hits like ‘Nil Battey Sannata’ and ‘Bareilly ki Barfi’, she has not only changed commercial Hindi cinema but also reinvented depiction of female characters with quiet strength.

9. Kanika Dhillon, Author, Writer, and Producer –

The writer of Hindi blockbusters like ‘Manmarziyaan’ and author of several notable books, she writes impactful features that redefine the quintessential Indian woman.

10. Zaaria Patni - Business Woman –

She is a true embodiment of power to change, having challenged the Indian judicial system’s archaic laws. As a single parent herself, she has fought the legal battle for single parents to enjoy their status as the sole guardians of their children in entirety.

These women are among many others who are defining strength, confidence, and hard work in every field possible, making their stories truly inspirational for the upcoming generation. The POW-fect Girls are true #ChangeMakers and they have only just begun to conquer the world.
