Will Thackeray drop remote, take direct control of Maharashtra?

Consensus on Uddhav as CM: Sharad Pawar

MUMBAI: Uddhav Thackeray ’s control over the new three-party government set to be formed in Maharashtra will not be remote. After Sharad Pawar declared Shiv Sena , Congress and NCP had at their Friday evening meeting arrived at a consensus on the Sena president’s name for the CM’s post, Sena MP Sanjay Raut told mediapersons that Uddhav had agreed to take up the top position.“Uddhav Thackeray will be the new chief minister of Maharashtra. He will be CM for five years,” Raut said. However, a close associate of Uddhav said a final decision would come only after Uddhav consulted his family. If he does agree, it will make Uddhav the first from the Thackeray family to lead the state government, a departure from the late Sena founder Bal Thackeray’s stand that as Sena Pramukh, he would rule with the remote control in his hands. When Sena got its first CM in the state in 1995, Thackeray had given the post to his long-time associate Manohar Joshi, with BJP’s Gopinath Munde becoming deputy CM.Negotiations between the three parties for power-sharing before they stake claim as the ‘Maha Vikas Aghadi’ to form the government appeared to be on track on Friday evening, with the principle of “equal distribution of key portfolios” accepted by all sides. However, the two main sticky points on which talks were “inconclusive” and would continue on Saturday were the deputy CM’s and Speaker’s posts. NCP has staked claim to the Speaker’s post on the ground that it is the second-largest component and wants Congress to settle for deputy speakership, but Congress has not agreed so far.The tussle over both positions would be sorted out when a fresh round of talks took place on Saturday, a Congress leader said, and the coalition of ideological opposites might stake claim to form government on Saturday by meeting governor B S Koshyari.If the final agreement is to have two deputy CMs, Ajit Pawar of NCP is likely to be one and Balasaheb Thorat of Congress the other.Ahead of staking claim to form the next state government, new-found allies Shiv Sena, NCP and Congress have more or less decided the issues of which portfolio will go to whom, along with appointments to state-run corporations. These will be finalised on Saturday, sources said.An NCP leader said, “The basic draft on portfolios has been prepared, and it will be placed before the senior members of all three parties on Saturday. These are all minor issues now. Our priority was to set up a non-BJP government in the state, and we have almost achieved our goal.”Besides NCP chief Sharad Pawar, the Friday evening meeting, held at the Nehru Centre in Worli, was attended by senior Congress leaders Ahmed Patel, Mallikarjun Kharge, Balasaheb Thorat and Prithviraj Chavan, NCP leaders Praful Patel , Jayant Patil and Ajit Pawar, and the Shiv Sena’s Uddhav Thackeray, Subhash Desai and Eknath Shinde. “We discussed at length the leadership issue, and there was consensus over the name of Uddhav Thackeray,” Pawar said after the meeting.A senior NCP leader said it was Pawar who had convinced both Sonia Gandhi and Ahmed Patel that keeping BJP out of power in Maharashtra was important in the larger interest of the state. “If we form the government in Maharashtra with the help of the Shiv Sena and Congress, it will be beginning of the downfall of BJP,” the leader said.Persuading Congress to join was the toughest . The concern within Congress was that if it collaborated with a “communal” outfit like the Sena, it would lose its voter base among Dalits and Muslims and such a tie-up would have an adverse impact on the upcoming polls in Jharkhand and Delhi.However, after a series of meetings with Sena MP Sanjay Raut following the assembly poll results and the bitter tussle over the CM’s post between the saffron partners who had a pre-poll alliance, Pawar used his good offices with the Congress leadership, the NCP leader said, and established communication with the Congress and Sena.
