Baaghi 3: Tiger Shroff aces kicks, flips & punches in Serbia and leaves the international stunt team surprised

Lately, Tiger Shroff has been on a spree of sharing photos from the Serbia schedule of his action love story, Baaghi 3. Even Shraddha, who has now returned to Mumbai, was with Tiger in Serbia to shoot for the action film’s third instalment. Recently, Tiger shared some photos in which he looked all pumped to take on action scenes of the film. The actor also revealed that he was shooting for the climax of the film. It seems the War star has left no stone unturned in nailing the action scenes of Baaghi 3 which has left international stunt teams impressed.

As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, For Baaghi 3’s stunt coordination teams from places like Thailand, Bulgaria and Serbia were recruited. In sync with Tiger, the kicks, punches and stunts were being choreographed for the climax shoot. When the shoot began, Tiger managed to ace all the stunts in one go which left the action teams quite surprised. The idea behind Baaghi 3’s stunts was to take the level of action higher and Tiger, who is known to ace all action sequences, was excited for the same.

(Also Read: Tiger Shroff’s motivating poem written at the age of 16 prompts sis Krishna to reveal his poetic side; See Pic)

As per a source that quoted to the daily, “They, in consultation with Sajid, Tiger and Ahmed, are designing kicks, flips and punches. The idea is to take the action a notch above the earlier two parts. The international team was pleasantly surprised when Tiger got the complicated stunts right in the first take.” Also, Sajid Nadiadwala has sought special permission to shoot with ammunition and military equipment from the Prime Minister of Serbia. He event met up with PM Ana Brnabic and top-ranking army officer, Colonel Mihailo Zogovic.



The report also stated that not just Tiger, even Shraddha Kapoor will be seen doing many stunts in the film. Shraddha will be seen essaying the role of an air hostess in the film. Ritiesh Deshmukh and Ankita Lokhande will also be seen in the film and the former will be flying to Serbia for shoot on December 1, 2019. Directed by Ahemed Khan and produced by Sajid Nadiadwala, Baaghi 3 is slated to hit the screens in March 2020.
