Punjab: 40 ‘drug peddlers’ rounded up in raid on two city colonies

LUDHIANA: In a drive against drugs, the city police conducted a raid at Ghora and Amarpura colonies on Friday and 40 suspicious persons involved in drug peddling, including three women, were rounded up.The suspects were taken to the police station in a bus for further verification.Around 150 cops reached Ghora and Amarpura colonies around 4.30am. 100 personnel came from the police lines, while 50 others were from different police stations. The team was led by additional deputy commissioner of police-1 Gurpreet Singh Sikand.ADCP Sikand said the drive continued for two hours after which nearly 40 suspects were rounded up, but nothing was found from their possession.In another incident, the Division Number 3 police arrested four accused for drug peddling on Friday morning in four separate cases and recovered 263 g heroin from their possession.ADCP Sikand said in the first case, Lakhan of New Hari Krishna Colony was arrested from Ganesh Nagar following a tip-off with 161 g heroin. The accused was already facing a trial in three cases, including kidnapping and drug peddling.In the second case, the police arrested Gurmel Kumar of Bindra Market and recovered 77 g heroin from his possession. He was arrested from the Transport Nagar crossing. In the third case, the police arrested Nasim of Kidwai Nagar with 13 g heroin from Isa Nagri Puli. In the fourth case, the police arrested Gaurav Kumar of Janakpuri with 12 g heroin.In another case, Division Number 2 police arrested Harbir Singh, 26, of Humayupura village of Ludhiana. The police recovered 40 g heroin and a country-made .32 bore illegal pistol from his possession.The accused was arrested from near the railway crossings behind the Gurdwara Dukh Niwaran Sahib, Field Ganj.Assistant commissioner of police (central) Waryam Singh said the accused had confessed that he brought the weapon to murder his rival.“The accused got the weapon from his friend Davinder Singh of Khedi village, who is convicted in a murder case. Davinder Singh had come out of jail on parole around one-and-a-half-years ago and arranged a weapon for him,” said the ACP.He said Harbir had an old rivalry with Lalli of Jodhan area as he along with his two accomplices thrashed him. Due to which Harbir was in coma for one week.According to Harbir, after gaining consciousness, he complained to the police, but the police did not take any action. Therefore, he wanted to take revenge form Lali.A police official said Harbir already had three criminal cases against him.Further, on the information of Harbir, the police also arrested a drug peddler Gurpreet Singh of Bulara village with 25 g heroin. He is also a convict in a drug peddling case, but is out on parole.
