Parents protest over fee hike by Amanora School

Parents of students of Amanora School, Hadapsar, were left stranded outside the school on Saturday while they took their fee-hike battle ahead. At least 60 parents approached the school claiming to pay only legitimate fees and denied paying the lofty fees determined by the school. Parents claimed that the school is asking for illegally hiked fees and fails to show the legality.



While the school authority insists on collecting a sum of Rs 67,500, the gathered parents were willing to shell out only Rs 49,000. Dhiraj Gendam, one of the parents, said, “We have our cheque of Rs 49,950 ready and have also written a letter to the school authorities assuring them that once the state education department’s final decision over our complain of fee hike is out, we are ready to pay the difference amount if the directive is in favour of the fee hike. On the other hand, if the fee determined by the education department goes below what we have decided to pay currently, then the school should, in turn, refund us the money.”



While parents were willing to hand out the declaration regarding them paying only legitimate fees as a protest, the school authorities were not ready to acknowledge the letter and asked them to send it through post. Parents also complained that they were made to wait outside the school for more than three hours and did not accept the cheques.



Another parent said, “The school has approved the fees in 2017 for both 2018-19 and 2019-20 which we have challenged and complained to state education department. The school has also sent a notice to us saying that if we do not pay the fees then they would remove our ward and also hand out a leaving certificate which is against Right to Education Act.”



While parents complained regarding the notice sent to them by school on January 25 to education officer of Pune Municipal Corporator (PMC), Shivaji Daundkar, he said, “We contacted the school to show us the documents supporting the fee hike and basis of approval of the fees. The school did not support our inquiry hence we have given a reply to deputy director of education, Pune, that the fee hike is illegal. They should accept the fees which parents are giving before final decision.”



Refuting the claims made by the parents, spokesperson of Amanora School, Shilpa Kulkarni, said, “The fees for 2018-19 and 2019-20 year had been approved in December 2017 by Executive Parents Teachers Association (EPTA). While parents have been complaining that we have not accepted their cheques and the letter issued by them, they can go ahead and post the same to us.



All our fees are approved and we have followed all the rules outlined in the Fee Regulation Act, 2011. Parents can also pay the fees online if they wish to, since that facility is also in place. Furthermore, we submitted the relevant documents when the state education department inquired about the same. If the parents continue to not pay the fees, then we would be forced to take some legal action against them.”



Gendam, on the other hand, said, “We have challenged the fees approved by EPTA 2017 as the school had removed two of our EPTA members and we had also given the letter that the fees approved is illegal. Also the school cannot approve two years fees in one EPTA meeting.”
