Scarred by tumours at childhood, victims battle endless stigma

TOPE OMOGBOLAGUN writes about the stigmatisation facing Nigerians living with a medical condition known as neurofibromatosis

I was not born like this,” said dark-skinned 29-year-old Aishat Ogwu during a chat with Sunday PUNCH.

She thereafter looked away briefly to recollect the event that led to her developing the growth on her skin.

Aisha’s swollen chin is the location of neurofibromatosis. The lady said she was over a year old when her aunt noticed some the growth on her body after they returned from a trip to their village.

She said, “According to the story my mother told me, it started when I was one year and six months. We just returned from the village when my cousin noticed a strange seed on my left chin and that was how the trouble started since then.”

Ogwu, who is the only child of her parent, became teary as she narrated how much the condition cost her and her parent trying to get rid of the growth on her chin.

“My parents initially thought it was a minor thing, so I was taken the hospital then and things became worse. My matter became like it was from the frying pan to fire. The more I sought medical treatment, the more the issue grew out of hand.”

Ugwu said she was under treatment for some years, adding that it was during a surgery in India to remove the growth that she discovered it’s called neurofibromatosis.

According to online sources, neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder causing tumours to form on nerve tissue and the tumours can develop in the victim’s nervous system, brain and spinal cord. It’s usually diagnosed in childhood or early adulthood and can be benign or malignant.

She added, “After my parents discovered the swelling on my chin, I was taken to a hospital within the neigbourhood where I was given an injection. After the injection, it seemed like hell broke loose as the matter became worse. From there we moved to another hospital and they said it was a growth. This made me undergo three different surgeries in Nigeria. ”

Due to the surgeries, she got a deformed face as the growth kept growing which left her emotionally drained. The more she made an effort to remove the tumours, the more damage it had on her face.

She added, “After the surgery in India, I witnessed lots of improvement on my face.’’

Tales of rejection, stigma

Ogwu, a fresh graduate from the Delta State University, said she prayed daily for science to discover a cure for the condition as she was tired of being treated as a lesser human because of the growth on her left chin.

She said the condition made socialising difficult for her and at times when she intended to, people would withdraw from her.

She stated, “My primary school was not really easy because at a point I couldn’t participate in activities. I was avoided like a plague. I remember at a particular time, one of my teachers pulled me out of rehearsals for the school party. Since then, I never participated in any activity nor mingled with my mates.’’

Ogwu s aid what the teacher did to her stuck with her for a long time as she never related well in secondary school coupled with the fact that people usually ostracised her. “I attended a boarding school when others had school mothers, I was rejected.”

Saying the rejection didn’t stop at secondary school, Ogwu noted that she had a similar dose during her university days. She described her years in the university as years of disappointment, rejection, and disdain. She, however, thanked some of her few friends who were cooperative and supportive amid the challenges.

Like Ogwu, 26-year-old Susan Eseoghene is a graduate of the Delta State University and currently at an orientation camp for the National Youth Service Corps in the North. She is not new to the stigma facing people battling neurofibromatosis.

She told our correspondent that she was tired of looking good because no matter how well she dressed, no man would come near her. Eseoghene stated, “It’s been a difficult journey for me since I was diagnosed with the condition at seven.’’

Eseoghene who is the only child of her parents described herself as an introvert. She added, “I don’t know how to make friends but even when I attempt to, I’m often rejected. I have been bearing the burden of a lonely life. I desire to have friends that will keep my company but they are always running away from me.”

The fresh graduate said being in a relationship was almost an impossible task for her as most opposite sex saw her as unattractive.

The lady said those who could stand the sight of her only wanted sex, noting that she continued to stay without a boyfriend hoping for a sincere man someday.

The condition is not only peculiar to females as it cuts across both genders and age grades. Thirty-seven-year-old Nehemiah Buriok is a male battling the medical condition.

Buriok said he discovered the growth on his body after completing secondary school education. He said he’s the only one with the condition among his parents’ four children.

He said, “I don’t really face much discrimination, though I can’t shy away from the fact that it exists. The people within my circle of friends are accommodating and lovely. I also have a girlfriend who has no problem with my condition. She is comfortable around me.

“But there was an occasion I cannot forget. While I was in higher institution, there was a lady who said to me, ‘Which woman go agree marry you’ (Which woman will agree to marry you.) She mocked me in public but was rebuked by fellow students.

“Another case was during the monkey pox incident. I boarded a vehicle and a man who sat close to me asked, ‘Oga hope this is not monkey pox.’’

The agriculturist said it seemed those with neurofibromatosis weren’t regarded as humans because people don’t think they have emotions.

For Grace Okhime, a graduate of Science Laboratory Technology, Auchi Polytechnic, Auchi, Edo State, she grew up to see the growth on her skin, but only got a full grasp of the condition when in 2012.

Like others, she is dealing with stigma every day. Okhime stated, “People see me as strange because of the condition. Someone once asked a friend what she was always doing with me and described me as someone with boil all over her body.”

She said people avoided her and never cared to hide it from her, “People avoid me always. I have many experiences I can even count. When I want to enter a bus a people tend to avoid me and they make it obvious.”

Twenty-four-year-old Joy Chris who never exhibited any symptom of the tumour until she became pregnant in her final year said she rushed to a hospital upon noticing the tumour on her skin. She said doctors told her not to worry that all would be well, after she put to bed, the spots would disappear.

She added that after she gave birth, the growth didn’t disappear but increased and that was when they discovered it was neurofibromatosis.

Accordin g to the mother one, she felt stigmatised when a family member saw and started avoiding her.

She said, “My mum and siblings will tell me that my body is bad and that I looked ugly. I almost committed suicide once if not for that I was pregnant. Because of the condition, I wear cardigan all the time even if the weather is hot because I don’t want people to stare strangely at me. One day, I was feeling hot while pregnant, so I went out. The tricycle rider who took me told me to go and look for a solution to my problem seeing the way my body is. I almost drank sniper that day.

“I decided not to go for NYSC because people will be looking at me strangely and I don’t want to experience negativity anymore.”

‘We’ve lost precious things to neurofibromatosis’

Ogwu noted that she lost herself and identity to the condition, adding that whoever wasn’t in her shoes wouldn’t understand what it meant to be rejected everywhere one went.

She stated, “Sadly mine is on the face which makes it visible to everyone. I am usually the centre of attraction whenever I visited anywhere. I don’t have a boyfriend because no one wants to date the lady with that ‘thing’ on her face. Whenever guys approach me and they see my face, they pretend as if all is well trying to make me feel comfortable at that point, after which they vanish. I believe that there is someone out there for me. ”

The fresh graduate further said she was unsure of what the future held with job search as she was still awaiting youth service. She said whenever she thought of job search her heart skips because of the stigma associated with her condition. “Even without job search, people run away from me, some parents will send away their children whenever they are trying to come close to me.”

Eseoghene also lamented that she lost several opportunities to be friends with people. “Neurofibromatosis has taken away people and company from me. I am lonely. I don’t have friends and nobody wants to come close to me.”

For Buriok, he lost a chance to join the Nigerian Army because of his condition. He explained that he was sent out by officers during the screening. Saying he got the support of other candidates who spoke up for him, he never got the chance to be what he desired.

He said, “The most painful was when I was disqualified during the Nigerian Army direct short service screening. I was shortlisted for the screening in 2012. But on getting to the venue in Enugu, one of the officers looked into my eyes and asked, ‘Oga why are you like this, why is your face filled with korokoro, you won’t make it ooh.’

“When I got to the medical session of the screening, I was asked to pull off my clothes. When I did, another officer asked his colleague to come and see something. On getting there, the officer said, ‘this is NF nah.’ I was asked to move out. They called the medical officer and he confirmed it. I felt bad, but some of the candidates stood by me and asked me not to give up in life.’’

Although he now works in a federal parastatal under the N-power scheme, he doesn’t know his fate as his contract with the scheme expires by December. “I am scared of going job-hunting again because of what I experienced. Someone who has the means to help me secure a job said he was afraid I might be rejected due to my medical condition.”

Also, Okhime said she lost many things to neurofibromatosis which enumerating would make her sad.

Okhime noted, “For relationship, I reconnected with a secondary school mate online. We got talking on a web call, and he made a statement saying I looked strange. He left and never called again. For the job, I was invited for an interview, went there early enough. In fact, I was the first to arrive. Since the interview had not started, I felt I needed to use the ladies. I told the lady who sat beside me that I wanted to use the restroom. She said I should inform the security man. I went inside and saw the security man. I greeted him and told him I wanted to use the restroom. He told me to talk to the receptionist but that I should put my name down first.

“My name was the first on the book that day–July 23, 2019. Inside, I saw a lady and a man. The man sat on a couch and I suspected the lady was the receptionist. I greeted them. I told her what I needed and she showed me the toilet. After that, I went outside to carry my bag. By then people were already coming inside to write their names.

“There was a man there who kept staring at me. I believe he was a worker in the company because he had easy access to the offices. When I noticed him, I looked elsewhere because I felt uncomfortable when someone stares at me for long. Then some people were asked to come in and I was among them. When we got in, I was standing in front of the receptionist and she said ‘you may leave; we will get back to you…’

She added that she wanted to be sure that she was talking to her but she didn’t reply her when she politely asked if she was talking to her.

“We were asked to go out again because the room was congested. Not long after, the security man came and told me he was told to tell me to hand over my Curriculum Vitae and leave the venue. I felt humiliated that I started to cry,” she added.

Chris said she never had an issue with outsiders because the tumour was mostly at her back. “My hubby feels irritated by it although he tries to pretend. It is written all over him. Personally, I feel bad that when my husband is having a romantic affair with me, he can’t touch smooth skin anymore. The condition has greatly affected my marriage. I pray I don’t lose my marriage to this medical condition that has become my worst nightmare.’’

Increased awareness essential

The victims noted that adequate awareness would reduce the stigma and maltreatment they face, adding that people would become more enlightened that it’s a medical condition and not a death sentence.

Ogwu said most of those who ran away from them were scared it would affect them. She said, “Awareness will go a long way and hopefully, science will find a cure and other preventive measures. I really do hope a cure will happen”

Eseoghene believed that if people were more informed of the condition, they would treat them as fellow humans.

Both Buriok and Okhime also agreed that stigma would combat awareness. Okhime added, “Awareness is necessary. It will help to reduce the stigma and possible cure may be found to stop the growth.”

For Chris, Nigerian doctors should take up the challenge to look for a cure to neurofibromatosis. She said, “I want an awareness campaign round the country. But more importantly, Nigerian doctors can do more. They should research and look for a cure to tackle the condition.’’

It has no cure but doctors can manage it—Dermatologist

Speaking about the growth, a dermatologist, Prof. Grace Ajose, described it as a hereditary disease and not infectious as believed by people. She explained that it could affect both internal and external organs of the body.

She said, “Neurofibromatosis is a hereditary skin disease that causes large soft nodules to appear on the skin. It may also affect the bones, heart and kidney.

“It is not contagious. It is inherited, in most cases one parent has it florid mild or moderate. Examination of parents often reveals presence of the condition in at least one parent.’’

The dermatologist said against popular belief, neurofibromatosis was different from leprosy known as an infection of the skin and nerves.

She stated that though there was no cure for the medical condition, however, doctors tried to manage complications arising from it.

She added, “There is no cure but doctors try to manage complications like malignant hypertension, inner ear tumours that can impair hearing; brain tumours that can present like epilepsy and so on. The soft nodules on the skin can also be found in internal organs where they disturb the functions of the organs.”



All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Copyright PUNCH.

All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Contact: [email protected]
