Woman, 20, secretly filmed accused killer boyfriend wiping fingerprints off bullets and loading gun

A Michigan woman used her cell phone to record her boyfriend on video as he is loading a gun and threatening to kill her moments before police say she was fatally shot inside a van parked in his driveway.

The video filmed by India Mackey, just a day after her 20th birthday, shows 18-year-old Kevin Dixon wiping his fingerprints off of bullets as he sat in the passenger seat of a vehicle.

Mackey was recording Dixon at around 5:30pm on Tuesday as the two sat in a van and argued near their home in the Detroit suburb of Warren, according to WDIV-TV.

‘You think I’m playing, huh? Gonna hit you with these hollow-tip 45s,’ Dixon says in the video.

WARNING: GRAPHIC CONTENT

India Mackey (left), 20, used her cell phone to record herself and her boyfriend, Kevin Dixon (right), 18, as they were arguing in a van parked in front of their house in Warren, Michigan, on Tuesday

Dixon is seen in the video wiping fingerprints off bullets and threatening Mackey

The video also shows Dixon loading a gun. Authorities say that moments after Mackey stopped recording, she was fatally shot

After Mackey stopped recording, Dixon shot her dead, according to authorities.

‘This video is being taken by a woman who is going to be killed in moments,’ Macomb County Prosecuting Attorney Eric Smith told WXYZ-TV.

‘It’s unbelievable to me.

‘The idea that he’s pulling the bullet out, wiping his fingerprints off, showing it to her.’

After Dixon shot Mackey, he then got out of the car and moved her body into the passenger seat, prosecutors say.

Authorities allege that Dixon then called his mother with Mackey’s phone which she used to record his threats.

Dixon allegedly asked his mother to take the gun used to kill Mackey.

Dixon then started driving his van with a wounded Mackey still inside.

Dixon (left) faces first degree murder, carrying a concealed weapon, and felony firearm charges. If convicted, he faces a mandatory sentence of life in prison. Mackey is seen right

Dixon and Mackey were dating for about a year and living together in the Detroit suburb of Warren, according to Mackey's father

Mackey was found with gunshot wounds in the passenger seat of the van after Eastpointe police pulled Dixon over for erratic driving about 20 minutes after the shooting, according to authorities. She was rushed to hospital, where she was pronounced dead

He was eventually pulled over by police in nearby Eastpointe for driving erratically.

Officers then noticed Mackey bleeding in the passenger’s seat, according to authorities.

She was rushed to a local hospital, where she was pronounced dead.

Dixon faces first degree murder, carrying a concealed weapon, and felony firearm charges.

If convicted, he faces a mandatory sentence of life in prison.

Dixon’s mother has also been charged with acting as an accessory after the fact and tampering with evidence.

Dixon was ordered held without bond in the Macomb County Jail during his arraignment on Thursday.

His next court dates are December 5 and December 11.

Mackey’s father, Joseph Polk, told WJBK-TV that he warned his daughter against dating Dixon.

‘I didn't like the young man and I got the wrong vibes from him,’ said Polk.

‘I told her, I talked to her, I said, “He's not the one for you, baby”.’

Mackey was one of Polk’s eight children. He said Mackey and Dixon were dating for about a year.

‘I try to pride myself on being a protector, but you can't protect your kids from who they interact with,’ Polk said.

‘I tried, I tried.’
