29 independents, MLAs from small parties may hold key to vote

(This story originally appeared in on Nov 24, 2019)

MUMBAI: The role of 29 MLAs belonging to smaller parties or elected as independents will be crucial as BJP is slated to prove its majority through a floor test.Devendra Fadnavis took oath as CM on Saturday after staking claim to form the government with the support of BJP’s 105 MLAs, NCP’s 54 and 11 independents. Sena claims it has the support of seven independents and MLAs of smaller parties. Party leaders said it will be crucial for all parties to keep their flock of independents together. “The next few days will be where attempts to poach MLAs will be made from all sides. The MLAs are vulnerable and can switch sides. It’s important to keep them under watch,” said a BJP leader.He gave an example of Peasants Workers Party, who had fought in alliance with Congress-NCP, but their lone MLA Shyamsunder Shinde in Nanded has backed BJP.“The floor test will be such that even one number will be important,” said a BJP leader. Meanwhile, independent candidates say they will back the party to whom they have already extended their support. BJP rebel Geeta Jain, who contested and won the Mira-Bhayandar seat as an independent after the party denied her a ticket, said that she will continue to support BJP. “I have already extended support to BJP and will never change my stand as I am a BJP worker by heart. There is nothing which can make me change my stand,” said Jain.Even Bachu Kadu, Prahar Janshakti Party founder who has two MLAs from Vidarbha, said that he has committed to Sena and will remain with it. He has also been staying with Sena MLAs when they were in the resort in Madh and then Lalit hotel.Meanwhile, the only party who is not supporting any of the ideas in the political tug-of-war in the state is the Asaduddin Owaisi-led AIMIM. With two MLAs, AIMIM will sit in opposition, neither with Congress-NCP-Sena nor with BJP. Former MIM legislator Waris Pathan said: “Our president (Owaisi) has made it clear that we will sit in opposition. Our stand remains the same,” said Pathan.
