Indian Spa Centres raided for Prostitution & Sex Rackets

He went on to say that most spa centres were a sex racket front

A number of Indian spa centres were raided by police after a Regional Ayurvedic and Unani Officer found out that prostitution and sex rackets were being run.

However, there are many more spa centres that are a front for these illegal rackets which have not been raided.

On November 21, 2019, four centres in Uttar Pradesh were raided which revealed that sex rackets were being run. Six men were arrested while 19 young women were saved.

But several spa centres in Delhi were not raided by police despite Ayurveda officials reporting them for illegal activities.

They had been locked out of fear that they would be raided but officers did not turn up.

There are 100 spa centres based in Sadar under the name of Body Massage Centre.

It was revealed that the owners of the raided centres have gone on the run and police are working to locate their whereabouts.

The prostitution and sex rackets came to light on November 20, 2019, when an Ayurveda official had gone to one centre for an inspection.

Upon entering, they discovered the illegal operation and alerted the police.

While some Indian spa centres were raided, it was expected that the police would take action on the others.

After finding out that raids were being conducted, operators of the illegal spas closed. However, raids did not happen.

Dr JK Rana, Regional Officer of the Ayurveda and Unani Department, stated that the raids were conducted under the orders of the District Magistrate.

He went on to say that most spa centres were a sex racket front and urged officers to take action.

The four raided centres were located on Fatehabad Road, Agra.

Dr Rana stated that around half of the 100 spa centres in Sadar were being run as prostitution and sex rackets.

Not only are they operating from spa centres, but sex rackets are also taking place within hotels. Police have been alerted but action is yet to take place.

Superintendent Rohan Pramod explained that not all raids have been conducted as more evidence is being collected.

Information is being collated based on what has already been said by those who have been arrested.

SP Pramod added that action will be taken and all illegal spa centres will be shut after they have provided a report to the administration.

Locals in Tajganj, Uttar Pradesh have said that several sex rackets were being operated from rented flats.

They explained that young girls would arrive at the properties in the morning by cars and go inside. During the day, high-profile people would enter the flats.

Inspector-General Satish Ganesh took notice of the allegations and instructed the area’s SSP to take immediate action.
