Delhi: CISF seizes Rs 50 lakh from Gujarati youth at Barakhamba metro station, hawala link suspected

The accused has been identified as 19-year-old Thakur Dilip, a resident of Patan in Gujarat. (Photo courtesy: CISF)

Key Highlights Rs 50 lakh seized from a Gujarati youth at Barakhamba metro station Man identified as 19-year-old Thakur Dilip, a resident of Patan in Gujarat Accused failed to produce valid document for carrying such a high volume of cash

New Delhi: The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has seized Rs 50 lakh of unaccounted cash from a passenger at Barakhamba Metro Station on Saturday. Reports suggest the money was part of hawala racket in Chandni Chowk in Delhi.

The accused has been identified as 19-year-old Thakur Dilip, a resident of Patan in Gujarat. The accused has now been handed over to Income Tax Officials.

According to CISF officials, a passenger-carrying bag reached the security checkpoint at Barakhamba Metro Station to gain access to the metro system. During x-ray screening of his bag, officials noticed a suspicious object inside the bag.

The bag was later taken for a thorough physical check which revealed the presence of cash amounting to Rs 50 lakh.

During the investigation, the youth revealed that he was carrying the cash to Chandni Chowk. Later, a man named Jalpesh Kumap Babulal Patel, a resident of Fathepuri, reached the Metro station to claim the cash.

Patel claimed that he is in the transport business and the cash was being transferred taken to Chandni Chowk on the instruction of his Ahmedabad-based employer Dhruv Bhai.

However, Patel could not produce any valid document for carrying such a high volume of cash.

The Delhi Metro Rail Police and Income Tax officials were also informed about the incident. Thakur Dilip was handed over to I-T officials for further necessary action.

In a similar incident in October, two persons carrying over Rs 1 crore cash were arrested at a Delhi's Jangpura metro station. The accused were identified as 20-year-old Vikas Chauhan and Arti, aged about 20 years. Chauhan is a resident of Shukurpur in Rajasthan, while the woman is a resident of Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh.
