‘Unauthorised’ camp raided in Rajkot: 7 detained for ‘taking money from people for health cards’

Officials of the Rajkot Municipal Corporation (RMC) and district administration along with the city police on Saturday raided an “unauthorised” camp organised to issue health cards of Ayushman Bharat scheme in Sadar area of the city and detained seven persons for questioning.

The officials led by Jaymin Thaker, chairman of health committee of RMC, raided the camp organised by a few private individuals on a tip-off that the organisers were collecting money from people by promising them that they would get cards of the government scheme.

The officials forced closure of the camp at Lal Bahadur Shashtri Girls School. “I got information on Saturday evening that some private individuals who were organising the camp were collecting Rs 700 from each person who wanted the Ayushman Bharat card. People had queued up from 6am to enroll themselves for the scheme and the organisers collected money from more than 12,000 people. When we questioned the four men who organised the camp, they said they were collecting money for their community and not as charges for the card. But money cannot be collected in the name of the government scheme,” Thaker said.

He said that one of the four organisers was a person from Bharuch who had contract to do enrollment of beneficiaries of the Ayushman Bharat scheme. “That person illegally got password of his counterpart in Rajkot and pretended to do enrollment at the camp. Contractors are not supposed to charge more than Rs 30 from beneficiaries. We suspect this is a state-wide racket as these people were collecting money and documents and telling people that they will get their cards after one-and-half months,” Thaker added.

Later in the evening, Pradyuman Nagar police said they were verifying facts of the camp. “We have picked up seven persons from the camp and are questioning them. We are verifying facts of the camp. If we find anything illegal, we will register an offence,” said BM Katariya, inspector of Pradyuman Nagar.
