Nagarjuna Akkineni rubbishes rumours of an IT raid in his office: 'This is news to me'

Nagarjuna Akkineni rubbishes rumours of an IT raid

Key Highlights Nagarjuna Akkineni is one of the most versatile and talented actors we've ever seen The actor has recently been in news for a reported IT raid at his office in Hyderabad Rubbishing the rumours, Nagarjuna took to his social media handle to reveal that the news floating around is baseless

Nagarjuna Akkineni is one of the most talented, versatile and phenomenal performers in the film industry. Apart from a few Hindi films, Nagarjuna is a legend in Tollywood and his filmography including Ninne Pelladatha, Annamayya, Azad and Santhosham have established him as one of the best actors we've ever seen. With an unmatchable fanbase, fans eagerly wait for Nagarjuna's next release. Apart from his films, it's an update on his personal life that has had everyone's attention.

Over the last few days, rumour mills have been rife that there was an Income Tax raid in the actor's office in Hyderabad. Nagarjuna went on to shut down all the rumours on his social media handles. He wrote on Twitter, "Quite a few of my friends Have been calling me and asking me if I had raid from the income tax department!! This is news to me no such raid has happened on me or my offices. FYI"

Check out Nagarjuna's Tweet here:

Quite a few of my friends Have been calling me and asking me if I had raid from the income tax department!! This is news to me no such raid has happened on me or my offices. FYI — Nagarjuna Akkineni (@iamnagarjuna) November 22, 2019

On the film front, Nagarjuna was last seen with Rakul Preet Singh in Manmadhudu 2 that received negative reviews by the audience. Miffed with the star for playing such a role, fans have been eagerly waiting for his next project. Nagarjuna will next be teaming up with Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra. Reported to be essaying the role of an archaeologist, Nagarjuna will be teaming up with Amitabh Bachchan, Dimple Kapadia, Ranbir Kapoor, Alia Bhatt and Mouni Roy for the film.

Apart from his return to Bollywood, Nagarjuna will be teaming up with his son Naga Chaitanya for an untitled film. Although the makers of the film have been tight-lipped about the project, fans have been eagerly been waiting to see the father and son team up on the big screen.

Stay tuned for further updates on entertainment and Nagarjuna!
