Virar police on lookout for a man who thrashed a stray dog to death

Virar police

Virar East

Local feeders and animal rights activists

Thane SPCA Hospital

Animal Welfare Board of India

Karuna Trust

Cruelty

Neighbours say the dog was sleeping when it was assaulted by the accused.Theare on the lookout for a man who allegedly beat a stray dog to death with a wooden pole on Friday intook the injured dog to thewhere he died during treatment. The accused has been booked for killing the animal.District animal welfare officer ofMitesh Jain had filed a complaint with the Virar police about the incident. Jain said that he was informed by a snake rescuer named Suraj Pandey about a man beating a dog with a heavy wooden pole at Gandhi Chowk, Virar East on Friday afternoon.“I went to the spot, and was told that the accused, Rakesh Sahani, lived on the same street. We saw the dog lying in a pool of blood. I immediately called an ambulance from, and the dog was administered first aid by a veterinarian on board. However, since the condition of the dog appeared very critical, we thought it was better to send him to the hospital,” said Jain.He said that after attending to the dog, he spoke to the residents. “Many of them said they tried to stop Sahani from hitting the dog but he didn’t listen to anyone. They also told me that the dog was asleep when Rakesh Sahani came with a big pole and began beating him up, unprovoked,” said Jain.He said that the neighbours told him that Sahani had beaten up other stray dogs in the area before.Talking about the dog, the feeders got emotional, and said that he was a very friendly animal. “He was very gentle. The young kids in the locality were fond of him. They would pet him and feed him without any fear,” they said.An officer from Virar police station said that Sahani had been booked under section 429 (mischief by killing or maiming an animal) and the relevant section of Prevention ofto Animals Act.The officer said that the police went to look for Sahani at the given address twice after the complaint was made, but did not find him.The police said that Sahani’s family members told them that he was angry after the dog bit him. The family has been asked to advise Sahni to show up in the police station on Monday, otherwise a lookout notice would be issued against him, the police said.
