Fake royals lived in ruined Indian palace for 40 years

In a photo from 1975, Begum Wilayat Mahal is seen with her daughter Sakeena and son Ali Raza occupying the VIP room at the New Delhi Railway Station where they stayed for three months.

A family who lived in a ruined jungle palace in India's capital for 40 years and claimed royal status have been exposed as imposters.

The widowed Begum Wilayat and her children, Princess Sakina and Prince Ali Raza, also known as Cyrus, moved into a dilapidated 14th-century hunting lodge in a patch of New Delhi woodland in 1985, The New York Times reported.

Wilayat had arrived in the city's train station in the early 1970s, claiming to be heir of the Nawabs of Oudh, descendants of Persian nobility who lost their land in northern India in 1856.

Wilayat refused to leave the station, demanding that her land be restored to her, and set up her household in the station's VIP waiting room.

READ MORE:

* Runaway princess 'swapped' for British arms dealer

* Following Diana's footsteps, British royals visit Taj Mahal

* Prince William, Kate pay respects to Gandhi in India

The government, fearing political unrest, offered Wilayat and her children a house in the northern city of Lucknow, but she refused, saying the house was too small.

SANCHIT KHANNA/HINDUSTA TIMES VIA GETTY IMAGES Ruins of Malcha Mahal, the medieval monument where the family lived.

In 1984, then-Prime Minister Indira Gandhi gave in, accepting the family's nobility and granting them use of the royal hunting lodge in New Delhi known as Malcha Mahal.

The family shunned "commoners", surrounding their dilapidated home with razor wire, guard dogs and a sign that read: "Intruders shall be gundown".

Wilayat never appeared in public again, although her children occasionally granted interviews to journalists.

In 1997, the prince and the princess told The Times of London that their mother had killed herself by drinking poison. Sakina apparently died in 2016, and Ali Raza reportedly died of dengue fever in late 2017.

After tracing the family's relatives to Britain and Pakistan, New York Times journalist Ellen Barry discovered the royal legend was simply made up.

Barry discovered that Wilayat had been the widow of a civil servant in Lucknow before her dramatic arrival in New Delhi. She was admitted to a Lahore mental hospital after her husband died, and later announced that she was Queen of Oudh.

While her younger children believed her, Wilayat's eldest son, Shahid Butt, left for England in his teens and secretly sent money to support the family. He died at home in Bradford earlier this month.

"They were so convincing, and so insistent, that for 40 years people believed them," Barry wrote.
