Made In India: How Desi Autos Have Become A Symbol In Iraqis’ Fight For Their Rights

It has been over two months now that ordinary Iraqis have been protesting against corruption, repression and poverty. Thus we see that every day, thousands are pouring into Tahrir Square, the centre of Baghdad, to be beaten, tear-gassed and shot.

An AP report describes the scenario as “the largest grassroots protest movement in Iraq’s modern history” but not many may be aware that its symbol and ‘hero’ is the humble autorickshaw, made in India.

FILE PHOTO. REUTERS

For most of its five years in Iraq, the Bajaj ‘RE’ — called ‘tuk-tuk’ on the street — was reviled as a poor man’s taxi, but now, these taxis for the poor have transformed into the ‘knights of the revolution’.

Wondering how?

The Times of India reported that walls around Tahrir Square even have graffiti showing a winged tuk-tuk. Hussam Alrassam’s song ‘Abu Altoktok’ has clocked over 60 lakh views and 2.4 lakh likes on YouTube in less than a month. The international press is already calling it the ‘Tuk-Tuk Movement’, and it’s likely that history will remember it that way.

To make things clearer, we must look at the importance that symbolisms hold in such movements. All of us remember how ISIS and the Taliban used Toyota vehicles with their flags to move from one part to another. Over a period of time, the vehicles sent a message to the onlookers.

AFP

In quite the contrary manner, the tuk tuk has earned people’s respect when it became central to the movement. Three-wheelers squeeze in — four abreast sometimes — where no car or ambulance would, and when police open fire, they get out nimbly.

“They bring injured people from the front lines to the field hospitals in the rear, and then they return with water and concrete blocks for the barricades,” says the Spiegel report. Also, “food, water, first aid, masks, helmets and anti-tear gas goggles,” says a report in Vice.

People’s attitude towards auto drivers has also changed because they have been serving the cause for free. Some have been shot, their vehicles have been badly damaged, but they have not deserted. Vice quotes Wafaa, a 22-year-old woman protester: “I apologise (to the drivers) for every bad word or look...I regret constantly criticising them, but I’ve made it up to them by sending specially-prepared meals for them to Tahrir Square twice a week.”

AFP

In honour of the autos, the movement’s field newspaper is also called Tuk Tuk. A team of six volunteers publishes the 8-page newspaper from Tahrir Square every alternate day. It has a circulation of 3,000 and the editors plan to make it a daily, says the AP report.

They started it after the Iraqi government shut down the internet following the first wave of protests in October. “We knew it would happen again, there needed to be something to keep everyone informed,” one of the editors told AP.
