Terror Attack In Delhi Averted, Three Suspects With 'ISIS Links' Arrested: Police

New Delhi:

The Delhi police has averted a massive terrorist attack and arrested three persons with improvised explosive devices (IED). The suspected terrorists, identified as Islam, Ranjeet Ali and Jamal, were arrested by the Delhi police special cell from Assam's Goalpara. A terror strike has been averted as three persons have been apprehended with Improvised explosive devices (IED)," ANI quoted DCP Pramod Kushwaha, Delhi Police Special Cell, as saying. "The three persons Islam, Ranjeet Ali and Jamal were arrested from Assam's Goalpara," he added.

The police claimed that the suspects were inspired by the ISIS and planning to carry out attack in Assam and Delhi. "Their first target was Raasmela, a religious fest at Krishan mandir and then Delhi. We are trying to look into their links. In their conversation they were talking about ISIS inspired links. Their IED is similar to Bhopal blast," the police said.

The ISIS had long been lanning to enter India but everytime it makes a move, the laert security agencies bust their evil designs of terror. In the past, the security agencies have nabbed several ISIS suspects but most of those arrests were made in Southern states.

Also Read | NIA raids 6 Tamil Nadu locations in Islamic State-inspired terror module investigation

Earlier last month, the National Investigation Agency (NIA) sleuths had carried out searches at the houses of two persons in the city in connection with a terror probe. The searches were conducted on the premises of the duo as they had allegedly been in touch with people associated with a terrorist gang which conspired, collected funds and made preparations to carry out terror attacks in India with the intention of establishing Islamic rule, sources said.

A five-member team carried out searches in the house of Nissar in GM Nagar and Sauridin in Lorrypet in the city, police said. The NIA had on September 21 conducted a search at the residence of a man in Tirunelveli district in the state for his alleged association with the terror group. Also, the NIA had on August 29 conducted searches across multiple locations in Coimbatore in connection with a terror alert issued to Tamil Nadu.
