Army, Navy, Air Force Special Forces in joint Kashmir ops: What makes the Paras, MARCOS and Garud so lethal

The Indian Air Force's Garuds | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Indian Army’s Parachute Regiment is the oldest of the country’s Special Forces units The MARCOS unit, developed in 1987, is the Navy’s elite Special Force trained to carry out any kind of mission from counter-terrorism to sabotage to surveillance and reconaissance As one of the youngest units in the Services, the Garud is the Special Forces unit trained specifically to provide rapid response to any attacks carried out on Indian Air Force bases

In a move to beef up its counter-terrorism operations in the Kashmir Valley, the defence ministry has announced a joint deployment of some of India’s finest military units across the Army, Navy and Air Force. India will deploy the Army’s Paras (Special Forces), its Navy’s Marine Commandos (MARCOS) and the Air Force’s Garud under the new Armed Forces Special Operations Division (AFSOD). The ministry stated that that Army’s Para (SF) forces are already stationed at a sensitive location near Srinagar, with the other two forces set to link up with them shortly. The AFSOD represents the first time all three special services units will be collaborating in the Kashmir region.

While one of the aims of the AFSOD is to train troops to carry out joint operations, even independently the three units themselves are among India’s most lethal. We take a brief look at what makes these units so clinical.

Army Paras (Special Forces)

The Indian Army’s Parachute Regiment is the oldest of the country’s Special Forces units, and is trained to be deployed swiftly to attack an enemy's first line of defence, or from its rear. The Paras carry out a huge range of missions including direct action, hostage rescue, unconventional warfare, counter-terrorism, counter-insurgency, seek and destroy and personal recovery among several others.

Only qualified paratroopers are eligible to join the Paras (SF), with all recruits expected to complete a three-month probationary period that tests their mental and physical fortitude. Upon completion, further advanced training could range anywhere between three and nine months and is widely known to be one of the toughest training programmes in the world, with cadets exposed to immense mental and physical challenges including sleep deprivation.





Navy Marine Commandos (MARCOS)

The MARCOS unit, developed in 1987, is the Navy’s elite Special Force trained to carry out any kind of mission from counter-terrorism to sabotage to surveillance and reconnaissance. However, they are specially trained to perform underwater missions. MARCOS operatives must undergo one of the world’s toughest and longest training periods that may last anywhere between two-and-a-half to three years.

Being selected to train as a MARCO is a challenge in itself, with applicants expected to complete a three-day physical and aptitude test during which at least 80 per cent of candidates are screened out. Following this, applicants undergo a five-week-long programme known as ‘Hell’s Week’ where they are believed to perform physical tasks for 20 hours every day, surviving on nearly no sleep. If applicants successfully ride through Hell’s Week, their real training begins.

Air Force Garud

As one of the youngest special units in the services, the Garud is the Special Forces unit trained specifically to provide rapid response to any attacks carried out on Indian Air Force bases. They are also highly trained to carry out airborne operations, air assault, special operations, search and rescue, counterinsurgency, and several other missions. There are reportedly around 1,000 Garud commandos serving in the Indian Air Force.

Unlike the Paras and the MARCOS, the Garud commandos are selected directly from selection centres for airmen. However, the training to become a Garud is perhaps even more gruelling, simply because it is the longest of any Indian Special Force unit. Training is conducted over a period of 72 weeks, with the first 12 weeks being used simply to improve physical and mental toughness. To become a fully qualified Garud, training may extend to three years. Garud operatives are adept at urban combat, combat free-fall, infiltration, ambush, combat diving and much more.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
