Karambir Kang: Man with steely spirit, a 26/11 hero who fought with no guns

Karambir Kang with actor Anupam Kher | Photo Credit: Twitter

It was a mammoth tragedy, an intelligence failure that cost dear. But above all, it was, in the four days of siege in Mumbai, a show of some brave Indians who displayed what it takes to be humans of integrity and valour. For me, after saluting the martyrs, there is one survivor, doer, braveheart whose name stands out - Karambir Singh Kang, the general manager at the Taj Mahal Hotel in Mumbai at that time.

I recall when the news of the first terror attack on 26/11 (November 26, 2008) in Mumbai broke out. Along with a bunch of few other journalists, I was in a TV channel's digital newsroom in Film City, Noida on night duty that began at 7 pm.

"It cannot be gang-war!" I first exclaimed, reasoning that as evil and notorious as they may be, gangsters usually do not shoot common folks. Their sharpshooters mostly make quick work of the enemy gangs and in rare cases, the constabulary.

I called up a journalist friend who had been my batchmate from our days at Xavier Institute of Communications, Mumbai. He was out chasing the Malegaon probe details - and not in Mumbai. But he too emphasised that it was most likely a gang war, albeit a different kind of gang, possibly.

Within minutes, however, it was clear that the horrific events unfolding were of a terror attack. All hell broke loose. Now news began coming in thick and fast and it became difficult to decide how many terrorists were there and what was their plan.

It was learnt much later that the doings were the handiwork of 10 Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorists - highly trained and heavily armed - who had arrived by stealth and deceit from Pakistan. They started from Karachi on November 21, murdered Indian boatmen at sea and hijacked their boats to reach India, and finally stepped on the Indian soil at Macchimar Nagar, in Mumbai's Cuffe Parade neighbourhood. They carried several large bags, apparently filled with weapons, communication devices and food supplies including sugary chocolate bars and dry fruits.

Two of them went to Leopold Cafe and started shooting. Four entered Taj Mahal Hotel and began a siege. Ajmal Kasab and Ismail took a taxi to Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (train) Terminus, began shooting. They then travelled to Cama & Albless Hospital, shot again. Came out and shot top cops: ATS chief Hemant Karkare, Vijay Salaskar and Ashok Kamte. A brave cop, Tukaram Omble, stopped the terrorists in their hijacked four-wheeler, killed Ismail and captured Kasab before being gunned down by the terrorists. Captured alive, Kasab - that boy from Pakistan's Faridkot - began singing like a canary in police custody.

Mumbai - India's commercial capital - was under attack and the nation watched shell-shocked. The action then moved to Taj Mahal Hotel, a Tata enterprise.

The four terrorists who have managed to secure an entry into the Taj around 11:00 pm began wreaking havoc by firing at the guests and staff.

Karambir Singh Kang - the son of a retired major general in the Army and the general manager of Taj Mahal Palace and Towers - had clocked 19 years of service in the group. When the terrorists entered the Taj Hotel's premises, Karambir was at the Taj Lands End in Bandra in the middle of a conference. His wife - the love of his life - Neeti, and his sons - 12-year-old Uday, and 5-year-old Samar Veer - were in their sixth-floor apartment in the Taj. As hands-on parents, Karambir and Neeti enjoyed every small development in their kids' lives including helping with their school projects, attending school PTMs, organising fun dos between the children and their grandparents.

Karambir rushed to his duty at the hotel. His guests and staff were his responsibility. His family mattered, of course, and so did the safety and lives of the staff members and the guests. After informing the security forces about the premises that they must know to run the operations smoothly, Karambir made one last-ditch effort to get across to Neeti and the kids. The commandos stopped him. The terrorists had taken over the intermediate floors and were lobbing grenades and shooting recklessly.

It was not meant to get so bad. Karambir hoped and trusted all will be over soon and will end well. On phone, the man and wife told each other "don't panic, all will be fine". Like O'Henry's Gift of the Magi, neither wanted to see the other worried.

Karambir stood along with the security forces all the four days of the operations, saving people, attending to the needs of the survivors. A call to his parents who were in Bahrain at that time reminded him how his name meant - Karamvir - one who is brave and a doer of brave deeds. He was reminded once again that as a courageous Sikh who had been groomed on stories of his dad's war exploits, Karambir had to put personal grief and worries aside. His mother reminded him that the great Sikh Guru Gobind Singh lost two sons when he fought for his people and principles.

The terrorists had rushed upstairs. They set room after room on fire. Neeti and the kids hid in the bathroom of their flat. But as the smoke filled the rooms, they were could barely breathe and felt asphyxiated.

And all this while, unable to reach wife and kids, where was Karambir? He was living up to his name and principles. Directing the staff, helping security forces and saving his guests. I recall how a number of fellow journalists out there in the field admired his demeanour - having known what was at stake for him and perhaps lost too - and how stoically he stood there for all.

Somewhere in between the chaos, Karambir managed to reach out to his childhood friend Partho and urged him to pray that Neeti and the kids make it out safe.

Not once allowing his personal potential loss or grief get the better of the hotelier in him, who was responsible for the guests as per laws that he had himself framed in his mind.

Sadly, neither Neeti nor the two vibrant boys made it. On November 29, the security forces declared that the Pakistani-origin LeT terrorists were dead and that the hotel was now sanitised. But Karambir's life was shattered. Neeti and his two beautiful, loving sons were now too far away amongst the stars for him to attend any more PTMs at their school or go home to play with. But Karambir soldiers on. The smile is gone, but there are no blame game sessions. He still finds it difficult to speak about the tragedy.

That was 11 years ago. Thankfully, Karambir made a brave effort to resettle his life - or what he thought remained of it. Now remarried, he heads the US operations for the Indian Hotels Company based in New York. Karambir has a loving daughter who fills his days with sunshine.

It was wonderful to meet my friend #KaramBirKang in New York. He was GM @TajMahalMumbai when 26/11 terrorist attack happened. He lost his wife & his two lovely children in that attack. But he helped build the grand hotel back to its glory. He is an inspiration & a HERO. pic.twitter.com/l4yDzwGlGv — Anupam Kher (@AnupamPKher) February 7, 2019

And for all Indians, be it celebrities like Anupam Kher or ordinary people like me, Karambir Kang remains a hero.
