Apex court to decide on floor test at 10.30 am

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

New Delhi, November 25

The Supreme Court will pass an order on Tuesday on the issue of a floor test in the Maharashtra Assembly to ascertain whether Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis enjoys a majority.

The order will be passed at 10.30 am on Tuesday, the court said, giving the shaky three-day-old BJP-led Maharashtra Government a breather in the intense battle for numbers between the rival camps.

In a dramatic turn of events, Fadnavis returned to power on Saturday, propped up by NCP's Ajit Pawar after the latter's revolt against the Sharad Pawar-led party. The order by an SC Bench, comprising Justices NV Ramana, Ashok Bhushan and Sanjiv Khanna, came after a 80-minute hearing on a petition by the Shiv Sena-NCP-Congress combine against the Governor's decision to invite the BJP to form the government and swearing in Fadnavis as CM and Ajit Pawar as his deputy.

The Sena-led combine pressed for an order for carrying out the floor test on Monday itself, which was opposed by Fadnavis and Ajit Pawar.

The BJP is the single largest party with 105 MLAs in the 288-member Assembly, followed by the Sena (56), NCP (54) and Congress (44). The majority mark is 145.

The Centre told the apex court that the BJP had the support of all 54 NCP MLAs to form a government and asked for two to three days to reply to the plea against Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari's decision. Appearing for the Sena, senior advocate Kapil Sibal countered the BJP by saying the combine had affidavits from 154 MLAs and the BJP should be asked to prove its majority within 24 hours if it had the numbers.

Though the deadline for proving majority had not been brought on judicial record, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, appearing for the Centre and the Secretary to the Governor, and senior advocate Mukul Rohatgi, appearing for Fadnavis, said the Governor had given 14 days time.

Mehta said nobody was disputing that a floor test was an ultimate test and no party could say it had to be conducted in 24 hours and also questioned whether the apex court could monitor the proceedings of the House, which was constitutionally barred.

After perusing Koshyari's letter inviting Fadnavis, the Bench said it had to be decided whether the CM enjoyed majority on the floor of the House.

Ajit Pawar told the court he was from the real NCP and had been authorised by 54 of the party's MLAs to take a decision on their behalf on government formation. Senior advocate AM Singhvi, appearing for the NCP and Congress, said "it was a fraud of the worst kind". — PTI
