11 years of 26/11: How well is the country prepared to thwart such terror attacks?

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: On this day 11 years ago, 10 terrorists of Lashkar-e-Taiba from Pakistan entered Mumbai and carried one of the deadliest terror attack in the history of India killing as many as 164 people, including 18 policemen and two National Security Guard (NSG) commandos, and injuring 308. The security forces, in the counter-operation, killed nine of the terrorists while captured one named Ajmal Amir Kasab. Later Pakistan admitted that Kasab was a Pakistani citizen.

The attack on India’s financial capital completely exposed the country’s security preparedness as the attackers easily entered Mumbai via sea route without getting noticed. A question that arises on everyone’s mind is how well the country is prepared for such attacks now.

The leaders, security forces and many defence experts have claimed that the country is now better equipped and prepared. Let’s take a look at some factors:

Coastal and maritime security preparedness: Admiral Sunil Lamba earlier, in an interview to news agency PTI, had said that India is better prepared and organised to repel a rerun of the 26/11 terror attacks and said that there has been a paradigm shift in coastal security, as vulnerabilities and risks were fixed and a layered maritime surveillance and security architecture was put in place.

He said that after 26/11 radar stations, with high-resolution cameras, have been fitted along the coastal line and the Navy is tracking movements of thousands of fishing boats adding that data about ships, dhows, etc. are regularly being analysed.

He further said the Indian Navy is now a potent multi-dimensional force, safeguarding the country’s interests in the seas and it is fully prepared to deal with any security challenge.

Deploying NSGs in all metros of the country: During 26/11, the National Security Guards or NSGs were stationed only in Delhi and by the time they reached Mumbai, a lot of damage was already done. However, after the attacks, four new hubs for the NSG -- each with an operational strength of around 250 personnel -- were opened in Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Kolkata to enable quick response to such attacks.

Establishment of NATGRID: National Intelligence Grid or NATGRID was constituted by the Indian government to create a database of security-related information. NATGRID collects and collates a host of information from government databases including tax and bank account details, credit card transactions, visa and immigration records and itineraries of rail and air travel which is made available to 11 central agencies like R&AW, IB, CBI, Financial intelligence unit, Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Narcotics Control Bureau, Enforcement Directorate and the Directorate General of GST Intelligence.

Subsidiary Multi-Agency Centres (SMAC): The lack of communication between security agencies was considered a major reason behind the 26/11 attacks. Thus after the attacks, the Intelligence Bureau or IB established SMACs in 30 different parts of the country to share intelligence with all other security agencies.

Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) team to guide youths: The Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) has deradicalised many misguided youths in the state from the path of extremism in the aftermath of the 26/11 attacks. The deradicalisation is done to bring back to normal life persons who had strayed in the name of 'jihad', a senior ATS official – quoted by PTI – had said.

Posted By: Talib Khan
