Bindu Ammini attacked with chilli powder on her way to Sabarimala

Ammini and Desai had reached the Kochi commissioner office to seek police security for their visit after arriving at the Kochi International Airport in the wee hours of Tuesday along with five other women. (Phtoo: ANI)

Thiruvananthapuram/New Delhi: Bindu Ammini, one of the two women who had managed to enter the Sabarimala temple on January 2, was attacked with chilli powder while she was on her way to the shrine along with Pune-based activist Trupti Desai, reported news agency ANI.

Ammini and Desai had reached the Kochi commissioner office to seek police security for their visit after arriving at the Kochi International Airport in the wee hours of Tuesday along with five other women.

According to a News18 report, officials said that a group of right-wing leaders apparently indulged in a heated argument with Ammini, following which they sprinkled chilli powder on her face. She has been rushed to a hospital.

Desai, the Pune-based activist, said they preferred November 26 to visit the temple as it was the Constitution Day. “Neither state government nor police can stop us from visiting the temple. Whether we get security or not we will visit the temple today,” Desai said.

She said she has come up with the 2018 order of the Supreme Court permitting entry of women of all age groups into the Lord Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala. "I will leave Kerala only after offering prayers at the shrine," the activist said.

Ammini, a lecturer at Kerala's Kannur University, had entered the temple earlier this year and offered prayers along with Kanakadurga.

On December 24, they made a first attempt to reach the temple, but were attacked by a mob and officials asked them to return home. Ammini, however, refused. At 1:26 am, Ammini and Kanakadurga started the climb toward the temple and prayed to the deity.

Catch the latest news, live coverage and in-depth analyses from India and World. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
