11 years later, wounds are still fresh; remembering the martyrs on 26/11

School children pay tribute to the martyrs of 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Eleven years after the worst terror attack in India's history which killed nearly 166 people The Mumbai police arrested a terrorist in the suicide attack - Ajmal Kasab Kasab confessed - he was a Pakistani citizen and belonged to Lashkar-e-Taiba As many as 18 security personnel were also killed during the attacks

Mumbai: Eleven years after the worst terror attack in India's history which killed nearly 166 people including 18 security personnel, the sacrifices of the martyrs are still afresh in every Indian's mind.

On the night of 26 November 2008, 10 Kalashnikov-wielding Pakistan-based terrorist entered the commercial capital via sea route. They struck simultaneously at various locations - the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus, the Oberoi Trident hotel, the luxurious Taj Mahal Hotel, Leopold Cafe, Cama Hospital and the Nariman House Jewish community centre. Terrorists enfiladed with automatic fire, seemed at a war with India.

What can be termed as a valorous move, the Mumbai police arrested a terrorist in the suicide attack - Ajmal Kasab which proved to be a game-changer in the interrogation process. He confessed to probing cobs stating that he was a Pakistani citizen and along with nine of his colleagues belonged to Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), a jihadist group based in Pakistan.

But even in the face of terror, there were several brave hearts who firmly stood against the perpetrators and fought with valour in a bid to save the lives of scores of people.

1. Tukaram Omble

Tukaram Omble was working with the Mumbai Police when terrorists fled to the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus and opened fire on the innocent people. All those who were killed at the station were Indians. Even though Omble's team wasn't well equipped to attack they still managed to shoot down one terrorist and captured another terrorist - Kasab. Short on artillery, Omble apprehended Kasab but lost his own life in the process.

2. Hemant Karkare

The chief of the Mumbai Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS), Hemant Karkare who fearlessly fought and managed the operation died during the action. Karkare shot Kasab which cause him to slow down and eventually was nabbed by Omble. In an interview, Karkare's daughter said that his father's devotion to his duty came before everything else. Policeman like Karkare saved the lives of several people who were safely pulled out of these locations.

3. Vijay Salaskar

Encounter specialist Vijay Salaskar was headed towards Cama Hospital in a jeep along with other colleagues including Hemant Karkare when Kasab appeared from behind a tree and fired several shots at the policemen inside the vehicle.

Here, Inspector Vijay Salaskar succumbed to his injuries.

4. Gajendra Singh Bisht

Bisht was an NSG commando who laid down with his life as part of the Operation Black Tornado. His team was responsible for fast-roping into Nariman House in an effort to neutralise the terrorist attacking the inmates. These terrorists were hiding with six hostages.

The team came under intense fire as the terrorist began using hand grenades at the commandos. Bisht, who had an option to step out, continued to attack the terrorists thereby making a safer way out for his colleagues.
