On The Anniversary Of 26/11, We Salute The Women Who Saved Many Lives

It was in 2008 that Mumbai experienced one of the most deadly terror attacks in the history of the modern world. 173 people were killed in a siege which lasted three days, and targeted six sites in the city, including a hospital. Eleven years later, we are paying tribute to the brave women who saved many lives.

Sandra Samuel

Sandra was the nanny of 2-year-old Moshe, the son of Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife, Rivka who were residents at the Mumbai Chabad House. When Moshe’s parents were gunned down by the terrorists, Sandra, who was hiding in a cupboard at the Holtzberg’s residence, left her spot to save baby Moshe. Sandra and Moshe were the only survivors of the attack on the Jewish organisation, where four people were gunned down over a three-day siege.

"Even today, I am thinking I should have sent the baby and done something for the rabbi and his wife," Samuel had told CNN in an interview.

Anjali Vijay Kulthe

Anjali was one of the eye witnesses whose testimonies helped to identify Ajmal Kasab as one of the perpetrators of the deadly attack. A nurse at Cama Hospital, she had seen Kasab and his partner Abu Ismail gun down the hospital’s guards. Anjali, who was shot at too, rushed to the antenatal ward and moved 20 pregnant women and their family members to safety, in another part of the hospital. When one of the women went into labour, while a gun battle raged in the hospital’s corridors and the terrorists bombed parts of the building, Anjali helped deliver the baby. The nurse, who was 40 then, was also among the people who went to Arthur Jail and identified Kasab as one of the gunmen who killed more than 173 people.

Mallika Jagad

Mallika was a 24-year-old banquet manager at Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, which was the site for one of the deadliest gun battles between the terrorists and the Indian forces. In an interview with Harvard Business Review, Jagad said that she locked the doors and turned off the lights after she heard multiple gunshots. She asked everyone to lie down quietly under tables and switch off their cell phones. She insisted that husbands and wives separate to reduce the risk to families. The Taj staff kept calm and went around offering water and asking people if they needed anything else, as the terrorists ravaged the hotel, hurling grenades and shooting everyone in sight. Early the next morning, a fire started in the hallway outside, forcing the group to try to climb out the windows. A fire crew spotted them and, with its ladders, helped the trapped people escape quickly. The staff evacuated the guests first and because of their bravery, all 60 people in that banquet hall survived the deadly siege.




