[Archive]11 Years Since 26/11: Nation Remembers Martyrdom Of ASI Tukaram Ombale, ATS Chief Karkare

Its been 11 years since the horrific events of 26/11 drew a dark shadow over the city of Mumbai. Tributes pour in for 166 people who lost their lives in the devastating terrorist attacks in the financial capital. While India's Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu called special attention to the security forces who lost their lives in the line of duty, Asst. Sub-Inspector Tukaram Omble's act of bravery remains unknown to many.

I salute the bravery and devotion of our security personnel who laid down their lives to protect the motherland. The nation shall forever remain grateful to their sacrifices#MumbaiTerrorAttack — Vice President of India (@VPSecretariat) November 26, 2019

A former army jawan, Tukaram joined the police force as a constable. On the day of the attack, he was assigned to one of the checkpoints along with his team, when they intercepted a car hijacked by two terrorists.

Constable Tukaram Omble : Your valour will never be forgotten. Overpowering a heavily armed terrorist, even after getting seriously injured. But for you, Terrorist Kasab would not have been apprehended & brought to justice. Salutes. pic.twitter.com/xfCTORQsWZ — Indian Police Foundation (@IPF_ORG) November 26, 2019

While the police managed to shoot down one of the terrorists, the second terrorist opened fire at them. He was Ajmal Kasab. Even though unarmed, Tukaram single-handedly attempted to tackle the AK-47 armed terrorist, who pretended to surrender but opened fire as soon as the 54-year-old policeman approached him.

Another brave soul who sacrificed his life that night was Mumbai Anti-Terrorist Squad Chief, Hemant Karkare. The 1982 batch IPS officer was appointed as the Mumbai Anti Terrorism Squad Chief in 2008 and had earlier served for India's external intelligence agency, RAW for seven years.

"For every child, their father is a superhero and, in my case, I always thought of him as a saviour," said Jui Karkare Navare, daughter of Maharashtra ATS Chief #HemantKarkare who was shot dead by terrorists in the line of duty#MumbaiTerrorAttack#Mumbaihttps://t.co/daK7pdO0Az — ARYAN (@Aryan8383) November 26, 2019

When the 26/11 attack was unfolding, Karkare was at home with family. While his team managed to disarm and shoot Kasab, they were then ambushed by a second terrorist, Ismail Khan.

Both men were posthumously awarded the Ashok Chakra, India's highest peacetime award for gallantry. Even 11 years on, messages flood social media in support of these martyrs who sacrificed themselves to thwart the terrorist threat.

On the night of 26 November 2008, 10 Pakistan-based terrorists entered the Mumbai via sea route, carrying out attacks at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus, the Oberoi Trident hotel, the luxurious Taj Mahal Hotel, Leopold Cafe, Cama Hospital and the Nariman House Jewish community centre.

While both Tukaram and Karkare were instrumental in fighting for the people in Mumbai, many others followed them into the line of duty – Police Inspector/Encounter Specialist Vijay Salaskar, Additional Commissioner Ashok Kamte and Additional Commissioner Sadanand Date, just to name a few.

Also Read: Know How Mallika Jagad's Bravery Saved Over 60 Lives In 26/11 Mumbai Terror Attacks
