Ahead of wedding, Soundarya Rajinikanth posts pics of 3 most important men in her life

Ahead of wedding, Soundarya Rajinikanth posts pics of 3 most important men in her life

In a tweet, Soundarya Rajinikanth said she was blessed and grateful beyond words.

Flix Wedding

Wedding season in Tamil Nadu this year has been kicked off by one of Tamil cinema’s most prominent families, with filmmaker Soundarya Rajinikanth getting married to actor and businessman Vishagan Vanangamudi. New pictures from the three-day-long affair show several bigwigs from the state gracing the occasion, including actors and politicians.

In a tweet on Sunday morning, bride Soundarya wrote, “Blessed & grateful beyond words !!!! The three most important men in my life ... my darling father ... my angel son ... and now you my Vishagan.”

Accompanying her post were three pictures with the men. Dressed in a stylish blue kurta and holding his daughter close to his chest, Rajnikanth looked dapper as ever with his effervescent smile that has transcended generations of fans. In another photo, Soundarya shows off her intricate mehendi pattern on her hands to her son, Ved. Dressed in a green kurta, the child is keenly observing his mother's hands.

In her photo with her husband-to-be, Soundarya and Vishagan can be seen posing for a picture. Dressed in resplendent blue frills, Soundarya looked every bit the excited bride, accompanied by Vishagan, who looked jacked in the traditional veshti, shirt and chequered angavastram.

Another picture was posted by photographers Made in Mono, which was taken at the sangeet. The company, exclusively shooting the wedding, wrote, “Happiness, unplugged. The calm before what was one off the most amazing sangeet we could ever imagine shooting. Not everyday do you get the superstar @rajinikanth to break a leg on the dance floor.”

Earlier in the day, father of the bride and superstar Rajinikanth met with Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami at the latter’s Greams Road residence in Chennai, to invite him to the wedding on Monday.
