Government officer, sarpanch killed, 6 others injured in two J&K terror attacks

SRINAGAR: A government official and a sarpanch were on Tuesday killed in a grenade attack by suspected terrorists on a crowd that had gathered for the newly created Union territory administration's first rural outreach programme at Hakoora in south Kashmir's Anantnag district . It was the day's second terror strike after a low-intensity blast outside the Kashmir University campus in Srinagar 's Hazratbal left three people injured.The victims in the Anantnag attack were Sheikh Zahoor Ahmed, an assistant agriculture officer posted in the district, and Peer Muhammad Rafiq, a local Congress leader and sarpanch of Hakoora village. Another sarpanch, Rafiq Shah, and government employees Manzoor Parray and Zahoor Ahmed Sheikh suffered splinter injuries.The terrorists struck around 3.30pm, moments before the 80-strong gathering at the outreach programme was to disperse. The grenade landed at a spot where the group of officials who conducted the event was interacting with the villagers and taking pictures. Gunshots rang out in the distance as the attackers fled, police said.The blast across Kashmir University's Sir Syed Gate had occurred around two hours earlier, injuring three people standing beside a shop. All three injured, including a girl, are stated to be out of danger.Rural development secretary Sheetal Nanda said the rural outreach programme would continue despite what happened at Anantnag. “Terrorists have tried to derail government programmes through violence earlier, too. We are going full steam ahead with our programme to strengthen people-government contact,” she told TOI.The back-to-back explosions 60km apart were preceded by an attempt to set ablaze a shrine dedicated to the Sufi poet and scholar Mir Syed Mohammad Hamdani at Kousarbal in the Tral area of Pulwama district around midnight on Monday. A small portion of the shrine was damaged before a fire brigade team doused the flames.Urging people not to be misled by rumours about who were behind the arson, Lieutenant governor Girish Chandra Murmu said the shrine had been targeted to stoke communal tension. He directed the DGP to strengthen security in and around all religious places across J&K and deputed the divisional commissioner to oversee restoration of the damaged shrine to its "original pristine state".While the hunt for the perpetrators of the three incidents since Monday night continued, two terrorists were killed by security forces at Pachaar Rajpora in Pulwama on Tuesday. On Monday evening, two Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists, including a district commander of the outfit, had been killed in a shootout with security forces in the same district. A police spokesperson said the slain terrorists — Irfan Ahmed Sheikh, Tahab and Irfan Ahmed Rather — were in a vehicle that had tried to dodge a checkpoint on the highway.
