Tollway firm seeks police security over Fastag

Ludhiana: With four days left for the December 1 deadline of affixing vehicles with the mandatory Fastag, the Panipat-Jalandhar NH-1 Tollway Private Limited (the company operating the Ladhowal toll plaza) has shot off a letter to deputy commisioner and Ludhiana police, demanding security. They fear some commuters who have not opted for Fastag will refuse to pay penalties, and in the wake of reports of private bus operators not procuring Fastag, any untoward incident could take place. The demand has been accepted by the authorities, and the Ladhowal police station has been asked to make adequate security arrangements at the toll plaza well in advance.

The letter — which was sent to assistant deputy commissioner and SHO Ladhowal — reads, “Our company is conducting operations and maintainance of the Panipat-Jalandhar section of NH-1, and we are authorised by NHAI (National Highways Authority of India) to collect toll from road users at Ladhowal toll plaza. It is submitted that as per directions from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 100% digital payment via Fastag has to be collected with effect from December 1. Furthermore, all lanes of the toll plaza are proposed to be converted to Fastag Express lanes, except one lane in each direction. As per the Government of India mandate, double toll fee for the vehicle category is to be collected from non-Fastag vehicles entering Fastag lanes.”

The letter further reads, “Private bus operators are reportedly not procuring Fastag, and thereby, that is anticipated to create traffic congestion and road blockage. You are requested for needful support by deploying adequate police personnel (men and women) and help prevent any law and order issues or untoward incidents, and revenue loss to the government exchequer and concessionare.”

Ladhowal SHO Balwinder Singh said, “Four days back, we received a letter from the toll plaza operators, demanding security in the wake of implementation of the mandatory Fastag for vehicles passing through this toll plaza. The company fears some commuters without Fastags on their vehicles may refuse to pay penalties and create a ruckus at the toll plaza, or even indulge in vandalism. As we have received instructions from senior officials to maintain law and order, and protect the property and personnel working at the toll plaza, we have decided to station 15-20 police personnel, including women, at the toll plaza from November 29 to ensure no untoward incident takes place there.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
