Friend murders DU student, runs body over with car after suspecting him of harassing niece

Police officers with the accused (Picture Courtesy: @FBDPolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The victim, 25-year-old Sandeep Vaishnav was a student of SOL Police arrested the accused from Faridabad's Sahurpura village Charan took the victim out for a drink in his car and murdered him, said police

New Delhi: Police in Faridabad have solved the murder of a 25-year-old Delhi University student. The matter came to light on Monday when locals spotted Sandeep Vaishnav's body near the IMT Industrial Area in Faridabad. A case of murder against unknown persons was registered and an investigation launched in this regard.

This led to the arrest of one Dhirendra Charan, a friend of the victim. Charan has admitted to the crime and told investigators that he murdered Vaishnav in a fit of rage after suspecting him of harassing his niece. He has been charged under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for murder and further investigation into the matter is underway.

In their complaint to the police, Vaishnav's parents said that he went to meet Charan on Sunday night but never returned home. The accused told investigators that he was drinking with the victim in his car when he used a baton to deliver a fatal blow on Vaishnav's head. He then pushed the victim out of the car near IMT Industrial Area and dumped the body near an old factory before running it over with his car.

Charan then fled to Sahurpura village in Faridabad where police found him sleeping in his vehicle. At the time of his arrest, the accused was under the influence of alcohol. He told personnel that he suspected the victim of harassing his niece which is why he decided to kill him. A resident of Faridabad, Vaishnav was a student of the Delhi University School of Open Learning (SOL). He is survived by his parents. A team led by CIA DLF Inspector Sajiv managed to nab the suspect within six hours of the discovery of the victim's body.

Police in Faridabad also solved the blind murder of a man whose body was found in his home earlier this week. In a statement released on Tuesday, officers revealed that a girl and her brother have been arrested along with two others for planning and executing the murder of their maternal uncle. They wanted him out of the way to get a clear shot at his property, revealed an officer familiar with the case. In order to attain their objective, the accused Khevita and Jaydev reportedly hired two friends to murder their uncle with the aim of claiming a stake in his property. All four were arrested and charged under relevant sections of the IPC for hatching and executing the murder.
