Varun Dhawan ESCAPES unhurt after stunt goes wrong during the shoot of Coolie No 1

Things might have taken an ugly turn for Varun Dhawan recently while shooting a stunt for Coolie No 1, had it not been for the stunt coordinator and director. Varun has been shooting for David Dhawan’s Coolie No 1 remake from quite some time. Recently, the actor had to shoot for a stunt in near a cliff on the outskirts of Pune. For the same, Varun had rehearsed several times with the stunt director and the team. The stunt shoot was to take place on a cliff with a car hanging upside down from the edge of it and Varun had to be inside it.

As per a report in Mid-Day, Varun had a close shave while shooting this stunt in which he had to deliver some close up shots whilst sitting inside a car that was hanging upside down from a cliff. Once the shoot was done, Varun wanted to come out of the car. However, the door of the car got jammed which made it hard for the actor to come out from the same. As per the report, getting Varun out from the car hanging on the edge of the cliff was very difficult for the stunt coordinator and his team. Despite the rehearsals, things went awry in this shoot.

(Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Bhumi Pednekar to romance Varun Dhawan in Shashank Khaitan's next?)

As a source quoted to a daily, “After Varun filmed his shot, he realised that the car door was jammed and wouldn’t budge. Even though the stunt was rehearsed several times under the supervision of the stunt coordinators and all safety precautions were employed by the director, things went awry. What followed was a few minutes of dread as the stunt coordinators tried to get him out of the vehicle. It was proving all the more difficult given how precariously the car was balanced on the edge. Varun kept his calm throughout the episode and finally escaped unhurt with the help of one of the stunt coordinators.”

Meanwhile, a while back fire had also broken out on the sets of Coolie No 1 in filmcity Mumbai. However, no one had been hurt back then too. The film starring Varun and Sara Ali Khan is a remake of the 1995 film starring Govinda and Karisma Kapoor. It also stars Paresh Rawal, Shikha Talsania, Rajat Rawail and Johnny Lever. It is slated to release on May 1, 2020.
