Mumbai: Man pushes pregnant wife from moving train after minor tiff

However, the police are now tracing the CCTV footages to trace Dhodi | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The victim survived the attack as the train was running slow The doctors stated that the foetus was safe Dhodi had an affair with Rani while he was married to his first wife

Mumbai: Perturbed over frequent arguments, a 25-year-old man pushed his 20-year-old pregnant wife out of a moving train between Dahisar and Mira Road station in Mumbai. The victim survived the attack as the train was running slow.

The accused was identified as Sagar Dhodi and the victim who is his second wife has been identified as Rani. Following the incident, Dhodi is still at large. According to a report, Rani told police that she was six-month pregnant and Dhodi did not want her to proceed with the pregnancy. This led to frequent arguments between the couple.

Dhodi had an affair with Rani while he was married to his first wife and was living his two children in Rawalpada, Borivali. After his first wife found about the extra-marital affair, she left Dhodi and moved out with her children. Meanwhile, on November 1 this year, Sagar tied the knot with Rani.

A police official told a media person that Sagar has been booked for attempt to murder and criminal intimidation. Earlier this month, since Dhodi did not want the child and this often led to arguments, Rani left for her mother's place. But on November 15, Dhodi went to meet her and asked her to accompany him to friend's place, added the officer. The duo boarded a Virar local from Borivali.

While they were travelling, the couple stood close to the door of the general compartment of the local train. They were still continuing with the arguments that they had begun since the start of the journey. Irked with her defiance, Dhodi allegedly punched Rani in the chest and pushed her in a manner such that she fell off the moving train. Rani landed on the tracks and suffered multiple injuries to her arms, legs and face. With the help of GRP officials, Rani was rushed to a nearby hospital where the doctors stated that her foetus was safe. Following recovery, Rani is now living with her parents.

However, the police are now tracing the CCTV footages to trace Dhodi. Further probe in the case is underway.
