State Visit to India

The King and Queen of Sweden will pay a State Visit to India on 2–6 December 2019 at the invitation of President Ram Nath Kovind.

The Swedish Government will be represented by Minister for Foreign Affairs Ann Linde, Minister for Business, Industry and Innovation Ibrahim Baylan and State Secretary at the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs Maja Fjaestad.

Some 50 Swedish companies – encompassing both large, well-established companies and start-ups – will take part, along with representatives of Swedish government agencies and universities, through the business delegation arranged by Business Sweden.

The aim of the State Visit is to further strengthen the good relations between Sweden and India, and to promote Swedish-Indian cooperation, including within the frameworks of the Joint Action Plan, the Innovation Partnership and existing memorandums of understanding. The visit affirms Sweden’s willingness to be a key partner for India in its rapid development, and in efforts to tackle common social challenges in areas such as the climate/environment, infrastructure, research and health. The visit aims to enable increased trade and investment for Swedish and Indian companies in both directions.

The State Visit will last for five days and encompass New Delhi, Mumbai and the state of Uttarakhand.

The programme in brief

Sunday 1 December

The King and Queen arrive in New Delhi.

Monday 2 December

President Ram Nath Kovind and Ms Savita Kovind welcome the King and Queen at an official ceremony, followed by the laying of a wreath at Raj Ghat, the memorial of Mahatma Gandhi’s cremation. Meetings with President Kovind, Prime Minister Modi and External Affairs Minister Jaishankar will take place during the day. The King and Queen will also take part in a high-level dialogue on innovation with Swedish and Indian representatives from companies, government agencies and academia. They will also visit the Jama Masjid mosque and the Red Fort World Heritage site. The day will conclude with a state banquet at the President’s official residence.

Tuesday 3 December

Climate and environmental issues and business issues will be discussed during the second day of the State Visit. The day will begin with the India-Sweden Business Summit, arranged by Business Sweden and the Confederation of Indian Industry. The Summit will offer Indian private and public actors the opportunity to meet Swedish companies and discuss business opportunities and cooperation. The King will then take part in a round-table discussion about Swedish and Indian efforts to reduce emissions and air pollution. In parallel, the Queen will visit the All India Institute for Medical Science (AIIMS) to discuss geriatric and dementia care in India. The Queen will later visit the UN office in India to learn about efforts to combat trafficking in human beings. The King and Queen will meet Indian alumni at a lunch hosted by the Swedish Institute. During the afternoon, the King and Queen will take part in the inauguration of the India-Sweden Business Leaders Roundtable. In the evening, the King and Queen will be the guests of honour at a major reception at the Embassy of Sweden.

Wednesday 4 December

On Wednesday the programme will continue in Mumbai, with the King and Queen arriving there in the morning. The King and Queen will take part in the world’s largest beach clean-up project on Versova beach with the project’s initiator and volunteers. In the afternoon, the King and Queen will visit the Door Step School, which gives marginalised children free schooling and homework support. This will be followed by an international Tekla workshop that aims to inspire young girls to explore technology. In the evening, the King will hold talks with senior Swedish and Indian business leaders. The evening will conclude with a reception hosted by the Swedish Consulate-General at the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya museum.

Thursday 5 December

The fourth day of the State Visit will continue in the state of Uttarakhand, with a visit to Rishikesh on the banks of the Ganges. There the King and Queen will have the opportunity to talk to young environment and climate activists, along with the head of the Centre for Science and Environment, an NGO. This will be followed by a traditional ceremony by the holy river Ganges. The King and Queen will then take part, alongside the Indian Minister of Jal Shakti, responsible for water issues, Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, in the inauguration of a sewage treatment plant in Haridwar. The plant is part of the national project to clean the river Ganges. In the afternoon and evening, the King and Queen will meet experts on nature conservation and sustainable forest management.

Friday 6 December

On Friday morning, the King and Queen will continue their meetings on nature conservation and biodiversity. They will also visit a Van Gujjar village to discuss and learn about the community’s traditional farming and animal husbandry methods.



Ms Linde, Mr Baylan and Ms Fjaestad will take part in large parts of the programme. They will also engage in bilateral meetings and activities with representatives of the Indian Government.
