Maoists ask villagers to enlist two children from every house

Patna: Faced with a severe manpower crisis, outlawed Maoist rebels have launched an intensive drive to recruit youth in a bid to boost the organisation. As part of this drive, the Maoists have issued a new order to the villagers, asking them to send at least two children from each family to join the organisation or be ready to face the consequences.

Villagers said the Maoists launched this recruitment drive in the villages to the beat of drums. They also issued a list of 162 youths who were told to join the organisation soon. All the youths who figure in their list hail from 19 villages of three districts, such as Jamui, Lakhisarai and Munger, located in eastern part of Bihar. The recruitment drive has been launched by the Bihar-Jharkhand Special Area Committee.

“We have information that the Maoists are asking the villagers to join their organisation. We are keeping a close watch on the situation but Maoists activities have drastically come down in recent years,” the local deputy inspector general of police Manu Maharaj said.

“The Maoists are known for launching publicity campaigns in the villagers to motivate the villagers but there is nothing to be panicky,” Maharaj added. He said no villagers have complained about this.

Informed sources, however, said the Maoists’ diktat has caused panic among the villagers and quite many of them have sent their children away, apprehending they could be forcibly taken away by the rebels.

The rebels have even fixed the physical and age limit for recruitment of youths. The minimum height of boys fixed by them is 5 feet 5 inch while for the girl, this has been put at 4.8 feet to 5 feet. The children in the age-group of 14 to 18 years are the main target of the rebels.

Reports said the Maoists have also announced to financially help the villagers who send their children to the organisation.

Last year, the rebels had launched recruitment drive in Gaya district, asking the interested candidates to drop their applications in the application box to be put up at every village and near community halls. The rebels launched campaigns for this through posters and handbills pasted and distributed among villagers in the rural pockets.

The recruitment drive was launched by the Bihar-Jharkhand Special Area Committee of the People’s Liberation Guerilla Army (PGLA), a splinter group of Communist Party of India (Maoist). The posters have also exhorted the villagers to lend their support to the organisation.

The rebels are said to be experts in guerrilla warfare but of late quite many leaders and top-ranking cadres were arrested by the security forces in the twin states of Bihar and Jharkhand, prompting them to go for open recruitment.

Authorities say the rebels are facing existential crisis with the police freeing many hills and forests located in Jharkhand and Bihar from their clutches while rebel activities too have been controlled to a significant extent in Bihar. This happened after several top Maoist commanders and cadres were either killed in encounters with security forces or were arrested during the ongoing “Operation Green Hunt”.
