Nithyananda case: More parents approach Gujarat HC, seek access to their children

The parents of the children have claimed that authorities at Nithyananda ashram were not allowing them to meet their kids. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Four more sets of parents file petition in Gujarat High Court to seek access to their children Parents allege their children are confined at Nithyananda's ashram in Ahmedabad Nithyananda had fled the country a few days ago

Ahmedabad: A day after the Gujarat High Court slammed the state police for failing to produce two missing women who were lodged at self-styled 'godman' Swami Nithyananda's ashram in Ahmedabad, four more sets of parents have filed a habeas corpus petition in the court seeking access to their children in man's ashram on Wednesday.

The parents of the children have claimed that ashram authorities were not allowing them to meet their kids. They alleged that ashram officials are also not allowing the kids to move out of the premises.

Now, the parents have sought the court's help to direct the police to produce the children in the court. The parents also claimed that the police did not allow them to enter the ashram and meet their 'confined' children.

A total set of five parents, one from yesterday, have now filed habeas corpus petition in the court seeking access to their children. Sources have told Times Network that the children held at the ashram are both majors and minors, but there is no confirmation yet whether the children of these four parents are boys or girls. The children were moved from Bengaluru ashram to Ahmedabad without informing their parents.

Yesterday, (November 26), the Gujarat High Court heard a habeas corpus plea of a Bengaluru-based couple who alleged that Nithyananda had confined their daughters against their will.

The high court had ordered the state police to produce the two missing girls before the court by December 10. The court had also directed the police to use all means to produce the girls and provide protection to them.

The court has asked the Gujarat Police to consult Interpol and External Affairs Ministry and other agencies to find the two girls, who are believed to be outside India.

The engineer-turned-godman fled the country recently even as his passport had expired. Nithyananda's passport had expired in 2018. He was denied the permission to renew his passport last year as the controversial guru faced serious criminal charges. The 'godman' has been accused of torturing and kidnapping the girls who were staying at his ashram.
