Uddhav Thackeray: Shiv Sena shares party chief's bio ahead of his swearing-in as chief minister

Shiv Sena chief and Maharashtra CM-designate Uddhav Thackeray. | File image

Key Highlights Uddhav Thackeray has relentlessly worked for the welfare of farmers and common people of Maharashtra for many decades, the Shiv Sena release said Shiv Sena on Wednesday held a long meeting with its ‘Maha Vikas Aghadi’ partners, the Nationalist Congress Party and the Congress, and decided that the NCP will give only the deputy chief minister of Maharashtra while the Assembly speaker will be from the Congress party

Mumbai: Ahead of Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray’s swearing-in ceremony as the 29th chief minister of Maharashtra on November 28, the party on Wednesday released the biodata of the stalwart leader who is set to take oath at Shivaji Park in Mumbai tomorrow.

Uddhav will take the oath of office and secrecy in the presence of Maharashtra Governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari.

Sena held a long meeting with its ‘Maha Vikas Aghadi’ alliance partners, the Nationalist Congress Party and the Congress, ahead of the mega event and came to the conclusion that the NCP will give the only deputy chief minister of Maharashtra, while the Assembly speaker will be from the Congress party. “The Deputy CM and Deputy speaker will be from NCP,” senior NCP leader and former aviation minister Praful Patel said.

Full biodata of Uddhav Thackeray as per Shiv Sena:

The 29th Chief Minister of Maharashtra State, Shri Uddhav Thackeray is the current chief of Shiv Sena. He is the son of Shiv Sena founder, late Shri Balasaheb and Meenatai Thackeray. Shri Uddhav Thackeray has relentlessly worked for the welfare of farmers and common people of Maharashtra for many decades.

The soft-spoken gentleman is also the editor-in-chief of the fiery Saamana, a prominent Marathi newspaper which was founded by Shri. Balasaheb Thackeray.

Born on 27 July, 1960 in Mumbai, Shri Uddhav Thackeray is a graduate from JJ School of Arts and a published author. He is also a professional photographer whose work has appeared in various magazines and has been showcased at numerous exhibitions.

Political career

He was handed over the responsibility of managing the party during 2002 Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation elections, in which Shiv Sena performed well. It was the first time that anyone saw Shri Uddhav Thackeray’s leadership qualities and flair for politics. He then started working with the party more closely, and was declared as the working president of the party in 2003. In 2004, Shri Balasaheb Thackeray announced him as the next party chief.

Personal Life

Shri Uddhav Thackeray is married to Smt Rashmi Thackeray and has two sons, Aaditya and Tejas. Shri Aaditya Thackeray is the president of the Yuva Sena and newly elected Member of Legislative Assembly.

Creative aspects

His photo book Maharashtra Desha (2010), full of breathtaking aerial shots is a glimpse into the cultural fabric, physical beauty and historical perspective of this wondrous state of Maharashtra. Pahava Vitthal (2011) capturing various aspects of rural Maharashtra and the Warkaris during Pandharpur Wari pilgrimage have also been received very well by national and international audiences. He also exhibited a deeper commitment to larger issues when he raised funds for farmer drought relief and wild life conservation through his photography exhibitions.

Achievements
