Kerala: CISF seizes Rs 50 lakh in foreign currency from Dubai-bound passenger

During the investigation, the man could not provide satisfactory reply for carrying a high volume of foreign currency. (Photo credit: CISF)

Key Highlights Man with Rs 50 lakh in foreign currency arrested from Cochin airport Foreign currency was hidden in a bag Accused was heading to Dubai from an Air India flight

Kochi: In a major haul, the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has seized foreign currency worth Rs 50 lakh from a Dubai-bound passenger at Cochin airport in the state of Kerala on Wednesday.

The accused has been identified as Ajmal Abdulkhader, a resident of Aluva, Kochi. He was bound for Dubai in United Arab Emirates (UAE) by an Air India flight.

The seizure was made by the surveillance and intelligence unit of the CISF. According to CISF officials, the security personnel observed suspicious movements of a passenger and stopped him for checking.

"During the screening of the passenger's luggage through X-ray machine, some suspicious images were spotted inside the bag. Later, the bag was selected for physical check which resulted in the seizure of the foreign currency," said an official.

The bag contained denominations of 34,635 (USD), 5,895 (Euro), 2,010 (British Pounds), 6,987 (Oman Riyal), 10,750 (Saudi Riyal), 12,250 (UAE Dirhams), 206 (Kuwait Dinar) and 360 (Bahrain Dinar). The total worth of the currency was estimated to be around Rs 50 lakh.

During the investigation, the man could not provide a satisfactory response for carrying a high volume of foreign currency. He also failed to produce any valid documents in this regard. The case was later handed to customs officials for further investigation.

On Saturday (November 24), the CISF personnel had seized Rs 50 lakh of unaccounted cash from a passenger at Barakhamba Metro Station in New Delhi. Reports suggested that the money was part of hawala racket in Chandni Chowk in Delhi.

The accused was identified as 19-year-old Thakur Dilip, a resident of Patan in Gujarat. The accused was later handed over to Income Tax Officials.

Similarly, the CISF seized Rs 1 crore from two passengers at Delhi's Jangpura Metro Station on October 24. The CISF guards detected two passengers, a man and a woman, at the security point and detained them after their movements were found to be suspicious.
