She’s on a high! Rasika Dugal on why being ‘happily overworked’ is ‘a good problem!’

Mirzapur to Manto, Delhi Crime to Hamid, Made in Heaven to now Out of Love , Rasika Dugal has had a stellar year. The 34-year-old actor has left a mark in each of her projects, with Delhi Crime — in which she plays an upright cop — and Out of Love, where she drives much of the action as the central protagonist Meera Kapoor, coming in for special praise.

The last time we spoke you had said you were ‘happily overworked’. Since then, you have not only done many more projects, but have also left a huge impact through each one of them. So, now even more happily overworked?

(Laughs) Nowadays, I call it ‘a good problem!’ There’s been so much work and I have been really trying to get my way around in terms of how to manage time and how to deal with all of this. Right now, I need a short break to figure out how I feel about everything. That’s because it’s really been continuous and I really haven’t had an opportunity to sort of sit back and fully absorb all these experiences. I am currently shooting for Mira Nair’s (TV series) A Suitable Boy and will soon start shooting for Season 2 of Delhi Crime. And I am really hoping that in between these two, I get a window where I can absorb all the overwhelming experiences of the last few months.

Where does Out of Love fit in?

What really hooked me was that my character, Meera Kapoor, drives the narrative. While I have had some very interesting work and beautiful roles to play in the last one year, I was really craving to play a part that drives the narrative. So when I was offered Out of Love, I was like, ‘This is it!’ And when I watched the original (Doctor Foster, the 2015 original BBC series on which Out of Love is based), I felt that this was an intimate and sensitive depiction of a relationship that is scarred by infidelity. The way the show is made, viewers will often feel that they are inside Meera’s mind and I hope the audience feels that they are a part of her dilemma.

Once I was offered the part, I chose to watch Doctor Foster before I signed on. That’s simply because I wanted to understand the intent of the story and the framework of the show. I really don’t know if deciding to watch the show before was a good decision or a bad one. Sometimes, you do fall into the trap of imitating a good performance and I hope I haven’t done that. I just watched it once and didn’t go back to it any more because I consciously wanted to bring in my own. There were times when I was stuck with a scene and didn’t know which way it was going and it was very tempting to go back and watch Doctor Foster, but I didn’t (laughs). I kept telling myself, ‘This is my journey and I have to find my own way’. But the original performance (by Suranne Jones) is a hard one to forget.

It’s a show that’s very high on emotions, with betrayal being a relatable emotion for everyone. What was your mindspace like when you were shooting Out of Love, coming as you were out of another emotion-heavy show like Delhi Crime?

Well, I had shot for Delhi Crime a while back, though everyone got to watch it just before Out of Love. By the time I started shooting for this one, I had had some emotional recovery from Delhi Crime. It was exhausting, but that’s what you do want from a piece of work that you sign up for. It should prompt you to go to places beyond your tried-and-tested realm of experience and bring out emotions within you that you otherwise didn’t know that you had or were capable of.
