Arrested criminal used 300 SIM cards in 7 years to avoid arrest

Allahabad: Communicating with over 300 different SIM cards, multiple aliases and not staying at home while visiting family is how Anurag Mishra — wanted in connection with the 2003 Kalinzar massacre — managed to evade cops for seven years.The 36-year-old was wanted in connection with the 2003 Kanlinzar massacre and several other heinous crimes. The Banda native was finally arrested on Monday by the STF after he fled police custody in 2012 from Manikpur railway station in Chitrakoot. Police said the SIM cards were registered from Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Uttarakhand.A key member of the bandit Pappu Yadav’s gang, Mishra did not use any of his numbers for more than two days, police said. Additional SP (STF) Neeraj Pandey said, “Mishra used to buy cheap mobile sets and procure SIM cards under forged names. ““Hecarried at least 30 SIM cards with him and changed his hideouts in every fifth or sixth day.”“Whenever he came to meet his family in Banda’s Kalinzar village, he did not stay with his wife or children, but used to take shelter in a house in the neighbourhood to evade cops,” said a senior police official. “He also didn’t used to talk to his wife from the same number for more than two or three days lest police might track his location through electronic surveillance,” the official added.Last year, Mishra had a close call when an STF team raided one of his hideouts in Mahoba. Police had seized over 36 SIMs, but Mishra managed flee. Following his escape, he had made extortion his key business and used the money to lead a lavish lifestyle.The ASP said that the wanted criminal was adept at changing costumes and using aliases. Raju, Bachcha and Abhay Singh were just a few of the aliases he used to dodge cops. Mishra carried a reward of Rs 65,000 — Rs 50,000 from UP Police and Rs 15,000 from MP Police — on his head.Pandey claimed that the gangster was wanted by UP and MP police in more than 17 criminal cases in Satna, Banda, Chitrakoot and Manikpur among others.The first case against Mishra was lodged with Baraudha police in Satna in 2000. He even changed his wife and two daughters’ names several times so that they might not end up in police radar.A school dropout, Mishra was the lone brother among seven sisters and had joined Yadav’s gang in 1999. He got a life term in connection with Kalinzar massacre.In April 2003, Pappu Yadav and his gang had gunned down eight persons in Banda’s Kalinzar area. Police said following his father’s death about three months back, Mishra used to call his family frequently from different numbers which helped them in tracing him.
