JD-U Candidate new PUSU President, BJP Nominee the New VP

Patna: The top five posts in the Patna University Students' Union (PUSU) went to the Janata Dal – U and Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) candidates the result of which was announced on Thursday amid heavy security arrangement.

{gallery}newsimages2018/dec/120618{/gallery}Despite the newly-minted rivalry between the student wing of the allies at the state level thanks to an attempt by JD-U leader and poll strategist Prashant Kishore allegedly tilt the election in JD-U-sponsored candidates, three of the top five posts went to the ABVP while two, including the top prize of the union President, went into to the JD-U.

Mohit Prakash, the JD-U candidate, was declared winner for the post of PUSU President when he defeated ABVP candidate Abhinav by a margin of 1200 votes.

ABVP candidate Anjana Singh defeated JD-U candidate Ashish Pushkar by 400 votes to grab the Vice President's post.

Manikant Mani of ABVP defeated his nearest rival by 300 votes for the General Secretary's post while ABVP candidate Raja Ravi was elected the Joint Secretary.

JD-U's Kumar Satyam was declared winner for the post of Treasurer.

Candidates representing a number of parties and political outfits including Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), Communist Party of India, Jan Adhikar Party (JAP), and Lok Janshakti Party (LJP) won for the post of Councilors.

The counting of the votes was not without any incident as students clashed with each other outside Patna Science College where counting of votes was being done. Students were angry because neither they nor the media was allowed entry in the campus. They also became agitated when the administration began the counting after much delay.

Chanting anti-VC slogans, protestors accused Ras Bihari Prasad Singh of intentionally delaying the counting with the intent to cheat. "That is why the barred reporters from entering the counting hall so they could do whatever they wished without any recorded evidence," they said.

Police had to resort to light lathi charge to disperse the crowd.

Results were finally announced at around 2:00 am in night.

As reported before, JD-U pollster-turned-politician Prashant Kishore had earlier ruffled some feathers when he, just a day before the election, met with PU VC behind closed doors sending a sense of electoral impropriety with intent to affect the outcome of the poll in favor of the JD-U candidates.
