Gujarat: Pest onslaught may hit cotton production

RAJKOT: As if the unseasonal rain hail storm and prolonged monsoon was not enough , the farmers in Saurashtra are now battling the massive onslaught of pink bollworm, the pest that ravages the cotton crop. Large number of farmers in Amreli and Surendranagar are complaining of the pink bollworm and mealybug attacks on their standing crop, a menace that potentially threatens to affect the cotton production in Gujarat Surendranagar is one of the highest cotton producing districts of the state.On Wednesday, the Junagadh Agriculture University (JAU) issued an advisory warning of pink bollworm attack for the farmers.Gujarat is the highest producer of cotton with the average area under cotton cultivation being nearly 26 lakh hectares, according to the state agriculture department figures.Janak Malani, a farmer in Amreli district, had cultivated cotton in 20 bigha land. “I have no option but to destroy my entire crop because I can’t afford to pay the labour charges for harvesting. A labourer who generally harvests 30kg cotton in a day will now be able to harvest only 10kg because of the pest attack. The labour charges are Rs 300 per day while I get Rs 300 to Rs 400 for 10kg in the market.”Mansukh Gorad, another farmer in Amreli said he was expecting 5,000 kg cotton production this year, but now estimates just around 1,000 kg due to the pink bollworm attack.Agriculture scientists said that the pink bollworm attacks the flower which makes it nearly impossible to save the crop by using pesticide . This is not the first time that the cotton farmers are facing this problem and it is turning out to be an annual headache.M A Vaddoria, research scientist of cotton at (JAU) told TOI: “The current atmosphere is favorable for pink bollworm this time in November. The pests have struck because of extended monsoon this year. The insect attacks the flower and it’s difficult to save the crop with the help of pesticide.”In October this year, the Cotton Association of India pegged the production for Gujarat to 100 lakh bales (one bale is equivalent to 170kg). However, the unseasonal rain thereafter destroyed the crop and the remaining is witnessing an onslaught of the pests.Some farmers in villages of Jetpur taluka of Junagadh district set their crop on fire and some gave it to animals as feed after the pest attack.V P Chovatia, principal and dean of Armeli Agriculture college, said “The pink bollworm insect lays 250 eggs at a time, so it’s very difficult to stop it’s spread as the crop is already 120 days old. This is the time for farmers to be alert otherwise they will face 2015 like situation next year.”
