After Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt, Amitabh Bachchan heads to Manali for the climax shoot of Brahmastra

One of the most talked about films is Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt starrer Brahmastra. Ayan Mukerji’s directorial has been in the news for quite some time now. The film is mounted on a massive scale and the shoot has been going on from quite a few months now. This week, Ranbir and Alia headed to Manali for the next leg of shoot. Now, as per the report, Amitabh Bachchan has also joined the duo in Manali for the climax shoot for Brahmastra.

As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, Big B headed to Manali and joined Alia, Ranbir on Wednesday. Since Mr Bachchan plays Ranbir’s guru in the film, he is critical to this schedule of shooting since the climax will be shot in Manali. As per the report, for the next few days, Big B will shoot with Ranbir and Alia and later will head to a foreign location for the shoot in early December. As of now, Mouni Roy and Saurav Gurjar are also in Manali and are prepping for the climax scenes.

(Also Read: Alia Bhatt and Ranbir Kapoor are all smiles as they pose with the fans while shooting for Brahmastra in Manali)

A source told the daily, “Amitji is in Manali, for the next few days before he moves to another shoot in a foreign location in early December. The film’s antagonists, Mouni Roy and Saurav Gurjar, too, will be a part of this schedule, that requires some amount of prep before the camera rolls.” Post the completion of Manali schedule, Alia and Ranbir will be heading to Varanasi to complete a song shoot which wasn’t shot in the earlier schedule. As per the report, the song is extremely important to the plot of the story.

Meanwhile, Brahmastra’s shoot has been going on for over 150 days and it all began in Bulgaria. Post that, Ranbir and Alia along with others of the cast headed to Scotland and then to Varanasi for shooting. Shah Rukh Khan will also be seen in a cameo in the film. Brahmastra is the story of Shiva and Isha. Shiva played by Ranbir can emit fire from his palms and the film’s first part will showcase his journey to find Brahmastra. A while back, Brahmastra’s logo was launched in Prayagraj with 150 drones that lit up the sky. Directed by Ayan Mukerji, Brahmastra is slated to release in summer of 2020.
