Suleman Usman Bakery case: Witnesses return without deposing after adjournment

Suleman Usman Bakery case

Mohammed Ali Road bakery

1992-93 riots

Commissioner of Police RD Tyagi

forego cross-examination

wireless messages

functional tape recorder

Court imposes costs of Rs 1,500 on the absent defence counsel; the trial in the 27-year-old incident began on February 13 this year.Thehas made little progress since the trial began in February this year. Another hearing in the case was adjourned on November 26 as the defence counsel Shrikant Shivade remained absent. Additional Sessions Court Judge UM Padwad imposed costs of Rs 1,500 on Shivade, to be divided among the three witnesses who returned without deposing.Seven policemen are standing trial in the case for murder of eight unarmed Muslims in the raid on theand the adjacent madrasa during the. The raid was led by the then. None of the victims had a criminal record. Tyagi and eight other co-accused cops, also charged with murder, were discharged in 2003. One accused policeman has died. Since the trial began on February 13, only five witnesses have deposed.It wasn’t easy for the three witnesses to come for their depositions on Tuesday. One had just finished night duty at Vanrai police station, 40 km from the court at Fort. Head constable Milind Kadam, 55, told Mumbai Mirror he hadn’t even washed his face, and he had to return to another eight hours of night duty. Retired police sub-inspector Chandrakant Jagtap, 61, had come all the way from Borivali.There was also 68-year-old Gulam Shaikh, who remained tense from the time he entered the court room right till the moment he went for tea with the other two cop-witnesses. Shaikh, who had a garment shop in a lane near the Suleman Usman Bakery in 1993, suffers from a heart ailment and entered the courtroom panting, having climbed up the steep stairs of the court as he was afraid he would be late if he waited his turn in the queue for the lift. This was the second time he was appearing in court, only to return without deposing.Shivade’s junior advocate Babar said they had no objection to the examination-in-chief, which is the questioning of a witness by the party that has called the witness to give evidence in support of the case. But Judge Padwad asked if defence would agree to, so that the witnesses would not have to come back. The defence counsel, however, was unwilling. Asserting that it was important that the examination-in-chief and the cross-examination were held on the same day, Judge Padwad adjourned the matter.In his order, the judge said, “The matter is very old and it was well within knowledge of everyone that the witnesses would be examined today. The reason given for asking for an adjournment is not sufficient, nor the proposal to record only the examination-inchief today is acceptable. In the interest of justice, adjournment is granted. It is made clear that no further adjournment shall be granted and the witnesses shall be examined on the next date.”Incidentally, in April, when the judge had set aside three days exclusively for this trial, defence counsel had not turned up on the first day as he had got the dates wrong. After being sent from one court to another for the last 11 years, the trial of an incident that took place 27 years ago has been stalled for many reasons. One of the major reasons was the hunt for the audio cassettes that contained therelayed on January 9, 1993. Once the cassettes were found, it took months to find ato play them. After the tape recorder was found, the judge got transferred.
