Illegal hoardings in Mayor’s honour come up across city

Banners erected without his knowledge, claims Mohol; citizens, activists not willing to buy his argument



Despite being repeatedly reprimanded by their leaders for putting up hoardings across the city, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) corporators seem to be at it again. This time around, Mayor Murlidhar Mohol, elected to the post just about a week ago, happens to be the one apparently flouting the norms. Umpteen illegal flexes and banners, congratulating Mohol for his new role, have allegedly cropped up in various parts of the city. Mohol, on his part, has distanced himself from the entire controversy, stating that the hoardings were put up without seeking his permission.



Citizens from areas where the banners have come up have expressed displeasure over the whole issue. Adding that the hoardings are causing inconvenience to them, locals have appealed to Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) authorities to look into the matter.



Barely a couple of months ago, the followers of Mohol, who was then a BJP corporator and an aspirant from Kothrud Assembly constituency, clashed with the faction supporting the then Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) Medha Kulkarni over erecting hoardings to welcome former Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis to the city as part of Mahajanadhesh Yatra. Fadnavis had then slammed the corporators and party workers, stating that the hoardings would not assure them election tickets. Fadnavis had further asked the authorities to take action against the offenders. However, only a single complaint was filed as a follow-up action, while some 22,000 illegal flexes were removed at that time.



Yet again, illegal flexes sporting Mohol's face have sprung up across the city. The day after Mohol was elected as the city's mayor, hoardings congratulating him have been put up by party workers and his 'well-wishers'. Similar flexes with the image of deputy mayor Saraswati Shendge can also be seen defacing the city. While these hoardings seem to be blocking city's footpaths at many spots, at a few other areas, they have been put up on electric poles and traffic signals, obstructing people's views right in the middle of traffic junctions.



~~72268089~~

Mohol, however, has claimed that the hoardings were placed without his 'permission'. "The day I was elected, I had appealed to the citizens to not put up any congratulatory banners or use gulaal/colours as part of the celebratory programmes. What can we do if people do these things voluntarily? I did what I could do on my part. The banners were put up without my knowledge," he said.



Residents from the area and civic activists are, however, not willing to buy this argument. Speaking to Mirror, Tanmay Kanitkar, activist and founder of Parivartan, an NGO, said, "How can the Mayor wash his hands off so easily even if we consider that he had no knowledge of the matter? He should have immediately sent a letter from his office, asking the authorities to take action against the illegal hoardings. He should also table a formal resolution, seeking action and get it approved in the general body meeting. One cannot shrug off responsibilities when one is in a position of power."



Vivek Velankar, another activist and founder of NGO Sajag Nagarik Manch, said, "There are pictures and names mentioned on each of these hoardings. The civic body should immediately file cases against these people. It is clear who has put up these illegal flexes. Mohol's argument holds no water."



PMC's additional commissioner Shantanu Goel and departmental head Vijay Dahibhate were not available for comments.


