List of business in Rajya Sabha on Thursday

New Delhi, Nov 28 : The Thursday list of business in Rajya Sabha includes several ministers laying the papers on the Table. Minister of Law and Justice Ravi Shankar Prasad, Minister of Tribal Affairs Arjun Munda, Minister of Textiles Smriti Irani, Minister of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions and Department of Space Jitendra Singh and Minister of State of Human Resource Development and Minister of Communications Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre will lay the papers concerning their ministries.

Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal will move motion for election to the Council established under section 31(1) of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, "That in pursuance of clause (k) of sub-section (2) of Section 31 read with sub-section (1) of Section 32 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (No. 59 of 1961), this House do proceed to elect, in such manner as the Chairman may direct, one Member from amongst the Members of the House to be a member of the Council established under sub-section (1) of Section 31 of the said Act." Questions entered in separate lists to be asked and answers given.

1. Nirmala Sitharaman will lay on the Table, a statement (in English and Hindi) showing the Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2019-20 (November, 2019).

2. Digvijaya Singh to call the attention of the Minister of Electronics and Information Technology to the reported use of spyware Pegasus to compromise phone data of some persons through WhatsApp.

Legislative Business: 1. Further consideration of the motion moved by Anurag Singh Thakur on the 26th November, 2019: "That the Bill to amend the Chit Funds Act, 1982, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration." Anurag Thakur to move that the Bill be passed.

2. Harsh Vardhan to move that the Bill to prohibit the production, manufacture, import, export, transport, sale, distribution, storage and advertisement of electronic cigarettes in the interest of public health to protect the people from harm and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration. Also to move that the Bill be passed.

Statutory Resolution: T. Subbarami Reddy to move the Resolution: "That this House disapproves the Prohibition of Electronic Cigarettes (Production, Manufacture, Import, Export, Transport, Sale, Distribution, Storage and Advertisement) Ordinance, 2019 (No.14 of 2019) promulgated by the President of India on 18th September,2019." Statement by Minister:

Minister of External Affairs S. Jaishankar will make a statement on the Government's efforts to promote foreign policy focusing on high level visits that have taken place recently.

-- The story has been published from a wire feed without any modifications to the text
