Tale of horror: Woman forced into flesh trade, 8-year-old daughter raped; both sons murdered

The woman was reunited with her daughters on Tuesday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman, her two daughters and two sons were abducted by a distant relative in 2015 Her alcoholic husband never bothered to look for the family Along with her daughter, the woman was gang-raped and sold off to sex traffickers Rajasthan police rescued the two girls in November, 2018 Both our brothers were murdered and buried by the abductors, revealed the girls

Lucknow: Abducted, gang-raped and trafficked, a 32-year-old woman from Firozabad in Uttar Pradesh was finally rescued and reunited with her daughters as the result of an operation by UP Police. The end of this four-year-long ordeal has brought with it details that are beyond comprehension.

With a drunkard for a husband, the woman lived with her two daughters and an equal number of sons in the Firozabad district of Uttar Pradesh. Their world came crashing down in 2015 when a distant relative abducted the woman and her four children. Since the husband never bothered to look for them, the case had been in the dark until recently when the woman's brother lodged an FIR in this regard in July.

A search operation by the UP police ended up reuniting the family. Once together, they narrated the story which is bound to invoke disbelief in anyone who reads it. The woman told police officers that she and her children were abducted on July 11, 2015, from Firozabad. Her 8-year-old daughter and she were repeatedly gang-raped by human traffickers and sold off to multiple brothels across the state of Uttar Pradesh. The woman's younger daughter, aged 3 at the time, also lived with them at these brothels until the girls were separated from their mother.

The two girls were rescued during a police raid in Rajasthan in November last year. After they failed to identify the address of their family home, the girls were moved to a children's home in the state capital of Jaipur where they were living until earlier this year. Sometime this year, police in Uttar Pradesh rescued the woman and she narrated her ordeal. According to a report by Times of India, this led to the police departments of both the states to coordinate in an effort to reunite the family.

All of them were brought to Firozabad on Tuesday. The minor girls told members of the Child Welfare Committee (CWC) that the distant relative who abducted them in 2015 strangled their two brothers, aged 4 and 10, to death and buried them soon after the abduction. On the basis of their statements, Rajasthan police have arrested the wife and stepson of the main accused who is currently on the run. The duo is believed to have acted as accomplices. The girls will now be presented before a POCSO court.
