Didn't do anything to get reaction like this: Alia Bhatt on Kangana Ranaut's remarks

Follow us on Kangana Ranaut and Alia Bhatt

Kangana Ranaut is upset with Bollywood actress Alia Bhatt, about which she spoke at a recent interview. The Manikarnika actress was talking about the lack of support from Bollywood fraternity for her directorial debut. The actress, who was in a take-no-prisoners mood fired fresh salvos at Bollywood 'gang'. Meanwhile, she also targeted Alia and Aamir Khan for not supporting Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi.

Reacting to this, Alia said that she will apologise to Kangana personally. Now, in an interview with DNA, Alia again clarified that she admires Kangana and has no intention of hurting her. ''I would like to react to her personally if she has any complaints. I don’t want to talk about it in the media. As I have said before, I really admire her as an actor and the choices that she makes. She’s a very outspoken person and I admire her for that as well. If I have upset her unintentionally, then I don’t know. Basically, it wasn’t my intention. I didn’t do anything to get a reaction like this,'' she said.

For unversed, in an interview to Pinkvilla, Kangana had said, ''These girls send me their trailers like Alia (Bhatt) sent me the trailer of Raazi and said, 'Please watch it'. For me, it was not a Karan Johar film or Alia film, for me, it was a film on Sehmat Khan, the girl who has given her everything to the country. When Aamir Khan called me for Dangal, Secret Superstar, I went all the way to Ambani house. Dangal, for me, was a film about women empowerment. But they don't have time for any of my trails. I have two-three films coming up, but I don't expect people to write about them."

Alia is currently in Berlin for Berlin International Film Festival, where her film Gully Boy was premiered. She was in the city with director Zoya Akhtar, actor Ranveer Singh and producer Ritesh Sidhwani. Gully Boy is set to release on February 14 in India.

Meanwhile, Kangana is basking in the success of Manikarnika. The movie, which is based on freedom fighter Rani Lakshmibai has raked in Rs 88.45 crore so far.

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
