For calling Godse a ‘patriot’ in Parliament, MP Pragya to be removed from defence panel

For calling Godse a ‘patriot’ in Parliament, MP Pragya to be removed from defence panel

Pragya Thakur interrupted DMK member A Raja, who was citing a statement by Godse on why he killed Mahatma Gandhi.

news Politics

BJP MP from Bhopal Pragya Singh Thakur is likely to be removed from the Parliamentary Committee on Defence after she called the man who murdered Mahatma Gandhi, Nathuram Godse, a ‘deshbhakt’ or a patriot in the Lok Sabha on Wednesday.

BJP working President JP Nadda told ANI that her statement was condemnable. “BJP never supports such a statement or ideology. We have decided that Pragya Singh Thakur will be removed from the consultative committee of defence, and in this session, she will not be allowed to participate in the parliamentary party meetings,” he said.

Pragya interrupted DMK member A Raja, who was citing a statement by Godse on why he killed Mahatma Gandhi, during a discussion on the Special Protection Group (Amendment) Bill. "Do not cite the examples of a patriot," Pragya told Raja.

Raja said that Godse admitted he had nursed a grudge against Gandhiji for 32 years before finally deciding to assassinate him. This remark was then expunged by the Speaker.

On Thakur's 'deshbhakt' remark, all opposition members stood up and protested. The BJP members then persuaded Thakur to sit down. When asked about her statement outside the Parliament, Thakur said she would reply on Thursday. "Pehle usko poora suniye, mai kal dungi jawab (Listen to the whole thing first, I will reply tomorrow)," she said.

She has also been barred from the meeting of BJP MPs.

This wasn’t the first time that Pragya called Godse a patriot. During the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections, she called Godse a "true patriot" during a roadshow in Madhya Pradesh.

"Nathuram Godse was a patriot, is a patriot, and will remain a patriot. Those who call him a terrorist should look within, and they will get a reply in this election," she had said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had then said in a TV interview that he would never forgive Thakur for the remark. "The remarks made about Gandhiji or Nathuram Godse are very bad and very wrong for society. She has sought an apology but I would never be able to forgive her fully," he had said.

Incidentally, Pragya's appointment to the Parliamentary Committee of Defence was also not without controversy. She was appointed as one of the members of the consultative committee of Parliament for the Ministry of Defence. Several leaders raised had raised objections, pointing that Pragya is an accused in the 2008 Malegaon blast case, and that she is facing trial for charges under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.

To outrage in isolation over Pragya's latest comments is to miss the point. She was brought into Parliament precisely to normalise extremism. — Sreenivasan Jain (@SreenivasanJain) November 27, 2019

‘I don’t think we should have ever given someone like Pragya a ticket! It sends out the wrong message, esp to the middle class voter!’ late @arunjaitley told me. So who over-ruled him? Page 286 2019: How Modi Won India. Gnight, shubhratri.. — Rajdeep Sardesai (@sardesairajdeep) November 27, 2019

Is there even one single MP among 545 in Lok Sabha and 245 in the Rajya Sabha who will sit on an indefinite fast before the Gandhi statue in the Parliament complex until punitive action is taken against Pragya Thakur for calling terrorist Godse a patriot? November 28, 2019

The Gandhi statue in front of main Parliament entrance has one particular quality: His eyes are closed.



It's good.



That way he doesn't see people like Pragya Thakur entering the building and praising his killer. — Meghnad (@memeghnad@mastodon.social) (@Memeghnad) November 27, 2019

But the Gentleman standing behind defended Pragya Thakur yesterday evening...

What changed now ?? https://t.co/oje830lP6I — Arvind Gunasekar (@arvindgunasekar) November 28, 2019

With IANS inputs
