'Retire': Amitabh Bachchan says his body is sending a message

Follow us on Amitabh Bachchan is thinking of retirement, says body is sending message

Megastar Amitabh Bachchan has been ruling Indian cinema for more than four decades. And fans can never get enough of this 'Shahenshah' -- be it his movies, or Kaun Banega Crorepati. But age is something even Big B cannot seem to fight. Or so he says.

According to the star of millenium, his body has been showing signs that it needs rest apronto.

"Tranquil .. essence of the freshness .. the winter feel, the purity hopefully of the air .. and a rest after 5am to now .. there is great humility and joy of felicitations en route .. the simplicity of the smaller town reigns supreme .. as does the generous hospitality .. we can never match their honesty and simplicity. another new environ and another readjustment to room and its accoutrements. I must retire .. the head is thinking something else and the fingers another .. its a message.”

ALSO READ: Salman Khan's family picture with father Salim, Arpita and others will give you Hum Saath Saath Hain feel

Amitabh Bachchan was recently admitted to a hospital in Mumbai owing to his ill-health and since then, speculation has been rife that his body was hinting at him to slow down.

The megastar has a lot on his plate right now -- Brahmastra, co-starring Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt; Chehre, co-starring Emraan Hashmi; Gulaabo Sitaabo, co-starring Ayushmann Khurrana; and the ongoing Kaun Banega Crorepati.

He is currently in Manali and is gearing up for the next schedule of Brahmastra. "Amitji is in Manali, for the next few days before he moves to another shoot in a foreign location in early December. The film’s antagonists, Mouni Roy and Saurav Gurjar, too, will be a part of this schedule, that requires some amount of prep before the camera rolls," a source was quoted as saying by Mumbai Mirror.

Other than his films, the social media also keeps Amitabh Bachcan occupied. He, on the occasion of the 112th birth anniversary of his father Harivansh Rai Bachchan, took to Twitter and wrote, "T 3562 - The calendar for 2019 same for year 1907, the year of birth of Babuji .. Nov 27, 1907. 13 calendars from past years that match 2019 in days and dates .. 1901, 1907, 1918, 1929, 1935 (the year Madhushala was published )1946, 1957, 1963, 1974, 1985, 1991, 2002, 2013.”

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

Click Here for Latest Bollywood Updates| Latest Celebrity News

Click Here for Latest Trending News| Latest Lifestyle News

Related Video
