Mukesh Ambani, Devendra Fadnavis, Raj Thackeray: Unlikely guests at Uddhav Thackeray swearing-in ceremony

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray's swearing-in ceremony was unprecedented in more than one way. It was for the first time that a member of Thackeray family took oath as an office bearer, it was also the first time that Bal Thackeray's dream of having a Thackeray in the CM office realised. But that is not all.

The swearing-in ceremony, held amidst a sea of Shiv Sainiks in iconic Shivaji Park in Mumbai, had some surprising guests. India's richest man and a known BJP ally Mukesh Ambani attended the ceremony in spite of the fact that Shiv Sena severed their ties with the BJP and allied with ideological opponents NCP and Congress to form the government.

Another surprising guest at the event was Uddhav Thackeray's breakaway cousin Raj Thackeray. Raj Thackeray had broken away from the family when Uddhav, instead of him, was elevated to the post of Shiv Sena chief by patriarch Bal Thackeray. In Thursday's event, Raj Thackeray walked in amidst rapturous applause and hooting by Shiv Sainiks.

Former CM Devendra Fadnavis, who has been at the loggerheads with the Shiv Sena ever since the results of Maharashtra Assembly Election 2019 came out on October 24, also attended the oath-taking ceremony. The BJP leader's presence at the event came as a surprise as the Shiv Sena's decision to break away from the NDA and join hands with the opposition has robbed Fadnavis of the chance to become only Maharashtra CM to return to power after serving a full five-year term.

There were several political bigwigs who were conspicuous in their absence. Acting Congress chief Sonia Gandhi, former PM Manmohan Singh and party leader Rahul Gandhi were among several Congress leaders who were invited to the swearing-in but they decided to skip the event.

While Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi skipped the meet, Congress was represented by Ahmed Patel, Kapil Sibal and Kamal Nath. DMK chief MK Stalin was also present. (Photo by Mandar Deodhar for India Today)

Uddhav Thackeray had also invited Prime Minister Narendra Modi for the ceremony during a telephonic conversation on Wednesday but the invitation seems to have been declined.

TMC chief Mamata Banerjee's office said that she was invited to the event, which was earlier scheduled to take place on December 1, but after it was rescheduled it clashed with her engagements. Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal gave a similar reason.

DMK chief MK Stalin, however, did attend the event.
