Maharashtra Conundrum: Ideologies murdered, Voters deceived

In a Democracy, everyone has the right to take a go at the formation of a government – that is the basic principle on which democracies work.

In Maharashtra, the post result scenario with Shiv Sena suddenly propping up its desire to lunge for the Chief Minister’s post actually queered the pitch. In the beginning, the BJP played by the rule book daring the other side to go for a disparate and immoral alliance between Congress, NCP & Shiv Sena where all sides would have had to light the pyre of key elements of their agenda. It was with this principle that the BJP went ahead with imposing President’s rule in the State. Then what prompted the midnight coup and the desperate support of Ajit Pawar with a bye-bye to the anti-corruption plank and a hurried swearing-in. Did Devendra Fadnavis mislead the Central leadership about the support Ajit Pawar enjoyed or did the Central leadership think, it held all the aces because the Pawar family – Sharad Pawar, Ajit Pawar and Praful Patel, had investigations on against them. It the unravelling of this mystery that will hold the key to the political drama that will unfold over the next few weeks.

While the BJP may have emerged bruised in this bout, it is the Congress and the Shiv Sena, that have virtually given-up on all future planks of their ideologies and their identity. The Shiv Sena’s manifesto with the BJP talked about the Ram Mandir resolution. In fact, Uddhav Thackrey was supposed to go to Ayodhya during this period to celebrate the Supreme Court verdict, but he gave that up to be present in Mumbai for confabulations of setting up a new Sarkar and a new common minimum programme. And the new common minimum programme has forgotten the Mandir and has promised to uphold secular values. What happens to the Hindu Rashtra?

Just last year, while unveiling a book on the Life of Hindu Mahasabha leader and freedom fighter Veer Savarkar, Uddhav Thackrey launched a scathing attack on Mani Shankar Aiyar, saying “he should be beaten up with shoes”. Mani Shankar Aiyar’s fault – he had called Veer Savarkar as the father of Hindutava and propounded of the two-nation theory. Will Uddhav Thackrey now hug Aiyar as an alliance partner and live happily ever after?

In its manifesto with the BJP, the Shiv Sena had decided to organise Tirtha Yatras for Hindu Aastha and dedicated corridors for Hindu Pilgrims. But now in its common minimum programme, the Congress and the NCP have ensured the Shiv Sena will swear by minority welfare. The contradictions are many.

Coalitions are known to have contradictions, but the one question that will need to be asked is- can the leopard (in this case the tiger), change its spots (in this case stripes)? And that is a question that will continue to haunt this alliance, sharing the spoils of power is very often a huge binding force and sticking glue but can such coalitions survive the test of time. Already questions are being raised by Ajit Pawar to his own uncle on why he should not be a Chief Minister for 50% of the tenure of this Government because he already had the Deputy Chief Minister’s post as part of the Fadnavis Government. Even if Sharad Pawar has been crowned as a Chanakya this whole season, he will find it difficult to manage his strange nephew Ajit Pawar, who might be a tag more difficult to manage that a Governance novice like Uddhav Thackrey.

And what are the Congress’ gains by this alliance? They may have got a foot in the door in the power sweep States, but really have managed only to get the crowns. Can Sonia Gandhi ever forget the names Bala Sahab Thackrey and his son Uddhav Thackrey have called her in the past? Political observers know the Gandhi family neither forgives nor forgets easily. In his last speech, from Shivaji Park Bala Saheb Thackrey himself has compared, Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, as foreigners and Italians ruling India after the Mughals and British. He had called for the throwing out of this family and these were not statements made in the heat of rallies, this at one time was the core ideology of the Shiv Sena. Can Sonia Gandhi forget these personal attacks or the fact that 38% of the Congress’s votes come from minorities, who might not be as forgiving of this betrayal as the Congress expects?

But for the BJP, lies the biggest challenge. In the first 2 weeks post results, did the BJP not moved because of the conspiracy theories of the distance between Fadnavis and the Central leadership and moved after pressure from Fadnavis at the end of the 4th week and differences within the party. Did this lead to a situation that went horribly wrong? And did Ajeet Pawar actually enter the alliance as a Trojan Horse, only to bargain closure of investigations against himself, his leader and his party members? Was BJP naïve to think that anything less than that would be the price to pay for this short-lived alliance? Its an introspection that the BJP will have to introspect on – Behind the Bravado – in the coming weeks. In the middle of this is the helpless voter of Maharashtra, who’s been royally corned by both sides and will only have to live day-to-day, hoping for the best, but expecting the worst. Not something, any citizen of India deserves.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
