Dalit youth strangled to death by girlfriend, her brother in Gujarat

A complaint was filed against Priya and her family as Ashok's body was found at their residence (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 19-year-old youth was allegedly murdered by his girlfriend and her brother in Gujarat The youth had gone to his girlfriend's house to meet her when the incident took place The deceased has been identified as Ashok Gohel

Rajkot: A minor girl allegedly murdered her girlfriend in Gujarat's Jamnagar. The police arrested the accused on Wednesday. Allegedly, the deceased Ashok Gohel was a member of the Dalit community. Ashok had gone to meet his girlfriend near Dhadhar river bridge when he was allegedly strangled to death.

Ashok's girlfriend's name has been changed to Priya to protect her identity. Ashok's father has been identified as Hasmukh Gohel.

How it happened

On Tuesday, Ashok went to his girlfriend's house to meet her. Ashok allegedly lied to his father while going out of the house and told him that he was going to collect payment for labour work. Priya and Ashok were talking when the former's brother came home. On seeing her brother, the 17-year-old girl panicked and told him that Ashok was trying to molest her.

Furious at this, Priya's brother attacked Ashok with a bat. Following this, Priya and her brother strangled Ashok to death. Meanwhile, when Ashok did not return till late, his family started getting worried.

According to Times of India's report, Ashok's friend Prakash told Hasmukh that he had been hospitalised. However, when Hasmukh reached the Lalpur Civil Hospital, he learned about his son's death. A complaint was filed against Priya and her family as Ashok's body was found at their residence.

On Wednesday, the police reached Priya's residence and started interrogating her. The 7-year-old girl confessed to committing the crime while she was being interrogated. Priya's brother, however, managed to flee from their residence. The police are searching for the girl's brother.

B S Vala, inspector of Lalpur police station said, "We suspect more members of the girl's family to be involved in the murder. However, it will become clearer once the girl's brother is arrested. "

Caught with girlfriend, 24-year-old man pays with his life

A similar incident came to light from Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh in June this year where a man was lynched after being caught with his girlfriend. The deceased was identified as Suraj Pal. Suraj Pal was shot at by his girlfriend's brother before being thrashed to death by her family.

The girl's brother was identified as Gautam Pal. Gautam allegedly used an unlicensed pistol to shoot at Suraj. After the incident, the police book Gautam, his father and four members of his family.
