Nikhil Siddharth’s Arjun Suravaram sees the light of day

Nikhil Siddharth’s upcoming film Arjun Suravaram is finally hitting the screens this Friday. The film was supposed to be released long ago, but it had to be postponed owing to various problems.

While speaking with the actor, we asked him how it affected him when the film kept getting postponed continuously. “It definitely affected me mentally and physically because every film is like a baby and when the baby is in danger your body and mind react accordingly. The film was supposed to release on 1 May, but there were some problems that didn’t let it happen then. I felt very bad when the release was postponed and spent many sleepless nights,” says Nikhil, who plays the lead actor in the film.

But as they say, all’s well that ends well, and the actor is back to feeling happy as its release date is set again. “Finally, after so many struggles we’ve got a release date and I am happy. We had initially titled the film Mudra, but someone else released a film by the same name, so we had to change our title. But that took a long while and finally last one month, things began turning around for us when we finally got the date,” adds Nikhil.

In addition to the title, reasons for the delay included a “silly reason”, as Nikhil puts it. “Generally, films get delayed because of financial problems, but our film did well in that aspect. Some middleman between the producers and theatres did something stupid, which affected our film. The person is from Chennai and not even related to our film. It felt like someone using my property without my permission for his benefits,” he says.

The actor then talks about why he wanted to be a part of the film. “This is the first time I’ve done a message-oriented film, and I think it’s made very honestly. In fact, I took only half my remuneration for this film,” he says.

For the future, the Happy Days actor says he’s signed three films, for which he will start shooting simultaneously. “Sequels for Karthikeya and Swami Ra Ra are in the pipeline and then there is another film called Hanuman. And because I want to do these simultaneously, I’ve decided to work day and night,” says the actor.
