This literary event promises to be more than just about books. Indira Chandrasekhar, part of Lekhana’s organising team, explains how

Ramachandra Guha

Natasha Sharma

literary festival

This literary weekend is unlike any of the literary festivals that happen in Bengaluru or outside. For one, it calls itself a ‘literary weekend’ and not a festival. And two, there may not be other literary events which have activism at their core and have made protests in a dignified and gentle manner. One of the previous editions of Lekhana (2015) held a relay reading of Perumal Murugan’s One Part Woman as a protest against the backlash to the book and to support the author who had famously announced his death as a writer. Incidentally, Murugan is one of the writers of Sangam House, an international writers’ residency programme located in the city, which is one of the organisers of Lekhana. This year, Indira Chandrasekhar, founding editor of Out of Print, which is one of the event’s partners, decided to take questions about the eighth edition. She is part of the organising team along with Arshia Sattar, author, translator and director of Sangam House.We have been thinking about this edition’s curation since August. Like every other year, the focus has been on our political and historical moment. There’s a tribute to Girish Karnad, a great writer and public intellectual, whose loss we feel most keenly in this dark hour. We’re also commemorating Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary by discussing his autobiography, which is one of the most important autobiographies of the 20th century.The refractive shift, the change that the lenses of time, memory and experience create in the trajectory of a narrative is the focus, particularly in the context of biography and memoir. We will feature Shashi Deshpande’s autobiography Listen to Me, a wonderful view of the life of a writer and a woman in a shifting yet eternal India. It is book in which every writer, indeed everyone, will find something that resonates. There will also be conversations with biographers and memoirists and their shifts in view.A manifestation of Gandhi’s great commitment to truth is that he examined and re-examined every aspect of his life, philosophy and thinking, sharing it in the public space through his columns that later went into the making of his telling autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth. It is a deeply personal and profoundly honest text that both reveals and contradicts Gandhi’s political image. Who better thanto talk about Gandhi’s public and private selves?In Hayavadana, two men, an intellectual and a wrestler are brought together by Padmini to create the perfect man. In Nagamandala, the snake lover and the human husband have the same appearance but very different personalities and Rani has to negotiate them both. And of course, in Broken Images, we have a writer who appropriates the life of her sister. We thought this would make for an interesting discussion since the split self seems to recur in Karnad’s plays.voices may have been quashed; from Perumal to this year’s open mic on readings for Kashmir. It has also posted a statement in support of, Priya Kurien and the publishing house Karadi Tales for their book The Art of Tying a Pug which was withdrawn by the author after being served a legal notice for hurting the sentiments of a certain community. How important is it for Lekhana to show such support?Lekhana stands against injustice and for integrity, values that slide away quickly when threatened. So yes, a gathering of writers must show support not only to successful great books, but also to voices that struggle to be heard, and to voices that are suppressed.One aspect of literary exchange is celebration, something which is associated with a festival, but at Lekhana, the intention is to enter into a deeper engagement with writing, reading, text and idea. The strength of such a gathering lies in that it is not about presentation and performance alone (they are no doubt of critical importance when sharing one’s writing) but also about exchange, support and commitment to literature and the literary community.
