Pati, Patni Aur Woe

Man left his mobile in Jharkhand and came to Bengaluru to kill his wife’s paramour. He stole the victim’s phone and threw it into a lake. The woman claimed the victim as her husband. Cops solved the twisted case and were recognised for it

Karnataka

Revenge is best served cold, the saying goes. And so Devanath Hembram, 23, of Sangajori village in Jharkhand, who was living and working in Bengaluru, planned a murder for six months. The plot was to kill Tarun Kumar Ghosh, 25, a native of West Bengal, who Hembram believed was having an affair with his wife. Due to this relationship, his wife refused to return to Jharkhand with their three-year-old son and so Hembram crafted what he thought was the perfect murder. But it was not, as a few bases had not been covered and the man was caught by some clever cops. And the cops who solved the twisted case have been declared as “Best Cops of November”.To cover his tracks, Hembram left to Jharkhand with his son six months ago and left his phone there so he could not be traced by his cell phone tower’s location. Next he mapped the movements of his soon-to-be victim. Then he checked the availability of the buses and trains to escape to his home state after committing the murder.Ghosh, a resident of Bommasandra Industrial area, was found murdered, just 100 metres away from his office. He worked at the printing section of a precision plastic components manufacturing firm located in the Bommasandra Industrial Area. Ghosh was on his way to work in the night shift, when he was murdered. On the CCTV footage, the accused is seen escaping with his phone after killing him. A police officer said, “Initially we suspected it to be a case of murder for gain as the accused was seen running with the victim’s phone. Nobody had any information about the victim. Then we found out that he was from West Bengal. Three days later, a woman who said she was Ghosh’s wife came to claim the body. The body was handed over to her. Through local intelligence it was found the woman works in a retail outlet in Bommasandra and was staying in a paying guest accommodation. Ghosh, we found out, shared a room with some friends. This made us wonder why they were living separately.”The police were under the impression that he could be a professional robber. They obtained call details of the victim and the woman and found that they used to talk to each other regularly. At the time of the murder, Ghosh was talking to the woman. The police also found that she was regularly talking to another man in Jharkand. They found the person in Jharkand was her husband, Hembram, and that she was having an affair with Ghosh.“We suspected the murder could be over the affair. But we could not establish that the woman’s husband was the killer as he was in Jharkand and his mobile phone’s location did not show his presence at the scene of the crime. The woman told us the man in Jharkhand was her distant relative. We took her friends into confidence and found out that her husband had returned to his hometown, upset over his wife’s affair. When we showed them the CCTV footage, they confirmed that the man running away was Hembram. The woman then admitted that Hembram was her husband and he had returned to Jharkhand due to a family dispute,” the officer said. The police then faced the uphill task of arresting Hembram as there was a lot of resistance from the villagers, said an officer. The Bengaluru police officers did not get any support from the police in Jharkhand, he added. Seniorofficers had to approach officers of Jharkhand to help with the probe and arrest.“During probe, Hembram said he came to know of the affair from his son who told him about an ‘uncle’ who would visit them during Hembram’s absence. He was angry that his wife refused to return with him to Jharkhand. While packing, he said he saw a photo of his wife with Ghosh. He tracked the victim’s movements. Two days before the murder, he came to the city and bought a knife. After killing Ghosh, he boarded a bus to KR Puram and from there took a train back home,” the officer said. During the journey, he threw the victim’s mobile phone into a lake. The murder weapon was recovered near the scene of the crime. His wife is not complicit in the murder, the police said.The star cops who were awarded are: Police Inspector BK Shekar, Sub Inspector M Shankarappa, assistant sub-inspector Rajshekar and police constable Gangaraju, all attached to the Hebbagodi police station.
