Day after her charred body found, Telangana cops question truck driver and cleaner over veterinarian's murder

Police officials at the spot where the victim's body was found | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Police suspect that the culprits may have punctured the tire of her scooty to trap her It is unclear whether police has charged the detained truck driver and cleaner as of yet The victim's clothes and footwear were found dumped near the Tondupally toll plaza Her sister was the last person to speak to her in a phone call at around 9:45 pm on Wednesday night Locals spotted the victim's charred body near Chatanpally bridge in Shadnagar

Hyderabad: The gruesome murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian in Telangana's Shadnagar town has left the country in a state of utter shock. Police have reportedly detained a truck driver and a cleaner in connection with the crime and are currently questioning them in order to establish a timeline of events that occurred near Tondupally toll plaza on Wednesday night. Citizens from across India are taking to social media platforms to express anger and disgust over the horrific manner in which the series of events turned out for this innocent girl from Telangana.

A resident of Shamshabad, the victim visited a veterinary hospital in Kolluru village on the day of her disappearance. She took a cab to visit a dermatologist in Gachibowli after parking her own two-wheeler near the Tondupally toll plaza. Upon her return at around 9 pm, the victim noticed that her two-wheeler had been punctured.

"She called me around 9:45 pm and told me that she had a flat tire and someone had offered to help her," the victim's sister told investigators. In addition, the sister also said that the victim expressed concerns about a group of truck drivers staring at her throughout the duration of the same phone call. The owner of a cycle repair shop near the toll plaza told police officers that a boy had brought a scooty with a flat tire sometime between 9:30 pm and 10 pm that same night.

Investigators probing the matter also told media outlets that the sister repeatedly tried calling the victim in order to ask her to leave the two-wheeler and take a cab back home but the latter's cell phone was switched off soon after their last conversation. Terrified, the girl's family approached the police and filed a missing person complaint at around 11 pm on Wednesday night.

A team constituted to locate her caught a break the next morning when locals spotted a charred body at the Chatanpally bridge near Shadnagar, about 25 kilometres from the Tondupally toll plaza where the victim was last seen. A bottle of alcohol along with the victim's clothes and footwear was found near the toll plaza and has been logged as evidence. Her scooty was also found abandoned and without a number-plate not far from the spot where her body was found.

Police are yet to issue a statement about the possibility of the detained truck driver and cleaner being the culprits who committed this heinous crime. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and an active police investigation into the matter is underway.
