Why hide MLAs if you have majority: Fadnavis attacks old ally Uddhav Thackeray

Devendra Fadnavis has hit out at Uddhav Thackeray a day after the Shiv Sena chief took over as Maharashtra CM. (PTI)

Former Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis who had to quit the government after four days has launched an attack on former and ally and now successor Uddhav Thackeray over his first Cabinet meeting on Thursday after the swearing-in.

In a series of tweets, Devendra Fadnavis said on Friday, "The first cabinet meeting of the new government discussed how to covertly prove majority rather than discussing relief for distressed farmers. Why these claims of majority then?"

Fadnavis further added, "If this government has a majority, why are they discreetly planning to call for a session? Why are there attempts to change the protem Speaker by flouting laws?"

- ?

! Devendra Fadnavis (@Dev_Fadnavis) November 29, 2019

The BJP leader posted a series of questions attacking his former ally and Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray. "Why distrust your own party MLAs? Why are they punished with confinement," Fadnavis has asked.

Fadnavis was referring to Shiv Sena, NCP and Congress MLAs being lodged at different hotels in and around Mumbai in fear of poaching attempts by other parties.

Fadnavis has asked when the BJP had declared that they would sit in the Opposition why is Shiv Sena still keeping its MLAs lodged in a hotel.

"Why play hide-and-seek and be afraid when BJP has declared it will sit in the Opposition? When the alliance has

claimed such a huge majority in the House why this hide-and-seek game and fear? Maharashtra wants an answer," said Fadnavis on Friday.

Fadnavis took oath as the chief minister of Maharashtra for a second time on Saturday with NCP leader Ajit Pawar by his side, who was made the Deputy Chief Minister. Days later, Ajit Pawar pulled the plug and returned to his party fold and resigned from the post, thus toppling the BJP government.

Uddhav Thackeray was then elected as the CM face for the Maha Aghadi alliance of NCP-Congress-Shiv Sena and on Thursday he took oath as the first Thackeray chief minister of Maharashtra.
