Clad in secularism, Shiv Sena cedes Hindutva entirely to BJP

The Shiv Sena has perhaps for the first time adopted secularism as its instrument of political power. The Maha Vikas Aghadi - technically led by the Shiv Sena - under Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray has committed itself to "uphold secular values" and "take a joint view" in consultation with the Congress and the NCP over contentious issues having bearing on India's "secular fabric".

This is in sharp contrast to the stand taken earlier by Shiv Sena founder late Bal Thackeray, who did not mince words in castigating Narendra Modi-the ultimate poster-boy of Hindutva politics-when he was the Gujarat chief minister.

Let's first see what Bal Thackeray thought about secularism and Hindutva from a 2011 episode -- three years before Narendra Modi became the prime minster.

Narendra Modi, then as Gujarat chief minister, had undertaken a three-day sadbhavna fast in 2011 and leaders from all communities - including Muslim clerics - thronged the venue in Ahmedabad. This was seen as an attempt by Narendra Modi to "moderate" his image from being a Hindutva poster boy.

Bal Thackeray was the Shiv Sena chief at the time. He reacted to Narendra Modi's sadbhavna fast with a severe criticism of secularism. He wrote in the Saamana editorial that Narendra Modi should not try to offer the "poison of secularism" to Hindus.

"Hindu ramsevaks were killed in Godhra riots (train burning) and that's why Hindus were inflamed. Do not kill them by giving them a dose of the poison of secularism," Bal Thackeray then wrote in the Shiv Sena's mouthpiece.

Bal Thackeray reminded Narendra Modi that it was Hindutva which heralded his political rise and warned him against shedding Hindutva for secularism in search of greater political power.

"Modi's battle may be for the 'gaddi' of Delhi (a reference to the Prime Minister's Office). But it is impossible without 'sadbhavana' (goodwill) of Hindus. It was the saffron flag which helped propel Modi to a leadership position. It was due to the Hindu vote bank that Modi reached the place where he is today," Bal Thackeray had said.

The Shiv Sena and the Thackerays have long claimed that Narendra Modi survived in the chair of the Gujarat chief minister due to timely intervention by Bal Thackeray, the Shiv Sena founder.

Bal Thackeray is said to have told BJP stalwart LK Advani that if Narendra Modi was sacked-as then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee wanted-in the aftermath of the 2002 Gujarat riots, the BJP must prepare to give up Gujarat.

Narendra Modi remained Gujarat chief minister till May 2014, when he took oath as the prime minister. The BJP earned a majority on its own in the Lok Sabha and this was hailed as victory of Hindutva.

The BJP and the Shiv Sena for long were the only prominent parties advocating Hindutva politics. Hindutva was the glue that held them together at national as well as state level politics.

If we take out the Jan Sangh, the Shiv Sena is an older party than the BJP. The Shiv Sena was formed in 1960s and the BJP in 1980. But both parties saw their rise through the 1980s, investing arduously in Hindutva politics. It was Hindutva that brought them together in 1984 and cemented a formal alliance in 1989.

The BJP grew faster at the national level and sought to go moderate on Hindutva. On the other hand, the Shiv Sena was electorally confined largely to Maharashtra where it faced formidable Congress and later the NCP too, and grew more aggressive in espousing Hindutva as a political ideology.

The two parties were for long called the saffron brigade, with Shiv Sena being depicted more saffron than the BJP. Even their flags tell the same saga. The Shiv Sena's flag has complete saffron colour scheme and is inspired by the warrior state flag of the Maratha empire founded by Chhatrapati Shivaji. The BJP has a flag that has a green band at its base and flaps saffron with a lotus in the middle.

They contested elections together in Maharashtra. This meant that they competed with each other for greater share in seat-sharing arrangement every election.

In the 30 years of their alliance, the BJP graduated from being a junior partner to a senior fellow leaving the Shiv Sena feeling suffocating as it saw its space shrinking. The BJP, which piggybacked on the Shiv Sena for long, was claiming a lion's share in everything - seat-share, vote-share and power-share.

With the oath-taking ceremony of the Uddhav Thackeray-led government, the Shiv Sena has crossed over to what is wrongly or rightly called the "secular" camp of Indian politics.

The preamble to the Maha Vikas Aghadi stresses on secularism and its sections call for special focus on minority (read Muslims) - a sharp departure from Bal Thackeray's stated position.

This means the Shiv Sena has conclusively decided to keep Hindutva in the backburner in favour of secularism. In doing this, the Shiv Sena has ceded the entire spectrum of Hindutva politics to the BJP, which at present may be singeing after being "ditched" by both the Shiv Sena and NCP leader Ajit Pawar, but would not mind being the sole claimant to Hindutva politics in the end.
