Should the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project be scrapped? Mumbaikars share thoughts

Mumbai-Ahmedabad

the bullet train

Untitled Carousel Uddhav Thackeray chucks remote to take oath as Maharashtra’s 19th CM Unsurprisingly, it was his feisty and trusted aide Eknath Shinde who was the loudest. The others who were sworn in were Subhash Desai, also of the Sena, Jayant Patil and Chhagan Bhujbal of the NCP and Balasaheb Thorat and Nitin Raut from the Congress.

twitter

#TaptheChatter: Should the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project be scrapped? Drop in your comments and stand a ch… https://t.co/JrxPZi4op5 — Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1575003000000

Untitled Carousel Here are the complete details of the Common Minimum Programme of the Maha Vikas Aghadi The Maha Vikas Aghadi, which is an alliance of Shiv Sena, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) and Congress, announced its Common Minimum Programme on Thursday.

Mumbaikars

Ahmedabad

Maharashtra Government Formation: Looking back at some important moments from Uddhav Thackeray's life 03:45

With the 30-year-old alliance of the BJP-Shiv Sena falling apart following the month-long political battle to form the Maharashtra government, many projects including the Rs 1.08 lakh croreBullet train project are expected to be in jeopardy due to the difference in agendas of the newly-formed Sena-NCP-Congress alliance.Many factors could hinderproject, a $17 billion investment largely financed by a long-term, low-cost loan from Japan. The BJP was in power in both Maharashtra and Gujarat when work began on the project in 2017.Since the announcement of the project, there has been a lot of chatter amongst citizens on whether there is a need for the project.Earlier, Sena spokesperson Manisha Kayande said, "We have always opposed bullet train." While an NCP leader said, "We will rethink about projects that farmers are opposing."As the uncertainty around the project continues, Mirror asked readers if they think the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project should be scrapped.While many feel it should be scrapped, auser, Sid Gala wrote, "No. It will pave the way for future bullet train projects in the country. For a densely populated country like India, high-speed rail is a very important project!""We need to move towards the future and the bullet train is one such move.. we should realise the importance of it and educate people to understand it's impact on growth and connectivity!" another Twitter user, Mehjabeen Raja added.Many also pointed out that politicians should rise above politics.Srisha Uchil wrote, "Wish Politicians would rise above " Politics " for once and look at National Interest. Bullet train is bound to be a game-changer as far as inter city travel is concerned. It's time to move forward by adopting modernity in every which way. Wonder if politicos see this??"While there were a few who supported the project, many thought it should be scrapped."1.1 lac crore for 500 km connectivity is just an ego trip and absutely a disaster financially , ecologically . Better to do other infra and more flight connectivity in that money ..... Should be scrapped," Vickram Chaturvedi wrote.Another Twitter user wrote, "Yes. Mumbai already has poor Road and Rail infrastructure. Money should be put to use where it is required the most. Improvisation in the local train services will help millions ofon daily basis. I repeat, Millions.""There is no need of having a bullet train between Ahmedabad-Mumbai. It will only be beneficial for upper class like businessmen. Scrapping the bullet train project would not only save the farmers livelihood, but also save the island city ,Mumbai from a life and death situation.," Nidhi wrote.Prime Minister Modi and his Japanese counterpart Shinzo Abe laid the foundation stone of the ambitious project in Mumbai on September 14, 2017.The bullet train is expected to cover the distance between Mumbai-in three hours.Earlier, the BJP-led Maharashtra government had committed to a capital expenditure of Rs 5,000 crore for the project. Around 150 km of the railway line is to be built in Maharashtra. Land acquisition for the project is still underway.
