Cyber-attack on Kudankulum Nuclear Power Plant underlines the need for cyber deterrent strategy

S D Pradhan has served as chairman of India's Joint Intelligence Committee. He has also been the country's deputy national security adviser. He was chairman of the Task Force on Intelligence Mechanism (2008-2010), which was constituted to review the functioning of the intelligence agencies. He has taught at the departments of defence studies and history at the Punjabi University, Patiala. He was also a visiting professor at the University of Illinois, US, in the department of arms control and disarmament studies. The ministry of defence had utilized his services for the preparation of official accounts of the 1971 war and the counterinsurgency operations in the northeast. In the JIC/National Security Council secretariat, he was closely involved with the preparation of the reports of the Kargil Review Committee and the Group of Ministers on national security as also with the implementation of their recommendations. His publications include two books and several articles. LESS ... MORE

The cyber-attack on the Kudankulum Nuclear Power Plant in October 2019, raises certain important questions about the security of our critical infrastructure and more importantly the adequacy of our response. Cyberattack on nuclear power plants was perturbing given the potentially catastrophic consequences of such an attack.

However, the press release issued after the attack reflected that the government considers that ‘its system is infallible and no penetration into the nuclear power control plant is possible’. The reflected overwhelming confidence, complacency, and ignorance about the emerging dimensions of cyber threats.

There are two issues that deserve thorough scrutiny. First is the need to determine the intent of the attack on the administrative unit. This could be aimed at manipulating the access control system so that the entry of unauthorised persons could be managed in the facility either to steal nuclear material or place monitoring devices near the operational network to collect data (each time a computer key is used, it emits electromagnetic radiation which can be monitored by a device kept within 200 meters) or to damage the facility or to disable the reactor cooling systems resulting in a Fukushima-like disaster. The threat emerging from humans and human-computer interface is the gravest security threat in the present age that must be kept in view.

The second issue is whether the separation of the administrative units dealing with management aspects and the operational unit acting as the nerve centre of the plant for power generation provides a dependent secured system. The administrative unit is usually internet connected with firewalls for its protection from the cyber-attacks. The operating network system controls machines and equipment through a complex algorithm to manage power generation is not connected with the internet and remains to stand alone.

It is routine to keep the two systems separated. In cyber terminology, it is called that the operating network is “air-gapped” from the administrative network. This means that no path exists between the two networks. When air-gap is deployed, the computers in the operating unit are not connected with the internet of the administrative unit.

However, usually, the two systems are separated through ‘the software-defined air-gap’ with a firewall. The firewall has a system for preventing any external connections being established with the isolated computer network. The reason for having a firewalled based air gap system is to allow for a controlled software update of the network. This exposes the operational network to a host of vulnerabilities. Our past attacks have established that no air gap system is impossible to surpass. Air-gaps may be effective against unsophisticated cyber-attacks but not against the targeted attacks by professional attackers. The Nuclear Threat Initiative’s report on cyber threats to nuclear facilities in 2016 stated that targeted attacks go beyond the network connections and generally leverage “witting and unwitting humans, or a long and difficult-to-defend supply chain to deliver the attack”.

For a successful cyber-attack, the hackers are expected to have the knowledge of the entire system-equipment used, their models and make and software versions as also ways to disable their safety mechanisms. These require substantial time and several efforts. When a state decides to obtain data or decides to destroy the data of the target country, it deploys its agents to get someone to connect an external device either to obtain or to destroy data. The combined efforts of human agents and hackers can wreak havoc.

The ‘stuxnet’ malware used in 2010 in the Iranian nuclear plant was focussed to hit the centrifuges. This meant that the hackers had all the information about the power plant. The attackers must have watched the systems through the cyber intelligence gathering process or could have got the information from someone inside the plant before targeting the centrifuges in Natanz uranium enrichment plant, which was separated by the air-gap system. The attack was initiated by a malware that was present in USBs.

The Ukraine attack in 2016 was also a case similar to Stuxnet. Attackers disabled power distribution stations in Ukraine, causing a widespread blackout. The attack started several months before the blackout actually occurred. The hackers had acquired detailed information about the system. In Ukraine, it is known that the cyber attackers had targeted several employees of the companies and embedded Microsoft Word documents with malware to gain access to the administrative network.

It would be wrong to presume that the attack on Kudankulum Power Plant’s administrative unit was an isolated attempt. It could be a part of overall plan to penetrate into the plant by managing the entry of unauthorised persons for later attack on a wide scale causing sufficient harm. An analysis of the malware shows that it was a modified version of Dtrack that was used for attacking Indian financial institution earlier. It is a Remote Access Trojan, which means that it is a malware that looks like a legitimate file but it actually allows a remote user to command a machine.

It is widely believed that it was developed by the North Korean Lazarus group. The North Korea in the past had targeted institutions linked with Indian Space Research Organisation. It is possible that the attack on Kudankulum Nuclear Power Plant was carried out at the behest of China or Pakistan- both of them have reasons for attacking India’s biggest power plant with two Russian designed water reactors that feeds India’s south power grid. Four more reactors are to be added soon. Hence for India’s rivals, this becomes an important target.

India needs to upgarde its system to protect critical infrastructure. It must admit that the ‘air gap’ system is not infallible and do away with the sense of complacency. A combination of hostile agents and hackers could penetrate any system. The statement of NPCIL after the attack reflected ignorance about the threat from this combination. Immediately in all such places the counter-intelligence system should upgraded to monitor the activities of all personnel working there. Our security policy for dealing with cyber-attacks hardly places importance to the emerging threats from the combination of the two.

The more important aspect is to have a strategy to deter adversaries from undertaking such attacks. Attacks on the critical infrastructure should be treated as a war against the nation. While attribution remains a problem, the continued attacks of similar types point fingers towards the culprits sponsored by a hostile state. The countries like US, UK, Russia and China despite accepting that attribution remains a problem, feel that a declared strategy to punish the hackers and their supporters can deter the known adversaries. They have created Cyber Commands and have adopted ‘active cyber defence strategy’.

It is heartening to note that India has announced the formation of a tri-service for cyber warfare. India is going to face more destructive attacks than disruptive attacks seen now. The Artificial Intelligence procedures can manipulate networks and devices in unthinkable ways. They engage very large elements at the very same time, and correct the nature of the attack by self-learning depending on the method of the defence it faces. The need for a declaratory strategy to address the new challenges can hardly overemphasised. In face of emerging threats a comprehensive cyber deterrence strategy to deter key state and non-state actors from conducting cyber-attacks against Indian interests is the need of the hour. In a positive move, India may soon have a single authority or agency responsible for the entire spectrum of defensive cyber operations in the country for better command and control. It would help in ensuring an integrated approach towards cyber-attacks and would be able to develop abilities to identify the hackers with the help of different agencies dealing with this aspect and would formulate the much needed cyber strategy to deter the hostile nations and their groups to launch attacks on Indian critical infrastructure.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
