Hotel Mumbai Movie Review: Dev Patel and Anupam Kher film is neither black nor white. It's just right

Anthony Maras's Hotel Mumbai is inspired by true events. The almost four-day terrorist attack that crippled Mumbai on that fateful November night in 2008, after six armed men went berserk AK 47s in hand, was a sight we all witnessed on our television sets, whether in the city or not. But Maras delves deeper, not only into the series of events but also into each key character that played a part. Albeit with some, if not more, creative liberty wherever he could.

The movie begins with a shot of six plain-dressed men floating in onshore on a steamboat - where we all know it started. The very next scene takes us into a dimly-lit house in one of Mumbai's many chawl areas, where we see Arjun (Dev Patel) getting ready for his night shift at the Taj Mahal Palace hotel. He meticulously fastens his turban, ironing out the creases with a pin even as his daughter wails. He then picks her up, drops her off at her mother's workplace and rides off to the Taj on a scooty.

Watch Hotel Mumbai trailer here:

The hotel, on the other hand, is preparing to welcome their VIP guests, Zahra (Nazanin Boniadi) and David (Armie Hammer), who're arriving with their baby son and his nanny. Hemant Oberoi (Anupam Kher), the head chef at the hotel lines up his staff, inspecting their uniforms, nails and hair before handing them duties for the night. Everyone wants the private party duty at that shady Russian's suite because that means big tips. It's a regular day at the workplace.

Cut to a scene in the dirty men's washroom at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (CST). Ajmal Kasab and his partner fire their first shot as they step out of the toilets. The frail man collecting coins at the pay-and-use drops his cash box, but the clatter is drowned under the deafening sound of gunshots.

The best thing about Maras's Hotel Mumbai is the use of background score - and more importantly, where he chooses not to use it. When several minutes of silence is suddenly interrupted by the sound of a gunshot or a muffled scream from a soul trying to duck under a table hoping to escape this nightmare, the violence hits you, it hits you hard.

A scene from Hotel Mumbai, featuring Dev Patel, Nazanin Boniadi and Armie Hammer.

Maras's film is not a black-and-white propaganda film. But at the same time, it leaves out several details that were crucial slips. Like the rifles not working, for instance, that laid bare the police's inadequacy at handling a siege of this proportion. It, however, focuses on the humane side of things. And perhaps intentionally. Thus building heroes out of an ordinary man. That's where Dev and Kher come in.

Dev Patel as Arjun is our lead, not the hero, but he does rise to the occasion when pushed to extreme conditions. His rise is gradual but resolute, and ultimately inspiring. Dev puts on a stiffness that conveys just how shook he is and blends beautifully into the role. Anupam Kher's Oberoi, modelled on Chef Hemant Oberoi, who was the head chef at the Taj Mahal Palace and Towers when the attack happened, is a strange mix of brave and hopelessness slowly creeping in.

Armie Hammer, after Call Me By Your Name, deserves a special mention for even taking up a role like this, secondary to both Dev and Kher. He delivers to the T.

Even as your heart leaps out of its cage for those under attack, Maras bravely humanises the terrorists too, something most would dare not. Wounded and in pain, one boy, all of 20, calls up his father to tell him just how much he loves him. He enquires if they've received the money that was promised for his 'sacrifice' only to realise he was played by his master. A captured Kasab lying on the hospital bed, sans his guns, is not scary, he is scared.

Maras also doesn't make sweeping statements about religion, or overtly dramatises the 'taking off the turban' scene. He does, however, allow one dialogue to that shady Russian. "Religion is what got us here!"

4 out of 5 stars for Hotel Mumbai. Make time for it.

(The writer tweets from @NotThatNairita)

ALSO READ | Former Taj head chef Hemant Oberoi on 26/11: We lost more staff than guests

ALSO READ | Vivek Oberoi to Raveena Tandon: Celebs attend Hotel Mumbai special screening

ALSO READ | Remembering 26/11: Internet pays emotional tributes on 11th year of Mumbai attacks
