Delhi: Man takes his wife on long ride, shoots her in Panipat

Delhi: Businessman takes wife on long ride, shoots her in Panipat

NEW DELHI: A 20-year-old woman, who had vanished from her house in west Delhi’s Janakpuri on November 10, was allegedly murdered by her husband and two accomplices. Apparently, fed up with their daily quarrels, the man took the woman to Panipat and shot her, police claimed on Wednesday after arresting the three accused.Nancy Sharma, 20, and Sahil Chopra, 21, got married in March, but soon after the couple started having frequent fights over Nancy’s predilection for late-night parties. Chopra also suspected her of having an extramarital affair. Chopra claimed to police that he had asked his wife for a divorce but was told that it was not possible within a year of marriage. Nancy had also threatened him if he insisted on termination of their marriage.This was why Chopra is believed to have decided to get rid of her. After the couple fought through the night of November 9, Chopra roped in his cousin, Shubham, and his driver, Badal, to murder her. They arranged for an illegal pistol and cartridges and arrived at Chopra’s home around 9am on November 10.Chopra apologised to Nancy and asked her to accompany him on a long drive to lighten the mood. The four of them got in a Chevrolet Cruze sedan and drove towards Panipat in Haryana.Around noon, they reached a refinery near Panipat, where Nancy asked Chopra to pull over as she needed to relieve herself. He stopped near a public toilet and thought the isolated spot suitable for his heinous plot. As she walked ahead, Chopra approached her from behind and shot her in the head from close range. He also beat her as she lay dying. The men then dumped the body in the bushes and returned home.Nancy’s father, Sanjay Sharma, called her several times, but each time the call was disconnected. He then phoned Chopra to be told that she hadn’t been taking the latter’s calls either. The Sharmas launched a search for the missing woman. When she remained untraceable, the family went to police. Chopra floated the theory that she might have eloped with somebody or had been abducted from home.Police initially treated the case as that of a missing person and only started investigations after Sanjay Sharma accused Chopra of demanding dowry and torturing her when the demands weren’t met. Chopra refuted the allegation before the cops, claiming he was a car dealer and financially well-placed.On November 26, police filed an FIR for the woman’s abduction. They reviewed the mobile locations of Chopra and his call details for the day she went missing. When questioned, he gave conflicting answers. He eventually broke down and confessed to the murder and led the cops to his wife’s body.“The trio were presented in court and given police remand for two days,” said Shalini Singh, joint commissioner (Western Range). “We still have to recover the murder weapon and collect evidence.”
