Telangana minister shocks; says Hyderabad veterinarian was educated, should have called police not sister

Telangana Home Minister Mohd Mahmood Ali | Photo Credit: ANI

Hyderabad: Amid outrage over the gruesome murder of a veterinarian in Telangana’s capital Hyderabad, state Home Minister Mohd Mahmood Ali left everyone shocked on Friday when he said the victim could have survived had she called police instead of ringing her sister seeking help.

Commenting on the alleged rape and murder case, Mahmood Ali made insensitive remarks and said he was saddened by the incident but added that crime happens and police were making efforts to control crime.

“We are saddened by the incident. Crime happens but the police is alert and controlling crime. It is unfortunate that despite being educated, she called her sister and not '100'. Had she called '100', she could have been saved,” the minister told reporters.

When his remarks triggered a row, the minister clarified: "I'm deeply saddened by the mishap. She was like my own daughter. Stringent punishment will be given to the culprits. When I met her parents, tears rolled down my eyes as well."

According to police, some passers-by had found the charred body of the 27-year-old woman. The body was recovered from under a culvert near Hyderabad yesterday – the woman had gone missing on Wednesday.

The victim’s younger sister had filed a complaint with the police and said that her sister had called her at 9.22 pm on Wednesday. The victim told her sister that someone had tricked her and told her that her scooter had a flat tyre. The victim said she was stranded at a toll plaza.

The Hyderabad Police today said it has arrested the accused persons involved in the alleged rape and murder case of the veterinary doctor.

Following the gruesome murder, the Central government has said that it will issue an advisory to all states to take all precautionary measures to prevent crimes against women.

Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy said the Centre was in contact with the Telangana government over the woman's murder.

"The Ministry of Home Affairs will send an advisory to all states as a precautionary measure so that no such incident takes place in future," he said.

The minister said the perpetrators of the crime should be arrested and awarded capital punishment.

The National Commission for Women has, meanwhile, set up an inquiry committee to probe the killing of the 27-year-old veterinarian.

"The National Commission for Women is constituting an Inquiry Committee headed by a Member, NCW to inquire into the matter. Considering the gravity of the matter, I request you to kindly investigate and take appropriate action in the matter," NCW Chairperson Rekha Sharma said in a letter.
