People On Twitter Tag Anupam Kher’s ‘Hotel Mumbai’ As A Promising Watch & Give It A Thumbs Up

The directorial debut of Australia’s Anthony Maras, Hotel Mumbai revisits the deadly 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, which killed 166 people and lasted four days. The film is majorly set inside The Taj Mahal Palace in Colaba and the audience gets to see the chilling goings-on inside the hotel and how its staff managed to save the guests from the terrorists.

Anupam Kher plays Chef Hemant Oberoi, who showed extraordinary courage during the 2008 attacks and the movie is told from his perspective.

The film has already has hit the screens and people on Twitter have been appreciating the movie for its raw and powerful content.



#HotelMumbai is well shot & directed, covers the horrific event of 26/11 attacks at Taj & gives us an insight of the events from the other side. The film's major drawback are the characters, there is no depth, no dimensions & often falls into the trap of cliches. Average Watch. — amit dadhich (@amit12354) November 29, 2019

Well, when you already know the course of events because the movie is following the real story, it’s hard to keep the audience hooked to the narrative, however, it seems that Hotel Mumbai has overcome that hurdle and has managed to keep people on the edge-of-the-seat with its gripping detail.



People are recommending the movie as a promising watch, even though it's a gut-wrenching tale.

#HotelMumbai shws how ordinary ppl emerge as extraordinary humans, displaying exemplary courage. @AnupamPKher is remarkable, #DevPatel stands out @armiehammer @NazaninBoniadi translate the fear & agony of th horrific 26/11 terror attack. My #TOI #MovieReview #HotelMumbaiReview pic.twitter.com/tFXJNM09Pt

— sreeparna sengupta (@sreeparnas) November 28, 2019

I have watched it during US release in April / May this year. Indeed a very important film and must watch! #HotelMumbai — Dr. Abhishek Jain (@drabhishekjain) November 29, 2019

.#HotelMumbai is a gut-wrenching film. It sends a chill down ur spine bringing back the horrific memories of 26/11 Mumbai terror attack. @AnupamPKher #DevPatel empathetically showcase the selfless acts of the hotel staff who saved their guests. A truthful film and a must-watch. — Monika Rawal (@monikarawal) November 25, 2019





Talking about the movie, director Maras said in an interview, “The film is thoroughly researched and most of the accounts shown in the film happened for real. We’ve had to amalgamate several characters into one and that was primarily done to respect the privacy of some of the people we had interviewed. These were people who were more than cooperative to share their accounts but didn’t want their names to be used. We changed the names of several key characters, but the accounts are real.”

Here’s the trailer of the movie:

Planning to watch it over the weekend? Let us know in the comments section below.
