Hyderabad vet's father: Kept pleading with police but crucial time was lost

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Hyderabad vet murder case: Father reveals details

The father of the Hyderabad veterinary doctor, who was gangraped and murdered on Hyderabad-Bengaluru Highway after her scooty broke down, has said that the police wasted crucial moments after learning about the incident. The case is a chilling reminder of Delhi's Nirbhaya gangrape and has sent shockwaves across the country. "I lodged a complaint at 11 pm and pleaded with the officers to accompany me to the spot, but I was asked to go to another police station," girl's father told a news channel.

According to the father's statement to CNN News 18, he had gone to the police station at 10 pm, however, the police wasted time checking the CCTV footage of the route. Commenting further, the father of the young veterinary doctor said the police asked him to check if the woman had reported to the clinic she worked at.

After sometime, the police officials told him to travel to another police station as the incident did not come under their area limits. Upon reaching the second police station, the father of the woman said they further wasted time calling the officials of the previous police station and enquiring about the incident.

"My daughter could have been saved had the police acted on time and searched for her in the vicinity," the father of the deceased said.

They finally lodged a missing complaint at 11 pm, but still followed the CCTV footage of the area rather than launching a manual hunt, the father of the young doctor said.

"I pleaded with the constables present at the police station to accompany me for the search of my daughter," the father said, adding "the police officials came with me at 3 am."

Upon being asked if he had updates about his daughter from the police, the father of the deceased woman said the police only informed them that the scooter has been recovered.

Meanwhile, the Hyderabad DGP has said that the Police have detained four persons in the case.

Image Source : INDIA TV Main accused in Hyderabad vet murder case arrested

The charred body of the woman was found under a bridge at the Hyderabad-Bengaluru highway at nearly 8 am on November 27. According to the information with the police, the vet had gone missing post 9:30 pm. Girl's family have put on record that their daughter last called at 9.22 pm informing her scooty had a deflated tyre and that she was feeling unsafe. She also informed the family that a lorry driver and a few others had offered help.

The police had listened to a recording of the conversation between the deceased and her sister, according to which, her scooty had broke down at the highway. Some truck drivers present at the location had offered to help the woman and took her scooter for repair, the vet doctor had told her sister on the phone.

Hyderabad vet's father statement puts a serious question on the way things were handled by the police after the first information reached.

Also Read | Hyderabad vet murder case: What we know so far

Also Read | Abducted, raped and set ablaze: Chilling details of Hyderabad vet's murder emerge
