Gotabaya Rajapaksa visits India: PM Modi announces $50 million assistance to Sri Lanka to combat terrorism

New Delhi/IBNS: During his first meeting with new Sri Lankan President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced on Friday a financial assistance of USD 450 million to Sri Lanka.

The assistance also included a special Line of Credit for Sri Lanka to combat terrorism.

Press Statement by PM during the State Visit of President of Sri Lanka to India https://t.co/CNtF7N8XXT — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) November 29, 2019



Incidentally, a series of bomb attacks across Colombo earlier this year left at least 250 people killed.

The talks between the leaders of the two neighbouring nations included issues like fulfilling aspirations of the Tamil community in Sri Lanka, ways to boost security and trade ties and address concerns of the fishermen.

Happy to receive @GotabayaR on his first overseas visit as the President of Sri Lanka.



His visit is a testimony to the time-tested ties between India and Sri Lanka and will help strengthen our bonds as well as energise our partnership. pic.twitter.com/siMQzFpuDk — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) November 29, 2019

Modi tweeted: "Happy to receive @GotabayaR on his first overseas visit as the President of Sri Lanka. His visit is a testimony to the time-tested ties between India and Sri Lanka and will help strengthen our bonds as well as energise our partnership."

This is the Sri Lankan leader's first overseas visit after assuming office recently.

ðŸ‡®ðŸ‡³-ðŸ‡±ðŸ‡°| A new chapter in our 2500 years old intertwined history.



PM @narendramodi welcomed President @GotabayaR ahead of their talks. President @GotabayaR’s is on his maiden visit to India in his capacity as President of Sri Lanka. pic.twitter.com/BFqWrnkFXY — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) November 29, 2019

Gotabaya Rajapaksa made an impressive mark in the Sri Lankan presidential polls in November.

He defeated nearest rival Sajith Premadasa by a margin of over 13 lakh votes to become the President of the Island Nation.


