She was educated, why call sister not police? Telangana minister blames murder victim

In a shocking remark on the murder of a veterinary doctor in Shamshabad of Ranga Reddy district in Telangana, state Home Minister Mohammad Mahmood Ali on Friday asked why the "educated" doctor called her sister and not the police. He also said had the victim called the police instead of calling her sister, "she could have been saved".

A charred body of a young veterinary doctor was found in an underpass near the Chadanpalli village in Rangareddy district, Telangana. Evidence gathered from the crime scene suggests rape, but that has not been confirmed yet as the body is completely charred, sources in the police told India Today TV.

Speaking to India Today TV, Mohammad Mahmood Ali said the "doctor was educated" and it was "unfortunate" that the deceased veterinary doctor dialled her family and not the police.

The Telangana home minister said, "The doctor was educated. She still called her sister instead of dialling 100."

"We are saddened by the incident; police are alert and controlling crime. It is unfortunate that she called her sister and not '100', had she called '100' she could have been saved," news agency ANI quoted Mohammad Mahmood Ali as saying.

Clarifying his bizarre remark on the murder of the veterinary doctor, Mohammad Mahmood Ali said the victim was like his daughter.

"I'm deeply saddened by the mishap. She was like my own daughter. Stringent punishment will be given to culprit. When I met her parents, tears rolled down my eyes as well," he said.

WATCH: Telangana home minister on alleged rape and murder of the veterinary doctor

#WATCH Telangana Home Min on alleged rape&murder case of a woman veterinary doctor: We're saddened by the incident,crime happens but police is alert&controlling it. Unfortunate that despite being educated she called her sister¬ '100',had she called 100 she could've been saved. pic.twitter.com/N17THk4T48 ANI (@ANI) November 29, 2019





The alleged rape and murder of the 26-year-old woman has sent shockwaves across the country. Meanwhile, the police have detained four people in connection with the rape and murder of the veterinary doctor in Cyberabad.

Indian police officers inspect the site where they found the burned body of a 26-year-old veterinary doctor who they say was raped and killed on the outskirts of Hyderabad. (Photo: KK Productions via AP)

The woman's body was found on Thursday morning at around 8 am. Nearly 12 hours before her charred body was found, she had called her sister and told her how some strangers around her were making her uncomfortable.

"Please talk to me for a while...I am scared. They [the strangers] are all waiting outside. You please keep talking to me, I am scared," the victim had told her sister.

The 26-year-old then told her sister that she would call soon and hung up the phone. When her sister called back, her phone was switched off. When the doctor's family could not get in touch with the doctor, they drove to the toll plaza from where she had called her sister. When her family could not find her there, they filed a complaint with the police.

A case has been registered under relevant sections and further probe into the matter is underway.

"We received a complaint in Shamshabad Rural Police Station from her sister. The victim was working as a veterinary doctor at Kollur had gone to a hospital for treatment and while returning her vehicle's tires got punctured. Today morning her burnt body was found from Shadnagar outskirts," ACP of Shadnagar, V Surender had said.
