Garlands to robbery: 6 times onion price hike made us laugh, not cry

The chaos in Maharashtra, BJP MP Pragya Thakur's Nathuram Godse comment, Ananya Panday's new outfit and Mamata Banerjee's statement on BJP. Several incidents made headlines over the past few days in India. But irrespective of these episodes, guess what the nation wants to know at this point of time. When will the price of onions reduce? Yes, that is the burning question.

Onions are being reportedly sold at Rs 120 per kg in Delhi while in West Bengal, prices have crossed the Rs 100 per kg mark. Considering the increase in the price of the vegetable, political parties are already keeping themselves occupied by invoking - well, what else, but politics in the matter. But certain quarters are having a feast. Pun intended, by the way.

For instance, thieves in West Bengal raided a shop and stole onions but left the cash box untouched. Can you believe it? On the other hand, an RJD MLA arrived at the Bihar Assembly wearing a garland of onions. Meanwhile, at a state cooperative counter in Bihar, onions are being sold at Rs 35 per kg. But, wait for the real deal.

In this piece, we have written about six incidents regarding onions that will not make you cry for a change. Instead, ROFL.

STAMPEDES FOR ONIONS

Officials spotted wearing helmets at the counter. (Photo: ANI)

Yes, you read that right. Onions at the Bihar State Cooperative Marketing Union Limited counter are being sold at Rs 35 per kg. And in the meantime, officials at the counter were spotted wearing helmets. Why? Because, "There have been instances of stone pelting and stampedes. So, this was our only option. No security has been provided to us," Rohit Kumar, an official, was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

FORGET CASH. ONIONS ARE THE NEED OF THE HOUR

Onions are being reportedly sold at Rs 120 per kg in Delhi. (Photo: Reuters)

Akshay Das was in for a shock on Tuesday morning as he found out that thieves had raided his vegetable stall in Sutahata in West Bengal's East Midnapore district. But the biggest surprise was that the robbers stole onions worth Rs 50,000 while leaving the cash box untouched. Speaking to news agency IANS, Akshay Das said, "They didn't take a single paisa from the cash box."

PYAAZ KA MALA

RJD MLA Shiv Chandra Ram photographed wearing an onion garland. (Photo: ANI)

RJD MLA Shiv Chandra Ram was photographed at the Bihar Assembly in Patna wearing a garland of onions on Wednesday. With his move, Shiv Chandra Ram wanted to bring focus on the increase in the price of onions. While speaking to reporters, Shiv Chandra Ram attacked Nitish Kumar's government in Bihar for its "empty promises". The chief minister, Shiv Chandra Ram said, had claimed to set up stalls where onions would be sold for Rs 35 per kg. "I am yet to see any such stall," Shiv Chandra Ram claimed.

A FILMY ROBBERY

Businessman Premchand Shukla sent onions worth Rs 20 lakh in a truck from Nashik in Maharashtra to Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh. But not even for a second did he contemplate that the onions would never reach Gorakhpur. Javed, a Shivpuri-based transporter, owned the truck. After being informed that the truck had not arrived at its destination, Premchand Shukla headed straight to Shivpuri, where police recovered the truck but not the onions. The driver is on the run while Premchand Shukla has filed a complaint against the transporter. Sigh!

EK AUR CHORI

Increase in the price of onions has triggered several thefts - you are well aware of that by now. 250 kg of onions worth Rs 25,000 were stolen from a vegetable shop in the Palanpur Patiya area in Gujarat's Surat. This has happened for the "first time", an employee of the vegetable vendor said, news agency PTI reports.

SOME MORE ONION GARLANDS

Congress MLAs raise slogans against the BJP-led Assam government. (Photo: PTI)

Not just in Bihar, but the opposition Congress also protested against the increase in the price of onions in the Assam Assembly by wearing garlands made of the vegetable. Blaming Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government for the price hike, the MLAs raised slogans against the BJP-led Assam government.

Meanwhile, if you are complaining about the price rise in Delhi and West Bengal, please note that in certain markets across India, onion prices skyrocketed beyond imagination - much above Rs 100 per kg.

Phew!

If you love onions in your curries and a slice of it on the plate as well, we feel you folks. That's all we can say at the moment.

ALSO READ: Thieves steal onions worth Rs 50k from Bengal shop. Owner finds biggest surprise in cash box

ALSO READ: Looming onion crisis leaves Indians in tears, govt in jitters
