Man-animal conflict: Tiger mauls farmer to death in Bareilly, leaves half-eaten body behind

The big cat allegedly came into the field from the adjacent forest region and attacked Surjeet (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Thursday morning, a farmer identified as Surjeet Singh went to his field to work A tiger attacked Surjeet while he was working the fields The tiger dragged Surjeet into a nearby forest area and left his half-eaten body

Bareilly: A tiger allegedly mauled a man to death in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh on Thursday afternoon. The deceased has been identified as Surjeet Singh. Surjeet was a resident of Balrajpur village, Singahi in Lakhimpur Kheri. Allegedly, the tiger attacked Surjeet when he was working in his field.

Surjeet's field is located near the Katarniaghat forest range of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve. The 30-year-old farmer was dragged into the forest area near his field and his half-eaten body was recovered from the spot.

According to Times of India's report, Surjeet was ploughing his field for sowing wheat on Thursday afternoon. The big cat allegedly came into the field from the adjacent forest region and attacked Surjeet. Two persons who were working in fields nearby saw the incident.

The two eyewitnesses could not do anything but play mute spectators as the tiger attacked the farmer and dragged him into the forest. The two farmers then went to the village and informed everyone. Villagers and police officials then came back to the field and started looking for Surjeet.

Meanwhile, the forest department learned about the incident. They rushed to the village and told the villagers that they will be installing camera traps to monitor the movement of the tiger. They also assured that the deceased's family that compensation will be paid to them.

Anil Patel, Division forest officer, DTR buffer said, "The tiger has killed a farmer and partially eaten his body. This is not a good sign. We will monitor the tiger's movement and try to push it back deep into the forest. Locals have been advised to work in groups and not to go near the forest till the tiger is present there. "

Woman returning after relieving herself in fields, attacked to death near Ranthambore

A 40-year-old woman was mauled to death by a tiger in Rajasthan's Ranthambore in February this year. The woman had gone to relieve herself in the fields and on her way back, a tiger attacked her. She was identified as Munni Devi. The incident took place in Kundera village of Sawai Madhopur, Jaipur. A forest department official said that the woman's face had been torn off by the tiger.
