Akshay Kumar outraged over Cyberabad murder case, writes: 'We need stricter laws'

Akshay Kumar enraged over the Hyderabad murder case

Key Highlights 27-year-old girl was allegedly raped and murdered in Cyberabad Celebrities including Akshay Kumar have taken to their social media handle to address the gravity of the matter Akshay Kumar went on to write, "We need stricter laws.This needs to STOP!"

A few days ago in Cyberabad, a charred body of a girl was found below a bridge in Telangana's Shadnagar town. Numerous reports suggested that the 27-year-old veterinarian was murdered on her way home. As per the police, she was sexually assaulted and the culprits have been arrested. The news of her murder and death has enraged everyone including celebrities. After Vijay Deverakonda and Keerthy Suresh, Akshay Kumar took to his social media handle.

Taking to Twitter, Akshay wrote, "Whether it is ***** in Hyderabad, ***** in Tamil Nadu or the law student gangraped in Ranchi,we seem to be losing it as a society. It has been 7 yrs to the gut-wrenching ***** case & our moral fabric continues to be in pieces.We need stricter laws.This needs to STOP!"

Earlier today, Mahanati actors, Keerthy Suresh and Vijay Deverakonda went on to express their rage over the Cyberabad murder case. Taking to Twitter, Keerthy had written, "Devastated and Heartbroken to know that *** was raped and burnt alive! Things are getting fearsome day by day. I am just speechless at the moment not knowing who is to be blamed specially in a city like Hyderabad which I presumed to be a super safe city.When will our country ever become safe for a woman to walk around at any time of the day. All the brutal psychopaths shut be hunt down and punished asap! Heartfelt condolences to her family. May god give them the strength and power to overcome the loss and help find the culprits. I believe in Karma, it works 24*7"

On the other hand, Vijay went on to write, "We all need to take the responsibility of the boys/men in our homes, our friends and in our surroundings. Stand up to any wrong behaviour, correct them, make them understand. And those who don't behave like humans deserve no human rights. Give them what they deserve."

RELATED NEWS Keerthy Suresh, Vijay Deverakonda and others express their rage over Cyberabad murder case

Stay tuned for all the updates.
