Hyderabad: Veterinary doctor's rape and murder has left the entire nation shocked

Hyderabad

veterinary

Shadnagar

I further request @TelanganaDGP to constitute a special team to nab the culprits and file charge sheets in this mat… https://t.co/lhGndeL3qN — G Kishan Reddy (@kishanreddybjp) 1574966143000

Untitled Carousel Hyderabad veterinary doctor rape and murder: Truck driver arrested, three more detained The accused has been identified as Mohamed Pasha, a resident of Nawabpet block in Mahbubnagar district. Unconfirmed reports suggest that the police have also detained three more suspects in connection. They are still to be arrested.

Rahul Gandhi

I'm shocked to hear about the brutal rape & murder of #DrPriyankaReddy in Hyderabad. How anyone could subject anoth… https://t.co/ZP9VhSfBfS — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) 1575027604000

Telangana

Outraged and deeply anguished by the murder of #Priyankareddy I am confident that @TelanganaDGP & the police will c… https://t.co/zRTVDRTFIq — KTR (@KTRTRS) 1575001687000

I’ve written this letter to draw attention to media establishments that have been publishing and broadcasting the v… https://t.co/InCuUcShoC — Rahul Ramakrishna (@eyrahul) 1575030804000

Untitled Carousel Telangana: Home minister backtracks on his statement over rape and murder victim, says she's like his daughter Telangana home minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali who made a controversial remark that the veterinary doctor should have dialed the police helpline 100 instead of her sister, backtracked after widespread protests.

Almost seven years after India’s most sensational Nirbhaya rape and murder case, a similar incident took place in. Governmentdoctor Priyanka Reddy was mercilessly gang raped and brutally murdered at least by four truck workers.According to police, the young woman was raped by the four behind two trucks on the highway a little away from the toll plaza. Later, they stuffed cloth in her mouth and took her in a DCM vehicle to a culvert near. On the way, the men raped her again in the moving vehicle. They then strangulated her with her dupatta before burning the body wrapped in a blanket.The tear-jerking atrocity on the hapless woman by beastly men shook the whole country. The Centre also expressed its shock over the tragedy. Union minister of state for home affairs G Kishen Reddy expressed shock over the heinous crime and directed the director general of police M Mahender Reddy to bring the culprits to book at the earliest and ensure that they get the stringent punishment.National Women’s Commission not only called for a report from Cyberabad police commissioner but also deputed a team to conduct independent inquiry. Several BJP leaders vowed to take the incident to the notice of the Prime Minister and the Home Minister for steps to prevent recurrence of such atrocities. BJP MLA Raja Singh Lodh threatened to launch a nationwide protest, if the state police fails to arrest all the culprits in 24 hours.Congress MPalso tweeted expressing his shock over the incident. He tweeted, “I'm shocked to hear about the brutal rape & murder of #DrPriyankaReddy in Hyderabad. How anyone could subject another human being to such terrible, unprovoked violence is beyond imagination. My thoughts & prayers are with the victim's family at this time of immense grief.”home minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali assured the bereaved family of Priyanka that the government would arrange for trial in a fast track court to see that justice is delivered quickly. He also said the police would try its best to ensure that the culprits get death penalty.Telangana IT and urban development minister KT Rama Rao said he would personally monitor the investigation. Outraged and deeply anguished by the murder of #Priyankareddy I am confident that @TelanganaDGP & the police will catch the animals who committed this heinous crime & deliver justice at the earliest. I’ll personally monitor the case too. Anyone in distress, please dial 100” he tweeted.Actor Rahul Ramakrishna tweeted, "I’ve written this letter to draw attention to media establishments that have been publishing and broadcasting the victim’s photos and videos of her bodily remains. It is unethical and downright disgusting. (sic)"The police have detained four culprits, all hailing from Maktal block in Narayanakhen (erstwhile Mahbubagar) district. All are in their 20s. Police said they were all in drunk condition. Mohammed Pasha, the main culprit, is a truck driver. The other accused are: Chennakesavulu, Naveen and Siva. While Pasha is from Gudigandla village, the other three are from Jakler village in the same block (Maktal). Two are drivers and two are cleaners.They carried out their plan to rape in a planned manner. Pasha is said to have seen her at a petrol bunk, while filling her bike. He was following her. She parked her moped near toll plaza where from she took a cab to go Gachibowli to meet a friend. Pasha and his accomplices were sure that she would return after some time to pick up her vehicle. They kept waiting for her, enjoying drinks.When she came there around 9:15 pm and tried to start her bike, one of the gang told her that the rear tyre was punctured. They offered her help to repair the flat tyre. She called her younger sister Bhavya expressing apprehension about being surrounded by these men with no others around.
