Deprivation of Bihari Muslims

One of the biggest migrations in the history of the world was in 1947 when the Muslims of India decided to live in a peaceful homeland, where they could not be dominated ethnically, socially or religiously by others; especially the dominant Hindu population. The fears of such dominance can be seen as clearly as the full moon at night. The founding fathers of Pakistan, which included Bengalis, Urdu-speaking Muslims of UP, Punjabis, Pashtuns, Sandhis and Balochis were convinced that they must live in united Pakistan under a Muslim ruler, instead of united India under dominant Hindu leadership; elected through the democratic system, who would certainly hail from Hindu population.

Since the message was very clear and common, Muslims also realised that those of them living in Hindu-dominant regions of India would be subjugated to hatred, oppression and tyranny. With the basic difference in the values of Islam and Hinduism, they would be unable to eat meat. They were observing their religious degradation as a part of the dominant Hindu society. Therefore, it was decided to put their lives at stake and get away from the potentially explosive environment.

Today, one can easily see the manifestation of the above-scenario; shaping up around the Muslims and the awkward situation, which they have to face. The statement of the cleric of Jamia Masjid Delhi, available through social media, depicted that a lady wearing the Islamic dress of the hijab was stared at; giving a message to them to conform to the norms of the dominant society, instead of showing oneself in the Islamic outlook.

The worst sufferers are the migrants from the Indian state of Bihar. This is located towards the east of Lucknow; bringing it geographically closer to East Pakistan (Bangladesh).

Migrants from Bihar moved towards the nearer province and settled in Muslim majority region of Bengal earlier known as West Bengal. They enjoyed the status of first-class citizens as long as it was united Pakistan. When the Hindu teachers started to pollute the minds of the youth, they did not know that the two-nation theory was given originally by Islam. When the Holy Prophet (PBUH) spread the message of Islam, the community started to adopt Muslim and kafir identities as two from the same family started to differentiate within the family. However, kinship and relationship continued without any prejudice. Respect for parents, despite being non-believers, was retained and ensured. The conclusion is that all Muslims are equal and brothers. The teachers in Bengal were sowing the seeds of hatred on an ethnic basis.

Neither Pakistan was a blunder nor Indira Gandhi could rectify it, however, she was killed by a Sikh guard who was annoyed at her decision to attack the golden temple

The above-stated contradiction is an interesting model for the researchers to analyse the unbalanced personality cults that take place in the believers of religion, being taught by another religion that too when the two religions are poles apart. The real problem started to manifest when the state of Bangladesh was erected on purely ethnic grounds setting aside the basic teachings and rules of Islam. The Bihari’s in Bengal was clear on the subject as their elders had given sacrifices and it was difficult to digest the new doctrine, only after 25 years of independence of Pakistan. Many of those who had seen the Pakistan moment with their own eyes could not digest the untrue ideology. Even many Bengalis opposed the very idea of a separate country. The people hailing from Bihar are very intelligent, they understood the Indian propaganda and remained united for the truth. As reported in various Islamic documents, ‘one of the characteristics of Muslim Ummah that it will never unite on the wrongful doing.’

One of the proofs of Muslim unity lies in the Shahadat of Syed Ahmed Shaheed and Shah Ismail Shaheed at Balakot while fighting the Sikh tyrant ruler armies. They had migrated from Rai Bareilly and Delhi respectively for the salvation of the oppressed Muslims of Punjab and frontier region. The Muslims of Bihar have stood to the ground to prove to the world that Pakistan was based on the right and true belief of the two-nation concept. During the so-called war of liberation of Bangladesh, the Indian troops had moved to East Pakistan and killed Muslims in the garb of Muktibahini workers and killing Biharis and other pro-Pakistanis including security official in the garb of so-called freedom fighters. This gave a flip to already existing misunderstandings and the political advantage was taken from the situation by the conspirators.

The population of Bihari’s has been isolated in the ghetto-like environment as they are not provided with education, jobs or civic facilities. The situation is rather illogical; the dismemberment of Pakistan took place 47 years ago whereas most of the population living in slums was born in Bangladesh. How they can be punished for the so-called crimes that took place before their birth. The violation of human rights is an example with no precedence in the known history of this planet.

Bangladesh government must be apprised of its sinful actions and policies at the behest of India. The deprivation to the Bihari’s must be eliminated. The castigation mindset can be well understood from the statement of Indira Gandhi, “I am a great admirer of my father but I will never forget him for accepting this{Pakistan}, and I am resolved to rectify this blunder.”

The writer is a freelance columnist and a retired commodore of Pakistan Navy
