Kashmir Solidarity march forcibly stopped at Ramban

Kashmir Solidarity march forcibly stopped at Ramban

Murder of democracy: Sunilam

JAMMU/RAMBAN, Nov 28: Kashmir Solidarity march, being taken out by 30 members of 11 socio-political organisations seeking restoration of democracy in J&K, was forcibly stopped by police at Ramban here on Thursday.

The march from Jammu to Srinagar started on November 26.

The organisers were not even allowed to address a press conference after they were stopped at Ramban. Earlier 30 participants were not allowed to take out procession at Jammu and Udhampur.

The march, being undertaken by these organisations, aimed at showing solidarity with the people of Jammu and Kashmir and against the government of India’s decision converting and bifurcating Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories after abrogation of Article 370 of Indian constitution & Article 35A.

Dr Sunilam, ex MLA and working president of Bangladesh Bharat Pakistan Forum alleged that journalists and participants were manhandled by local police officials at Ramban. “As the participants started meeting at a hall in a Ramban hotel, we were informed by the SHO Ramban that Section 144 CrPC was in force in the area so we were not allowed to hold meeting,” he said.

“On one hand EU MPs were taken to Srinagar to show case the normal situation in Kashmir while on the other hand, the representatives of 11 organisations were stopped. This shows that nothing is normal in J&K,” he said.

Dr Sunilam said that soon a report containing experiences of participants would be prepared and would be shared with the media and also would be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor of J&K and the Union Home Minister.

The representative of J&K Forum for Peace and Territorial Integrity, Bangladesh Bharat Pakistan Forum, Samajwadi Samagam, Loktantrik Janata Party, Socialist Party India, National Alliance of People’s Movement, All India Students Federation and Yusuf Meherally Centre.

Among the participants also included I D Khajuria of J&K Forum for Peace and Territorial Integrity, Sheikh Abdul Rehman of Bangladesh Bharat Pakistan Forum, advocates Subhash Uppal, Jameel Qazmi, Sukhdev Singh, Ranbir Bandral and local co-ordinatror Amrit Varsha.

In the meanwhile, the district administration Ramban and police claimed that section 144 CRPC was imposed and the movement and the participation of common people especially youth in the meeting, held in a private hotel of Ramban, was restricted.

Even media persons were not allowed to cover the proceeding by the police. However, immediately at the arrival on Wednesday while talking to media, participants had expressed their concern over the decision of union government and had described it as ‘anti-people and murder of democracy.’

After stopping the march towards Srinagar, the participants were forcibly sent back to Jammu by police.
