Noida: Alcoholic man takes two daughters for walk, smashes their faces

Representative image

GREATER NOIDA: An alcoholic man took her daughters — aged 6 and 3 — out for a walk and allegedly killed them by smashing their faces against a wall in Surajpur on Thursday night. The 29-year-old accused returned home under the influence of alcohol and apparently wanted to throttle his wife and a four-year-old son too, but they escaped to their landlord’s house.

Till Friday evening, police were still trying to find out why Harish Solanki — who worked as a painter of houses — killed his daughters. Harish, who was detained on Friday, is believed to have told the cops that he did not like his wife working as a domestic help in other people’s houses and wanted to eliminate his entire family.

Harish had been staying with his wife Ruby, a Delhi resident, and three kids — Radhika (6), Pooja (3) and Deepak (4) — at a rented room in Surajpur town area for the past one year. According to a complaint lodged by Ruby, her husband was an alcoholic and would beat her often over trivial issues. “On Thursday night, he took his two daughters out around 8 pm and returned alone after an hour in an inebriated state. When I asked him about the kids, he told me and my landlady that he had killed them. In the next moment, he said he was joking and that the kids were with our relatives. He fled after saying that,” Ruby said.

She added that she and the landlady went around in search of the two girls, but could not find them. “We then went to the police station. But the cops there only gave us an assurance that they would trace them,” Ruby said.

When Ruby returned, she had a premonition that Harish might come back home late at night and attack her. So, she and her son Deepak spent the night at the landlady’s house

When Ruby visited home next morning, she found the body of her elder daughter on the cot, wrapped with a white sheet. “Her face had been smashed. It seemed someone had banged it against the wall several times,” she said.

A police team reached soon, and after an hour of frantic search, the body of the younger daughter was recovered from a plot 100 metres from the Surajpur police outpost. “The father was detained later in the day. He is being interrogated,” circle officer Tanu Upadhyay said.

Chandra Prabha, the landlady, said the couple had been staying in the room she owns for the past one year. “He would beat Ruby a lot. I had rescued her a number of times and asked her to work in houses as a domestic help. Harish did not like this,” Chandra said.

According to the cops, Harish had confessed to have committed the murder. “He told us he did not like his wife working as a domestic help as he thought people of his caste should not go to other people’s house. It appears he had come back to the house late at night to kill his wife too, but could not find her,” said Dileep Singh, senior sub-inspector at Surajpur. He added that Harish had been booked under sections 302 (murder) and 201 (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code.

“He will be sent to jail after a detailed interrogation on Saturday,” he added.


