Amid water shortage, Old Sangvi residents battle sewage mixed into borewell output

Hundreds of families depend on well, to which a drainage line runs adjacent; PCMC says such repairs can take time



Since Monday this week, residents of Pimpri-Chinchwad have been facing intense water cuts, despite an unusually long monsoon this year, forcing them to take to alternative sources like water tankers and more. In fact, their water woes have persisted for months. And now, residents of Old Sangvi are further lamenting that their one steady source of water — a borewell in the area on which hundreds of families depend — is also being sullied by sewage in the last few weeks.



Complaints have been filed with Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation (PCMC), claiming that the civic body’s delay in cleaning drainage lines adjacent to the well is the main reason behind this mishap.



The borewell in question is almost 25 years old, located in Pavna Nagar, with some 250 families in surrounding homes and societies benefiting from the source for over two decades, such as in the Jaymala Nagar and Sangam Nagar complexes. From these two residencies alone, more than 100 families use the borewell for non-drinking water. Meanwhile, half the area receives water from the civic body in the morning, and the rest in the evening.



Given the general water shortage, the number of people using the borewell also increased recently — and for the last 20 days, sewage mixed into the water has affected a larger population of residents.



Raju Savle, an area resident and citizen activist who has approached the civic body with a complaint in this matter, shared, “This well has been a prime source for all of us to draw water for cleaning. Our plaints have reached both the PCMC drainage and water departments, but in vain. Civic officials even visited the spot twice, but did nothing. They claimed the borewell is not maintained. This is not true, as residents maintain it well. In fact, a bout of maintenance work was done just a year ago.”



He claimed it was around 15 years ago that PCMC had conducted stormwater and drainage line work at the spot, with both lines located adjacent to the borewell, adding, “The gap is not sufficient. The lines are located just two or three feet next to each other. Now, drainage water is mixing with the stormwater and eventually, well water.”



Explained area resident Mahesh Kedari, “PCMC officials are unable to find the exact fault, saying the affected lines are deep underground. The drainage lines are 15 feet underground and their chambers are four feet below surface. The officials should repair the lines immediately but they are doing nothing.”



Emphasising on the gravity of the issue amid overall water woes, resident Mahesh Kamble told Mirror, “Supply is very low in the entire area, as is water pressure. Residents absolutely don’t get enough for drinking and cleaning. In our society, we are forced to depend on tankers for non-drinking water.” Ajay Patole from Jaymala Nagar informed, “We get water only on alternate days, and it just about dribbles. Even our underground tanks don’t get filled, forget the ones on the roof. How is one supposed to manage daily needs? The borewell was our only blessing, and for free, in this whole mess.” Lamented resident Sridevi Pillai, “Why doesn’t the civic body do its work on time so that citizens don’t suffer? Water is released for us for just 1.5 hours a day — it takes 15 minutes to reach our taps. We have to depend on those 20-litre water jars purchased from stores to drink from.”



In the same vein, Sangam Nagar resident Tushar Rathi said, “People working in night shifts, like in IT companies, face immense issues if water is released at night. We can’t just leave our taps open! Contaminated water has added to the nightmare, due to damaged lines. Even the borewell is sullied.”



Citizens emphasised that the borewell is also a prime source for animals like dogs, cows and goats, who are also facing a threat due to the contamination.



Confirming that a complaint was received on Thursday, joint city engineer MD Nikam claimed orders have been issued to conduct repair work, but cautioned, “The drainage lines are not completely leak-proof or waterproof — leakages can happen. When lines get choked up, leakages can get into nearby lines. The lines will be cleared and orders have been issued to get it done. Leakages take time to get both identified and then repaired.”


