Four Haibowal factory employees die in Ambala car-truck crash

AMBALA: Four Ludhiana residents were killed after a truck rear-ended their car near Ambala jail flyover on National Highway-44 late on Thursday night.Deepak Bansal, 31, who worked at Bansal Factory in Haibowal, along with his colleagues Arvind Kumar, 32, Anshul Kumar, 25, and Sanjay Kumar, 19, was going to Dehradun for a work-related assignment.“Deepak was at the wheel. When they reached a turn towards Chandigarh on GT Road, their car (DL 9CW 3696) ran into a road divider. A truck (HP 12 H 9905) that was following it could not jam on the brakes in time and ran into the car. All four car occupants died on the spot. Scared, the truck driver fled leaving the vehicles behind,” said a cop.Passerbsy called up the police, who took the four to Ambala City civil hospital, where they were declared brought dead.“The crash had badly damaged the car. Cutters had to be used to bring the four out. The bodies were handed over to their families after autopsies,” said Baldev Nagar police station sub-inspector Satinder Singh.An inconsolable father of Anshul, Mahesh, said, “Anshul had been working with the factory for the past about five years. He had left for Dehradun with factory controller Deepak Bansal Thursday night. He would paint t-shirts and sweatshirts at the unit.”Sanjay’s brother-in-law Deepak said, “It’s an irreparable loss... Sanjay had shifted base to Ludhiana five years ago.”Arvind’s younger brother Subhash Pal said, “Arvind has left behind his wife, 28, and two minor children.”Deepak’s uncle Sudarshan Bansal is the owner of Bansal Factories.While Arvind was a resident of Ludhiana’s Sunil Nagar, the other three resided in Haibowal.The truck driver has been booked under sections 279 (rash driving) and 304-A (causing death by negligence) of the Indian Penal Code Pall of gloom descends on HaibowalA pall of gloom descended on street number nine of Joshi Nagar, Haibowal, when it received the news of Deepak Bansal’s fatal accident.His friend Ali said, “On Thursday, he had taken my unwell father to PGI, Chandigarh. On coming back, he left for Dehradun around 10pm. He was a very considerate man.. I still can’t believe he is not among us.”“He was a good colleague. His mother is in poor health. His uncle has gone to Ambala to bring the bodies. His father had died some years ago,” said a factory worker.
