Chemical inside IED that was being tested caused Bengaluru Forensic Lab blast: Cops

Chemical inside IED that was being tested caused Bengaluru Forensic Lab blast: Cops

The explosion on Friday left six members of the staff injured, with three of them sustaining grievous injuries.

news Accident

An improvised explosive device (IED), which was being tested as evidence at the Karnataka State Forensics Science Laboratory in Bengaluru’s Madiwala, exploded on Friday afternoon leaving six members of the staff, injured. Three of them sustained grievous injuries, including one of the victims who lost an eye and a ear.

While the fire and emergency service vehicle was pressed into service, the Deputy Commissioner of Police South East, Isha Pant, and a bomb squad also rushed to the spot. The victims are currently undergoing treatment at St John’s Hospital in Koramangala.

Within minutes of the explosion, the police cordoned off the area. According to doctors treating the victims at St John’s hospital, the blast occurred due to an undetonated IED, which contained triactone triperoxide, a combustible chemical.

Sreenath, one of the victims of the explosion, lost a finger, while Navya, the forensics expert, lost an eye and hearing in one ear as her ear had been detached due to the blast. Both were shifted to Apollo Hospital for treatment. Another victim of the blast, Prabhu, sustained an injury to his skull, and underwent surgery on Friday night.

"They told me he's in the operation theatre now, with a wound to his head. We don't know what will happen to him. We are praying,” said Amit, a relative of Prabhu, to TNM.

The other three victims, Basavaprabhu, Vishwanath, and Vishwanathan, sustained minor injures, and were discharged on Friday evening after medical treatment.

According to a senior police official, the victims were all new recruits and trainees and had begun examining the IED that was seized from Raichur in a case that was registered in 2016.

In December 2016, soon after demonetisation, the Raichur Police had stopped a KSRTC bus on suspicion that new Rs 2,000 notes were being transported. A couple of cartons were recovered and the police had found they had wires attached to it. A bomb squad was pressed into service and the Raichur Police had declared that the bomb was not live. “The police took two years to catch the suspects and now they wanted the FSL report due to which the IED was being tested. The Raichur Police had in their report stated that the IED was not live. The staff were operating with this knowledge. Generally, when IED evidence is sent to the FSL, it is first detonated. In this case, it was the chemical inside the device that caused the explosion,” a senior police official said.

Read: Two improvised explosive devices found in KSRTC bus going from Hyderabad to Raichur

Bengaluru Police Commissioner Bhaskar Rao said that the head of the department Dr Vani, was in Shivamogga to depose as a witness in a case and hence was not in the lab on Friday.

“There are numerous backlogs in the FSL. Evidence from all over the country comes here and there are 10 people to do the job. There has been a longstanding demand from the police for better equipment and more staff at the Karnataka State Forensics Lab. There are backlogs going back years that delay the progress of important cases because of the lack of staff,” the senior police official said.
