Man gets 2.5-year rigorous imprisonment for attacking mother-in-law

LUDHIANA: A local court has sentenced a resident of Moga district to 2.5-year rigorous imprisonment in an assault case. Sessions Judge Gurbir Singh also imposed a fine of Rs 4,500 on the convict and in default of payment of fine, he will have to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for five months.The case dates back to July 16, 2016, when Hathoor police had booked Bohar Singh, a resident of Nihal Singh Wala in Moga district for attacking his mother-in-law Gurcharan Kaur with an intention to kill her. He was booked under sections 307 (attempt to murder), 458 (lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint), 326 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 450 (house-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment for life) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).Complainant Sarabjit Kaur, a resident of Dalla said that her elder sister Kuldip Kaur was married to the accused Bohar Singh five years ago. She said that Bohar was harassing her sister Kuldip and their two daughters and he stopped giving them maintenance. Her sister was also being harassed by her mother-in law, brother-in-law Seera and his wife. When Kuldip narrated her ordeal to her mother Gurcharan Kaur, she called her back to their village Dalla in Jalandhar district . However, after a few days, on the village panchayat’s intervention, Kuldip was sent back to her husband’s home, but the accused didn’t refrain from his acts. He kept harassing Kuldip and sold all the household items after which she returned to her mother’s house. On July 15, 2016, Bohar Singh armed with a sharp-edged weapon went to Gurcharan’s house and attacked her and even threatened to kill her if she didn’t send Kuldip back to her in-laws’ home.Sarabjit immediately called up the police after which a case was registered against Bohar Singh. On August 6, 2016, the police presented a chargesheet against him in the court. During trial of the case, the accused pleaded that he was falsely implicated in the case.The additional public prosecutor pleaded for punishment for the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence including statement of the complainant, her mother, her sister among others.The court didn’t find merit in the plea of the defence counsel about false implication of the accused. “Gurcharan and other eye witness have supported the version of prosecution in the examination in chief. The accused is son-in law of the victim and was relative of all the witnesses. There was no reason for Gurcharan and eye witnesses to falsely implicate the accused,” the court held after appreciating the evidence on record.The court sentenced the accused under section 326 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means) of the IPC instead of attempt to murder. The court also convicted the accused under sections 324 (voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means) and 452 (house-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint) of the IPC.
