Blot on humanity: Congress's Abhishek Singhvi on Telangana doctor rape-murder

Congress leader Abhishek Singhvi on Saturday demanded death penalty for the accused in the Telangana doctor's rape-murder case that made headlines on Friday. "The criminals should be immediately punished and hanged," he tweeted.

While condemning the brutal crime, Abhishek Singhvi tweeted, "Such inhuman cases are blot on entire humanity and strongly advocate the need of death penalty. The criminals should be immediately punished and hanged."

Abhishek Singhvi even pointed at a series of such chilling crimes that took place recently across different states. "26-year-old gangraped and burnt in Hyderabad, 19-year-old raped and murdered in Kanchipuram [Tamil Nadu], 25-year-old gangraped in Ranchi...," he tweeted.

26-YO gangraped and burnt in Hyderabad, 19-YO raped and murdered in Kanchipuram, 25-YO gangraped in Ranchi...



Such inhuman cases are blot on entire humanity and strongly advocate the need of death penalty.



The criminals should be immediately punished & hanged.#HangTillDeath Abhishek Singhvi (@DrAMSinghvi) November 30, 2019



On Friday, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi had expressed shock over the murder of the 26-year-old Telangana vet saying that the "unprovoked violence is beyond imagination".

"How anyone could subject another human being to so much terrible, unprovoked violence is beyond imagination. My thoughts and prayers are with the victim's family at this time of immense grief," Rahul Gandhi had tweeted.

I'm shocked to hear about the brutal rape & murder of #DrPriyankaReddy in Hyderabad. How anyone could subject another human being to such terrible, unprovoked violence is beyond imagination. My thoughts & prayers are with the victim's family at this time of immense grief. Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) November 29, 2019



The Telangana rape-murder case

On Thursday morning, a charred body of a woman in Telangana was found under a National Highway 44 bridge. It was then reported that the woman was smothered, raped and then burnt by four men in Shamshabad of Ranga Reddy district in Telangana.

The incident happened on Wednesday night and the body of the Hyderabad-based veterinary surgeon was found the next day under a culvert in Chatanpally on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway, just a few hours after the crime.

The Cyberabad Police arrested four men on Friday in connection with their involvement in the rape and murder case. The accused have been identified as Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu. Mohammad Areef (25), who works as a driver, is the prime accused in the Telangana rape-murder case.

Another similar case unravelled

Later in the day, charred body of another woman, reportedly 35 years old, has been found just a day after a Telangana doctor was raped, suffocated and burnt by four men in the same area. The dead body was found near a temple at a deserted place.
