Swiss company Zurich AG emerges as highest bidder to build Jewar airport

Representational image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Zurich AG (FZ) was among partners of the joint venture that developed the greenfield Bengaluru airport over a decade back Jewar Airport will have a capacity of 1.2 crore flyers per year starting with two runways which are expandable to six

New Delhi: The Jewar airport near the Yamuna Expressway in Greater Noida and close to 100Km from the Delhi's Indira Gandhi International (IGI) airport, is expected to be built and operated by Flughafen Zurich AG. This company manages the eponymous Zurich Airport in Switzerland, according to a ToI news report. It will be India's largest airport once it is completed.

It may be noted that Zurich AG (FZ) was among partners of the joint venture that developed the greenfield Bengaluru airport over a decade back. Among the other three big players-the Fairfax-backed Anchorage, IGI airport operator Dial and Adani Enterprises, it has emerged as the highest bidder in terms of the per passenger fee (PPF) government will get as revenue share.

A final nod is remaining from the Uttar Pradesh government’s project monitoring and implementation committee, before the contract to build the greenfield airport off the Yamuna Expressway is officially awarded to FZ. The Jewar international airport will commence its operations in its first phase with two runways and the deadline is 2023 or early 2024.

Jewar Airport will have a capacity of 1.2 crore flyers per year starting with two runways which are expandable to six. The IGI airport’s annual passenger handling capacity is expected to be 10 crore once its expansion is over while Jewar, in the first phase, will have an annual passenger handling capacity of 1.2 crore. Compared with 2018, when IGI handled 7 crore passengers, it will be a capacity addition of more than 4 crore, collectively, for Delhi-NCR.

Zurich AG (FZ) emerged the frontrunner after financial bids for the Jewar airport were opened by Noida International Airport Limited (NIAL). The Zurich AG has offered the highest per-passenger fee of Rs 401 to the government. Adani Enterprises was second at Rs 360. Delhi International Airport Ltd (DIAL), which is backed by the GMR group, was third at Rs 351. Anchorage Infrastructure Investments Holdings Ltd, part of the Fairfax Group, quoted Rs 205. With the FZ quote being over 10 per cent higher than DIAL’s, the latter will not have right of first refusal, meaning it won’t be asked to match FZ’s offer.

"PMIC will send the details to the state cabinet, which will give the final approval for the concessionaire," said Arunvir Singh, CEO of NIAL and the Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority, as cited by the national publication. "We are expecting that the concessionaire will be given final approval by the cabinet this year itself, However, financial closure may take up to three months. We are glad we have been able to complete all formalities on or before the deadline and hope that the first flight will take off from Jewar in 2023."

"Of the four bidders, this (FZ) is the only group that is investing 100% foreign equity with no Indian partner. Once we start drafting the concession document, we will finalise whether they want to do the construction and operation with NIAL or not. However, NIAL will be the monitoring authority since it holds land equity," Singh further added.

Daniel Bircher, CEO, Zurich Airport International AG, told the ToI, "Delhi is a huge city and the existing airport has reached capacity. It needs another airport. There is much potential for this airport to attract flyers from Delhi as well as across UP."
