Dragged behind bushes during driving lesson with friend, minor girl gang-raped in Vadodara

Police are yet to identify the accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The 14-year-old girl was found lying in a bloodied condition, said police She was learning how to drive at the Navlakhi ground when the incident took place Vadodara police have formed teams to identify and track down the accused

Ahmedabad: Less than a day after the horrific case of the gang-rape and brutal murder of a veterinarian came to light from Telangana, yet another sexual crime has come to light. This time, from Vadodara in Gujarat where a minor girl was raped by two men at the Navlakhi Ground on Thursday.

Preliminary inputs suggest that the 14-year-old girl was learning how to drive at the vast Navlakhi Ground which is located along Palace Road in Moti Bagh area when the incident took place. At the time, she was accompanied by a friend who was helping her out.

In his statement to the police, the friend claimed that two men approached them and started threatening them without any provocation. They chased the friend away and forcefully dragged the minor girl towards the other end of the ground where they took turns raping her.

Immediately after they chased him away, the girl's friend ran to the nearest police station and alerted them about the incident. A team of personnel rushed to the spot and launched a search operation that lasted for about an hour-and-a-half. They found her lying behind a thick set of bushes, covered in blood.

The child was taken to the Shree Sir Sayaji General Hospital in Vadodara where she is undergoing treatment. Bruises on her body indicate that the accused thrashed the girl mercilessly after they sexually assaulted her. Meanwhile, a medico-legal test has confirmed that the child was raped.

A case of gang-rape has been registered against the two unknown assailants and teams of local police personnel have been formed to identify and nab them. Once arrested, they will be chared with relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

More details are awaited as this is a developing story.
