Madhya Pradesh: Undercover cop poses as bride to catch murder fugitive

BHOPAL: A woman police officer in MP’s Chhattarpur posed as a bride to nab a dreaded murder fugitive , who had the reputation of shooting first and not bothering with questions ever.Sub-inspector Madhvi Agnihotri, 28, hooked gangster Balkishan Choubey over three days of phone conversations, and reeled him in for the trap set at a temple, where they would meet on Thursday before their ‘marriage’. “When I was preparing to meet him, I kept reminding myself of his habit of carrying guns and shooting without hesitation,” the gallant cop told TOI.After the takedown, when Choubey was being wrestled to the ground, Madhvi stepped close, looked into his shocked eyes, and said: “Radha aa gayi.”Choubey was wanted for at least 15 cases of murder and dacoity on both sides of the Madhya Pradesh-Uttar Pradesh border. Chhattarpur police got on his trail after he allegedly committed a murder-dacoity in August this year. But Choubey proved to be a slippery one. Every time Chhattarpur cops got close to arresting him, he would slip away. The SP recently announced a reward of Rs 10,000 for his capture.When Madhvi — a gold medallist in shot put and 100m university nationals — was posted as officer in charge of Garoli Chowky of Naugaon police station, she decided to end Choubey’s run and started studying his background. “I learnt that he was trigger happy and absolutely ruthless. He was always armed. And I also learnt about his interest in women,” she told TOI. Choubey was so brazen that he had a Facebook account, which he updated regularly. “His latest picture was taken from his Facebook page, so that there was no margin of error while arresting him,” she said.Police began tracking him on Facebook. The trap had begun to close around the fugitive. “I initiated a conversation with him. In Bundelkhandi dialect, I started talking to him as ‘Radha Lodhi’. I told him that I am from Chhattarpur and work as a labourer in Delhi and am visiting my village,” Madhvi said.Choubey took the bait. “After chatting for just three days, he offered to marry me,” said the officer. Choubey wanted to meet her before marriage. ‘Radha’ agreed, and a temple in a small village on the UP-MP border was chosen as the rendezvous.Armed policemen in plainclothes recced the temple and took up positions. “Some policemen accompanied me as my relatives. I wore a pink salwar kurta and proceeded to meet him. I had a pistol in my purse,” said Madhvi.The moment arrived. Choubey came on a bike, saw the woman in pink and started walking briskly towards her. The waiting cops pounced on him, taking him completely by surprise. And yes, he was armed. “A loaded pistol was seized from him,” said Madhvi, adding: “He looked completely shocked when I said, ‘Radha, aa gayi’.”
