No lessons learnt from Nirbhaya; government fails to make its betis feel safe

A most recent rape case that exposes the reality of the government's inability to make a change is the Hyderabad case (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Several incidents in the past have proved that women in the country are unsafe Even as the number of rape cases and sexual crimes against women have risen in the past, the government has only made hollow promises to the women of the country The most recent event that exposes the government's inability is the alleged rape and murder of a veterinarian in Hyderabad

New Delhi: In December 2012, a medical student was raped, severely tortured and thrashed by six men in the national capital. The incident sent shock waves across the country and citizens demanded strict action against the accused. Candle marches were held across India to urge the police and the court to give strict punishment to the six perpetrators.

As a result of the massive outrage, the police sprung into action and nabbed some of the accused men within 24 hours of the incident. On December 29, 2012, the victim died, way before justice could be granted to her. In July 2013, the court held the six accused guilty and sentenced them to death by hanging. The juvenile who was involved in the incident was sentenced to three years of imprisonment as he was a minor.

In 2017, a 17-year-old girl was raped in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh. A woman named Shashi Singh allegedly lured the minor on the pretext of getting her a job. The woman asked the minor to move to Kanpur. On June 11, 2017, the girl was raped by Shashi's son Shubham and his driver. Further investigation revealed that the girl was later raped by unidentified men on multiple occasions and was also sold to a man for Rs 60,000. The girl also alleged that she was raped at BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar's house.

Tired of police inaction and hostility, the survivor tried to immolate herself at Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence. The incident came to light once again in July 2019 when the survivor, her mother and another relative met with a road accident.

At the time of the accident, the family of the rape survivor was alone, they were not being escorted by police officers. Apart from this, the truck that collided with the survivor's vehicle did not have a number plate. The aforementioned facts and several other details raised the suspicion of a conspiracy but nothing was done to delve deeper into the incident and to find out if the accident was staged.

In January 2018, an eight-year-old girl was abducted, raped and murdered in union territory Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua. The trial of the case began nearly four months after the incident. The case that began with a missing complaint being lodged, turned into one of the most harrowing rape cases of all time.

An investigation revealed that the minor girl had been drugged, raped and murdered after being abducted. After sexually abusing and assaulting the girl, the accused strangled her to death and even smashed her head with a heavy stone.

Several protests were staged against the arrest of the accused. Two ministers of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) participated in the protests instead of expressing their solidarity with the minor girl's family and community.

A most recent rape case that exposes the reality of the government's inability to make a change is the Hyderabad case where a veterinary doctor was allegedly raped and murdered by four men. The 27-year-old doctor was set ablaze after being raped in Shadnagar area of Hyderabad.

It must be noted that these are a few of the many cases that are taking place in the country on a regular basis. Some of these cases make international headlines while most of them go unreported. Despite repeated sexual offences, the government's inability to tackle them has been consistent. In most cases, the survivors are silenced with political power and influence and in the others, their voices drown in the abyss of social stigma.

The increasing number of sexual crimes in the country are proof of the fact that change is needed and that it is needed now. Instead of coddling perpetrators and shielding them from punishment, the administration needs to step up and change for the better. The government needs to accept the fact that introducing schemes like 'Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao' will not do any good if the betis of the country fear to step out of their houses.
