Senior citizen raped, strangled to death in Delhi's Gulabi Bagh area

Delhi police is currently investigating the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The woman lived alone and ran a small shop outside her home Police said that the accused has admitted to the heinous crime The autopsy report is awaited for further details

New Delhi: Police in the national capital has launched an investigation into the murder of a 55-year-old woman who was found dead at her rented accommodation on Saturday morning. The victim lived alone in north Delhi's Gulabi Bagh area, said an official familiar with the investigation.

She had no next of kin and ran a small grocery shop. The matter came to light on the morning of November 30 when a call was made to Delhi police personnel about the woman not opening her shop that particular morning. Inquiries were made and a PCR was dispatched to check into the matter.

Upon arriving at her home in Kishanganj in Gulabi Bagh, officers found her body under mysterious circumstances. A case was registered against unknown persons and an investigation launched into the matter. A team of personnel and forensic experts were rushed to the scene of the crime and are in the process of collecting evidence that might allow investigators to piece together what happened to the woman.

#DelhiHorror | A 55-year-old woman allegedly strangled to death by a 24-year-old man in N. Delhi's Gulabi Bagh area. Police suspect that accused raped & then murdered the woman. Autopsy report awaited.@AlokReporter with details pic.twitter.com/9E6aLO6xAc — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) November 30, 2019

According to a report, deputy commissioner of police (north Delhi) Monika Bharadwaj has confirmed that the culprit has been arrested. He has confessed to the crime. In his statement, the accused said that he raped the woman and murdered her later. Investigators suspected sexual assault after the found the woman's clothes torn in places. He had initially entered the victim's home with the intention of robbery but he ended up sexually assaulting and murdering her. He has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

He has been identified as 22-year-old Dharmaraj. He worked at a streetside stall not too far from the scene of the crime. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and further investigation into the matter is currently underway. Meanwhile, the autopsy report is expected to divulge further details.
