Telangana veterinary doctor's rape-murder: State home minister blames victim, asks why she didn't call cops

Video | T'gana home minister on alleged rape & murder of a woman doctor: We're saddened by the incident, crime happ… https://t.co/G37E8Eev3U — TOI Hyderabad (@TOIHyderabad) 1575027314000

Read Also

Vet's rape and murder: Victim should have called police, says Telangana home minister

HYDERABAD: Amid a nationwide outrage over the alleged rape and murder of a 27-year-old government veterinary doctor in Telangana, state home minister Mahmood Ali, in a shocking statement, on Friday blamed the victim.Media reports quoted the minister as saying "had she called '100' she could have been saved".The minister told news agency ANI, "We are saddened by the incident, police is alert & controlling crime. It is unfortunate that she called her sister and not '100', had she called '100' she could have been saved."The minister added that efforts would be made to spread awareness about the use of police helpline number in the future. "We will try to spread awareness about the use of '100' number. It is for the help of the public," said Ali.The home minister hoped that the whole matter would be clear by the evening and added that justice would be ensured to the victim's family."Just six months back, justice was ensured within two months in another case in which a minor girl was raped. In this case too, 10 teams have been formed. Some people have been picked up in connection with the crime. I believe the whole matter will be clear by evening," he said.The veterinary doctor, who was returning home at Shamshabad in Telangana's Ranga Reddy district, was allegedly murdered and her body set ablaze at an underpass in Shadnagar in the early hours of Thursday."The victim’s bike was found at Kothur while her mobile phone and purse are missing,” Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjanar confirmed. But the bike’s number plates were missing. Police believe the accused, who drove her bike all the way to Kothur, about 30km away from the toll plaza, might have removed them before abandoning it.The victim’s family members said the vet reported for duty at her place of work in Kollur in Mahbubnagar district and returned to her residence in the afternoon. Around 5.30pm, she left her residence on a two-wheeler for consulting a dermatologist at a private hospital at Gachibowli for a skin problem.She parked her vehicle at Tondupally toll plaza at Outer Ring Road (ORR) in Shamshabad, police said. From there, the woman took a shared cab to reach Gachibowli and met the skin specialist at the hospital.“A couple of hours later, she returned from Gachibowli and reached the toll plaza in a cab to take her bike, which was captured by CCTVs at the plaza. However, two men approached her, claiming her bike had a flat tyre. They offered to get it repaired,’’ Cyberabad deputy commissioner of police (Shamshabad) Prakash Reddy said.The duo took the bike and returned after some time claiming that the nearby tyre repair shop was closed and they would help her by taking it to another shop, police said. She walked for a few metres and waited for the duo at an isolated place where some lorries were parked.“My sister called me at 9.22pm and said two (unknown) persons had offered to help her, but returned without getting the tyre repaired. She said nearby there were several persons along with their lorries. My sister said that she was feeling scared. So, I asked her to be at the toll plaza and be safe,’’ the victim’s younger sister told media personnel.When the younger sister tried reaching the victim at 9.44pm, her mobile phone was found switched off. Later, the disturbed family approached Shamshabad police, who registered a missing case. After the body was identified, Shadnagar police registered a case under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Police recovered liquor bottles from the scene of the crime. They are trying to track the accused using the barcode on the liquor bottles. Police have formed 10 teams to nab the culprits.(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)(With inputs from ANI)
