Indian police: Four men confess to gang rape of woman they later burned alive

Russia President Vladimir Putin chairs a video meeting of the Pobeda (Victory) organising committee at the Novo-Ogaryovo state residence outside Moscow on July 2, 2020, as he thanked Russians today after a nationwide vote approved controversial constitutional reforms that allow him to extend his rule until 2036. (Photo by Alexei Druzhinin / Sputnik / AFP) (Photo by ALEXEI DRUZHININ/Sputnik/AFP via Getty Images)

See the moment a brawl broke out in Honduran Congress

'He knows he will get away with it': Analyst predicts Putin's move

Russia President Vladimir Putin chairs a video meeting of the Pobeda (Victory) organising committee at the Novo-Ogaryovo state residence outside Moscow on July 2, 2020, as he thanked Russians today after a nationwide vote approved controversial constitutional reforms that allow him to extend his rule until 2036. (Photo by Alexei Druzhinin / Sputnik / AFP) (Photo by ALEXEI DRUZHININ/Sputnik/AFP via Getty Images)

TOPSHOT - Yemen's Shiite Huthi rebels shout slogans during a gathering to mobilise more fighters to battlefronts to fight pro-government forces, on June 18, 2017, in the Yemeni capital Sanaa. / AFP PHOTO / MOHAMMED HUWAIS (Photo credit should read MOHAMMED HUWAIS/AFP via Getty Images)

Still unvaccinated? You could be fined $4,000 in this EU country

A medic prepares a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine against the coronavirus at a private nursing home in the Israeli central coastal city of Netanya on January 5, 2022. - Israel began on January 3 administering fourth Covid vaccine shots to people over 60 and health workers amid a surge driven by the Omicron variant. (Photo by JACK GUEZ / AFP) (Photo by JACK GUEZ/AFP via Getty Images)

Russia expert: Putin wants a 'replay of the end of the Cold War'

Britain's Prime Minister Boris Johnson leaves from 10 Downing Street in London on January 25, 2022. - London's police chief on Tuesday said her officers are investigating several parties that took place at Prime Minister Boris Johnson's office and government departments during Covid lockdowns. "The Met is now investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations," Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cressida Dick told the London Assembly local authority. (Photo by Daniel LEAL / AFP) (Photo by DANIEL LEAL/AFP via Getty Images)

Explained: How Italy will elect a new head of state

Opposition leader speaks out as Putin's ally allows Russian military to enter the nation

Opinion: These maps show why Putin might want to invade Ukraine

New Delhi CNN —

Four men have confessed to the gang rape and murder of a 27-year-old woman whom they later set on fire, according to police in the Indian city of Hyderabad.

The woman was a veterinarian and the incident took place on November 27, R. Venkatesh, Police Inspector from Shamshabad Police Station in Hyderabad told CNN.

“Four people have been arrested and they have confessed to sexual assault with the victim. Due to the sexual assault and the force, she became semi-conscious,” he said.

“They put her body in a lorry and took her to a different location where they put her body under the bridge and poured diesel fuel and petrol (gasoline) on her body and burnt her,” Venkatesh added.

Indian police officers inspect the site where they found the burned body of a 27-year-old woman in an underpass on the outskirts of Hyderabad. KK Productions via AP

Protesters in New Delhi hold a demonstration on Friday demanding justice after the rape and murder case of the veterinarian in Hyderabad. STR/AFP/AFP via Getty Images

A medical examination could not conclude that the woman had been raped due to the extensive burns to the remains.

The woman was not named, as India has strict laws that protect the anonymity of sexual assault victims.

The four men are due to appear in a local district court to be charged before a magistrate on Saturday.

The Indian legal system could allow for the four men to request a trial or just be sentenced for the crime at a later date.
