UeI pays tribute to Maqbool Bhat, Kulgam encounter militants

Ummat-e-Islami Jammu Kashmir paid rich tributes to late Maqbool Butt, Mohammad Afzal Guru and the five rebels who were killed on Sunday in a gunfight in Kulgam.

The party general secretary Waheed Khan said that Maqbool Butt has been the founding leader of the freedom movement of Kashmir, who sacrificed his life, gave his blood to fight for people’s rights. “His stature is grand and it is important for every Kashmiri to follow his footsteps to make the freedom movement successful. We shouldn’t forget the sacrifices of thousands of people, who laid down their lives for the cause. It is significant that we continue our struggle and we shall achieve azaadi, one day,” said Khan.

The general secretary also paid glowing tributes to the five militants who were killed in a gunfight in Kulgam on Sunday. He said that the militants have kept the freedom movement of Kashmir alive, with their blood. “It will be betrayal to the blood of martyrs if we forget our mission. Our path should be of these militants and our leaders like Maqbool Butt and Afzal Guru, whose whole life was determined towards the azaadi of Kashmir.”

While condemning the denial of medical facilities to Kashmiri prisoners, Khan added that it is highly condemnable that India is not providing medical facilities to Kashmir’s political prisoners, who are languishing in jails for fighting the oppressor. “Several political prisoners have been complaining that the jail authorities have not been providing them medical facilities, which is basic human right. This is a violation of human rights, and we urge the authorities to immediately take action on this else protests will be launched in the Valley,” said Khan.

Khan also demanded the release of the party chairman Qazi Ahmad Yasir, who has been slapped with the PSA last year and continues to be in Hiranagar jail. “We demand release of our chairman Mirwaiz Qazi Yasir, molana aijaz Noori District president JKUI Pulwama and Sarjan Barkati, and all other prisoners who have been jailed.”
