Boris Johnson visits London Bridge as questions mount over terrorist release

The Prime Minister and Home Secretary Priti Patel met with Metropolitan Police Commissioner Dame Cressida Dick and City of London Police Commissioner Ian Dyson and toured the scene this morning

Boris Johnson has visited the site of Friday's London Bridge terror attack as questions mount over how a convicted terrorist was able to carry out the atrocity.

The PM, who last night said Britain would not be cowed by the attack, visited the scene with Home Secretary Priti Patel just hours after the attacker was identified as convicted terrorist Usman Khan.

The Prime Minister and Home Secretary Priti Patel met with Metropolitan Police Commissioner Dame Cressida Dick and City of London Police Commissioner Ian Dyson inside the police cordon shortly after 11.30am.

Mr Johnson accompanied the police chiefs in a walkabout of the area.

Khan, 28, killed two innocent people and injured three more during yesterday's horror attack, which police believe he carried out alone.

He was reportedly automatically was released from prison a year ago just seven years into a 16 year sentence after being jailed in 2012 for terror offences.

The jihadist was one of nine men jailed after police uncovered a plot to attack high-profile targets including Parliament and the London Stock Exchange.

They planned to carry out a "Mumbai-style" atrocity - replicating a series of 2008 attacks on the Indian city which killed more than 160 civilians.

Image: PA) PA)

Questions were immediately raised over why Khan was released and why he wasn't monitored in the run up to the attack.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan warned that Tory cuts and legal changes may have left judges and the probation services without the tools to keep the country safe.

The London Mayor paid tribute to the heroism of the members of the public who confronted terrorist Usman Khan yesterday - but warned that the lessons that led to the incident must be learned

Speaking to LBC, Mr Khan said: "As far as City Hall is concerned, we're invested in as much as we can and I indeed did raise council tax and also business rates.

Image: AFP via Getty Images) AFP via Getty Images)

"The real challenge is to make sure we can persuade the Government to reverse the cuts they've made because 80% of our funding comes from central government."

Mr Khan told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that “you can't disaggregate terrorism and security from cuts made to resources of the police, of probation, the tools that judges have.”

He added: “The key thing is we need to support the police and security service.

Image: PA) PA)

“And of course politicians can't use trite words and trite language after a terror attack. The key thing is to remind ourselves of two things.

“First is yesterday we saw the very best of Londoners, but also, secondly, we've got to make sure the right lessons are learnt.”

Later Mr Khan, who prior to being a politician worked as a lawyer, warned that sentencing changes that scrapped powers to jail the most dangerous criminals for an indeterminate amount of time need to be reexamined.
