Female street vendor gang-raped and murdered in Telangana's Asifabad; 3 arrested

The accused have been booked under IPC, SC/ST Act (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights She was last seen outside Ellapatur village Lingapur police have arrested all three of the accused who have confessed to the crime Her cell phone had been switched off by the accused

Hyderabad: The country is still reeling with the shock brought about by the horrific rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian on the outskirts of Hyderabad city in Telangana. However, a similar incident has now come to light where a woman was gang-raped and killed by a group of men. This tragedy took place in the Komaran Bheem Asifabad district, hardly six hours from Ranga Reddy district where locals found the charred body of the doctor on Thursday morning.

Police found the 30-year-old woman's body at a spot along the way from Ramnayaktanda and Ellapatur villages in Lingapur mandal of the state. Her husband, a resident of Khanapur of Nirmal alleged that she was gang-raped and murdered on November 24. He further told investigators that he and his wife were vendors who went from door to door in order to sell their products and feed their families.

The couple practiced their trade in Jainoor and Lingapur mandals. Mallareddy superintendent of police told TheNewsMinute that the husband dropped off the wife near Ellapatur on Sunday. He returned to the spot where they were supposed to meet that afternoon but his wife was nowhere to be seen. After an exhaustive search, the husband approached Lingapur police that same night and registered a police complaint in this regard.

Her body was found the next morning near Ellapatur village. An investigation into the matter led to the arrests of three people identified as 30-year-old Shaik Shaboddin, 35-year-old Shaik Babu and 40-year-old Shaik Makdum. All of them have admitted to rape and murder. Apart from the IPC, they have been booked under relevant sections of the SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act. Meanwhile, samples collected from the spot where police found the victim's body has been collected and sent to the Hyderabad Forensic Science Laboratory where they will be tested. The reports for these tests along with the autopsy report will further allow investigators to build a water-tight case against the accused.
