Men who gang-raped, murdered veterinarian in Cyberabad sent to judicial custody, senior cops suspended

The four accused will remain in judicial custody for the next 14 days (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The four men who raped a veterinary doctor in Shadnagar have been taken into judicial custody The four men will be taken to Mahbubnagar jail

Hyderabad: According to a recent development, senior police officers of the Cyberabad Police have been suspended for causing a delay in the filing of an FIR. Commissioner of Police, Cyberabad said, "Based on findings, M. Ravi Kumar, SI of Police, Shamshabad PS, P Venu Gopal Reddy, Head Constable, RGIA Airport PS & A. Sathyanarayana Goud, Head Constable, RGIA Airport PS have been placed under suspension till further orders."

The four men who were arrested in relation to the gang-rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian in Cyberabad have been sent to judicial custody. The four accused will remain in judicial custody for the next 14 days. They will be taken to Mahbubnagar Jail.

Two of the accused are truck drivers while the other two are cleaners. The four men allegedly gang-raped and murdered the doctor on Wednesday in Shadnagar area of Hyderabad.

During a media briefing on Friday, the Hyderabad Police assured that stringent action will be taken against the accused. The four accused gang-raped the doctor after deflating a tyre of her scooter.

On Wednesday, the veterinary doctor had gone to visit a clinic. On her way back home, the doctor parked her scooter at the Tondupally toll plaza. She decided to book a cab to visit a dermatologist in Gachibowli.

Meanwhile, the accused saw the doctor as she parked her two-wheeler and deflated her vehicle's tyre after she left. When the doctor came to the spot, she noticed that her tyre had been punctured. As the doctor waited near the vehicle, one of the accused offered to help her.

At around 9.30 pm, the doctor called her sister and told her about the punctured tyre. She also mentioned that fact that a local had offered to help her. Following this, the accused gang-raped the doctor, strangled her to death and set her ablaze.
