Scandal reaches India as trafficking charity reviews relationship with Prince Andrew

A charity which works with sex trafficked women in India has said that it will have to “review” its relationship with Prince Andrew following the Jeffrey Epstein scandal.

The founder of the Women’s Interlink Foundation (WIF) has said that despite receiving support from the Prince, they will have to look at parting ways with him to ensure its reputation is not damaged.

“I can’t believe it. He’s been so supportive. The support had been there of the whole family,” Ms Mitra said.

The freshest exclusives and sharpest analysis, curated for your inbox Email address is invalid Thank you for subscribing! Sorry, there was a problem.

Sarajit Mitra, WIF’s financial officer, added that it would be “a sad day if we had to part ways because then there will be a lot of women who would lose their cover because we would no longer be able to provide them that support.”

Knock on effect

The review comes after Prince Andrew stepped down from official royal duties last week after facing scrutiny for his connections to Jeffrey Epstein, the American financier who was waiting on sex trafficking charges when he died in prison.

Despite stepping down, the Duke did not cut ties with Key To Freedom, which helps fund WIF.

WIF, which is based in the West-Bengal region of India, traces its links to Prince Andrew back to 2012.

The Duke’s team became involved in the project to help WIF as it was being investigated by authorities when 10 girls ran away from one of its homes, claiming mistreatment and physical abuse.

WIF maintains that the allegations were “untrue”.

Prince Andrew scandal

Prince Andrew had a years-long friendship with Epstein, even after he was convicted of a sex offence.

Since Epstein’s death, he has become embroiled in the Epstein scandal with one woman, Virginia Giuffre, accusing Prince Andrew of having sex with her when she was a teenager.

Ms Guiffre, who went by Roberts at the time she knew Prince Andrew, said she was pushed into having intercourse with him three times when she was 17.

However, Prince Andrew has denied the allegations, saying that he has “no recollection of ever meeting this lady”.
