Demonstrators clash with a policeman in India during an anti-rape protest

Thousands of protesters gathered outside a police station on the outskirts of the Indian city of Hyderabad on Saturday demanding four men accused of raping and murdering a 27-year-old woman be handed over to them.

Some protesters clashed with police, hurling slippers, after the charred body of the woman, a veterinarian, was found in the town of Shadnagar, near Hyderabad, on Thursday.

Police said medical evidence would be hard to obtain given the state of the body but that they were working on the assumption the victim had been raped.

Demonstrators can be seen confronting a policeman during a protest today in Shadnagar, on the outskirts of Hyderabad, India. Protesters called on the station to hand over four men accused of raping a 27-year-old female veterinarian, killing her, and then burning her corpse

People shout slogans during the protests in the town of Shadnagar today. The victim's mother, not pictured, demanded the culprits be burnt alive

A police van carrying the four men accused of the alleged rape and murder of a 27-year-old woman,can be seen leaving the Shadnagar police station, on the outskirts of Hyderabad, India

The four accused were remanded in judicial custody for 14 days, police said.

The victim's mother demanded that the culprits be burnt alive, the Times of India newspaper quoted her as saying.

The incident is reminiscent of the fatal gang rape of a young woman, labelled Nirbhaya (Fearless) by Indian media, on board a bus in 2012. The crime sparked widespread protests and drew international attention to violence against women in India.

A police officer can be seen wielding his baton against demonstrators today. Some of the protesters lobbed slippers at the police as they demanded the four culprits be handed over to them

A police officer can be seen standing guard during the protests in a town on the outskirts of Hyderabad earlier today

The current case has also provoked outrage on social media with #HangRapists trending on Twitter in India.

'It has been 7 yrs to the gut-wrenching #Nirbhaya case & our moral fabric continues to be in pieces,' Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar tweeted. 'We need stricter laws. This needs to STOP!'

India's National Commission for Women has condemned the incident, with its head Rekha Sharma saying it 'won't leave any stone unturned till these perpetrators get the punishment they deserve'.

A police officer can be seen standing guard in Shadnagar earlier today. One of the protesters said that women in India 'don't feel safe'

Protesters and policemen can be seen gathered in Shadnagar today as demonstrators clashed with police over the rape and murder of a 27-year-old female veterinarian

The commission advises the government on policy regarding women's rights and aims to provide a voice for issues ranging from sexual exploitation to employment, but has no judicial powers.

On Saturday, around 30 protesters including college students rallied outside a police station in central Delhi, carrying placards demanding justice and an end to crime against women.

'If your blood doesn't boil even now, it's not blood but water,' they chanted.

One of the protesters, student Kanchan Pal, 19, said she wanted to raise her voice in support of rape victims.

'Women are being raped everywhere, whether it is Delhi or Hyderabad or any other state,' said Pal. 'We don't feel safe.'
