Bengaluru: Grandmom throws 8-day baby girl to death, arrested

Bengaluru: Unhappy with the birth of a girl child and her ailing health, a woman allegedly killed an eight-day-old granddaughter by throwing her from the first floor of a building in Myadarahalli in Soladevanahalli police limits on Saturday.

The police detained the accused, Parameshwari, and questioned her on the murder. The deceased baby was the daughter of Marshal and Tamilselvi.

The couple got married three years ago and moved to Bengaluru from their hometown Tiruchi in Tamil Nadu along with Parameshwari. They lived in a rented house in Myadarahalli. Tamilselvi gave birth to a girl child eight days ago at a private hospital in the city. As it was premature delivery, the baby had contracted jaundice soon after birth and was undergoing treatment.

Parameshwari kept taunting Tamilselvi for not giving birth to a male child after she returned home from hospital. Around 11 am on Saturday, Tamilselvi went to the washroom but could not find the baby in the cradle when she came out. She immediately called up her husband Marshal and informed him about the incident.

Marshal, who owns a milk parlour, informed the police and rushed home. Tamilselvi told the police that she went to the washroom after putting the baby in the cradle. Only she and her mother-in-law Parameshwari were at home at that time.

The Soladevanahalli police rushed to the house and started searching for the baby. When they went to the terrace, they found the baby lying on the ground in a pool of blood. They immediately climbed down and called the ambulance. The baby was taken to a nearby hospital where the doctors declared the baby dead.

The Soladevanahalli police registered a case of murder and questioned Marshal, Tamilselvi and Parameshwari. Preliminary investigation revealed that Parameshwari, who was not happy with the girl child and her ailing condition, threw the baby from the first floor when Tamilselvi went to the washroom.

Parameshwari cooked up a story to mislead the police saying that a thief entered the house and took the baby away. The police took Parameshwari into custody and will arrest her after questioning.
