A Tempest In A Turban

Twinkle Khanna aka Mrs Funnybones crafts satirical stories and funny fables when she is not running a design business, selling candles or running in circles around her small but rather odd family. She narrowly escaped a gruesome tragedy when Bollywood tried to bludgeon her brain to the size of a pea, but she ducked at the right moment and escaped miraculously unharmed; she is now a popular columnist as well and is currently in the process of creating lame jokes like ' Why do all Hindu boys worship their mother? Because their religion tells them to worship the cow.' She firmly believes that nothing in life is sacred except laughter. (Not even her name, which she is secretly trying to change to Chetali Bhagat so that her columns get made into movies.) LESS ... MORE

The Art of Tying a Pug states the cover of an illustrated children’s book. A little boy in a blue patka and his father are struggling with a swatch of turban fabric and a small dog, a pug. A tongue in cheek reference to the colloquialism used for pagri.

I can’t help smiling as I look at it and am reminded of my cousin Jimmy and a similar tussle we had with our German Shepherd. We were fooling around with my grandmother’s dupatta, trying to see how Jimmy would look in a turban instead of his regular patka, when Caesar grabbed the dupatta between his teeth and ripped it right through the middle. Soon, it wasn’t just Caesar in the doghouse but the both of us as well.

Another equally hairy situation occurred when I took him swimming. I had been warned by my Masi to wash his long hair carefully afterwards as he was too young to do it himself. Inside the ladies changing room, our swimsuits on, I shampooed his hair and began scrubbing mine as well. In less than a minute, I heard two piercing shrieks. I opened my eyes and realised that Jimmy had slid under the gaps between cubicles and emerged in another, where a Parsi lady was showering in the buff. A boy with waist-length hair semi-plastered on his face, popping up suddenly while you are scrubbing your armpits would scare even the bravest of us and Jimmy and I were both banned from the club for a month.

Engulfed in nostalgic memories, I would have bought this book as a reminder of the good old days but it has now been withdrawn by the publishers Karadi Tales due to a fierce controversy.

The book, written by Natasha Sharma, a practising Sikh herself, is based on her experiences with helping her father tie his turban and has offended a large section of her community. There has been an avalanche of abuse against the author and her family and numerous threats of violence including one that claimed she would soon end up with the same fate as Indira Gandhi.

Bewildered as to why something as innocuous as a children’s book was causing this tempest inside so many turbans, I call my oldest friend in the world. Sanmeet has not just taken me to gurdwaras regularly but has also often used me as a tone-deaf audience of one when she practised entire kirtans about a single fluttering leaf in her high-pitched voice.

“Sat Sri Akaal, Ms Sanmeet Kaur!” I say, doing my best Lois Lane imitation, “Why are Sikhs against The Art of Tying a Pug? Isn’t the book just a quirky way of trying to engage people and educating them about a religious ritual?”

Sanmeet lets out a long sigh, “Honestly, from what I’ve read about it, I would not buy the book. The turban trailing on the floor, the dog having it in his mouth, that really disturbs me. I don’t let turbans even touch the floor when I fold them. This is not just cultural, there is a thought behind it, that every Sikh who wears it feels uplifted from the shackles of caste that pulled down his ancestors. You must understand that a turbaned Sikh is subject to scrutiny every day.

Post 1984, it ate me up inside that Sikhs were not even given a choice to walk away from their religion before they were

persecuted. There have been so many hate crimes, so much discrimination.”

She goes on to tell me about Sandeep Dhaliwal, the first Sikh officer in Texas allowed to wear his turban, who was gunned down just a few months ago in what was possibly yet another hate crime.

Closer to home, I recall that Jimmy would return from school crying, because the other boys in class teased him about concealing a tomato under his patka and incessantly squeezed his top knot.

She continues, “Wearing a turban comes with a heavy price, sometimes literally on your head. So a pagh is special. And a Sikh who chooses to wear one is special. That is why its significance should be understood, not undermined.”

I can now partly understand why certain sections may be irked by the book. There is a layered narrative here, a tangled history that can’t just be dismissed. But in a world where no matter what you write, someone will find it offensive, can the fate of books truly rest upon pleasing everyone?

And if it doesn’t, then is violence the answer?

In 2015, a celebrated author posted on his Facebook page, “Perumal Murugan, the writer is dead.” after he was hounded by Hindu right-wing groups who were offended by his book, One Part Woman. Rushdie’s Satanic Verses earned him both the Whitbread Award and a fatwa. Penguin India was pushed into pulping Wendy Doniger’s The Hindus. Books that touch upon religious beliefs ironically seem to ignite the same violence in people that their religion teaches them to steer away from.

When I tell my old friend this, she immediately retorts, “I would rather conquer my enemy and attack it with my five weapons.”

As I have visions of Sanmeet doing her TikTok version of Kesari, armed with a giant orange turban, flying kicks and a sword and ambushing the poor author of Tying a Pug, she explains: “It’s every Sikh’s duty to defeat his or her anger and to attack it in five ways — truth, compassion, contentment, humility and love. Banning a book or violence is not the answer or solution to anything.”

Faith, I consider a sturdy canoe, one that is used to steer through the vagaries of life. If a hurt sentiment causes people to make violent threats and give up the very tenets of their religion, then how are they true believers in the first place? In the latter scenario, faith seems as fragile as a child’s inflatable tube, one that needs constant safeguarding from jabs to avoid being deflated.

Now if this piece makes certain people want to throw the book at me then I am armed and ready, not just with the five virtues that my friend holds dear, but also with my pen which is meant to be mightier than a sword. I just hope that adage takes into account a kirpan or two as well.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
