C-60 commandos carry out operation in Abujhmarh; 2 Maoists killed, several others injured

In a major operation carried out by C-60 Commandos of Gadchiroli police, two Maoist cadres were killed while three to four Maoist cadres are suspected to be injured in the Abujhmarh area of Dandakaranya in border area of Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra.

The operation is being termed as one of those rare daring operations by security forces against Maoists as the encounter happened in the jungles of Abujhmarh -- called Unknown Hills sometimes -- which is an isolated zone in the country away from government's control - under control of Maoists.

The encounter operation kicked off last evening and went on till Saturday morning.

Around 70 to 80 Maoists were said to be present at the spot armed with fire arms and explosives. It was said that the area was training centre of the Maoists located in the Bhamragad taluka bordering Bijapur district of Chattisgarh.

Maoists fired at C-60 Commandos and lobbed grenades followed by an IED explosion.

This morning when the commandos with their reinforcements searched the spot they found two dead bodies of the Maoists and it is suspected that the encounter has left three to four other Maoists injured.

A senior police officer from Gadchiroli police said, "We operated in Maad area. Encounter took place yesterday evening and today morning again. Search was done today morning after encounter and a huge cache of fire arms, ammunition and a large quantity of explosives were found along with training material and literature. Food ration and other things were also found at the camp."

Food, clothes and utensils were found at the camp of the Maoists | Photo courtesy: Divyesh Singh

ABUJHMARH

Abujhmarh area is said to be the capital of Maoists and top commanders of People's Liberation Guerrilla Army (PLGA) and Communist Party of India (Maoist) operate from this zone which is a dense forests.

It is believed that the complete area has been covered with mines and IEDs to restrict entry of security forces into the core area.

Spread over 4,000 kilometre, the area is bigger than Goa and Maoists have been controlling their operations from here since past 40 years.

A safe haven for Maoists, Abujhmar has never been mapped and civil administration is yet to reach here. The indigenous Abujhmar tribes reside in the jungles and very little has been known till date about the area and tribes living here since Independence.

Maoists run a parallel government called Janta Sarkar in this area and regularly hold courts known as Jan Adalat here.

The operation by Gadchiroli police is said to be one of the first such operations in the territory controlled by Maoists since past several decades.
