Chandrababu Naidu failed to use Central funds: Narendra Modi

Guntur: In a blistering attack on the AP government, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu was having sleepless nights as the chowkidar was insisting on account for every rupee given to the state from the Centre. “Naidu did not like this and hence he took U-turn, came out of the NDA and was now latching on to the lap of the Congress, he said.

Addressing a public meeting amidst protests from all political parties, NGOs and social organisations and activists except the main Opposition YSRCP, the Prime Minister targeted the Chief Minister and his son N Lokesh and accused them of corruption.

Modi said that Naidu had ignored the state’s development and had joined the ‘Mahamilavat’. He said the Opposition alliance consists of parties who had cheated the people and the country and those whom the law was now catching up with. Modi criticised Naidu using all the abuses available in a dictionary. He said the people of Andhra have great culture but ‘Babu garu’ was insulting the great culture.

He promised to make Andhra Pradesh as Sunrise State but instead he had used it for ‘Son rise’ and was promoting his son. He promised new schemes for the poor but pasted his own sticker on Modi’s scheme, he said. The Prime Minister also took pot shots at Naidu. He said, “Arey Babu garu, you claim that you are senior to Modi. I do not dispute your claim.

You are senior in changing parties, in backstabbing your own father-in-law and entering into an alliance with various parties and you are senior in shattering the dreams of the people of the state.” He said Naidu had never won any election twice consecutively and was scared that he would lose again.

“Naidu says that he knows how to create wealth and he has now proved himself that from Amravati to Polavaram all efforts of the CM were to create wealth for himself and his family,” he alleged. Referring to the proposed Deeksha of Naidu in Delhi on Monday, Modi said it was more of a photo session for sounding the bugle of his party by spending public money. People of Andhra should wake up and demand account for money.

Assuring that his government was committed to work for the development of Andhra Pradesh, the PM said the Centre had so far given projects worth about Rs 3 lakh crore to the state and claimed that 10 out of 11 institutions of higher learning were approved for the state and six out of eight big infrastructure projects were grounded.

By M Shyam Sundar
