London attacker of PoK descent

laxmi@tribune.com

London, November 30

The man who stabbed and killed two persons in the London Bridge terror attack on Friday has been identified as a convicted terrorist, who was jailed seven years ago for plotting to bomb the London Stock Exchange and build a terrorist training camp on land owned by his family in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

The suspect, identified as Usman Khan, had also discussed staging a Mumbai-style attack on the UK Parliament and described by the judge, who sentenced him for terrorism offences in 2012, as an ongoing risk to the public with a “serious, long term venture in terrorism”.

Khan went on a rampage while out on parole and killed one man and a woman and injured three others before being shot by police officers. “We are now in a position to confirm the identity of the suspect as 28-year-old Usman Khan, who had been residing in the Staffordshire area,” said Neil Basu, Assistant Commissioner, Scotland Yard’s Head of Counter Terrorism Policing, on Saturday.

“This individual was known to authorities, having been convicted in 2012 for terrorism offences. He was released from prison in December 2018 on licence and clearly, a key line of inquiry now is to establish how he came to carry out this attack,” the senior Indian-origin top police officer said.

The profile of Khan dating back to his conviction in 2012 reveals his links with Islamist terrorism, believed to be al-Qaida but could also have an IS connection. He had been secretly recorded talking about plans to recruit UK radicals to train at a camp in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), the region his family comes from. He and two other co-conspirators had conducted a surveillance trip around central London as they talked about launching a Mumbai-style attack on UK Parliament.

Khan had originally received an indeterminate sentence to be kept behind bars for public protection but this was quashed by the UK Court of Appeal in April 2013, after which he was given a determinate 16-year jail term and ordered to serve at least eight years in prison before being considered for parole.

The Islamic State group on Saturday claimed responsibility for the stabbing attack. “The person who carried out the London attack... was a fighter from the Islamic State, and did so in response to calls to target citizens of coalition countries,” IS said, referring to a multi-country alliance against the group. — PTI

Planned Mumbai-style attack on UK house

Usman Khan was convicted in 2012 for terror offences, released on bail in December 2018

He and 2 others had conducted a recce in London to launch a Mumbai-style attack on UK Parliament

Khan planned to recruit UK radicals to train at a terror camp in PoK, where his family comes from

British PM Boris Johnson, then London Mayor, was on a hit-list found with Khan at the time of his arrest

3 stabbed in The Hague, suspect arrested
