Woman cop captures wanted criminal after proposing marriage to him

A wanted fugitive ended up in handcuffs on what was supposed to be one of his happiest days, after an undercover cop proposed to him and arrested him during their engagement ceremony in Madhya Pradesh, India.

Balkishan Chaubey, a man with 16 criminal cases including murder, was finally caught after being on the run for a year, as per Orissa Post last Saturday, Nov. 30. Chaubey had a cash reward of 10,000 rupees (around P7,000) on his head.

ADVERTISEMENT

The authorities were made aware that the suspect was in search of a bride, which lead to the entrapment operation. A woman officer was tasked to contact the fugitive via mobile phone.

“Police arranged a SIM card of New Delhi circle in the name of a woman laborer from Bundelkhand, who is presently living in New Delhi,” police superintended, Tilak Singh said in the report.

The officer then called Chaubey, telling him she dialed the wrong number. Chaubey reportedly checked the credentials of the number and soon the two were talking to each other. After a week, the woman officer proposed to the suspect.

Chaubey decided to meet his bride-to-be in a temple at the Bijouri village in the state of Madhya Pradesh, as per report, for their Roka ceremony. It is a pre-wedding ritual in Indian weddings. He was arrested last Thursday, Nov. 28.

“The woman sub-inspector reached there with other police personnel in civil dress,” Singh was quoted as saying. “When Chaubey reached the temple, police arrested him.”

Chaubey was immediately presented to the court on Friday, Nov. 29. He was later sent to jail after the court rejected his plea for bail. Cha Lino/JB

RELATED STORIES:

Man marries 60 times in 25 years, sued by his 60th wife

‘Oxygen bar’ in India sells fresh air amid extreme air pollution

LOOK: Newlyweds lie in muddy field for ‘post-wedding’ shoot

Subscribe to our daily newsletter By providing an email address. I agree to the Terms of Use and acknowledge that I have read the Privacy Policy

Read Next
