Politics revolving around Hindutva: PDP president Mehbooba Mufti

A major political storm has hit Jammu and Kashmir after former chief minister and Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) President Mehbooba Mufti praised Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan for taking steps to set up Guru Nanak Dev Ji University and castigated the Narendra Modi led government over the Ram temple issue.

"How times change. Centre's top priority is seemingly renaming historic cities and building Ram Mandir. On the other hand, it is heartening to see that Pakistan Prime Minister has initiated steps to name Baloki forest reserve after Guru Nanak Ji and create a university after his name," Mehbooba said.

Elaborating, former chief minister noted that the names of old buildings and cities having Muslim names are being renamed and given Hindu names. "There is a race to construct the temple on the demolished structure of Babri Masjid. Similarly Muslims are being killed in the name of cow slaughter. Instead of taking actions against accused, like in Madhya Pradesh where Congress is in power three Muslims were booked under NSA. It seems politics is revolving around Hindutva in this country. There seems to be competition between political parties to prove who the biggest votary of Hindutva is," she said.

Showering praises on Pakistan, Mehbooba said it seems there is a role reversal between India and Pakistan. "Pakistan has enacted an act for upkeep of temples. They have named forest reserve after Guru Nanak Devi Ji and are creating University in his name. Our country was formed on secularism while Pakistan was formed on religious grounds. If you make a comparison it appears that there is a role reversal between the two countries," she said.

Mehbooba's remarks evoked a sharp reaction from BJP which asked her to take her words back. "Is constructing Ram Mandir a wrong thing? Lord Ram was born in this country and he is Maryada Purushottam. There are so many good things happening in India, which she, unfortunately is not seeing. Mehbooba is doing vote bank politics. Pakistan is responsible for terrorism and killing in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan has destroyed Kashmir. She should take her words back," Kavinder Gupta, former deputy chief minister and senior BJP leader told DNA.

PRAISE FOR PAK

Showering praises on Pakistan, Mehbooba Mufti said it seems there is a role reversal between India and Pakistan. “Pakistan has enacted an act for upkeep of temples. They have named forest reserve after Guru Nanak Devi Ji and are creating University in his name,” she said
