Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Keralam Anchor: I used to shiver on the shooting floor while uttering the initial dialogues: Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Keralam host Jeeva

With his witty interactions with the contestants and judges, handsome look, rib-tickling one-liners, Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Keralam 's host Jeeva shot to fame within a short time. From co-hosting a LIVE show with anchor-turned-actress Rajisha Vijayan to anchoring the Malayalam version of one of India's popular music reality shows, Jeeva's career graph has quite some interesting turns.In a freewheeling chat with TimesofIndia.com, the handsome host opens up about becoming an 'accidental anchor'.The engineering drop out revealed that becoming an anchor as an accident. 6 years back, the aspirant actor auditioned for the anchor hunt without much interest in it."It was purely a coincidence that I got selected as one among the 12 anchors out of thousands. I learned the basics of anchoring and started doing LIVE phone-in shows," Jeeva recollects.Earlier Jeeva was seen hosting shows music-on-demand shows like '100% Love', 'Jango Boys' and 'Friends Corner'. While talking about his co-host in '100 % Love', Rajisha Vijayan, the host expressed that it was great watching a dear friend succeeding in their dreams.Even though Jeeva is in the industry for 6 years, the host credits 'Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Keralam' for giving him the recognition which he felt, was lacking."People still doubts whether Sa Re Ga Ma Pa is my first show. Even though I was doing many shows for years, the acceptance I got from this show is unbelievable. Viewers started seeing me as one of their own family members," he shares.Talking about the initial days of shooting for the show, Jeeva opened up that he was very anxious."I used to shiver every time I deliver an intro. But, thanks to the team, I have overcome it. The bond we share made me a better host," Jeeva adds.Jeeva is widely praised for his funny interactions with Shan Rahman, music director and judge of the show. The host thanks the striking off-screen bond they share for the same.Although, Jeeva termed himself as an 'accidental host', he is enjoying every bit of attention he is getting as an anchor."Anchoring is one of the most beautiful jobs in the world. Every day you meet new people, interact with them. You are both the representative of the audience and the mascot of the show, it just thrills you every single day," Jeeva sums up.
