Here are the most spectacular pictures of last week from Asia



1 / 8 A farmer removes the chaff from paddy harvest in Umwang village, on the outskirts of Gauhati. (AP Photo/Anupam Nath, File)



2 / 8 Supporters of pro-China candidate Or Sin-yi Windy hold her promotional placards in Hong Kong. Long lines snaked around plazas and extended for blocks as citizens of the semi-autonomous Chinese territory turned out in droves Sunday for an election seen as a test of public support for anti-government protests that have persisted for more than five months. (AP Photo/Kin Cheung, File)



3 / 8 Pro-democracy supporters celebrate after pro-Beijing politician Junius Ho lost his election in Hong Kong. Vote counting was underway in Hong Kong early Monday after a massive turnout in district council elections seen as a barometer of public support for pro-democracy protests that have rocked the semi-autonomous Chinese territory for more than five months. (AP Photo/Kin Cheung, File)



4 / 8 A police officer adjusts the uniform of a colleague as they wait to pay tribute to victims of the Mumbai terror attacks at a memorial in Mumbai. The attack by Pakistani gunmen in India's financial capital on November 26, 2008 killed 166 people. (AP Photo/Rafiq Maqbool, File)



5 / 8 A couple takes pictures in a heart sharp light installation during a light festival to celebrate upcoming Christmas on the beach in Busan, South Korea. (AP Photo/Ahn Young-joon, File)



6 / 8 Priests, religious seminarians and Catechists touch the hands of Pope Francis as he leaves after meeting them at Saint Peter's Parish on the outskirts of Bangkok, Thailand. Pope Francis urged more efforts to combat the "humiliation" of women and children forced into prostitution as he began a busy visit Thursday to Thailand, where human trafficking and poverty help fuel the sex tourism industry. (AP Photo/Manish Swarup, File)



7 / 8 The sun casts the shadows from cyclists as they cross the Mirae Scientist Street in downtown Pyongyang, North Korea. (AP Photo/Dita Alangkara, File)
