Aurangzeb Lane signboard painted black by SAD; Manjinder Sirsa says 'seeing his name hurt Sikh sentiments'

SAD MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights 'We oppose Aurangzeb's name on the streets and books, he was a murderer' Guru Tegh Bahadur sacrificed his life against Aurangzeb's attempts of forceful conversions: SAD In September this year, a similar incident was reported from Bengali market when fringe right-wing organisation Hindu Sena blackened Babur road's board

New Delhi: Demanding removal of the name of Mughal emperor Aurangzeb from signboards on roads and history textbooks of students, Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa and other Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) members blackened signboards for Aurangzeb Lane.

Calling the Mughal emperor a murderer, Sirsa said that Guru Tegh Bahadur sacrificed his life against his attempts of forceful conversions.

“We oppose Aurangzeb's name on the streets and books, he was a murderer. Seeing his name on streets hurts our sentiments,” he added.

Delhi: Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa and other Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) members blacken sign boards of Aurangzeb Lane. They are demanding 'removal of Aurangzeb's name from roads, and books of the country'. pic.twitter.com/M0x4n3Rp6L — ANI (@ANI) December 1, 2019

In September this year, a similar incident was reported from Bengali Market when fringe right-wing organisation Hindu Sena blackened Babur Road's signboard.

The organisation called for a change of the board’s name, saying the founder of the Mughal dynasty was a foreigner.

If Mughal emperors have dominated the political discourse in the north, down south in Karnataka questions have been raised about the legacy of Tipu Sultan and his father Haider Ali.

Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa and the state education department have set up a textbook committee on Tipu Sultan. Not only this, a memo was submitted to the CM calling for removing the mention of his father Hyder Ali from state history textbooks.

In the letter, the organisation has demanded that the names of the father-son duo should be erased or history books should be re-written showing them as tyrants who snatched kingdoms and butchered Hindus.

The proposal was first mooted by BJP MLA Appachu Ranjan after which State Education Minister Suresh Kumar ordered Managing Director of Karnataka Textbook Society to submit a detailed report.

A lot of hue and cry was raised over the cancellation of Tipu Jayanti celebrations in the state when the BJP formed the government. However, when Congress was in power in Karnataka the event was an important political affair and a sure-shot way of tapping into the Muslim vote bank.

While for the BJP, Tipu is a tyrant, the Congress sees him as a freedom fighter who embraced death while defending his country in the fourth Anglo-Mysore war. The BJP, on the other hand, claims that the Tiger of Mysore was not only anti-Kannada but also anti-Hindu.
