Two Pak Army officers injured in Indian firing along LoC

RAWALPINDI (Dunya News) – At least two armed forces officials were injured when Indian army resorted to unprovoked firing from across the Line Of Control (LoC) in Rakhchikri, Rawalakot Sector on Sunday.

In a statement issued by the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), Indian Army resorted to unprovoked firing in Rakhchikri, Rawalakot Sector along LOC while mortor rounds fired on Pakistani post.

Pakistani forces effectively responded to the Indian ceasefire violations silencing the guns of the enemy.

Indian Army’s unprovoked firing in Rakhchikri, Rawalakot Sector along LOC. Mortor rounds fired on Pakistani Post. Indian fire effectively responded. During exchange of fire two officers of Pakistan Army got injured. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) December 1, 2019

Earlier in October, nine soldiers of the Indian army were killed and many others injured when Pakistan Army troops "effectively responded" to the latest Indian ceasefire violations, deliberately targeting civilians, in Jura, Shahkot and Nousehri sectors along the Line of Control.

One soldier of Pakistan Army and three civilians had also embraced martyrdom, while two soldiers and five civilians sustained injuries in an exchange of fire.

Two bunkers of the Indian army were also destroyed in firing by Pakistani troops.

The Foreign Office (FO) had also summoned Indian Deputy High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia to protest "unprovoked ceasefire violations" by Indian border forces along the LoC in Nezapir Sector on October 15, 2019.

Due to indiscriminate and unprovoked firing by Indian Army in Nezapir Sector of LoC, three innocent civilians, Ghulam Qaider s/o Lal Din 55 years, Mariam Bibi 12 years and Haider Ali 10 years, residents of village Kirni, embraced shahadat, while eight others, including women and children, sustained serious injuries.

"The Indian occupation forces along the LoC and Working Boundary have continuously been targeting civilian populated areas with artillery fire, heavy-calibre mortars, and automatic weapons, which still continues," an FO statement said, adding that this unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by Indian forces has been going on since the year 2017, when they committed 1,970 such violations.

"The deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws," the statement said.

It added that India’s ceasefire violations were a threat to regional peace and security and "may lead to a strategic miscalculation".
