Kashmir: IHRC asks UN to take measures against India

SHAFAQNA- The Islamic Human Rights Commission (IHRC) calls campaigners to write to the United Nations and ask them to take measures against the Indian government that imposes communication blackout on Kashmir.

IHRC announced that it continues to call for the occupation of Kashmir to end, for India to withdraw all troops and stand by the 1947 UN call for a plebiscite of the people of Kashmir to determine their own political future.

IHRC asks Campaigners to contact the UN Security Council and request they demand India to:

– Immediately ends its curfew;

– Withdraws all military presence (both its recent surge and its pre-existing military occupation);

– Help facilitate the UN plebiscite demanded since 1948, for the people of the region to decide their sovereignty.

It has now been over 100 days since the arrests of young men and teenagers began. Over 100 days since Kashmir has been cut off from the world and been silenced with a complete communication blackout. 4000 have been arrested with no knowledge of their whereabouts.

Reports suggest that thousands have been arrested and detained without charge, including children, hundreds injured by the continued use of pellet guns including blinding of protesters. An ever more restrictive regime of curfews is in place, making it difficult amongst other things for people to access medical care, food and supplies.

On August 5, the Indian government withdrew Article 370 of India’s constitution, which gave the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir partial autonomy. The article, abrogated in a cloak-and-dagger manner by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government, was followed by the imposition of a stringent curfew in the Himalayan region and the snapping of phone and internet connections.

India’s latest move also included bifurcating Jammu and Kashmir into two “union” territories, Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh, to be administered by the federal government.
