Hyderabad veterinarian rape and murder: Telangana CM orders fast track court to try accused

Chandrasekhar Rao expressed the willingness of government to extend all assistance to the family of the veterinarian.

Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao has ordered immediate constitution of a fast track court to try the accused in the rape and murder of a veterinarian at Shadnagar.

He gave instructions in this regard to officials on Sunday while discussing measures to speed up trial of the case and severe punishment to accused. He also asked them to start the process of setting up the fast track court immediately, a release said.

Mr. Rao recalled the constitution of a fast track court that delivered judgement in 56 days in the case of a minor girl's murder in Warangal. There was need for such verdict in the instant case too. He expressed the willingness of government to extend all assistance to the family of the veterinarian.

Neighbours confront politicians outside Hyderabad victim’s home

Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao on Sunday described the rape and murder of a veterinarian at Shadnagar as “atrocious” and expressed his deep anguish over the incident.

He ordered the setting up of a fast track court for expeditious trial in the case and assured all necessary help to the victim’s family, a release from his office said. Mr. Rao recalled in this context the constitution of the fast-track court that had delivered judgment in the murder of a minor girl in Warangal in 56 days. There was need for such verdict in the present case too, he said.

The incident also figured in the meeting of Mr. Rao with RTC workers from all over the State at his camp office on Sunday. The Chief Minister asked officials not to assign night duties to women as “human sharks” were all around.

Meanwhile, leaders of various political parties, who wanted to call on the family of the 27-year-old victim, had to turn back as the residents of the gated community did not allow them to step in. They locked the gates and put up placards saying ‘No Politician, No Media, No police, No outsiders’.

The residents maintained that the family did not need the sympathies of anyone. “Mild tension prevailed near the gated community after the residents did not allow any outsiders in. They locked the gates,” the Cyberabad police said.

They also raised slogans demanding justice for the victim. “They (family) don’t want any sympathy from anyone, but action from the police,” a resident said.

“Why is the Chief Minister not ensuring quick justice? Why is the same treatment not being meted out to them [the accused] for what they have done to the girl,” a woman asked.

Another woman asked why the Prime Minister had not commented on the incident.

Former CPI(M) MLA J. Ranga Reddy and party workers, who were asked by the residents to go back, said he and his colleagues squatted at the gates for some time, expressing support to the family.

He demanded that the Chief Minister take steps to ensure quick police response to prevent crimes against women.

Later, Union Minister of State for Home G. Kishan Reddy, Telangana Home Minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali, Chevella MP Dr. G. Ranjith Reddy and several leaders of various political parties were allowed to visit the victim’s family.

On Sunday, a resident of Saroornagar approached the cybercrime police demanding action against the people who were posting distasteful posts on social media platforms. The police said a case will be registered after verifying the posts on Facebook pages.

(With PTI inputs)
