Patna: Army man shoots wife, sister-in-law, commits suicide moments later

Vishnu's wife has been identified as Damini Sharma (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An army man allegedly killed his wife and sister-in-law in Bihar's Patna The army man ended his life soon after killing his wife and sister-in-law The man's sons and relative managed to escape

Patna: A man allegedly ended his life after killing his wife and sister-in-law in Patna. The deceased has been identified as Vishnu Kumar Sharma. Vishnu was an Army man. He allegedly shot at his wife and sister-in-law in a moving car. The incident took place on a road near Saidabad village in Patna.

Vishnu is posted in Gujarat but he had taken a one-month leave recently. He had also been diagnosed with dengue during his leave. Allegedly, the army man's behaviour had drastically changed after he came down with dengue. He had started losing his temper at trivial issues. He was being taken to a doctor in Patna for his treatment when the incident took place. Vishnu's wife has been identified as Damini Sharma. Damini's sister Dimple was also shot dead by the accused.

At around 11.30 am on Sunday, Vishnu and his family were travelling in a car. The car was being driven by Vishnu's relative Mithilesh Thakur. Vishnu, his wife, sister-in-law and his two sons were also in the car. The car was bought in Vishnu's name and it has a registration number of Jharkhand.

According to the police, Vishnu shot his wife and sister-in-law. After this, he loaded another magazine in the pistol and shot another round of bullets. He then pointed the pistol on his chin and shot himself.

Vishnu tried to shoot his son and Mithilesh as well. However, Mithilesh stopped the car and the three (Mithilesh, Vishnu's two sons) managed to escape. The police told Times of India that they found four live and several empty cartridges from Vishnu's four-wheeler.

An investigation of the case revealed that Vishnu had a criminal history. He was sent to jail from the Kotwali police station and Danapur police station in Patna. In the past, Vishnu had been to jail four times. Allegedly, he also had temper issues.

Ghaziabad man stabs 23-year-old wife to death, injures self

A similar incident came to light from Ghaziabad in November this year where a man killed his wife and then injured himself. The accused's wife had around seven-eight deep wounds. The accused was identified as Vikas Kumar. Vikas Kumar's deceased wife was identified as Puja.

Puja's family said that around two months after his marriage, Vikas had demanded Rs 30,000 and a motorcycle as dowry. After more differences arose between the couple, Puja took the decision of living away from Vikas. On the day of the incident, she had gone to Vikas' rented accommodation to get some of her belongings. When Puja entered the room, the accused allegedly locked both of them in and stabbed Puja.
