India, Pak trade fire in Poonch for 2nd day

India, Pak trade fire in Poonch for 2nd day

POONCH, Nov 30: Pakistan army on Saturday, for the second consecutive day, shelled Indian forward border posts and the villages on and along the Line of Control (LoC) in Shahpur and Kerni sectors of Poonch district of Jammu.

Indian army also retaliated in equal measure thus ensuing heavy exchange of fire between two sides. It continued till late evening.

PRO Defense Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation, said, “Pak initiated cease fire violation in Shahpur and Kerni sectors of district Poonch at around 03.15 PM. Indian army retaliated befittingly to silence Pakistani guns.” He said there was no report of any casualty in the firing and shelling by Pakistan.

Local sources said, the Pakistani troops used small arms and fired mortars shells targetting the Indian positions and villages on and along the LoC this afternoon. The unprovoked firing from the Pakistani side evoked a strong response from the Indian army, which retaliated heavily.

On Friday also Pakistan had resorted to small arms firing and mortar shelling on forward areas along the LoC in Balakote sector of Poonch district, triggering “effective retaliation” by India, which continued from 8.30 PM to 9.15 PM.

According to official sources, Pakistan has violated ceasefire over 2,500 times between January to November 15 in 2019 in the border areas of Jammu and Kashmir along the Line of Control (LoC).

More than 350 ceasefire violations took place in October itself, which were the highest in the 10 months of 2019, according to a report by the Indian Army.

In the first 11 days of the November month, as many as 97 Pakistan-initiated ceasefire violations were reported.

The other time when Pakistan-initiated ceasefire violation crossed the 300-mark was in August 2019, when India revoked Article 370 and Article 35A, taking away the erstwhile state's special status. The number of ceasefire violations recorded in August was 307.
