Supremacy on trade routes

The strategy of controlling warm waters is not a new phenomena. Various ideas and ways were adopted by the powers in this regard. China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) and Free Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) seem two vehicles to extend economic sphere of influence with exposition of trade for all.

The Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean carry importance due to number of reasons. The Indian Ocean was termed as an Ocean of future and a country (s) having influence on the Ocean would rule the globe. The Pacific Ocean contributes to global economy.

This is not an age of armament. In cold war, the world mostly remained divided between two blocs. The U.S and the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) dominated the global affairs. There were various bases of their dominance including defense pacts. North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO in 1949), Warsaw Pact (1955), Australia, Newzealand and U.S Treaty (ANZUS in 1951), former Pacific Security Treaty, South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO in 1954) and Central Treaty Organization (CENTO in 1955) former Baghdad Pact etc were product of the cold war. One of the two important Defense Treaties, Warsaw Pact ceased to exist after the cold war and disintegration of the USSR. NATO still continues but it has lost reason of its existence founded in the cold war.

Politico-strategic regional blocs have lost their weight. Economic interests have supplanted. Bilateral, multilateral and intercontinental seem main channels of ensuring economic interests. Economic supremacy on trade routes including and beyond ones continent is new approach of controlling the globe.

According to one source the pillars of FOIP are firstly, promotion and establishment of rule of law, freedom of navigation and free trade, etc, secondly, pursuit of economic prosperity and thirdly commitment for peace and stability. It is aimed at creating Rule of Law for maritime traffic in the Indian and Pacific oceans. Its objective is to improve connectivity between Asia, the Middle East and Africa through the strategy and promote stability and prosperity of the region as a whole.

According to one source the pillars of FOIP are firstly, promotion and establishment of rule of law, freedom of navigation and free trade, etc, secondly, pursuit of economic prosperity and thirdly commitment for peace and stability

Asia and Africa continents have remained important since long and may continue to carry its pivotal position in future. Role of other continents may not be undermined but they may not affect central position of the two continents in future. Such position is due to number of reasons. Firstly, they possess cheap labor. Secondly, the continents are plenty of natural resources. Thirdly, being existed on important geostrategic and geo-economics locations their support to ensure smooth and peaceful international trade carries weight. Fourthly, Asia remained centre of attention of international community in the cold war period. Lastly, in post cold war period, the importance of Asia and Africa continents may be viewed in back drop of China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.

The continent of Asia experienced number of wars and issues. These included Problem of Kashmir (1947-48), Korean war (1950 ),Vietnam War (1955),, Arab oil embargo in 1973, Soviet occupation of Afghanistan (1979), Iran-Iraq war (1980 ), Palestine-Israel conflict and Iraq invasion of Kuwait (1990) etc. Three Asian countries i.e China, India and Pakistan possess nuclear weapons. India fought wars with China in 1962 and Pakistan in 1965 and 1971 and in 1991 (limited war). The problems of Palestine and Kashmir are still threat to world peace. 9/11 occurrence ushered a new era of Asia in post cold war period when the U.S and its allies landed its forces in Afghanistan. Disintegration of the USSR and emergence of Central Asian Republics caused race of supremacy between the world powers due to enumerable deposits of oil, gas and uranium etc in CARs.

Pakistan has begun attaching importance to the continent of Africa. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Pakistan held conference of its envoys in Islamabad on 27th November, 2019. It was exclusively to focus on Africa aimed at deepening Pakistan’s engagement with Africa in diverse fields. Pakistan is located in Asia. It shares its borders with a friend forever China, and staunch enemy India. Iran and Afghanistan also share common border with Pakistan.

Pakistan is important country of Asia being located at pivotal strategic position. However, various factors may restrict it to certain extent for achieving its interests in view of Free Open Indo-Pacific.

Japan conceived idea of “Free and Open Pacific Strategy”. The strategy mainly consist of four countries i.e the U.S, Australia, Japan and India. Out of four countries two are located in Asia continent. The U.S and Australia have diverse type of interests in this continent. Thus, “FOPS or FOIP” may go parallel to CPEC challenging its expansion and influence.

It would be in the interest of each country to allow all to achieve its interests not at the cost of other. Peace will prevail which may promote trade.

The writer is an author and has a doctorate in Political Science
