Amitabh Bachchan to fly off to Poland and Slovakia to shoot for Chehre

Amitabh Bachchan

Ranbir Kapoor

Brahmastra

Alia Bhatt

Emraan Hashmi

Annu Kapoor

Karan Johar

Mirror had earlier reported (November 28) that, who plays’s guru in the Ayan Mukerji-directed action fantasy adventure, joined the 37-year-old actor and co-starin Manali last week to film the larger-than-life climax. And amidst speculations following his blog post that it is time to retire, we’ve now learnt that Big B will be flying off to Europe next week to shoot for the last schedule of Rummy Jafry’s upcoming thriller Chehre.“We will be shooting an action sequence at a Slovakian national park and in south Poland beginning December 10. Amit ji will be leading a chase sequence. The schedule is spread over eight days with Amit ji also engaging in mild hand-to-hand combats. We have roped in two action directors from Europe to design the sequence,” informs producer Anand Pandit, adding thatandwill also be a part of the shoot.The film, which kicked off in May, revolves around a group of friends, some of whom are retired lawyers. They meet at a bungalow in Shimla to play a psychological game. While the 77-year-old actor plays one of the lawyers, Emraan is a business tycoon. They are pairing up for the first time. Emraan is shooting for the film in Delhi till December 7, after which the team will take off for Europe. “We will be filming in unexplored, scenic locations for which we have taken special permission. The temperature will be between minus 5-7 degree Celsius and there will be snow, which we are all excited about,” beams the producer.Owing to his health problems, Bachchan was hospitalised last month. But he has bounced back quickly. He recently attended the opening ceremony of the International Film Festival of India in Goa, which was followed by a moving performance which was part of a tribute to the 26/11 martyrs in Mumbai, before taking off to Himachal Pradesh for theproduction.“Amit ji himself insisted that we go ahead with the Poland schedule. His health is a concern for everybody, but by agreeing to go there, he proves that he is fit and fine,” Pandit points out.Meanwhile, the producer also has another surprise up his sleeve. “On the last day of the schedule, we will request Amit ji to direct the film’s last scene. It will be a wonderful memory for all of us. Every star wants to direct a film once in his life and Amit ji hasn’t directed one yet. We’d really like him to do it for us before we call it a wrap,” he concludes.
