Priyanka Chopra, Nick Jonas mark their first wedding anniversary with unseen pics: 'Thank you for finding me'

Priyanka, Nick share adorable unseen pics from their wedding

Key Highlights Priyanka Chopra and Nick Jonas celebrated their first wedding anniversary yesterday The couple went on to share unseen images from their ceremonies on Instagram to mark the occasion Priyanka Chopra wrote, "My promise. Then..today.. forever. "

Hands down, Priyanka Chopra and Nick Jonas are one of the cutest couples ever. Apart from their PDA and mushy captions, Priyanka and Nick have gone on to shell out some serious goals for us in the last one year. The lovebirds tied the knot on December 1 in Jodhpur with the world waiting for just one picture from the ceremonies. And a year later, fans have still been waiting for a few more pictures from their ceremonies.

To mark their first wedding anniversary, the happy couple went on to share images with the most heartwarming captions on Instagram. Sharing three beautiful images on Instagram, Priyanka wrote, "My promise. Then..today.. forever. You bring me joy, grace, balance, excitement, passion.. all in the same moment...thank you for finding me..Happy First wedding anniversary Husband.. @nickjonas

And Thank you to everyone for the love and good wishes. We feel blessed."

On the other hand, Nick shared a moment from their Christian wedding and the image also featured the bridesmaids, groomsmen and Priyanka's gorgeous Ralph Lauren creation. Nick wrote, "One year ago today we said forever... well forever isn’t nearly long enough. I love you with all of my heart @priyankachopra happy anniversary."

While Nick continues to wow the audience with his charming voice, Priyanka was in New Delhi to shoot for her upcoming project alongside Rajkummar Rao. She will also be teaming up with Mindy Kaling for an untitled venture that will be based on weddings. On the other hand, Priyanka was last seen in Shonali Bose's The Sky Is Pink that was also produced by the Desi Girl. The film also starred Farhan Akhtar, Zaira Wasim and Rohit Saraf. The film revolved around the life of Aisha Choudhary and the film received a positive response by the audience as well as critics.

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on entertainment.
