2 brothers get 5 years in jail each for murder bid

Ludhiana: A court here has sentenced two brothers to five years in prison each for an attack on a man which has impaired his speech.

The court of additional sessions judge Karamjit Singh Sullar also imposed a fine of Rs 10, 000 each on the two convicts. In default of payment of fine, they will have to serve another six months behind bars. On February 2, 2018, Payal police booked Hardeep Singh (34) and Jaswinder Singh (32), both sons of Darshan Singh of Lapran village in Payal, under sections 308 (attempt to commit culpable homicide), 325 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of IPC for attacking Pardeep Singh, also from their village.

Balwinder Kaur, mother of Pardeep, alleged in her complaint that on December 31, 2018, at about 8.30 pm, she and her daughter-in-law Rupinder were returning home on foot. Near the house, they saw Jaswinder holding the arms of her son and Hardeep raining blows on his head.

She added that when her son shouted for help and the accused saw her and her daughter-in-law, the accused persons fled from spot and threatened that they would kill her and her family. Then, her son fell near the gate of the house injured. She with the help of two villagers, Mandeep and Lakhwinder, got Pardeep shifted to a hospital at Rarra Sahib. However, but due to serious injuries, the doctor referred her son to Deep Hospital in Ludhiana, where he is still under treatment and cannot speak.

The motive behind the attack was old enmity. The accused and the victim had gotte into a fight nearly a year before the attack, but the matter was settled by the panchayat at the tim.

During the trial of the case, the accused pleaded false implication.

The court didn’t find merit in the claims made by the defence. It observed that counsel for the accused failed to point out major and material discrepancies in the statements of prosecution witnesses. “So far as the minor discrepancies and flaws in the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses are concerned, these are bound to occur even in the statements of most truthful witnesses by efflux of time,” the court remarked.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
