Tamil Nadu rains Updates: 17 killed, several trapped after wall collapses in Mettupalayam

Tamil Nadu rains Updates: 17 killed, several trapped after wall collapses in Mettupalayam

Tamil Nadu weather, Chennai rain forecast: The regional meteorological centre in Chennai has predicted more showers in the next 24 hours. It has issued a red alert for six districts in the state.

15 people killed in Tamil Nadu after wall collapses due to rains. (ANI Photo)

Tamil Nadu Rains, Weather forecast Updates: At least seventeen persons were killed when a wall collapsed on three houses due to heavy downpour in Tamil Nadu’s Mettupalayam on Monday morning, news agency ANI reported. The incident took place in Nadoor Kannappan Layout. The local administration officials have reached the site and operations are on to pull out those trapped inside. Rescue personnel have retrieved nine bodies so far. Various parts of the state have been receiving good rainfall since the onset of North-East monsoon on October 16. Rains lashed many parts of Tamil Nadu and neighbouring Puducherry with the North-East monsoon in the last 24 hours. The regional meteorological centre in Chennai has predicted more showers in the next 24 hours. It has issued a red alert for six districts in the state. The districts are Thiruvallur, Vellore, Thiruvannamalai, Thoothukkudi, Ramanathapuram and Tirunelveli. The Met office said that these districts are likely to receive extremely heavy rainfall in the next 24 hours. Live Blog Highlights Tamil Nadu rains LIVE: Flood alert issued in Erode Authorities have issued a flood alert to people living on the banks of river Bhavani. This came after a dam built across the area surplassed in the wake of heavy rains in catchment areas. The water level in the Lower Bhavani Project reservoir reached its maximum of 105 feet and the storage crossed 32 tmc feet against the maximum of 32.8 tmc feet, prompting the Public Works Department authorities to more than triple discharge from 3,500 cusecs to 11,950 cusecs on Monday morning. IMD asks fishermen to not venture in sea India Meteorological Department said that squally weather with wind speed reaching 40-50 km/ph likely to prevail along and off the coasts of Karnataka and Kerala, and over Lakshadweep area. Fishermen are advised not to venture into these areas. Tamil Nadu rains live: Helpline numbers People can contact the Fire and Rescue services at 101 at all the district headquarters, including Greater Chennai corporation areas. For Greater Chennai Corporation, the landline numbers are 044-28554309, 28554311, 28554314, 28554376. 12 cm of rainfall in Puducherry in last 24 hours In Puducherry, incessant rains hit normal life. Chief Minister V Narayanasamy said that the UT saw nearly 12 cm of rainfall in the last 24 hours and the directorate of school education declared a holiday for schools and colleges on Monday. Chennai rains: Water storage level in major reservoirs increasing The water storage level in Chennai’s major reservoirs such as Chembaramkkam, Poondi Sathiyamoorthi, Redhills and Cholavaram have been increasing since Friday. These reservoirs had dried up in June last which led to severe water scarcity in Chennai. Around 5000 houses in low lying areas of Cuddalore marooned Several places in Cuddalore, Nagapattinam and Thoothukkudi districts have also been waterlogged. According to the locals in Cuddalore, around 5000 houses in low lying areas of the coastal town have been marooned. About 500 people from KS Pettai in Cuddalore town have been forced to take shelter in a private marriage hall. Stalin urges government to prevent damages and loss of life Opposition leader and DMK president MK Stalin urged the state government to work on a war footing to prevent damages and loss of life. The Central government’s Water Resources department also had sent a warning to Tamil Nadu Government about increasing water levels in the state. Chennai rains: Sub-urban areas waterlogged The heavy rain has left several sub-urban areas of Chennai waterlogged. These include Shozhinganallur, Pallavaram, Tambaram, Nanmangalam and Selaiyur. The rain has partially submerged more than 100 houses in the outskirts of Chennai. Chennai City Corporation has opened helplines for people who need assistance to drain out the water. Tamil Nadu rains 2019: CM announces Rs 4 lakh ex-gratia Tamil Nadu Chief Minister K Palaniswami said 15 people, including two minors, were killed in the early morning incident. In a statement in Chennai, he condoled the death of the 15 and announced a relief of Rs 4 lakh each to their families from the State Disaster Relief Fund. Tamil Nadu rains: Death toll rises to 15 in Coimbatore In Coimbatore, at least 15 people, including ten women, were killed when a wall collapsed on a row of houses in a village. The incident took place in the morning on Sunday. The 15-foot tall private compound wall, totally wet due to heavy rains lashing the area for the past few days, fell on the adjoining tiled-roof houses in Nadur village. Tamil Nadu rains Live: Flood alert issued in Erode district A flood alert has been issued to people living on the banks of river Bhavani in Erode district of Tamil Nadu as a dam built across it has surplussed in the wake of copious rains in catchment areas. The water level in the Lower Bhavani Project reservoir reached its maximum of 105 feet and the storage crossed 32 tmc feet against maximum of 32.8 tmc ft. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE Tamil Nadu rains latest news: Heavy rains likely in Kerala, Lakshadweep and coastal Karnataka The IMD said that heavy to very heavy rainfall is also likely to occur at isolated places over Kerala, Lakshadweep and coastal & south interior Karnataka for the next two days. Tamil Nadu weather forecast: Heavy to very heavy rainfall likely to continue for next two days India Meteorological Department said that due to convergence of strong northeasterly winds, the ongoing heavy to very heavy rainfall activity over Tamil Nadu is very likely to continue during next 2 days. Tamil Nadu rain alert: Madras University, Anna University exams postponed Also, examinations of Madras University and Anna University slated for Monday have been postponed. In the neighbouring Puducherry, the government has ordered schools to remain shut on Monday following the IMD alert. Tamil Nadu rains: Schools closed in Chennai In Chennai, the district administration has declared a holiday for schools and colleges on Monday. Schools in Chengelpet, Thiruvallur, Ramanathapuram, Thoothukkudi, Ramanathapuram and Cuddalore districts too have been asked to declare holiday in view of the bad weather. Several parts of Tamil Nadu have been lashed by North East Monsoon rains in the past few days. Normal life was badly hit the capital Chennai as well as several low-lying areas were flooded and water entered into several houses. The IMD has predicted heavy to very heavy rainfall for the next two days across the state.

Get live Stock Prices from BSE, NSE, US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds, Check out latest IPO News, Best Performing IPOs, calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator, know market’s Top Gainers, Top Losers & Best Equity Funds. Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.

Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
