Jaish Planned Terror Attack In Delhi Post-Pulwama Attack, Claims NIA Chargesheet

New Delhi :

Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed were planning attacks in Delhi and National Capital Region (NCR) post Pulwama attack, according to the National Investigation Agency (NIA). According to reports, one of the members of the terror ground had carried out a recce of key government organisations such as South Block and Central Secretariat along with areas like Delhi’s Civil Lines, Kashmere Gate, BK Dutt Colony, Lodhi Estate, etc.

According to NIA, the discovered a new modus operandi of the Jaish in which they used ‘virtual number’ to hide their identities. They opted for it after photo IDs were made mandatory for purchasing SIM cards in India, reported India Today.

“NIA has revealed the information in a chargesheet filed before Delhi court on September 16 against alleged JeM members Sajjad Ahmad Khan, Tanvir Ahmad Ganie, Bilal Ahmad Mir and Muzzafar Ahmad Bhat. Sajjad was arrested by Delhi Police Special Cell in March from Old Delhi, following which three more terror operatives were arrested. The case was handed over to the NIA, the report said.

The NIA in its chargesheet claimed that Bilal Ahmed volunteered to be the suicide bomber after viewing the video of Pulwama suicide bomber on February 14 itself.

“On February 15, at about 10.24 hours, Bilal requested Pulwama mastermind Mudassir Ahamad: Next main karuga insha allah’ [I will carry out the next suicide attack], the chargesheet mentions,” reported Indian Today quoting NIA chargesheet.

According to the report, Pakistan-based Jaish terrorist Kari Mufti Yaseer infiltrated into India a few months before the Pulwama attack. He was sent her to recruit, train and motivate Kashmiri boys to launch further attacks.

“The NIA in its chargesheet said the terror module also watched Union Minister Rajnath Singh speak of giving befitting reply to Pakistan attacked operators for 14th February Pulwama terror attack,” the report said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
