Salman Khan Condemns Hyderabad Vet's Rape-Murder, Says 'Let Beti Bachao Be Not Just A Campaign'

It's time to let the demons know that we all stand together. Let Beti Bachao not just be a campaign. That's what Bollywood superstar Salman Khan said as he expressed his anguish on the brutal gang-rape and murder of a young veterinary doctor in Hyderabad.

"This is the worst evil (shaitaan) of the society in the form of humans," the 53-year-old-star wrote on Twitter. Salman referred to the agony and torture that lead to the death of women victims of major criminal incidents in the country. He added that these incidents should get the people of the country united in putting an end to such evildoers, who exist among us before any other innocent woman gets caught.

#JusticeForPriyankaReddy These r the worst kind of shaitans disguised in the human form! The pain, torture n death of innocent women like nirbhaya n Priyanka Reddy should now get us together n put an end to such shaitans who live among us, before any other innocent woman...(1/2) — Chulbul Pandey (@BeingSalmanKhan) November 30, 2019

As Salman condemned the act, he added, "their family goes through this extreme agony and loss and this has to be stopped. Let 'Beti Bachao' not be just a campaign. This is the time to let these demons know that we all stand together. May her soul rest in peace."



(2/2)..n their family go through this extreme agony n loss as this has to be stopped. Let betii bachao not be just a campaign. This is the time to let these demons know that v all stand together. May Priyanka’s soul rest in peace #JusticeForPriyankaReddy — Chulbul Pandey (@BeingSalmanKhan) November 30, 2019

A veterinary doctor from Shamshadabad in Hyderabad was found dead a few days ago. Her body was found partially burnt. The incident took place on Wednesday night. She was gang-raped, smothered and then murdered by four men.

The incident has outraged the people of our country. They are once again reminded of what Nirbhaya went through years ago. The history has repeated itself and several questions have been raised again. People are in shock and demanding death penalty for the accused.

But when will the women live safely in this country? What will it take for men to understand that rape is a brutal crime? When will things change? We are only left with questions with no concrete answers in sight, it seems.

All we can hope right now is that speedy justice is delivered to the innocent one who lost her life after undergoing such misery, so that an example is set for the society and such perpetrators.


