BJP, Congress spar over urea crisis

BHOPAL: BJP and the ruling Congress have cross swords on the urea crisis affecting the state. After chief minister Kamal Nath ’s threat to protest against the alleged bias of the Centre, former agriculture minister and BJP leader Gaurishankar Bisen said that the Congress-led Madhya Pradesh government has not sent any assessment report to the Centre on the requirement of urea.“The Kamal Nath-led government is sans a policy and yet it plans to combat the urea crisis across MP. The government has no idea about the requirement of urea in the state. Besides, it has sent no assessment report on the shortage of urea to the Centre,” Bisen told the media here on Sunday.The BJP leader, who had claimed that during its rule, the then government had taken adequate preventive steps to prevent urea shortage also said that the Centre has given more urea than the demand raised by the state government.“The government is busy minting money through transfers and postings. The Centre has given adequate quota of urea to the state, even more than the demand raised. The allegations by the Congress government are totally baseless,” Bisen said.On Friday, chief minister Nath had clarified that the government would take all possible steps to solve the ongoing urea crisis in the state. “We will not allow urea shortage. We have been continuously trying to boost urea supply and has been requesting the Centre to increase the quota.”Reacting to the CM’s remarks, Leader of Opposition (LoP) Gopal Bhargava took to Twitter to accuse the Kamal Nath government of messing up urea supplies. “Instead of managing urea supplies, the government is busy black marketing the fertiliser,” he alleged.The senior BJP leader even claimed that farmers never faced any such issues in the BJP-led government.The ruling Congress, however, criticised former minister Bisen for blaming the government. “The BJP leaders should request their government at the Centre against bias,” said Congress state media coordinator Narendra Saluja.
