Ghaziabad: 'Doctor' tries to kill patient, her mother; strangles puppy

The accused doctor barged into the victim's house and attacked her with a knife. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 'Doctor' attacks patient, her mother with knife in Ghaziabad Accused 'fake' doctor also strangled their puppy Doctor was caught by passerbys after the duo raised an alarm

Ghaziabad: The argument over dental treatment complaint turned fatal when the 'doctor' allegedly attacked his patient, her mother and strangled their puppy in Vijay Nagar Nagar area of Ghaziabad on Saturday (November 30).

Police have now arrested the accused identified as Yamin Siddqui. The woman said the accused attacked them with a knife following an argument after she complained of improper dental treatment.

According to a report in Times of India, the accused runs a dental clinic at Sector 9 of Vijay Nagar in Ghaziabad. The woman said that her teenage daughter was getting tooth treatment at the clinic of the accused, but when her ailment did not cure, she had an argument with the dentist.

The woman also alleged that the accused does not hold any valid medical degree and was indulging quackery. According to the victim, her daughter was having tooth treatment at the clinic for the last six months.

"Every time my daughter visited the clinic, he demanded money for the treatment. But I found out that he could not cure my daughter's tooth problem and after that, I had a heated argument with the 'dentist'," said the woman.

But on Saturday, the accused doctor barged into the victim's house and attacked her with a knife. As the family's puppy tried to intervene and save the woman, the accused threw the canine away and strangled it with his feet.

The woman further said, "We have appealed the accused to spare the puppy, but he did not budge and killed the canine."

The woman also accused the doctor of trying to touch her and her daughter inappropriately. The victim and her daughter were saved after they raised an alarm and some by passerbys intervened and caught the accused.

The doctor has been booked under Sections 354 (using force on women with an intention to outrage the modesty of a woman), 307 (attempt to murder) of Indian Penal Code (IPC). The police also charged the accused under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals for killing the canine.

"The accused was produced in court on Monday and sent to judicial custody," said Station House Officer (SHO) Vijay Nagar, Shyamvir Singh.
