Govt, Opposition Vociferously Condemns Hyderabad Vet Doc Murder in Parliament

NEW DELHI: The Union Government as well as the opposition vociferously condemned the horrifying gang rape and murder of young woman veterinarian Disha in Hyderabad in both houses of Parliament and government opened discussion on toughening the laws related to rape.

Vice-President (and Rajya Sabha Chairman) Venkaiah Naidu, who spoke about the Hyderabad rape-murder case today in the House, said, "No mercy should be given to rapists. No new bill, but political will is required. We should have nipped in the bud already. It's too late already." He added that what was required wasn't a new bill, but "political will, administrative skills," and a change of mindset. And then, he said, "go for [the] kill of the social evil.''

Union Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said the Modi government is open to discussions on making rape laws tougher. If there's consensus on a more stringent law, the government is ready to bring it into force, he said. Rajnath Singh said he would leave it to Speaker Om Birla to decide if such a discussion should take place.

Actor and Samajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan called for strictest punishment for the perpetrators of the heinous crime and went on to suggest that the accused must be "lynched" in public view. "People now want the government to give a definite answer. Is justice given? No justice yet in Nirbhaya case. These people should be lynched."

The Telangana incident has led to massive protests and an outpouring of rage and grief across the country. The accused, aged between 20 and 26, have been arrested and three cops have been suspended for negligence.

As Zero Hour begins at the Lok Sabha, Congress MP Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy first raised the incident and said that "This incident took place in highest security area of Hyderabad city. Then came Telangana Home Minister's shocking remarks where he said that she should have contacted the police instead of her family. The police officers insulted the family members by saying that your daughter must have eloped with somebody. One of the reasons behind this incident was due to the indiscriminate sale of liquor in the state. We condemn the incident and want accused to be hanged."

Senior MP from Congress, Ghulam Nabi Azad while speaking in the Rajya Sabha on the horrific Hyderabad gang-rape and murder case said that, "Many laws have been made, but looks like they are not enough. The whole nation has to get together to finish this from roots. We have to create an atmosphere where such incidents do not happen. Stricter punishments should be given."

The All India Trinamool Congress, the Revolutionary Socialist Party, the Shiv Sena and the Congress have given an Adjournment Motion notice in the Lok Sabha over the "gang rape and killing of girls in Hyderabad".

Meanwhile, Rajya Sabha Speaker has accepted the adjournment notices and is now discussing the case. TMC has demanded strict action against the accused.

Also Read: 14 Days Remand To Accused In Priyanka Reddy Murder Case
