Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray allotted 'Varsha' bungalow; Devendra Fadnavis to move into 'Sagar'

Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Uddhav Thackeray has been allotted the sprawling 'Varsha' bungalow at Malabar Hill in Mumbai Devendra Fadnavis, who recently vacated Varsha, will move into 'Sagar' residence

Mumbai: Newly-elected Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray has been allotted an official bungalow in Mumbai while his ministers Chhagan Bhujbal, Jayant Patil and Eknath Shinde have also been given official residences in the capital city. Meanwhile, outgoing CM and Leader of Opposition in Maharashtra Assembly, Devendra Fadnavis has been allotted 'Sagar' bungalow as his official residence.

According to a government notification, Uddhav Thackeray has been allotted 'Varsha' bungalow, Chhagan Bhujbal will move into 'Ramtek' bungalow, Jayant Patil in 'Seva Sadan' house and Eknath Shinde in 'Royal Stone'. While Devendra Fadnavis, who recently vacated 'Varsha', will now move into 'Sagar' in the capacity of Leader of Opposition.

Official residences allotted to Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray and ministers Chhagan Bhujbal, Jayant Patil and Eknath Shinde. pic.twitter.com/az99Vfn9Sv — ANI (@ANI) December 2, 2019

The notification further reminded the chief minister and his ministers that they would be required to vacate the bungalows as soon as their term in office ends.

However, there are reports that Uddhav Thackeray is unlikely to move into the plush 12,000-sq ft Varsha residence at Malabar Hill. Earlier, while taking oath as the CM, Thackeray had stated that he would only use the official residence for meetings and other official purposes when required.

"Should I shift or not? There is nothing more to say about Matoshree. But having said that, once I have accepted these responsibilities, I will do all that is required, which includes meeting people, etc. Whenever I am required to go there (Varsha), I will keep going," said Thackeray during his swearing-in ceremony.

It was expected that Thackeray, with his wife, Rashmi, and sons, Aaditya and Tejas, could move into the official residence by next week. The entire Thackeray family currently lives in the iconic 'Matoshree' located in the capital city of Maharashtra.
