Jaya Bachchan: Hyderabad rape accused should be lynched

Rajya Sabha

Hyderabad

Jaya Bachchan

#WATCH "People now want Govt to give a definite answer. These type of people (the accused in rape case) need to be… https://t.co/g3dZjEsoIE — ANI (@ANI) 1575271200000

Untitled Carousel Telangana CM directs to set up fast track court to try Hyderabad rape and murder accused Telangana chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao directed the officials to arrange for trial of the accused in the veterinary doctor’s rape and murder case in a fast track court. He also expressed that the culprits should be awarded stringent punishment.

Venkaiah Naidu

TMC MP Mimi Chakraborty on Jaya Bachchan's statement in Rajya Sabha "rapists should be lynched" after rape & murder… https://t.co/zn29xCvhTX — ANI (@ANI) 1575290223000

Untitled Carousel Hyderabad rape and murder case: Tired of sympathies, residents lock entrance of gated community Unending VIP rush and the police arrangements, along with media vehicles around, have angered the residents at the gated community at Shamshabad, where the brutal gang rape and murder victim’s family lives.

Shocking details of Hyderabad veterinary doctor rape and murder case 02:05

members on Monday condemned the gruesome rape and murder of the 26-year-old veterinarian inExpressing grief over the issue, Samajwadi Party MPsaid, "People now want the government to give a proper and definite answer." She said that the people must know about what has happened, how it is being tackled by the government and how justice is being given to the victim.She even said that the authorities should be questioned about why they failed to protect the area.She further said that people who have not done their jobs properly and the criminals should be named and shamed in public. "I might sound harsh, but I think these kind of people should be brought out in public and lynched," she added.Other leaders too called for handing over the case to a fast track court and dispense justice as soon as possible.Trinamool Congress leader Shantanu Sen said, "The punishment should be publicised so that people think twice before committing such a heinous crime."Vice President of Indiacondemned the issue and said, "What happened in Hyderabad is a total disgrace to all principles of humanity and highly condemnable."Reacting to Jaya Bachchan's statement, TMC MP Mimi Chakraborty said, "I agree with her. I don't think we need to take rapists to courts with protection and then wait for justice. Immediate punishment is needed. "The gang rape and brutal murder of a Hyerabad-based veterinarian has sent shock waves through the country. People held protests all over the country demanding justice for the victim. Meanwhile, the four accused, all in their 20s, have been kept in solitary confinement in the Chelrapally prison for their own safety.
