LoC in Kashmir, IB in Jammu, Punjab become very sensitive: BSF

LoC in Kashmir, IB in Jammu, Punjab become very sensitive: BSF

Infiltration attempts post Art 370 scrap

NEW DELHI, Dec 1(Agencies): The government's decision to bifurcate the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir has rendered the Line of Control (LoC) in Kashmir and the International Border (IB) along Jammu and Punjab “very sensitive” as terrorists are making continuous efforts to infiltrate into India, Border Security Force chief V K Johri said on Sunday.

Johri, during his address on the occasion of the 55th raising day of the force here, said his troops have avowed to ensure that the sanctity of the borders, specifically the India-Pakistan border, is ensured “at every cost.” The LoC in Kashmir and international border along Pakistan in Jammu and Punjab have become “very sensitive” due to recent administrative decisions, Johri said while referring to the bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir after the abrogation of Article 370.

“Anti-India forces are continuously trying to infiltrate (through the borders)...we assure the country that the BSF will foil all such bids,” the DG said. He said the force has expanded its "strategic capabilities" by inclusion of new technology and weapons. The Union government had abrogated Article 370 of the Constitution that gave special status to the state of Jammu and Kashmir on August 5 and the new bifurcated Union Territories of Jammu-Kashmir and Ladakh came into existence on October 31.

While the BSF guards the over-700-km-long LoC under the operational command of the army, it also guards 2,289 kms of international border with Pakistan that runs along Jammu, Punjab, Rajasthan and Gujarat. The about 2.5 lakh-personnel-strong BSF was raised on this day in 1965 and is primarily tasked with guarding the India and Pakistan borders apart from rendering a variety of roles in the internal security domain.

He also said that the Border Security Force (BSF) was working on technical solutions to combat the threat of rogue drones along the India-Pakistan International Border.

BSF Director General said that the force has expanded its “strategic capabilities” by using new technology and intelligence to guard the over 6,386 km long borders with Pakistan and Bangladesh.

The DG said the Line of Control (Loc) in Kashmir and the International Border in Punjab have become “operationally sensitive” in recent times.

“We have received reports about the activity of drones along the western border front (along Pakistan) in the recent past and we are working on technical solutions and taking important steps to tackle this issue,” DG Johri said.
