Indian MP calls for men who raped and murdered vet to be 'brought out in public and lynched'

An Indian MP has called for the men who raped and murdered a young veterinarian to be 'brought out in public and lynched', after the victim's called for the monsters who committed the horrific crime to be burned alive.

The body of Priyanka Reddy, 27, was found charred under an overpass near Hyderabad in India after she was raped and murdered by men who had offered to help her with a puncture last week.

Priyanka was on her way home when she was gang-raped and killed near Hyderabad and her body was dumped and burned 15 miles away.

Four men have since been arrested, including lorry driver Mohammed Pasha.

Priyanka Reddy was gang-raped, murdered and her body burned in India last week. An Indian MP has called for the perpetrators to be 'brought out in public and lynched'

MP Jaya Bachchan prescribed a strong punishment for the perpetrators of the crime, saying in Parliament on Monday: 'I know it sounds harsh, but these kind of people should be brought out in public and lynched.'

Other MPs from across India's political spectrum condemned the crime during the parliamentary sitting.

It came as many took to the streets of New Delhi today to demand justice for Priyanka and demand a fast-track investigation in the case, as well as stringent laws for the safety of women in India.

'We are not safe anymore in India. We are scared to move out of our homes,' said Sejal Kumar, a college student.

Police recovered Priyanka's clothes, shoes and a bottle near a toll road on Thursday morning where she had parked her motorbike, and her family could only identify her by a locket she was wearing.

A milk vendor found her body at 6am yesterday morning and immediately alerted the police.

Four men have been arrested, including Mohammed Pasha, a lorry driver.

The victim's mother has called for those who committed the brutal crime to be burned alive.

The grieving family are pictured after saying the accused men should be burned alive, the same fate that befell Priyanka

Police identified the suspects after looking through CCTV footage from the crime scene.

Priyanka had called her sister Bhavya at 9.45pm to say that her motorbike had a puncture and someone had offered to help.

She then said that she was feeling scared by a group of truck drivers near her.

Bhavya advised her to leave the vehicle, walk to the toll and get a taxi home, but she never made it.

She tried to leave but the men blocked her then offered to repair the flat tyre.

Lorry driver Mohammed Pasha (pictured) has been arrested, along with three other men

Police now believe the suspects may have deliberately caused the puncture to make their attack easier.

The victim's mother said her daughter could have been saved if police acted quicker.

Bhavya had approached one police station shortly after her phone call with Priyanka but was redirected to another station and searches were not carried out for a few hours.

Priyanka's younger sister said: 'We lost a lot of time moving from one police station to another.

'Had the police acted without wasting time, at least my sister would have been alive.'

The shocking allegations follow a number of horrific gang rapes in India and comes shortly after a wife in India was gang-raped by her nephews and forced by her ex-husband to drink acid in front of her young daughter.

Earlier this month, two teachers were accused of raping a blind girl over a two-month period in a school for children with disabilities.

The amount of rapes recorded in India is almost 40,000 each year, according to official figures.

Campaigners say the real number is higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma and a lack of faith in investigators.
