Your story continues to inspire everyone: PM Modi pens touching note for Israeli survivor of 26/11 attack

PM Modi embraced the young boy during his trip to Israel in 2017 | Photo Credit: ANI

Jerusalem: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has written an emotional note for the Israeli boy who survived the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack, describing his story as a "miracle" which continues to "inspire" everyone.

In a moving message, the Prime Minister congratulated Moshe Tzvi Holtzberg who was just two-year-old when both his parents lost their lives in the terror attacks at Nariman House, also known as Chabad House by Pakistani terrorists.

The Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorists who carried out Mumbai 26/11 attacks in 2008 also attacked the Chabad House killing six Jews, including Moshe's parents Rabbi Gabriel and Rivka Holtzberg. They were Chabad emissaries to Mumbai at that time.

Moshe, who has now turned 13-year-old, was then saved by his nanny, Sandra Samuels, who was hiding in a room when the terror attack took place.

“As you make this important transition and cross a significant landmark in the journey of your life, the courage of [nanny] Sandra [Samuel] and prayers of the people of India will continue to bless you for a long, healthy and successful life,” PM Modi wrote in his touching letter.

“As you make this important transition and cross a significant landmark in the journey of your life, the courage of [nanny] Sandra [Samuel] and prayers of the people of India will continue to bless you for a long, healthy and successful life,” PM Modi wrote in his touching letter.

"Your story continues to inspire everyone. It is one of miracle and hope overcoming tragedy and immeasurable loss,” he added in his message.

India's Ambassador to Israel Sanjeev Singla, who read out PM Modi’s message for the young boy, said that the perpetrators of the "cowardly terrorist attack" in Mumbai "clearly failed" in their intent.

"They could not subdue our vibrant diversity. Nor could they dampen our spirit to march forward. Today, India and Israel stand together even more determined against terrorism and hatred,” PM Modi wrote.

In his letter, the Prime Minister also recalled his meeting with Moshe during his trip to Israel in 2017 and expressed hope that his wish to return to Mumbai as the director of the Chabad House "comes true".

On July 5, 2017, the young boy met PM Modi in Jerusalem and expressed his wish to be able to visit Mumbai.

"I hope I will be able to visit Mumbai, and when I get older, live there. I will be the director of our Chabad House...I love you and your people in India," Moshe had told PM Modi who embraced the young boy on seeing him.
