16 Heartbreaking Images From Bhopal Gas Tragedy Show Why We Will Never Forget The Darkest Hours

On the intervening night of December 2 and 3 in 1984, the city of Bhopal was destined to change forever as a gas leak in the Union Carbide pesticide plant would kill at least 3,500 people, and leave its scars on hundreds of thousands of residents in the surrounding areas.

It was just another December night and winter was gradually setting in when a gas leak was noticed at the Union Carbide’s (later Dow Chemicals) pesticide factory. By early morning, the winter winds carried the poisonous gas leaking from the factory and engulfed the city.

The city was so far known for its natural splendour, beautiful lakes and rich historical heritage but things would change forever after that day. Here are some powerful photos of Bhopal gas tragedy show why we will never forget the darkest hours:

1. The underground three-flanged stainless steel tank at Union Carbide's Bhopal factory from which poison gas leaked.

2. The city of Bhopal was destined to change forever as a gas leak in the Union Carbide pesticide plant would kill at least 3,500 people.

3. Victims of the Bhopal tragedy wait to be treated at Bhopal's hospital where a poison gas leak from the Union Carbide factory.

4. A victim of the Bhopal tragedy walks in the streets.

5. A blinded child, a victim of the Bhopal tragedy, receives first aid to be treated for gas effects in eyes.

6. Bhopal hospital treated a victim of the Bhopal tragedy where a poison gas leak from the Union Carbide factory killed 20000 persons and injured around 300000.

7. Bodies of victims lined up following a poison gas leak which killed thousands from the Union Carbide factory.

8. Gopal Singh

Young Bhopal slum dweller Gopal Singh makes his way on crutches after being born disabled from parents victims of the 1984 gas leak disaster at a Bhopal slum.

9. Suraj

Fourteen-year-old Suraj smiles at the Chingari Trust, which provides medical care to children with gas-related congenital deformities in Bhopal.

10. Laccho Bai

Elderly woman Laccho Bai, whose eyes were damaged by the 1984 Union Carbide gas leak, sits on the dirt floor of her home. Laccho Bai's life has gone from bad to worse in the 25 years since the Bhopal gas tragedy, when fumes escaped from a pesticide plant in the central Indian city, killing thousands instantly. Like many other survivors living close to the Union Carbide facility, she and her family saw none of the multi-million dollar settlement package meant to help those affected.





11. Minaz

Six-year-old Minaz sits at the Chingari Trust, which provides medical care to children with gas-related congenital deformities in Bhopal.





12. Vikas

Ten-year-old Vikas (R) is carried by his father Sanjay at the Chingari Trust, which provides medical care to children with gas-related congenital deformities in Bhopal.

13. Umar

An Indian resident feeds second-generation victim of the Bhopal Gas disaster Umar at the Chingari Trust, an organisation working to help the second generation victims of the disaster near the Union Carbide factory in Bhopal.

14. Abdul

Three-year-old Abdul, who suffers from mental and physical disabilities. Abdul receives treatment at a rehabilitation centre supported by Bhopal Medical Appeal which only treats families they believe have been affected by the Union Carbide gas leak.

15. Eight-year-old Abhi, who suffers from mental and physical disabilities because of Bhopal gas leak.

16. A girl who suffers from hearing and speech disorders reacts to the camera at a rehabilitation centre.
