Accused In Telangana Veterinarian's Rape And Murder Served Mutton Curry In Jail: Reports

New Delhi :

The four accused in the Telengana veterinarian’s rape and murder case, who have been lodged in a high-security prison in Cherlapalli, were served mutton curry in dinner, according to reports. The food was served to them as per the jail manual, according to prison authorities. The Hyderabad Police had Friday arrested four accused involved in the alleged rape and murder case of a woman veterinary doctor. The four accused have been identified as Shiva, Naveen, Mohammad Areef, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu.

"They spent the sleepless first night. They are continuously under watch. They had dal rice in lunch and mutton curry with rice in dinner as per the jail manual," India Today quoted sources as saying.

The are accused of raping and somthering the 26-year-old veterinarian in Shamshabad area of Ranga Reddy district in Telangana on Wednesday night. After killing her, the accused burnt her body and left it near an underpass. According to the police, the accused had hatched a conspiracy to rape and murder when they saw the vet parking her scooty near a toll plaza at around 6:30 pm on Wednesday.

One of the accused then punctured the tyre of her scooty and when she returned to pick it up, another approached her and offered help. He then took the scooty away for sometime. However, when she called her sister to inform her about it, they pushed her into the bushes and committed the crime.

The probe revealed that the accused forced liquor down the doctor’s throat. Unconscious, the doctor was not able to call for help. The accused - Mohammed Areef, Chintakunta Chennakesavulu, Jollu Naveen and Jollu Shiva - took turns to rape her. When she started bleeding and gained back her sense, Areef smothered her to death. The police probe also says that to remove all the evidence, the accused decided to dump the body. They wrapped the body in a bedsheet and set it on fire near Ashiyana Hotel in Chhattanpalli.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
