Bombay HC questions Himalaya FoB’s deadweight beautification at CSMT

CSMT

BMC

Bridges Department

GT Hospital

DD Desai’s Associated Engineering and Analyais

structural audit

Geo Dynamics

During bail hearing, auditor Neeraj Desai’s lawyer says crash was caused by 14,000 kg of granite tiles.The Bombay High Court on Monday questioned the refurbishment of the Himalaya foot overbridge (FOB) atwithout assessing its structural condition or without obtaining an NOC from the’s. The HC was hearing a clutch of bail applications, including that of auditor Neeraj Desai, who has been in jail for the past nine months. Seven people, including three nurses from, lost their lives and 36 suffered injuries in the collapse on March 14 this year.Besides Desai, BMC’s executive engineer Anil Patil, assistant engineer Sandeep Kakulte, and Shitalaprasad Kori, who was chief engineer (Bridges Department) in March, were arrested under the Indian Penal Code sections for culpable homicide not amounting to murder, for endangering life or personal safety of others, and for causing grievous hurt. The police had arrested Desai as an audit report by his firm,, had declared the FOB in “good condition” in 2016-17.Desai, through his lawyer Deepak Salvi, contended in court on Monday that even before he could complete the audit, the FOB was refurbished without his knowledge. Salvi said, “After Desai’s report was submitted, beautification work was carried out and dead load of 14,000 kg, equivalent to the weight of nearly 300 people, was added to the bridge.” He said the granite tiles used for refurbishment caused the collapse. When Justice SK Shinde asked Salvi how he arrived at the figure, Salvi said it’s based on his client’s calculation of the work order involving use of 30-mm granite slabs.“Was there any technical data collected before you permitted the beautification? Did you make any assessment? …before receiving the [audit] report you finalise the quantity of work… you’ll have to explain this,” Justice Shinde said before adjourning the case for hearing today.“Neither did Desai ask for repair documents and maps required for theof the bridge, nor did the BMC’s Bridges Department hand it over to him, resulting in a faulty structural audit,” the prosecution (the police) has said in the chargesheet, quoting BMC’s chief engineer (Bridges Department) Sanjay Darade.While the contract for beautification was given in November 2016, work commenced on December 23 that year and was completed by March 31, 2017. However, Desai’s structural audit report was first submitted on December 26, 2016, three days after the work commenced. In July 2017, a strength test of the FOB was conducted by an independent company, Geo Dynamics, on Desai’s instructions. However,has blamed Desai for lapses in instructions.
