HC upholds death penalty to four for triple murder

Bombay High Court

Dalit

triple murder case

murder and criminal conspiracy

lower caste ventures

The convicts wanted to show what happens if people belonging to different castes have a relationship, the court observed while passing the verdict.Theon Monday upheld the death penalty awarded to four people for murdering threemen in Maharashtra’s Ahmednagar district in 2013 over an intercaste love affair. Another accused in the six-year-old case was acquitted by the high court.In January 2018, a sessions court in Nashik had awarded the death sentence to six persons – Raghunath Darandale, Ramesh Darandale, Prakash Darandale, Ganesh alias Pravin Darandale, Ashok Navgire and Sandeep Kurhe – in theThey were convicted on various charges, including. The victims were Sachin Gharu, 24, Sandeep Thanvar, 25, and Rahul Kandare, 20, and all of them worked as sweepers.All six convicts had moved the HC, challenging their conviction and the capital punishment awarded by the Nashik court. One of the convicts, Raghunath Darandale, died during the pendency of the case.On Monday, a division bench of Justices BP Dharmadhikari and SK Shinde confirmed the death penalty on four of the convicts – Ramesh Darandale, Prakash Darandale, Ganesh alias Pravin Darandale and Sandeep Kurhe. The court, however, acquitted Ashok Navgire, 32, for lack of evidence against him.“All the victims were defenceless, and the crime was unprovoked. It is established, the crime was perfectly premeditated and it was committed with brazenness and coldness. The accused’s vengeance, caused loss of three precious lives. Two were innocents. The evidence shows that the accused committed the crime in the most gruesome manner,” the bench observed while discussing the death sentence awarded to the convicts.On the issue of honour killing, the court while upholding the death penalty, observed, “They intended to hint at a section of the society, and set example as to what happens if one belonging to theto keep relations with a girl from the upper class of the society. Thus, the totality of the facts and circumstances, clearly reflects that there is no scope for reform of the accused. The manner in which the victims were eliminated and killed has shocked the conscience of the society.”The three Dalit men were brutally killed in Sonai village of Ahmednagar district on January 1, 2013, and their mutilated body parts were found in a septic tank and a bore-well. According to the police, the killings were prompted by an inter-caste love affair between Gharu and a girl from the Maratha community, to which the accused belonged, except the now acquitted accused, Navgire. Gharu and his colleagues were summoned by the girl’s family to their home on January 1, 2013, on the pretext of cleaning their septic tank. The next evening, the police found Gharu’s decapitated body, with his limbs severed, in the tank. The mutilated bodies of Thanvar and Kandare were recovered from a well in the village on January 3, police had said.The court accepted the call detail records of the accused as well as the three deceased to confirm the presence of all of them around the crime scene. Recoveries of murder weapons and the bodies were also accepted by the court to uphold the conviction.While acquitting Navgire, the bench observed that he was used by the other accused to call the three deceased to the place of crime as he was of the same caste as the deceased. His presence at the crime scene around the time the crime was committed and further role in the crime was not established, the court ruled.
