Defense news on: 2019 December 03 (acquisition and contracts)

Americas

The United States will reportedly reduce its financial contribution to NATO in a largely symbolic gesture announced a week before the military bloc’s annual summit. Member nations agreed to a new formula for NATO’s common funding, under which the United States will pay about 16 percent of the alliance’s budget, a drop from the current 22 percent. This covers the amount of about $150 million, funding that covers the cost of NATO’s Brussels headquarters and limited military operations. Trump has insisted that other NATO countries pay more for their defense since the 2016 presidential campaign. He has also expressed doubts on NATO’s viability and value as it approaches its 70th year of operation. European members and Canada will now see their cost shares increase while that of the United States will decline, an unidentified NATO official said Wednesday.

The Ecuadorian Air Force ordered six H145M multipurpose helicopters for defense and security missions. Additionally Airbus will provide a training and support package. No contract value or delivery timeline for the helicopters was disclosed. The new helicopters will be assigned to the 22 Fighter Wing at Guayaquil and will be tasked with transport, search and rescue, combat, medical evacuation, surveillance, and security missions. The service is replacing its Indian-built HAL Dhruv helicopters with this new platform. Ecuador bought seven such helicopters a decade ago, four of which were lost in accidents with the remaining three being grounded.

Middle East & Africa

Yemen’s Houthi rebels have claimed that they have downed a Saudi Apache helicopter and killed its two crewmembers near the Yemeni-Saudi border, Al Jazeera reports. “A Saudi Apache helicopter was shot down by a surface-to-air missile… and its two pilots were killed as it was completely burned,” the group’s military spokesman, Yahya Sarea, said in a Twitter post. There was no Saudi confirmation of the group’s allegation. On Thursday, some 128 Houthi rebels held in Saudi Arabia were released and flown to the Yemeni capital Sanaa. A senior official in Riyadh said it had an “open channel” with rebels to end the five-year conflict.

Europe

General Designer of the Luch Design Bureau in Kiev, Ukraine, Oleh Korostelyov reportedly told Defense Express that development testing phase of the Neptune anti-ship missile is completed and will now move to operational testing. At a recent test on November 28, the missile flew a distance of 250km. The next stages of the testing will be essential to examine the combat characteristics of the missile. The R-360 missile weighs 870 kg; the weight of its warhead is 150 kg; its launch range is up to 280 km and speed is about 900 km/h. It is able to get at a height of from 3 m to 10 m above the surface.

Asia-Pacific

Japan’s Defense Minister disclosed that the Indian Air Force will be sending its Su-30MKI to Japan for training next year. Tar? K?no was saying to reporters at the sideline of the first “two-plus-two” dialog in New Delhi. The meeting in New Delhi took place for about 2 hours and a joint statement was announced centering on the advancement of the Indo-Pacific concept. The countries expressed willingness to continue to strengthen cooperation in the region toward the realization of a free and open Indo-Pacific region.

India has carried out the first night launch of its Agni-III intermediate-range ballistic missile on November 30. The missile was fired from a mobile launcher at the Integrated Test Range in Odisha. The flight test of the intermediate-range missile, which has a strike range of over 3,500 km, was part of a user trial by the Army, sources said. The missile, which has a length of 17 m, a diameter of 2 m and launch weight of around 50 tonnes, has been inducted into the Armed Forces. The Strategic Forces Command of the Indian Army with logistic support from the Defense Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) carried out the trials at launch complex-4 of the ITR.

Today’s Video

Watch: Naval News Monthly Report – Episode 10 – November 2019
