Bengaluru police arrest man a day after he allegedly stabbed a head constable

Bengaluru police arrest man a day after he allegedly stabbed a head constable

Mardhan, who was arrested, had allegedly attacked a head constable a day earlier.

news Crime

Police in Bengaluru nabbed a man on Sunday after shooting him on both legs a day after he allegedly stabbed a policeman in RT Nagar Police Station limits.

Inspector Mithun Shilpi reportedly resorted to shooting at Mardhan after he allegedly attacked the police at the time of his arrest. Mardhan had allegedly managed to attack two cops with knife and stones. He is currently undergoing treatment at the Victoria Hospital.

This incident happened when police had rounded him up and was doing the spot inspection to recover the weapon used to stab Nagaraj. Subsequently two of his associates were also arrested.

Police said Mardhan is a habitual offender and has four cases against him in RT Nagar and Hebbal Police Stations. Even the day before he attacked the policeman, he had allegedly attacked his brother-in-law over a trivial issue.

Head Constable Nagaraj, 40, was allegedly stabbed by Mardhan on Saturday when he was taking him and another man Kandala to the RT Nagar Police Station as they were allegedly harassing women in the locality.

Nagaraj and another policeman Chandrashekhar were visiting Chamundi Nagar on Saturday to verify a passport applicant’s background. It was then that the police were told by locals about the incidents of harassment.

While the two policemen were making their way back to the police station on their bike at around 1:15 pm, they reportedly spotted the two accused in a group of men who were allegedly harassing women.

When the police tried to catch hold of them, the men tried to run away, but the police managed to apprehend two of them. Nagaraj put them in an autorickshaw along with him. It was then in the autorickshaw that the policeman was allegedly assaulted.

Nagaraj was admitted in a private hospital where he is now recuperating and his condition is stable.
