50 Student commit suicide in 23 IITs over the past 5 years, IIT Guwahati tops the list with 14 suicides!

50 student suicides in past 5 years at various IIT | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Human Resource Development, HRD Minister in a written reply to questions raised in the parliament has shared the data on the number of suicides at the 23 Indian Institutes of the country. In a shocking revelation, as many as 50 student suicides at the 23 IITs have been notified over the past 5 years. Of these, IIT Guwahati has recorded the highest number of suicides with 14 – which is close to 3 suicides every year! IIT Madras and IIT Bombay have 7 student suicides each in the last 5 years.

As for the others, the other top IITs have also had their share of student suicides and deaths. IIT-Delhi has had 4 suicides in the past 5 years whereas IIT Kharagpur has had 5 such unfortunate deaths. IIT-Kanpur has had one and IIT-Roorkee two.

Of these, the more recent ones were reported from IIT Guwahati and IIT Madras. A Japanese Exchange student was found dead in the hostel room at IIT Guwahati while Fathima Lateef, a first year student at IIT Madras had taken the drastic step on November 9, sending ripples of shock through the country. Related | Three IIT Roorkee students get Rs 1.54 cr job offer from US firm

Fathima Lateef’s suicide at the IIT Madras hostel has been reportedly linked to harassment by faculty members. While the case of the particular student suicide has been shifted to crime branch, the administration has also decided to launch a better grievance redressal system.

While many have often succumbed to the pressures of the finding their own success, cases have also been reported of students who though managed to reach the famed IITs never truly wanted to be engineers. These numbers, though minuscule in terms of the actual strength across the IITs and the relevant success rates, are still ominous and call for stricter measures.

Indian Institutes of Managemnt or IIMs also have their own share of such tragedies. As many as 10 student suicides have been reports at the 20 IIMs in the last 5 years – reported the government in the same reply.
