Unseasonal snow buries hopes of Kashmir farmers

With streets infested with violence and the air thick with strife, Kashmir's farming activities were crippled this year, limiting chances of a good yield for Mohammad Yusuf Mir.

The apple grower on the foothills of the Himalayas was pinning his hopes on next year, knowing little that nature had its plans for him.

Mir's orchard spreads over one and a half acres in southern Kashmir's volatile Pulwama district in Kashmir, close to the India-Pakistan border where tension and a curfew escalated from August.

Just like hundreds of farmers in the Kashmir region, Mir could not harvest or market his crops because of the three-month lockdown that was relaxed only in October. "We hardly had any earnings this year," he said.



Tensions rose in August after India's federal government, run by the pro-Hindu Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), took away the autonomy of Muslim-majority Jammu and Kashmir state.



To contain protests from Muslims, the government deployed thousands of extra troops, snapped communication lines including mobile phone services and the internet, and imposed a curfew in many volatile parts of the state.



Disgruntled with the government's decision, people held continuous strikes, refused to open their shops and kept their children home from school. Even after four months, peace remains elusive.



As the harvest season descended on the landlocked valley in October, Mir wasn't sure how to market his produce as there were no transport facilities to other parts of India.



His fears came true when militants fired on several fruit growers in different parts of Kashmir who were trying to send their produce to markets. The attacks by Islamist militants shocked growers and stopped further marketing moves.



Mir, 52, turned his attention to next year, praying that peace would return and he would be able to earn decent profits.



On an early November night, Mir heard a few cracking noises near his home. As he tried to peep through the window, all he could see were heavy, thick flakes of snow enveloping his dust-inundated courtyard and his orchard.



"The cracks that I heard were the cracking of tree branches. It snowed for days, and never since I was born have I seen such a heavy snowfall engulfing us in November. The trees were full of leaves as autumn had not yet left. The weight of snow crushed them to the core," Mir told ucanews in a shocked voice.

He says it will take at least five years for his orchard to fully recover and produce the same yield as it was producing until this year.



Fruit growers in dire straits

More than nine people, including two Indian army soldiers, were killed and property worth more than US14 million damaged due to the early whiteout this year in Kashmir.

According to government figures, 35 percent of fruit trees across Kashmir have been damaged due to the snowfall, putting the growers in the region in dire straits.



Farmers make up 80 percent of the state's 12.5 million people, and agriculture and horticulture are the backbones of its economy. The unique climate in the foothills of the Himalayas allows for the growing of exotic fruits and vegetables not usually found in India.



In view of the drastic climate change the region is witnessing, Caritas India, the Catholic Church's social service wing, is running disaster risk reduction program that aims to minimize the losses of farmers battling climate change.



Program coordinator Altaf Hussain Lone told ucanews that Caritas is training fruit growers in disaster mitigation, crop development and climate change.



"The farmers are being trained in the pruning of fruit trees so that they can bear the extra weight if there is an untimely snowfall. They are also being imparted with the skills of proper grafting. It minimizes the risks of climate change," said Lone.



The program currently runs in 10 hamlets of Pulwama. "But we are expecting to expand our base so that the maximum number of orchardists can benefit," said Lone.



Mohammad Ashraf Dar's half-acre apple orchard was saved due to the pruning he did on time. It was only in June this year that he had attended an awareness program that Caritas organized.



Dar, like scores of the fruit growers of his area, was advised on the proper procedure of cutting away dead and overgrown branches in trees.



"The result was unexpected. The snowfall didn't damage any of my trees except for breaking a few small branches. The practice was beneficial," Dar told ucanews.

Some 60 percent of the state's population are Muslims, while Hindus form 30 percent, making it India's only Muslim-majority region. Christians are a minuscule minority of some 35,000 people, half of them estimated to be Catholics.



The region has been witnessing violence for the past three decades after Islamic groups began an armed movement to free it from Indian administration.



Both India and Pakistan claim Kashmir entirely and have fought at least three wars and countless skirmishes over it. Both administer it now in parts.



India often accuses Pakistan of supporting a secessionist movement to free the region from India, an allegation Pakistan has consistently denied. At least 100,000 people have died in the past three decades after the insurgency intensified.



Farmer's like Mir say they look towards a future where they can engage in farming without fearing violence.
