Expulsion if students found involved in ragging, politics at Buet

“Could you give my son back to me?” reads the graffiti being drawn by an artist depicting Abrar’s father Barkat Ullah on Buet campus. Star file photo

Ragging leading to death, serious “bodily harm”, any form of disability, permanent mental imbalance or trauma, disruption of academic life of any Buet student will lead to expulsion of those involved in the act.

The university law officer will also file a case in such situation following due process on account of the university, a notice published yesterday by the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (Buet) authority reads.

The notice further said the authorities can impose fine, suspend for any length of time or expel for good if they find any student’s political involvement.

Any student who holds political posts or conducts political activities (including campaigning, participating in processions, meetings, putting up graffiti or posters, etc) in the university or associates the name of the university; forces or induces or inspires others to take part in the above activities can also be given the same punishment, it mentioned.

With these, the authorities have fulfilled all the three demands of the Buet students placed following the death of Abrar Fahad, who was tortured to death allegedly by some Bangladesh Chhatra League activists in October.

The notice further said that punitive measures for the offences and penalties related to ragging and political involvement of the students have been decided according to the recommendations by a committee formed in this regard.

The academic activities of Buet remains halted since Abrar murder. Earlier, the Buet vice chancellor said the students had agreed to sit for exams from December 28 if all of their demands are met.

On November 22, the authorities expelled its 26 students for their alleged involvement in Abrar Fahad murder case.

Abrar, a second-year student of electrical and electronic engineering department, died after he was brutally beaten allegedly by some Chhatra League men at Sher-e-Bangla Hall of the university on early hours of October 7.

The incident triggered a firestorm of protests on campuses across the country. Many took to social media to demand justice for Abrar.

Law enforcers suspect Abrar was attacked because of one of his recent Facebook posts, which seemed critical of some recent deals with India.

Amid protest on the campus, Buet authorities on October 11 banned all political activities and suspended 19 students, mostly leaders of the university’s BCL unit, accused in Abrar Fahad killing case.
