Laal Singh Chaddha: Kareena Kapoor Khan visits Golden Temple in Amritsar

Kareena Kapoor Khan was spotted at the Golden Temple in Amritsar on Monday. The actress is currently shooting for Aamir Khan's Laal Singh Chaddha in Chandigarh.

Kareena Kapoor left for Punjab on Sunday night after spending some time with her family in Mumbai. The actress posed in front of the Golden Temple and looked resplendent.

Several fan pages of the actress shared photos of her in front of the Sikh shrine. Naina Sawhney, who is a part of the team that manages Kareena, shared her pictures on Instagram. She wrote, "Amritsar! Visit to Golden Temple #lalsinghchaddha #Beautiful and #serene."

In another picture, Kareena is seen with Naina, who captioned the photo as, "With my fav person at my fav place golden temple. Just pure magic. (sic)."

Laal Singh Chaddha is the Hindi adaptation of Tom Hanks's 1994 film Forrest Gump. The first look poster of the film was recently released. Aamir is seen donning a turban in the poster. Sharing the poster, Aamir wrote, "Sat Sri Akaal ji, myself Laal...Laal Singh Chaddha."

Several pictures of the stars from the Chandigarh shoot schedule were leaked on social media. In the leaked picture, Aamir is seen wearing a checkered lilac shirt with a thick beard and high-waisted pants.

Apart from Aamir Khan, Kareena Kapoor's look was also leaked. The actress was seen wearing a simple pastel pink salwar kameez and dupatta, and sported a no make-up look.

The actors were spotted partying after shoot pack-up during their schedule in Chandigarh. Several pictures from the party made it to the internet.

While earlier, Taimur accompanied Kareena to Chandigarh, this time the actress was spotted without the little munchkin at the airport.

ALSO READ | Laal Singh Chaddha first poster out: Aamir Khan will make you smile

ALSO READ | Aamir Khan is unrecognisable as Laal Singh Chaddha. You look handsome as sardar, say fans

ALSO READ | Kareena Kapoor Khan's look from Laal Singh Chaddha leaked. See pics

ALSO READ | Laal Singh Chaddha on Christmas 2020: Aamir Khan announces gift for fans in new video
