Shah Rukh Khan to start shooting Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK's comic-action thriller in 2020?

Shah Rukh Khan to start shooting for his next in 2020? | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Shah Rukh Khan is currently on a break but will soon be back to grace the big screens King Khan will start shooting for his next in 2020 The movie will be directed by Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK

Bollywood's King Khan aka Shah Rukh Khan is currently on a break from movies but is going to make a comeback soon! Shah Rukh, who was last seen in Anand L Rai's Zero announced on his birthday that he has taken a break from movies to spend time with family and that he will be back when he finds an exciting script. Looks like he has found one now!

According to a report in a leading daily, Shah Rukh will be next seen in a big-budget comic-action thriller. The movie will be directed by Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK. The duo has directed and written for crime comedy 99, Go Goa Gone, Shor in the City amongst other projects.



The report in Mumbai Mirror said that according to sources close to the development, SRK had loved the script of the movie and has signed the action film, which is likely to go on floors in 2020.

"The film is infused with Raj and DK’s brand of quirky humor. It is a space he hasn’t explored yet," the source has been quoted as saying.

The film will be reportedly produced by the Jab Tak Hai Jaan actor himself and will be shot in exotic locations around India and abroad. The report also said that an international stunt crew will be handling the action sequences in the film. As of now, the directors are still finalising the script and will finalise the shoot locations soon.

The untitled film may be released in 2021. There are also rumors that Shah Rukh will be seen in another movie from the feel-good zone which also sees a 2021 release.

On the personal front, the actor celebrated his birthday on November 2 and got a grand wish all the way from Burj Khalifa.

While Shah Rukh's upcoming project is yet to be confirmed, the fans are eager to know what the actor has in store for them.
