Azamgarh: Another monster rapist caught; had raped 10-year-old child, corpse of her mother

Nasiruddin also shot a video of the horrible act on his mobile phone. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused killed a man, his wife and raped the woman's dead body on November 25 The accused is identified as 38-year-old Nasiruddin Police: Nasiruddin has admitted to committing similar crimes in other states

Azamgarh: In a major success, Azamgarh police have arrested a man for allegedly killing three members of a family and seriously injuring the other children in Mubarakpur area of Azamgarh district of Uttar Pradesh.

The accused identified as Nasiruddin was arrested from his home on the basis of circumstantial evidence.

According to a report in The Times of India, the 38-year-old accused is a sex-maniac and a necrophile, who committed similar crimes including rapes and murder in other states.

Police said he has confessed to killing the couple and their four-month-old son. He also seriously injured the couple's two other children after killing the couple.

Police said Nasiruddin first killed the woman's 35-year-old husband with a heavy stone and then killed her. Before leaving the house, the accused raped the corpse of the woman for three hours.

According to police, Nasiruddin also shot a video of the horrible act on his mobile phone. Police say he has allegedly confessed to the crime and also of raping the couple's 10-year-old daughter.

"The accused had sex with the corpse for three hours and also shot the video. Later, he also showed the video to his sister-in-law who was horrified after watching it. During interrogation, Nasiruddin has also accepted using stimulative drugs and condoms while perpetrating the crime. He killed all his victims using a knife and a stone," said Azamgarh Superintendent of Police (SP) Triveni Singh.

The ghastly crime was perpetrated on the night of November 24 when the accused barged into the house while the family members were asleep. He first killed the woman's husband and then killed and raped her. The police had found three naked bodies from the spot on the day of the crime.

According to police, the accused further narrated gory details of his crimes perpetrated in Haryana, West Bengal and Delhi.
