Properties worth Rs 2.3 lakh crore confiscated in three years to recover NPAs

Representational image

Key Highlights These properties belong to 1.45 lakh NPA account After the RBI forced lenders to recognise NPAs in their books, banks have seen a spike in their bad debt

New Delhi: In the last three financial years -- from FY17 to FY19 -- over 1.7 lakh properties with a market value of Rs 2.3 lakh crore have been confiscated under laws dealing with recovery of non-performing assets of public sector bank, the government told Parliament on Monday.

These properties belong to 1.45 lakh NPA account and have been seized through Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, Debts Recovery Tribunals and National Company Law Tribunal, among others, junior finance minister Anurag Thakur said in reply to a question in the Lok Sabha.

A Times of India (ToI) report citing Anurag Thakur said there are another 64,400 properties related to NPA accounts which haven’t been taken over due to a variety of factors, including the nature or quantum of loan or the nature of security or the judicial process.

After the RBI forced lenders to recognise NPAs in their books, banks have seen a spike in their bad debt. As on March 31, 2019, the total NPAs of banks stood at Rs 9.4 lakh crore. Due to the ongoing slowdown in the economy, companies are finding it difficult to repay their debt.

Several borrowers repaid dues as IBC was invoked

Worth mentioning here is that the government and the regulators have taken several steps including enactment of the IBC and strengthening SARFAESI to aid the recovery of bad debt. The record pile of NPAs had pushed several public sector banks into losses, forcing the government to recapitalise banks.



In recent months, there are signs of improvement with recovery of loans picking up. During the last four financial years, over Rs 3.35 lakh crore of NPAs, including close to Rs 1.3 lakh crore in 2018-19 was referred to IBC. In the last financial year itself, nearly Rs 70,000 crore of loan recovery happened, the ToI report said citing estimates of rating agency Crisil.

Several borrowers have repaid their dues to banks, as well as other creditors such as vendors, as the IBC was invoked, prompting them to settle the matter before the case was admitted in the National Company Law Tribunal.




