MBA student found dead in Pune flat littered with liquor, food and a broken door

An MBA student was found murdered at her residence in Pune after she stopped answering her family's calls for two days. Her mother rushed to Pune from their home in Beed and found a door in the house broken and her daughter lying in a sleeping position, but dead.

The girl has been identified as Tejasha Payaal, an MBA student studying in a college in Pune. She had been living in Pune for five years along with her two sisters and mother.

The family went back to Beed on November 15 from where only Tejasha had returned. On Sunday morning, her sister deposited Rs 1,000 in Tejasha's savings account and waited for her usual confirmation call.

But this time she did not make the confirmation call. So her younger sister who is an engineering graduate verified Tejasha's WhatsApp status which showed Tejasha had last logged on WhatsApp on November 30 at 1:30 am.

Talking to India Today, Tejasha's mother said she saw liquor bottles, hookah and leftover food lying all over the living room when she rushed to the Pune house on Monday.

She said she also found the wooden door in the bedroom broken into two parts. Then the police informed her mother that huge stone slabs were recovered from near the bedroom door. Police suspect someone might have forcefully entered into the bedroom.

The mother said there was a chunari hanging from the ceiling fan while a wooden stool sat next to the bed and Tejasha's body lay on the bed in a normal sleeping posture.

Tejasha's mother said that since Sunday morning she had continuously tried to contact her daughter, but since her phone was switched off throughout Sunday she hurriedly came from Beed and entered the rented apartment on Monday evening. She opened the door with a substitute key.

She informed the police after finding her daughter's body under mysterious circumstances. Police have sent the body for post mortem to Sassoon government hospital. A suspected murder case has been registered at Sinhagd police station in Pune. Three teams have been deployed to investigate the death.
