US Delivers Advanced Multi-Mission Chinook Helicopters To India That Will Strengthen IAF Fleet

Our defence armed forces have been in dire need of modern combat equipment. The Indian Air Force arms and ammunition needed thorough modernization and upgradation and ahead of their schedule, the first batch of four Chinook helicopters arrived in India on Sunday.

India has obtained 15 of these helicopters from the United States for boosting the operational capabilities of IAF. The first four CH-47F Chinooks were brought to the Mundra Port in Gujarat.

The Chinooks will be ferried to Chandigarh and will be formally inducted into the Indian Air Force later this year. The Chinook is a multi-role, vertical-lift platform which is used for transporting troops, artillery, equipment and fuel.

The @IAF_MCC Chinooks are here! Here’s a sneak peek of the beautiful CH-47F(I) Chinooks that arrived at the @AdaniOnline Mundra Port in Gujarat, ahead of schedule. MORE: https://t.co/Ei0ZpFHTlW pic.twitter.com/onSsmFo2Ch — Boeing India (@Boeing_In) February 10, 2019

Special Features And Characteristics

The CH-47 is considered among the heaviest lifting Western helicopters. It is an advanced multi-mission helicopter for the U.S. Army and international defence forces. It contains a fully integrated, digital cockpit management system, Common Aviation Architecture Cockpit and advanced cargo-handling capabilities that complement the aircraft's mission performance and handling characteristics.

Boeing on its official website had mentioned last year on July 27, 2018, that the U.S company in collaboration with India took a significant step toward modernizing the Indian Air Force’s helicopter fleet by completing the first flights of Apache and Chinook helicopters destined for delivery next year, i.e 2019.

David Koopersmith, Vice President and General Manager, Boeing Vertical Lift had said, “From coastal operations to high-altitude mountainous missions, these aircraft will play vital roles with the Indian armed forces.”

Photo: Boeing.com

Chinook helicopters are also used for humanitarian and disaster relief operations and also in the transportation of relief supplies as well as mass evacuation of refugees. At Chandigarh, the helicopters will become a part of the 126 Helicopter Flight, which currently operates the last of the Mi-26 heavy lift helicopters.

India ultimately will receive 22 AH-64E Apache attack, and 15 CH-47F(I) Chinook transport, helicopters, as per Boeing’s last year statement.

The helicopters have been delivered well-in-advance, they were scheduled to arrive in March. According to Economic Times, IAF crews had begun their training on the Chinooks at Delaware in the US last year. Earlier this month, the first Chinook helicopter was handed over to the IAF in Philadelphia.

The helicopter can also carry 9.6 tonnes of load including artillery guns, light armoured vehicles and heavy machinery to high altitude areas.

Reportedly, the defence ministry last year approved the procurement of six Apache helicopters along with weapons systems from Boeing at a cost of Rs 4,168 crore for the Army. These will be the first fleet of attack choppers. Boeing added that it strengthened its supply chain with over 160 partners in India.
