4 am video call, bounced cheque, note on wall: How Ghaziabad couple committed suicide

In a grim reminder of Delhi's Burari deaths, a husband and wife jumped to death from their eighth-floor flat in Indirapuram early Tuesday morning after murdering their two kids.

A second woman also jumped with the couple. She was rushed to a hospital but succumbed to her injuries.

But what drove the family to commit the mass suicide-murder?

THE VIDEO CALL

At 4 am on Tuesday, Gulshan made a video call to his friend Ramesh. What happened next left Ramesh shocked - his friend was showing him the lifeless bodies of his daughter and son.

"I understood something was wrong. I called his brother to alert him but by then the couple had committed suicide," Ramesh told India Today TV.

The security guards at the Ghaziabad society heard a loud thud. Three persons had jumped from the eighth floor. The police were informed.

SCENES INSIDE GHAZIABAD FLAT LEAVE POLICE SHOCKED

The police arrived at the scene. Officers opened the eighth floor flat and were left shocked when they found bodies of two children on a bed in one of the rooms.

They also recover a dead rabbit from the room. And notes scribbled on the bedroom wall.

As per new details that have emerged in the case, the man held his brother-in-law responsible for his actions. He wrote that his brother-in-law, identified as Rakesh Verma, owed him Rs 2 crore and that cheques sent by him had bounced.

The note added how the family was financially strained.

The family also made a peculiar wish asking to be cremated together. Some cash was even left behind, cash the family said should be used to cremate them, police said.

CASE REGISTERED, PROBE ON

Gulshan ran a garment factory that had run into loses. And cheques given by Rakesh had also bounced, which added to troubles of the family, police said.

The police said Sanjana, believed to be a manager in Gulshan's company and the second woman who jumped along with the couple, died in hospital during treatment. Sanjana had apparently been working as a manager in Gulshan's company for the last five years.

Police have said they are investigating the case and an FIR has been registered.

Also read | Indirapuram couple murders sleeping children, jumps to death from 8th floor flat
