CM Amarinder Singh walks the talk! Punjab Police to provide free pick-up and drop facility to women at night

Punjab CM Capt Amarinder Singh | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The facility will be for stranded women who do not have access to a safe vehicle A lady police officer will escort the woman to her home to provide her with a sense of total security The facility will be available between 9 pm and 6 am across the state

Amritsar: Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Tuesday announced free and readily available police help to women stranded outside in the evening. In this specific service, the police will drop the stranded women safely to their homes and the service will be available between 9 pm to 6 am. In order to give a better sense of security and safety to the woman, a lady police officer would accompany her to her home in the police vehicle.

According to officials, the state-wide facility will be soon available for women on DIAL 100, 112 and 181. A woman can dial on the given numbers to immediately connect with the Police Control Room (PCR) and ask for a safe drive home between 9 pm and 6 am.

It should be noted that the pick-up and drop facility will be available to women who do not have access to a safe vehicle, which includes a cab or even a three-wheeler. Also, a lady police officer will accompany the woman in the police vehicle to her home in order to give her sense of total security.

CM Amarinder Singh has directed DGP Dinkar Gupta to ensure swift implementation of the service across the state. The DGP has confirmed that dedicated PCR vehicles will be made available at the Commissionerates, in Mohali, Patiala and Bathinda, as well as other major towns in the state.

The DSP/ACP (Crime Against Women) will be the Nodal Officer to see out the implementation of the facility in each district of the state. ADGP Crime, Punjab, Gurpreet Deo will be the State Nodal Officer for the facility. The contact numbers of all the nodal officers will be available on the Punjab Government and Punjab Police's official websites.

This facility has been rolled out by the Punjab government in the wake of horrific rape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinarian in Telangana's Cyberabad last week.

Reacting to the incident, the Punjab Chief Minister said that his government is committed to ensuring safety and security to women in the state and he would take all the necessary steps to implement it.
