My family is in pain, would have helped if CM had visited: Cyberabad victim Disha's father

Women shout slogans during a protest against the Cyderabad rape-murder case | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Expressing disappointment, the 27-year-old victim's father said that his family is in extreme pain Further addressing the country's justice system, he added that the laws should be amended to bring faster justice for the victims The doctor's family alleged that the Hyderabad Police played a negative role and wasted precious time So far, four accused in the case have been sent to judicial custody for 14 days

Cyberabad: The grieving family members of the young veterinary doctor who was brutally murdered and gang-raped are addressing the loopholes in the system. Expressing disappointment, the 27-year-old victim's father said that his family is in extreme pain that the Chief Minister of the state, K Chandrashekar Rao could not find time to visit them.

He added, that CM's visit would have been a confidence-building gesture not just for his family but for the citizens of the state who are equally shaken by the horrific case.

Further addressing the country's justice system, he added that the laws should be amended to bring faster justice for the victims and also requested the authorities to deliver justice to his daughter as soon as possible.

Father of the woman veterinarian (who was raped and murdered in #Telangana): The culprits must be punished as soon as possible. Laws have been made, but they are not being implemented take Nirbhaya's case, the culprits must be hanged till death. pic.twitter.com/mRdBYp0Pun — ANI (@ANI) December 3, 2019

A day after the doctor had gone missing the police officials found her charred body under a culvert near Hyderabad on Thursday. Later, the National Commission for Women (NCW) took cognisance of the case and sent an inquiry committee headed by a member of the panel to look into the rape and murder. The doctor's family alleged that the Hyderabad Police played a negative role and wasted their precious time which could have been used to save their daughter's life.

The family alleged that the police, instead of registering a case and responding with quick action, resorted to fighting over jurisdiction and what police station the case would fall under. NCW in its report stated that the victim's family was shunted between two police stations over the issue of jurisdiction and the police came into action only the next day.

The victim's family had reached out to them immediately after her cellphone was found switched off, it stated in the report. NCW further claimed that the victim's family has still not been given any protection and there are no women investigating officers in the entire team probing the case. So far, four accused in the case have been sent to judicial custody for 14 days on Saturday.

The Cyberabad police have changed the victim's name to Disha to protect her identity as stated in the Supreme Court guidelines.
