Bengaluru man allegedly kills wife, tries to mislead cops claiming she met with accident

Bengaluru man allegedly kills wife, tries to mislead cops claiming she met with accident

According to the International Airport Traffic Police, Tej Singh constantly fought with his wife.

news Crime

The Bengaluru police have arrested a 27-year-old man for allegedly murdering his wife and misleading the police by claiming she died in a car accident. On Tuesday, the International Airport Police arrested Tej Singh, a resident of BV Raman Nagar near Bengaluru’s Hunasemaranahalli.

Tej Singh and his wife Dipal Kamwar (27), originally from Rajasthan, had settled in Bengaluru a few years ago. According to the police, Tej Singh constantly fought with his wife. “The couple had a lot of marital problems and in November, he decided to kill her,” a police official told TNM.

On the night of November 16, Tej Singh allegedly came home and on the pretext of making up for fighting with Dipal, he allegedly suggested that they go out for dinner. The couple went to have dinner at a nearby restaurant and when it was time to leave, Tej Singh allegedly suggested that they go on a long drive.

He booked a rental car and drove Dipal to Bechahalli Gate (which falls under the International Airport Police jurisdiction) located on the way to Nandi Hills. Police say that Tej Singh allegedly stopped the car, dragged Dipal on to the road and when she began running, he ran the car over her. He then called 100 and when the police arrived, Tej Singh allegedly claimed that his wife was run over by a man who was driving the rental car at high speed. He allegedly told the police that the driver fled after the accident.

The International Airport Traffic Police registered a case under sections 304 (criminal negligence), 279 (rash driving) and 134 (abetment of assault) of the Indian Penal Code.

The police had sent Dipal’s body for an autopsy and the postmortem report concluded that Dipal died due to a head injury.

“The autopsy suggested that her head was smashed. The car had hit her on the torso and the force with which she fell down could not have killed her. We then questioned Tej Singh as we suspected he may have something to do with her death. He later confessed to killing her,” the police said.

The International Airport Traffic Police then transferred the case to the law and order police, who registered a murder case against Tej Singh. The International Airport Police have seized the rental car as evidence. Tej Singh has been remanded to judicial custody.
