Deepika Padukone, Kareena Kapoor Khan show you how to wear a puffer jacket this winter

Wait long enough, and you’re sure to spot any silhouette that was once considered unfashionable on a designer’s runway. Such is the case with puffer jackets as well—once shunned for their voluminous appearance (you have to admit, they do look a little like a duvet), puffer jackets are now back in the good books of the most popular designers around the world. Demna Gvasalia introduced a red padded jacket in his first collection for Balenciaga in 2016 bringing the debated silhouette on a runway. Ever since, couturiers everywhere have been adding the pillowy outerwear to their offerings—everyone from Chanel to Versace has incorporated it in their recent collections. Considering this, the rapid rise of the puffer jacket’s popularity among the masses is not all that surprising—but the stats are definitely remarkable. Online retailer Net-a-Porter listed puffer jackets as one of the most popular styles on their site, with sales up by 41 per cent since 2018. And in February 2019, two specific puffers—one by The North Face and another by Monclear—were listed as second and sixth most desirable products in the world, respectively.

Just like the rest of the world, Bollywood’s best dressed stars have also been experimenting with the new trend. In India, the puffer’s celebrity fan base includes everyone from Alia Bhatt and Priyanka Chopra to Deepika Padukone. Bhatt has worn the puffer in multiple iterations till date—a blue Fendi number featuring iridescent bug eyes during her trip to New York, a muted puffer jacket with fur details on the collar, and a striking neon green piece while shooting for her upcoming film, Brahmastra, in Shimla. Priyanka Chopra has been spotted in everything from a white, furry puffer jacket to an all-gold version, and Padukone once returned to Mumbai wearing a red padded jacket.

Malaika Arora made a case for maximalism with her animal printed neon green puffer jacket, while Sara Ali Khan looked towards pink and purple options to stay warm and stylish at the same time. And Kareena Kapoor Khan served us with an all-new way to wear the style with her yellow puffer jacket and white jeans combination. Prefer to play it safe? Take cues from Parineeti Chopra and Shraddha Kapoor, who were both spotted favouring classic black puffer jackets over coloured iterations. Scroll ahead for our edit of the best puffer jackets spotted on the celebrities in recent times.
