What Our Music Lost In The Last Decade

Holi, the festival of colours, of romance, of love between Radha and Krishna and sringar rasa would see Vidushi Girija Devi become a nayika herself.



At this particular concert dedicated to Holi, held in 2017, she presented khayal, and thumri, dadra, hori, kajri, the fine semi classical nuances of the Benaras Gharana.

An artiste known for taking over the dais as a queen, she was in her element, connecting the spiritual with the romantic.

The venue was the Ravi Shankar Institute for Music and Performing Arts, and Appaji was swaying into nostalgia, remembering Pandit Ravi Shankar and Ustad Bismillah Khan.

She addressed them as “bhaiya” (brother) respectively. Between compositions, she announced that this could be her last dedication to the festival. It is hard to explain what prompted Appaji to make this declaration of sorts.

Appaji was unstoppable during the summer that followed. It would be the last stretch of her illustrious life immersed in a unique mission. She wanted to give the audience more and more — in terms of what she delivered at a single concert.

So battle ready she seemed towards giving as much as she could, that it left her followers stunned.

The energy in her singing was pouring out in total control, voice — even more chiseled and softer, improvisations — unparalleled and retrospective — and her explaining of what made her generation of musicians different and robust — affection laden but blunt.

In the Holi concert, she sang the celebrated dadra — Ganga Reti. She dedicated it to Ustad Bismillah Khan's memory. Her tear-laden eyes glistened through it more than the diamond in her nose in the yellow light that fell on her.

Another concert at another venue followed days later, and there too, this author listened to Appaji, in awe of her hurried mission, a strange sense of time-bound duty towards the audience, and an emotion behind it.

She passed away later that year.

Miles, months and states away, in Maharashtra, Vidushi Kishori Amonkar was performing at concerts, being generous with her balance of popular and less popular compositions.

Then one day, she asked Swarnima Gosain, one of her senior disciples: “Thumri gayegi? (Will you sing thumri?)”. The question meant that it was time for Gosain to leave for Kolkata — to start learning thumri from Appaji after a gruelling training in khayal singing from Amonkar for 11 years.

The question came a year-and-half before she left the world. Gosain explains the guru's vision for a disciple as a yogi's insight.

If music itself had a voice, mind and temperament it would be best represented by Vidushi Kishori Amonkar's.
