‘Repeated frauds have coincided with East Europeans replacing Nigerian gangs’

KOLKATA: As Kolkata — along with rest of India — has now aligned itself with modern-day banking, several ATM skimming gangs from foreign shores, such as Nigeria, Romania, Turkey and Bulgaria, seem to be taking maximum risk for minimum gain. These gangs have hit several other cities across Europe, America and Australia, before striking Kolkata.CCTV footage from Delhi confirmed such suspects’ involvement in the latest skimming incident in Kolkata.Police said that these ATM skimming gangs originated from Nigeria. “Several criminals there took to cyber fraud, including skimming. However, as ATM technology improved, the gangs were stuck with their conventional methods.It was then that the East European gangs took control of the skimming gangs over the past five years. “The biggest reason for their rise was the easy availability of skimming devices in many eastern European countries. According to cops, the devices are powered by lithium ion batteries, and can run for three-five days on a single charge, assuming that the skimmers transmit about 200-300 texts per day. This skimmer kit includes an ‘alarm’ feature that would immediately transmit the skimmed data.Interrogation of arrested Romanian gang leaders revealed that the bosses would pocket maximum gains from the racket, leaving the bottom-rung workers with little.“Even among the Romanians there are hierarchies. Thus, while gang leader Adrian Liviu put up at Taj Hotel, Lucknow, Vaico Aurel had booked a small flat for his two men — Dumitru Calin and Oprea Ovidiu Simion — in Hauz Khas. Simion is a window-fitter back home while Calin is an auto mechanic. “We are aware of this commissioning system. We are not ruling out the possibility of several Indians working with the Romanian gang earlier,” an officer said.Interestingly, the gang leaders rarely allowed the Indians access to data from the skimming devices. “They claimed that only they possessed the technology to transfer skimmed data (PIN) on to plastic cards. They said the cards were procured from a shop in Nepal,” said a top SIT official.
