Priyanka Gandhi Vadra makes Twitter debut ahead of mega Lucknow roadshow in UP

New Delhi:

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has finally made her Twitter debut. The development comes ahead of her key roadshow in Lucknow, which marks the beginning of her political innings. Priyanka’s entry in the Twitter club comes days after Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati opening her account on the social blogging site. Interestingly, without tweeting anything, the Congress General Secretary has already gained 16.9K followers. Among those whom she follow include Sachin Pilot, Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot, her party’s official Twitter account, senior party leader Ahmed Patel, party spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala, Jyotiraditya Scindia and brother Rahul Gandhi.

It should be noted that Priyanka has Instagram and Facebook accounts. However, these accounts don’t have the ‘blue tick.’

Sister’s entry into active politics is seen as much-needed help for brother Rahul Gandhi. After Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s appointment as General Secretary, the Congress chief had expressed his happiness. Talking to media in Amethi, Gandhi had said that he was very happy with the news. “I am personally very happy that she will work with me now. She is extremely capable person,” a visibly happy Congress president said. On the impact of Mrs Vadra’s entry into politics, Gandhi said that “we can totally trust her. The Congress won’t work on backfoot now in Uttar Pradesh. Priyanka has mission UP with her.” On his political opponents, Gandhi said that “BJP wale ghabraaye hue hain (BJP is very scared).”

Gandhi had also congratulated Jyotiraditya Scindia for the new role as Congress in-charge in UP (West). Scindia is a very dynamic leader. The Congress chief also didn’t shy away from talking about the crucial SP-BSP alliance in Uttar Pradesh. “We have no enmity with Mayawati ji and Akhilesh ji, in fact I respect them a lot. We are ready to cooperate with them wherever possible. Ultimately the aim of all three of us is to defeat BJP, but yes our fight is to save Congress ideology,” Gandhi said.

Numerous Congress leaders were seen congratulating Priyanka Gandhi Vadra after her appointment. “As Priyanka Vadra Gandhi takes charge of Uttar Pradesh as AICC gen secy the politics of the Hindi heartland is about to change. With a new general in command each UP Congressman is battle ready,” former minister Jitin Prasada said on Twitter.

Reacting to the story, BJP UP in-charge JP Nadda said, “Priyanka Gandhi officially becomes General Secretary of Congress, but everyone knows how this household company works. It is also first official declaration from Congress that Rahul ji has failed, he should tell what is his view of Parivarwadi soch?”
