Neighbour held for raping, murdering 60-year-old woman in Andhra Pradesh

The accused allegedly raped her and strangulated her to death. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The victim, a widow used to live alone in her house The accused was a 31-year-old man who allegedly raped and then killed the woman On Tuesday, the accused was arrested by the police, who lives a house away from the woman's residence

Hyderabad: A 60-year-old woman was allegedly raped and murdered by her 31-year-old neighbour in Cheruvu Gattu village of East Godavari district, Andhra Pradesh on Monday night. The victim, a widow used to live alone at her house.

Apparently, to ensure that police dogs were not able to pick his scent, the accused sprinkled chilli powder on the woman's body after committing the crime. However, within a couple of hours, the police tracked down the accused with the help of footprints at the crime spot leading to his house.

On Tuesday, the accused was arrested by the police, who lives a house away from the woman's residence. The Superintendent of police, Adnan Nayeem Asmi, told a media person that the accused was believed to be in an inebriated state when he committed the heinous crime.

Reportedly, the same day, most of the villagers were busy in an ongoing celebration at the Subramanya Swamy temple. The accused took advantage of the hub of activity and clandestinely entered the woman's house. He allegedly raped her and strangulated her to death.

The police officials added that the accused fled with Rs 80,000 case from the deceased's house. The police records stated that the accused had been arrested for theft earlier as well. He had been counselled by village elders after his wife complained of constant physical and domestic violence.

However, the police are interrogating the accused and the CCTV footage from the area is being investigated. The police added that the deceased's daughter lives in Hyderabad and she has been informed about her mother's death. Further probe in the matter is underway.
