In India, Westerners are fuelling a gender affirmation surgery boom

Gilligan was travelling to India, a destination long known for medical tourism that is now emerging as a hub for gender affirmation surgery (GAS), also called sex reassignment surgery. High costs and long waiting times in the US and UK have prompted Americans and Britons to cast about for alternatives. And India is starting to provide them.

“Never in a million years did I think I would go to Mumbai but then I found a British girl on Facebook who offered interesting packages,” says Gilligan. The “British girl”, Jane Watson, a Manchester-born transwoman walked her through the process. Gilligan is one of about 200 clients to have gone through Watson’s company PriyaMED, which she set up three years ago to provide bespoke packages mostly for trans tourists seeking various surgical procedures.

After exchanging emails and phone calls, Gilligan, a pharmacist, decided she was ready to head to Mumbai. The $25,000 (£19,400) package included the operations, doctors’ appointments, medicines, accommodation, food and airport shuttle services. An additional $7,000 (£5,438) took care of dental work. In the US, the same procedures would have cost Gilligan between $125,000 and $150,000. She signed the deal, booked three months of leave at work and prepared to take off.

For decades, Thailand has been considered the nerve centre for medical tourism in general and GAS in particular. In 1975, Preecha Tiewtranon performed Thailand’s first GAS surgery and revolutionised the industry, making the country a global go-to destination. The medical tourism business as a whole attracts more than two million visitors annually to Thailand.

Gilligan, too, had her sights on Thailand at first, but it was expensive, and the surgical aesthetic did not appeal to her. “People thought I was crazy going to India, but since there are so many qualified Indian doctors in the States, I knew they were well trained,” she says.

In 2016, Watson, then 42, had been researching options outside England, as the NHS covered some procedures (top and bottom surgeries), but not others (facial feminisation). She came to Mumbai for the first time in May 2016 for dental work, having momentarily set aside the idea of undertaking gender affirmation surgery. But once she arrived, she decided to check out some of the country’s plastic surgeons, walking endlessly across the city’s suburbs during a week of research, interviewing doctors, matching prices and procedures. Having found what she was looking for, a week later, she underwent facial feminisation, implants and “some work downstairs” as she puts it. When she posted about her India experience online, others asked her if she would accompany them too. She did.
