61-Year-Old Widow Gang Raped, Killed In Andhra Pradesh

EAST GODAVARI: Even before the nationwide public outrage over the gang rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Hyderabad could subside, a similar horrific crime has come to light from Andhra Pradesh's East Godavari district.

According to police, a 61-year-old widow was allegedly gang-raped and murdered in the Mumidivaram constituency, I - Polavaram mandal, G. Vemavaram village of East Godavari district on Monday night.

Three men are alleged to have committed the crime when the victim was alone in her house, police said. Police have arrested one of the suspects, Kesanakurthi Nagababu and two more suspects Varre Babi and the Degala Ramulu have also been taken into custody by the police on Tuesday.

As per the locals, the victim's neighbour staying next to her house knocked her door on Tuesday morning and when she did not get any response she called the locals who found her body in her house.

They immediately informed SI S Ramu , who immediately rushed to the spot.After reaching the spot and seeing the body he quickly informed the district SP and the Clues Team and Dog Squad were called to verify the scene of crime.

The found the body lying semi clad and interestingly they found chilli powder around the body and in the house.

But the dog squad saw foot prints which led to a house two houses away from the victims house and returned to the home of the deceased. Upon inquiry, the police came to know that it was the house of her relative Naga Babu. Knowing that she lived alone, it is alleged that he had forcibly entered her house in a drunken state, raped and murdered her and along with the two other suspects.

When the dog squad reached Naga Babu's house the irate villagers first thrashed Naga Babu and then handed him over to the police.

The Police upon interrogating Naga Babu got to know that he had learnt from other criminals that chilli powder cold be used to detract the dog squad during his jail term. A habitual alcoholic, Naga Babu was living alone after his wife had left him due to his bad habits. There was a Section 498 -domestic violence case pending in Samarlakota and also a theft case for which he was arrested jailed for a period of time in Kakinada. Locals also informed that both families had previous enmities and were not in talking terms.

Nagamani's husband and son had died a couple of years ago and she was surviving on government pension. Her daughter-in-law was staying at Bhimanapalli and daughter was living in Hyderabad.

East Godavari District SP Naeem Asmi, Accused K Naga Babu

East Godavari District SP Naeem Asmi said that the murder was solved within 24 hours and the accused were apprehended. He also informed that based on vital information provided by one Nalla Sudarshan,they had identified the accused and brought the case to a conclusion.

SI S. Ramu registered a case and the victim's body was shifted to Mummidivaram Government Hospital for post-mortem.

Meanwhile, Andhra Pradesh Home Minister M. Sucharita made a surprise visit to an all woman police station in the Guntur district. Some women complained to her that the police were not responding properly to their complaints. The minister voiced concern about this and said that the crimes against women were continuing. She said people were seething with anger over Nirbhaya and Disha cases and asked police to remain alert and deal sternly with those involved in crimes against women.

Also Read:Vet Doctor Burnt Alive Near Shadnagar
