Captain Amarinder Singh writes for TOI: 'Drug peddlers on the run after more than a decade'

Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh writes exclusively for TOI on the various measures his state government has taken in more than half a term, so far, to combat drugs.

I have always believed that losing a child to drugs is no less nightmarish and painful than losing one to a disease. We, in Punjab, have lived this nightmare and suffered this pain for more than a decade now. We watched helplessly while the political leadership of that time allowed an entire generation of Punjabis to be destroyed by drugs.In more than two years and a half, since my government took over the state’s reins with a vow to save our youth from this devastation, today we are no longer the helpless bystanders of the past. We have taken up the cudgels, with full might, against the peddlers of this nightmare.It has not been an easy journey, and the battle is far from over, but I am happy to say that a lot of ground has been covered and the change is palpable. No longer are drugs available freely to our children and no longer are smugglers and peddlers free to spread the disease at will. They fear the consequences of their heinous crime because they know that I consider drug smuggling as heinous an offence as murder.The combined effect of our Cada ( Comprehensive Action against Drug Abuse ) and EDP ( enforcement and prevention ) strategies has choked the supply of drugs and reduced the demand drastically. My government has devised a multi-layer monitoring and implementing mechanism through a cabinet subcommittee that I steer personally.Complementing its effort is an apex committee headed by the chief secretary and a special group on drugs headed by the additional chief secretary (home).Together, these initiatives have helped us address the grave issue holistically through close coordination among various departments. There are many rungs in the ladder we have woven to get to the deepest and highest levels of the drug mafia and help with the implementation of Cada.A focused strategy is in place to implement the EDP plan, which mandates the special task force (STF) to monitor, coordinate, and synchronize the efforts of all the agencies involved.In addition, we have constituted, activated, and energized anti-narcotics cells (ANCs) in all 22 districts and identified 372 hotspots for action and focused enforcement. The STF has proposed a detailed plan to develop these hotspots as safe, secured, and drug free zones by creating adequate local infrastructure. We are going full force to implement the plan.The results of these initiatives are more than satisfactory, as manifest in numbers. Heroin seizures have gone up from 192 kg in 2017 to 384 kg in 2018 and 359 kg in 2019 (till November 30). Increasing arrests and forfeitures of property of the accused have built pressure on the drug mafia.At the same time, we are concerned about the treatment and rehabilitation of the victims of this mafia. Besides opening de-addiction centres, we have launched additional modes of treatment in outpatient opioid assisted treatment (OOAT) clinics to help patients lead a normal life as productive members of society. For prevention, we focus on generating mass awareness through ‘drug abuse prevention officers’ (Dapos) and introducing ‘buddy programme’ in schools and colleges to protect the students and youth and use them as catalysts for combating drug menace.Dangers are far from over, as Pakistan-based drug smugglers have found new routes. Delhi has emerged as a major centre for their pushing drugs into Punjab and adjoining states. To counter these threats, we keep scaling up our efforts to strike at the root of the menace. My government has, in principle, approved the STF proposal for a separate drug division under the health department (headed by a secretary). The media and the social media are being used aggressively for mass awareness and we plan to involve public representatives in the anti-drug campaign.The helplines of STF headquarters (79019-39393, 79019-59595) and police(181) are proving beneficial in strengthening enforcement. Separate coordination meetings are being held with UNODC (United National Office on Drugs and Crime), NCB ( Narcotics Control Bureau ), BSF (Border Security Force), Delhi Police, and the neighbouring states for a joint strategy against drug traffickers. As a result, cooperation and coordination among all the northern states has improved.Drugs are a national problem, necessitating a national policy and programme. The solution requires collective will and collective action to destroy the drug mafia completely. I am committed to taking this fight to its logical conclusion, even if I have to use every single resource at my disposal. I am confident that the other states as well as the Centre are also doing the same. Our collective future is at stake and it’s our joint responsibility to save it.
