Terrorist body JKLF’s letter of support to Labour Party further alienates its member

Dr Neeraj Patil, former mayor of the Lambeth Borough of London, had expressed concern over the letter of support extended for Labour Party by terrorist organisation Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) but is still waiting for a response.

In a letter to party’s Jeremy Corbyn and Labour Party General Secretary and the Jennie Formby, Dr Patil requested the party to sever its ties publicly with JKLF. In an interview to India Today, Dr Patil said, I am a strong advocate of peace between India and Pakistan. Our party is for international peace and justice and I hope they will understand the sensitivity of the situation and sever their ties with JKLF. I am confident that my party will take all the necessary remedial measures and dissociate itself from this terrorist organisation JKLF.

Dr Neeraj Patil former Mayor of Lambeth Borough, in a conversation with @loveenatandon, raises objection on terror group JKLF endorsing Labour Party. #ReporterDiary

More videos: https://t.co/FAHzdk9TO8 pic.twitter.com/MUshdXWINd India Today (@IndiaToday) December 4, 2019

Dr Patil, who is still waiting for a response from the party, firmly believes that anti-India’ forces in the Labour Party need to be fought while remaining in the party and not resigning from it.

JKLF, in a letter issued in favour of the Labour Party, had written, JKLF leaders in the UK have engaged with UK parliamentarians and have had great help from the Labour leaders to raise the profile of Jammu and Kashmir dispute over the years. JKLF is proud to support Labour to work within communities throughout the UK in order to engage and unite these diverse communities and use local platforms to highlight and address many issues faced by ethnic minorities across UK.

Dr Patil pointed out that not only has the JKLF extended support to the Labour Party but, the Luton Labour party and its official website is displaying and circulating a letter of endorsement by JKLF to the Labour Party and is appealing to vote for our party. Our Labour party does not need the endorsement of a terrorist organisation. It is very disturbing to note that Luton Labour party is displaying this letter of endorsement from JKLF on the official Facebook of the Constituency Labour Party.

On February 6, 1984, JKLF had kidnapped an Indian diplomat Ravindra Mhatre in Birmingham and demanded the release of its founder member Maqbool Bhat from an Indian prison.

When the Indian government declined, the diplomat was brutally murdered in Birmingham by members of JKLF at Alum Rock. JKLF also has a long track record of terror offences in India and is designated as a terrorist organisation in India.

Also read | British Indians send Diwali van in response to Kashmir van protesters in London
