Rohini doctors bodies: Delhi: Bullet-ridden bodies of two doctors found from car; police suspect 'extra-marital affair'

The incident took place when the two were leaving for the hospital in a car and the 62-year-old shot the woman after some argument. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Bullet-riddled bodies of two doctors were found from a car in Rohini Police: Doctor shot the woman to death before turning the gun on himself Police suspect the two were having an extra-marital affair

New Delhi: In a chilling incident, the bullet-ridden bodies of two doctors have been found from a car in Rohini area of Delhi on Wednesday morning. The two doctors-a man and a woman, were working together at a private nursing home in the capital.

According to police, the man allegedly shot the woman first before turning the gun on himself.

Police believe the two were allegedly having an extra-marital affair. Meanwhile, police further say the investigation into the incident is underway and they are looking at all other angles.

Both the bodies have been sent for post-mortem. The bodies were first spotted by people who were on a morning walk in the area and later informed the police. The bodies of the doctors were found at around 7.45 am at a desolated stretch of a road in Sector 13 of Rohini.

The incident took place when the two were leaving for the hospital in a car and the 62-year-old shot the woman after some argument. Cops say the man was married with two children. However, police are still working to find out the details of the deceased woman.

According to officials, they are trying to find out what actually happened between the two that led to the suspected killing and suicide.

"The doctor and the 55-year-old woman, who was also managing director of the nursing home were in a relationship. The woman wanted the doctor to marry her. (The male doctor apparently did not desire marriage and possibly) the woman's demand led to an altercation and the murder and suicide,” a Hindustan Times report quoted Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Rajneesh Gupta as saying after initial probe.


