2 months after Bengaluru woman's death, 6-yr-old son's help proves it was murder

2 months after Bengaluru woman's death, 6-yr-old son's help proves it was murder

The accused has been identified as 21-year-old G Venkatesh Kumar, who confessed to having had an extramarital affair with the woman and killing her.

news Crime

Two months after a 23-year-old woman from Bengaluru died, a recent statement by the victim’s 5-year-old son was able to help police conclude that the woman had been murdered.

The victim, identified as Sumata, was a worker at a garment factory in Chinnayanapalya. According to reports, she had been found dead at her residence on September 18. As she had been unwell for some time, her husband didn’t have any reason to suspect foul play.

However, two months after her death, a statement made by the woman’s young son led her husband, Devaraj, to suspect that something was amiss. He approached Anekal police who also spoke to the boy and decided to exhume the woman’s body to investigate.

“One day Venkatesh mama came home. He and amma went inside the room and they were talking loudly. Then I saw mama hit amma with a club on the back. I saw mama tying a sari around amma’s neck. She fell down and I ran out of fear,” the boy reportedlytold his father.

“The man approached us with this complaint and said that the boy’s statement reminded him of some rumours that there was an affair happening between his wife and the accused. He had also realised that he had not seen the accused around the time of his wife’s death. We also spoke to the boy and he repeated what he had told his father,” said police at the Anekal station in Bengaluru to TNM.

The accused has been identified as 21-year-old G Venkatesh Kumar, a resident of Chinnayanapalya who confessed to having had an extramarital affair with Sumata. As per his confession, Sumata wanted to end the relationship to which he objected. She threatened to reveal everything to his family, which angered him and led him to kill her by stranglulation.

A charge sheet will be filed soon.
