We stayed unscathed despite ruthless scrutiny: Kejriwal

New Delhi :Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal here on Tuesday claimed his government eradicated corruption and did away with unwanted expenditure, and said the AAP government and MLAs got clean chit from the CAG for the five consecutive years and other investigation agencies, like the CBI and the ED and the Income Tax, couldn't find fault irrespective of ruthless scrutiny.

Speaking in the Assembly, he said his government spent the money on people and it was the most accountable government ever in India.



"The Delhi government reduced corruption, unwanted expenditure and spent the money for providing facilities to the people. It got clean chit from CAG and other investigation agencies irrespective of ruthless scrutiny in the last five years," Kejriwal said during the concluding session of the Assembly on Tuesday.



While Delhi offered a people-centric development model, the Union government followed crony-capitalism, he said.



"In spite of harsh scrutiny, the CAG couldn't find anything wrong with the Delhi government in the last five years. In 2015, people of Delhi gifted us an unprecedentedly massive victory with 67 seats out of 70. After five years, we have fulfilled the responsibilities entrusted to us by the public", said the Chief Minister.



He said all agencies controlled by his political opponents scrutinised them.



"The CBI raided my office. The Delhi Police raided my house, including the bedroom. My fellow Ministers -- Manish Sisodia, Satyendra Jain and Kailsah Gahlot -- were also raided by the central agencies. They got nothing suspicious. It was the first time a Chief Minister's bedroom was searched by the police.



"Our principle on probity that apublic servants should always be ready for public scrutiny took us ahead. When some people expressed fear over complaints against MLAs, I said don't worry; Prime Minister (Narendra) Modi and his agencies will take care of such complaints," Kejriwal said.



Stating that they got clearance from the judiciary too, he said there were cases against 20 MLAs and none of them withstood the court.



"The Shunglu Committee inspected 400 files for many months and could not find anything problematic. No government in independent India has been scrutinised like ours, that too by the political opponents. But we could come out clean in every instance. We have the most responsible MLAs in the country," Kejriwal said.



"The present Union government promotes crony capitalism and serves the interests of the big corporate. But the Delhi government's policies and schemes are centered on people, and aimed at the welfare of the society. People should get the economic benefits directly.



"Delhi's development model and economic policy are unique in this respect and can be emulated across India", said the Chief Minister.


