Forensic report says Fathima Latheef's suicide note genuine, family tries to meet PM

The father of the deceased student along with family friend and Kollam mayor V Rajendrababu arrived in Delhi on Wednesday and are waiting for an appointment with the PM.

“We are expecting to hear about the appointment with the PM before 11 am. There are many grievances I would like to share with the Prime Minister regarding my daughter’s death. I am an unlucky father who still does not know why my daughter died. Once I discuss it with the PM, we have decided to hold a press meet and announce the decisions we have taken regarding the case,” Abdul Latheef told Asianet news on Wednesday.

On Tuesday, the forensic department confirmed the authenticity of the suicide note and other notes typed by the 19-year old before she killed herself on November 9. The department inspected the notes in the presence of a few relatives and confirmed that Fathima had written it before she took her life. They also confirmed that it had not been edited by anybody else following her suicide.

This forensics report was submitted to the magistrate on Tuesday and will now be handed over to the investigating officials.

“Those in her class are responsible for Fathima’s death. In her note, she has clearly mentioned the names of whoever has mentally harassed her and tried to destroy her. “It is not just the professors, some of her classmates also played a role. I am preparing to take legal action against each one of them,” he told local media. He also added that he will move the Madras High Court demanding a thorough investigation into this. "All of these details have now been submitted to the Investigating officer C Easwaramoorthy IPS,” Abdul Latheef added.

He also added that based on the action taken by the investigating officer on the persons who have been named in the suicide note, he will move court against the accused persons.

Abdul Latheef also added that he has received tons of support across leaders from political parties in Kerala.

“All of them have backed me. All of them have spoken to me. Led by the Kollam MP (NK Premachandran) a signature campaign was started for a fair probe into the case,” Abdul Latheef added.
