India: DJ in Punjab shot dead for not playing music

An 18-year-old DJ was shot dead at a pre-wedding party at village Maste Wala of Kot Ise Khan in Punjab, India for not continuing to play music post-midnight on November 30.

Five people have been booked for murder in the case of Karan Singh, according to Indian media reports

The victim’s cousin identified as Gursewak Singh, filed an FIR (First Information Report) and according to the report, the music was first stopped at 10 pm, but continued till midnight after the accused threatened them, Indian Express reported.

When the music was again stopped at midnight, the victim was shot dead by one of the five accused.

According to Gursewak, he along with his father and cousin, the victim, had gone to the residence of Nirvair Singh at the village to provide DJ services for a pre-marriage party.

The party reportedly started around 7 pm and when it was 10 pm, they said that they would stop the music as it was against administration’s orders for DJs to play music post 10 pm.

However, according to Gursewak, the five accused started firing in air to threaten them after which they continued to play the music.

Gursewak added that at midnight they finally refused to continue and the accused Sukhdeep Singh allegedly opened fired and the bullet hit Karan on the right side of his chest.

The 20-year-old said that the accused fled from the scene. Karan was rushed to Civil Hospital Moga but was declared dead on arrival.

Inspector Amarjit Singh, SHO Kot Ise Khan of the local police station, said that Sukhdeep Singh was carrying the legal weapon of his father but he himself had no authority to carry or use it. “He is a relative of groom’s family and was carrying 12-bore rifle which has a licence in name of his father. He wasn’t authorised to carry it. Another accused Major Singh who also had 12-bore rifle is groom’s father. Three other accused — Sharanpreet, Jagroop and Sukhchain — are also groom’s friends and relatives. All of them are absconding. Sharanpreet and Sukhchain also allegedly fired with their weapons and multiple rounds were fired in the air. We have recovered shells of all weapons from the spot,” was quoted as saying.

A case was registered against the five suspects. However, the victim’s family had refused to let an autopsy take place until arrests were made.

On December 2, one of the accused was arrested and a weapon was recovered from his possession. Two others have also been taken into custody.
