Hardoi SP reprimands hotel management for compromising on safety of female staffer

Hardoi SP Alok Priyadarshi scolding the hotel owner | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Hardoi police posted a video of the SP confronting hotel management on Tuesday Alok Priyadarshi told the hotel management that safety of female employees is the management's responsibility In Punjab, the CM has announced the women can now approach police for a ride home

Lucknow: The recent case of the brutal rape and murder of a veterinarian in Telangana's Ranga Reddy district has re-ignited the debate about the safety of India's female citizens. This has led to everyone ranging from politicians to roadside vendors weighing in on the issue and suggesting measures that can make Indian streets safer for women.

There is no doubt that a crime so heinous instils a sense of fear in the hearts and minds of ordinary citizens. It also leads to a sense of awareness and precaution. A report from Uttar Pradesh's Hardoi gives a glimpse of how the horrific rape and murder of a 27-year-old in Telangana has left a lasting impact in the hearts and minds of Indians across the country.

On Tuesday, Hardoi Police posted a video on the micro-blogging website Twitter which shows superintendent of police Alok Priyadarshi scolding a hotel's manager and owner. According to inputs furnished by the Hardoi Police, the SP was on his patrolling round on Tuesday night when he saw a female walking alone on an isolated street pretty late into the night. When he asked her, the woman told Priyadarshi that she works at a local hotel and was walking back home.

The policeman offered her a lift in his police car and first took her to her place of work - the hotel - where he confronted the manager and owner over failing to provide the female employee with a ride back home after dark.

Both the manager and the owner can be seen issuing clarifications about how they usually ensure a ride home to the female employees but could not arrange anything on that particular day. The policeman, however, stays firm and clearly tells them that the safety of female employees is the responsibility of employers and should not be taken lightly. Priyadarshi also told the hotel management to take specific measures to ensure female employees are not left in the lurch at odd hours of the night and reminded them that should anything untoward happen under their watch and the woman suffer any mishap on the streets, it will be the employer's responsibility.
