Hyderabad vet gangrape: Telangana govt orders for Special court to be set up

Hyderabad vet gangrape: Telangana govt orders for Special court to be set up

Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao had earlier asked for a speedy trial in the murder of the 26-year-old veterinary doctor.

news Sexual Assault

The Telangana government on Wednesday issued orders to designate the I Additional District and Session Judge in Mahabubnagar as a special court for speedy trial in the case of gangrape and murder of 26-year-old Disha* (name changed).

The government had earlier appealed to the Telangana High Court to give permission for the same.

In the order signed by A Santosh Reddy, secretary to government, legal affairs, legislative affairs and justice, states, “Government after careful examination of the proposal, hereby designate the Court of Additional District & Sessions Judge, Mahabubnagar, as a Special Court for speedy trial of the rape and murder case of Disha.”

As protests asking for justice refuse to die down, earlier this week, Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao, termed the accused as animals in human form, and asked for a speedy trial in the case. The CM had expressed that the government would extend all help and support to the family members of the victim.

Meanwhile, the four accused have been imprisoned under high security in Cherlapally jail. They were sent to a 14-day judicial custody by the Shadnagar magistrate on Saturday. Police have now appealed for a 10-day police custody to interrogate the accused--Areef, Shiva, Naveen and Chennakeshavulu.

On November 27, Disha, a 26-year-old veterinarian doctor from Hyderabad was brutally gangraped and killed allegedly by a four-member gang, natives of Narayanpet district at Thondupally toll gate on Outer Ring Road, Shamshabad.

The gang who were driving a lorry had trapped her by deflating one of the tyres of her two-wheeler which she had parked near the toll gate. At around 9 pm, when she reached the spot to take her vehicle she noticed that the tyre was punctured. The men approached her saying they would help her fix the tyre. They forcibly took her to nearby bushes, assaulted and killed her.

After killing her, they burned her body at Chatanpally village under Shadnagar police station limits, a few kms away from the place where she was murdered.
