Four accused in Hyderabad vet rape and murder sent to 7-day police custody

Four accused in Hyderabad vet rape and murder sent to 7-day police custody

The Hyderabad police had filed a petition in the court on Monday seeking 10-day custody of the accused.

news Crime

The Shadnagar court on Wednesday remanded the four accused in the rape and murder case of Hyderabad veterinary doctor Disha (name changed) to seven day police custody. The Hyderabad police had sought for ten days’ custody.

The Hyderabad police on Monday had filed a petition in a local court at Shadnagar seeking 10-day custody of the accused for a more comprehensive interrogation. The accused were sent to a 14-day judicial custody by the Shadnagar magistrate on Saturday. According to reports, the four accused — Areef, Shiva, Naveen and Chennakeshavulu — were kept in an isolated cell at the Cherlapally Central Prison to avoid confrontation with other inmates, suspecting that they may be attacked by other inmates.

Earlier in the day, the Telangana government issued orders to set up a special court for a speedy trial in the case of the gangrape and murder of the 26-year-old woman. The government had earlier appealed to the Telangana High Court to give permission for the same. Breaking his silence on the issue, Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Sunday had extended all help and support to the family of the victim.

On November 27, Disha, a 26-year-old veterinarian doctor from Hyderabad was brutally gangraped and killed allegedly by the four-member gang, who are natives of Narayanpet district, at Thondupally toll gate on Outer Ring Road, Shamshabad.

The gang who were driving a lorry had trapped her by deflating one of the tyres of her two-wheeler which she had parked near the toll gate. At around 9 pm, when she reached the spot to take her vehicle she noticed that the tyre was punctured. The men approached her saying they would help her fix the tyre. They forcibly took her to nearby bushes, assaulted and killed her.

After killing her, they burned her body at Chatanpally village under Shadnagar police station limits, a few kms away from the place where she was murdered.

Also read: Hyderabad vet gangrape: Telangana govt orders for Special court to be set up

Hyderabad vet gangrape: Police ask media to stop publishing photos of accused
