Shantanu Maheshwari: 'I always strive for excellence at both acting and dancing'

Known for his groovy moves, dancer, choreographer and actor Shantanu Maheshwari was recently in Jaipur to shoot for a music album. The winner of Khatron Ke Khiladi Season 8 , Shantanu stayed at a suburban property and the ride from the airport to his hotel (around 40km) gave him a feel of the royal city.He said, “I’m here on a brief trip and I am not sure if I will get time to explore, but the ride gave me a nice impression of the city. The old buildings are still in the same colour giving the city its unique identity, which you don’t usually find in other cities. Since I have heard so much about the jewellery of Rajasthan, I am planning to buy silver jewellery for my mother.”The actor was recently seen on the dance reality show, Nach Baliye 9. Ask him what he loves more – acting or dancing, given that he also played the lead in the hugely popular dance-based youth show, Dil Dosti Dance (2011-14) and he is quick to reply, “I always strive for excellence at both acting and dancing so that at the end of the day, I am a better performer.”Shantanu has also starred in episodic shows like Pyaar Tune Kya Kiya, Yeh Hai Aashiqui, and Twistwala Love. On being asked if he would like to be a part of a full-fledged TV soap, he said, “Daily soaps are long-term commitment and right now I am busy with several different things. I wouldn’t mind doing a daily soap, if the show’s content and storyline are good and I have a substantial role. I need to be happy with what I am portraying on screen.” As someone who has done a reality adventure show (Khatron Ke Khiladi), can we see Shantanu in a controversial reality show like Bigg Boss. At one point, there were rumours that Shantanu too had been approached to be a contestant on Bigg Boss 13 . “Not this year. I did get a call last year to be a part of the show. To be honest, a person like me would not fit into a show like that. In fact, I don’t even like watching Bigg Boss personally. I don’t find the show entertaining enough to get drawn to it, but am sure the show has its own fan following.”
