Indian Women arrested at Spa Centre for running Sex Racket

they would provide various sex acts depending on the payment.

Four Indian women were arrested on Monday, December 2, 2019, for running a sex racket at a spa centre.

The incident happened in the city of Jalandhar, Punjab.

Not only were four women arrested but four men were also taken into custody for their involvement. This included Surinder Kumar, who worked as the ‘manager’ of the spa centre.

The spa centre business acted as a front for the sex racket operation.

During the police investigation, it was discovered that customers paid up to Rs. 2,000 (£21) to have sex with one of the sex workers. Regular customers received discounts.

ACP Harsimrat Singh stated that a case was registered at Ramamandi Police Station under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act.

The other three men were identified as Shivam Kumar, aged 21; Deepak Puri, aged 46 and 29-year-old Balveer Kumar.

While the men were identified, police have decided not to name the women involved.

Police officers received a tip-off about the illegal sex racket and sent an undercover officer who posed as a customer. When he saw the operation being run, he passed on the information.

ACP Singh explained that they had received information about the sex racket being run from a spa centre called ‘Grand Beauty Salon’.

An undercover officer posed as a customer and went to the premise. Upon entering, Surinder greeted him.

When the officer asked about the services they offer, Surinder showed them several young women and said that they would provide various sex acts depending on the payment.

After receiving the information, the undercover officer informed ACP Singh and a police team was assembled to conduct a raid.

Police stormed the spa centre and arrested Surinder. Four Indian women were also arrested for their role in the illegal operation.

They also arrested the three other men who were with some of the victims inside the building.

ACP Singh said Surinder had a lot of criminal connections and that prostitution and sex rackets were being run under the disguise of spa centres.

During interrogation, Surinder admitted that he ran the sex racket but claimed that the owner lives in the town of Kartarpur. Further investigation is underway to identify the owner.

ACP Singh revealed that a number of spa centres recently opened in the city. Officers have received allegations that they are also acting as fronts for sex rackets.

There have been police raids on numerous spa centres across India which have found to be sex rackets.
