Trudeau's jet, which is his backup plane, grounded by engine trouble in London

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Trudeau's jet, which is his backup plane, grounded by engine trouble in London Photo by Sean Kilpatrick / THE CANADIAN PRESS

Article content OTTAWA — Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s bad luck with planes continues.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content He was forced to use a back-up aircraft Monday to ferry him to London for a NATO summit because the usual prime ministerial jet was damaged in a hangar accident last month. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Trudeau's jet, which is his backup plane, grounded by engine trouble in London Back to video But after he got to London, the Royal Canadian Air Force discovered a problem with one of the engines on the backup plane during a post-flight inspection. The RCAF says that plane, a CC-150 Polaris, is being repaired but is temporarily “unserviceable.” So, the RCAF has commandeered another CC-150 Polaris — which was in Italy with Gov. Gen. Julie Payette, who has been on a European tour of her own — to take Trudeau, his entourage and accompanying media back to Ottawa. Another plane will have to be found to bring Payette home in time to read Thursday’s speech from the throne to open the new session of Parliament.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Pain with planes also dogged Trudeau during the election campaign earlier this fall. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or On the first day of the campaign, the chartered Liberal plane was knocked out of service when the media bus scraped the underside of a wing. The Liberals hastily arranged a replacement but were later criticized for the revelation that they were actually using two planes — one for Trudeau, his aides and media and another for cargo — while preaching the need to combat climate change by reducing fossil-fuel consumption. As prime minister, Trudeau is normally transported in a Polaris CC-15001, an aircraft fitted out to carry VIPs. Once dubbed a “flying Taj Mahal,” it is now 32 years old and has been plagued with mechanical problems.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content In October, it rolled into a wall while being towed into a hangar at 8 Wing Trenton, sustaining “significant structural damage to the nose and right engine cowling,” according to the RCAF. During his first term, Trudeau experienced numerous problems with the aircraft. He arrival in India last year was delayed after a mechanical problem during a refuelling stop in Rome. A problem with a flap in October 2016 required the aircraft to return to Ottawa 30 minutes taking off with Trudeau, who was en route to Belgium to sign the Canada-Europe free-trade deal. Planes in the fleet available to transport the prime minister and the Governor General have an estimated retirement date of 2026. The government is studying whether it’s time to replace them. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Calgary Sun Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Calgary SUN, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Calgary Sun Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
