Firing and violence on first day of YCC polls

Ludhiana: The first day of the Youth Congress Committee (YCC) elections witnessed unruly scenes which had turned ugly as some Congress leaders had allegedly opened fire, in which one worker got injured outside the polling booth in the community centre of Model Town on Wednesday afternoon. The situation got ugly because two groups of Congress councillors — Parvinder Lapran and Youth Congress functionary Gurjit Singh — indulged in a heated argument, accusing each other of bogus voting.

Following the incident, a heavy police force reached the spot. Meanwhile, one group of Congress workers indulged in a heated argument with the assistant commissioner of police (Civil Lines) Jatinder Singh, after which the Congress workers were lathi-charged by the cops. The incident occurred at around 12noon on Wednesday when polling was on for the Youth Congress elections. Ashwani Dadlan and Manraj Thukral were contesting from Atam Nagar constituency. It is alleged that groups of both the candidates indulged in an argument over bogus voting.

During the argument, one group spread the word that one of their workers was stabbed in the crowd. The workers of both groups then indulged in a clash and opened fire in the air. Amid this, voters who were at the booth fled from there. The police also intervened to pacify both the groups.

Meanwhile, ACP Jatinder Singh reached the spot where Congress worker Gurpeet Gopi tried to stage a protest outside the polling booth, and stopped him. This triggered an argument between ACP and Gopi, following which police used force and lathi-charge to push back Gopi.

The videos of the incident had gone viral on social media by Wednesday evening. Jatinder Singh said, “Congress worker Tajinder Singh got a bullet injury on his right leg. In his statement, Tajinder alleged that Manraj Thukral and his uncle Jaswinder Thukral had open fired at him. On his statement, the police had registered a case against the duo under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC, and the Arms Act.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
