Delhi News: Delhi doctor, woman friend found dead in car

NEW DELHI: In what appears to be a murder followed by suicide, a 62-year-old doctor, who ran a hospital in northwest Delhi’s Rohini, and his 50-yearold woman employee were found dead in the doctor’s car outside his Rohini home on Wednesday morning. The woman had been shot in the chest and the doctor in the temple.Citing ballistic and forensic experts, police said the doctor had shot the woman before killing himself with his licensed revolver. Curiously, the car’s engine was on in the morning, when passersby spotted the bodies and alerted police.According to DCP (Rohini) S D Mishra, the two were in a relationship. He said the doctor was worried as the woman, Sutapa Mukherjee, was allegedly pressuring him to leave his wife, whose vision is impaired, and get married to her.The doctor, Om Prakash Kukreja, owned Nirvana hospital in Rohini where Mukherjee was a director. They had worked together for decades. Kukreja had started out from a small clinic in Samaypur Badli, where Mukherjee was a midwife. On Tuesday, the two left home around 9.30pm to “attend a wedding”. They went incommunicado after midnight.‘Families aware of doctor’s relationship with woman’The woman’s husband is a transporter and her only son lives in Dubai. Kukreja has a son and a daughter, both of whom are doctors and are married. His son lives in Dehradun while his daughter lives in east Delhi.“We received a call at 7.45am informing us about a white car with two bodies inside it. The car was parked in a lane adjacent to the apartment and the ignition was on. Police broke the glass of the rear door window and opened the car. Kukreja was on the driver’s seat with his licensed revolver in his hand and a gunshot wound to his right temple while the woman’s body was on the front passenger seat,” DCP Mishra added.The cops also recovered Kukreja’s mobile phone from the car but were unable to open it due to a pattern lock. Mukherjee had left her mobile at home.The bodies were taken to Baba Saheb Ambedkar hospital, where a postmortem will be conducted on Thursday. Kukreja is survived by his wife Nisha, who is partially blind due to advanced diabetes. They resided at the Rang Rasayan apartments in Rohini sector 13 area. Kukreja’s son flew down from Dehradun on Wednesday evening after being informed about his father’s demise.Investigating officials said the two families were aware about their relationship. A close aide of Kukreja said the families had tried in vain several times to get the two to end their relationship.Mukherjee’s mother Dipti Sarkar, who resides in Kolkata, was currently in Delhi to spend time with her daughter. Sarkar told the police that Sutapa left home around 9.30pm on Tuesday saying that she was going for a wedding and would be back by 1am.“The mother tried calling her but couldn’t get through. Her husband is a transporter and left for work early on Wednesday morning. His phone has been unreachable since then,” an offer privy to the investigation said.Police said the two did attend a wedding in Paschim Vihar and had arrived at the venue at 10.30pm.Before setting up the hospital, Kukreja had run a clinic by the name of ‘City clinic’ in Samaypur Badli till 2004. He opened Nirvana hospital in Sector 15, Rohini, in 2005.
