Madhya Pradesh honey trap case: MC demolishes properties of Sanjha Lokswami owner

Indore Municipal Corporation demolishing a property of Sanjha Lokswami newspaper owner Jitu Soni for his alleged involvement in honey trap case. (Photo:India Today)

The Indore Municipal Corporation on Thursday demolished four illegal structures built by Jeetu Soni, the owner of Sanjha Lokswami tabloid, for his alleged involvement in the Madhya Pradesh honey trap case.

The tabloid published transcripts of sex chat between five women arrested in the honey trap case which involve a former minister and principal secretary of former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan.

The four properties that are demolished on Thursday included My Home Hotel in Geeta Bhawan, Hotel Best Western in South Tukoganj, O2 cafe in Janjeer Square and Lokswami’s bungalow Jag Villa-a 7,000 square ft structure on a 24,000 square ft plot.

Jeetu Soni, who is presently absconding, has nine cases against him -- cases of human trafficking, extortion, blackmailing, arms act and forgery.

The police have also issued a lookout notice for Jeetu Soni to prevent him from escaping the country.

The police had earlier raided his properties and rescued 67 women who were allegedly being forced to indulge in illegal activities. Soni used to run an illegal dance bar in one of his hotels, police have claimed.

The confrontation between the state government and Soni started after he published transcripts of sex chats between a former minister and an official with the previous government with the women arrested in the honey trap case.

Jeetu Soni, through his advocate, had earlier submitted a hard drive containing sex videos of top bureaucrats and ministers of the former Shivraj Singh government in the Indore High Court. The court has sent the drive to the Hyderabad forensic laboratory.

The Madhya Pradesh Police had on September 18 arrested five women and a man from Bhopal and Indore for their alleged involvement in the honey trap case. The six are since in judicial custody and are accused of trapping top ministers and officials and blackmailing them for government projects and money.

Also read | MP honeytrap case: Indore police forms 6 teams to arrest owner of Sanjha Lokswami

Also watch | BJP MP honey trap case: He sexually exploited me, says victim
