Alia Bhatt says Ranbir Kapoor co starrer Brahmastra is a ‘different kind of film’; REVEALS why it got pushed

Off late, Alia Bhatt and Ranbir Kapoor starrer Brahmastra has become the talk of the town. The film is one of the highly anticipated flicks of 2020 and it’s shooting began back in 2017 from Bulgaria. Earlier, it was supposed to hit the screens in 2019. However, it got pushed to 2020. Since then, fans have been waiting for Alia and Ranbir’s first big screen outing together. Over the last few days, social media has been flooded with photos of Ranbir and Alia shooting in Manali for Brahmastra and they have added to the excitement.

Now, in a recent chat with reporters at an event, Alia revealed why Brahmastra is taking so long. At an event, Alia was quizzed about Ranbir co-starrer and the reason behind the delay. Alia mentioned that Brahmastra is a different kind of film due to which it is taking longer than usual. Alia said, “That's because it's a really different kind of a film. So good things take time.” A day back, photos of Alia and Ranbir prepping to shoot a song surfaced on social media and went viral. In a recent chat with Times of India, Alia called Brahmastra a ‘magnum opus’ and mentioned that the film’s shoot is nearing its end.

(Also Read: Alia Bhatt can’t stop gushing over Anushka Sharma’s regal white look; Here’s what she has to say)

The Manali schedule has been going on from the past few days. Alia returned to Mumbai this week after shooting for the film while Ranbir continued to shoot with Amitabh Bachchan in the hills. Big B also shared photos on social media while hanging out with Ranbir in the snowy hill station. When the release date was pushed, it was said that a lot of VFX had to be used in the film and hence, the work is pending to make Brahmastra into a masterpiece. A while back, Alia, Ranbir and Ayan Mukerji launched the logo of the film in Prayagraj. Directed by Ayan, Brahmastra stars Big B, Dimple Kapadia, Nagarjuna Akkineni and Mouni Roy. It also will have a cameo by Shah Rukh Khan. The first part of the trilogy is slated to hit the screens in summer of 2020.
