‘1984 massacres could have been avoided’: Narasimha Rao's grandson condemns Manmohan Singh's statement

NV Subhash, the grandson of former home minister PV Narasimha Rao | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Immediately after then-PM Indira Gandhi's death at the hands of her two Sikh bodyguards, there were riots targeting Sikhs, especially in Delhi Several cases against Congress leaders like Jagdish Tytler and Sajjan Kumar were filed, alleging that they abetted riots that killed thousands of Sikhs NV Subhash, the grandson of former home minister PV Narasimha Rao, is affiliated to the BJP NV Subhash said Manmohan Singh used to be the close friend of Narasimha Rao

Hyderabad: NV Subhash, the grandson of former home minister PV Narasimha Rao, on Thursday denounced former prime minister Manmohan Singh’s statement that the anti-Sikh riots, which took place in 1984, could have been avoided had Rao heeded Inder Kumar Gujral's advice. IK Gujral, who headed an unsteady coalition government in the late 1990s, had passed away on November 30, 2012.

"As a family member, I am feeling saddened by this statement by Dr Manmohan Singh. It is unacceptable," said Subhash.

Rao’s grandson, who is now affiliated to the BJP, also asked if any home minister can take an independent decision without the approval of the Cabinet.

Subhash further opined that calling Army would have been a "disaster".

Saying that Manmohan Singh used to be the close friend of Narasimha Rao, Subhash asked: "Why must you blame Narasimha Rao?"

On Wednesday, Manmohan Singh, while speaking on the occasion of 100th birth anniversary of late IK Gujral, had said, "When the sad event of 1984 took place, Gujral ji that very evening went to the then home minister Narasimha Rao and said to him that the situation is so grim that it is necessary for the government to call the Army at the earliest."

"If that advice would have been heeded, perhaps the massacre that took place in 1984 could have been avoided," he had added.

While the BJP has accused Congress of being responsible for the massacre, the Congress has not issued any statement post-Manmohan Singh's stunning admission as yet. Shiromani Akali Dal has, meanwhile, slammed Manmohan Singh for his statement.

Riots broke out in 1984 after former prime minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards. As a result, thousands of Sikhs were killed in the national capital and across the nation.

Last month, a Delhi court had pulled up the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) over delay in recording of statements of arms dealer Abhishek Verma against former union minister and senior Congress leader Jagdish Tytler in connection with the anti-Sikh riots case.

"Why is it that even though 35 years have elapsed since the incident and many times directions for further investigation have been passed and witnesses have come forward after much hesitation and efforts, the investigating agency is satisfied with the statement under Section 161 which is neither signed by the witness, over which the witness has no control and which is of little evidentiary value?," asked the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.

Abhishek Verma is a witness in the case related to the killing of three Sikhs at Gurdwara Pulbangash in north Delhi on November 1, 1984.
