Telangana CM Is Busy Attending Wedding Ceremonies, He Has No Time To Meet Rape Victim's Kin

Even as the nation boils over the spine-chilling rape and murder of a 27-year-old vet in Telangana, the state chief minister is busy attending weddings with no comment on the case. Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao KCR has not visited the family or even spoken to them over the phone.

His actions have sparked a massive outrage; however, the state chief seems impassive by the developments.

KCR arrived from Delhi after attending a big-fat wedding on Tuesday night and drove off to another wedding in Hyderabad on Wednesday morning. This was his third wedding attendance in six days while the whole nation is protesting over the heinous crime against the woman.

On November 28, the charred body of the vet was found under a culvert of National Highway 44 after she went missing the previous night from Shamshabad toll plaza under the Cyberabad commissioner zone.

On December 1, CM K Chandrashekar Rao along with his cabinet colleagues attended Khanapur MLA Rekha Naik's daughter's wedding and blessed the couple in Hyderabad. He later went to Delhi to attend another wedding on Tuesday.

KCR’s insensitivity towards the crime in his own state is drawing sharp criticism from across the country. While protests are happening in the national capital was well as other cities demanding justice for the woman and outrage over pathetic law and order condition, KCR is busy merry-making with his cabinet colleagues.

The Telangana rape and murder case has shocked the country reminding people of the horrendous Nirbhaya gangrape and murder case in Delhi in 2012.

The Cyberabad Police arrested four men on November 29 in connection with their involvement in the rape and murder of the Telangana doctor. The accused have been identified as Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu. Mohammad Areef (25), who works as a driver, is the prime accused in the Telangana rape-murder case.

Jayamma, mother of Chennakeshavulu, who is accused in the case, told media, “If my son committed the crime, burn him too. My son is nothing to me. Wrong is wrong. She (victim’s mother) gave birth to a daughter after nine months. Her daughter becoming the victim of such a crime… what she must be going through.”



Students and activists have been protesting at Jantar Mantar demanding death penalty for the accused and implementation of stricter laws for crimes against women.

Even the Parliament erupted in outrage with MPs demanding swift death penalty, public lynching and castration of rape convicts.
