Hooch Tragedy Claims 100 Lives, IAF To Train Gaganyaan Crew Members + More Top News

The death toll in the hooch tragedy in parts of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand has crossed 100 after more deaths were reported from the two states.

Most numbers of deaths have been reported from UP's Saharanpur where 70 people lost their lives.There are fears that the toll could go up even further as dozens are still admitted in hospitals, some in critical condition. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) ISRO Gives IAF Full Charge Of Selection And Training Of 10 Crew Members For Gaganyaan Mission

As India treads a step closer to unfurling the country’s flag in a manned mission to space ‘Gaganyaan’, the Indian Space Research Organization has tasked the Indian Air Force with the selection and training of the Gagannauts.

The Gaganyaan mission, as it's called, will launch from the Sriharikota spaceport in Andhra Pradesh sometime in 2022. Read More.

2) US Delivers Advanced Multi-Mission Chinook Helicopters To India That Will Strengthen IAF Fleet

The Indian Air Force arms and ammunition needed thorough modernization and upgradation and ahead of their schedule, the first batch of four Chinook helicopters arrived in India on Sunday.

India has obtained 15 of these helicopters from the United States for boosting the operational capabilities of IAF. The first four CH-47F Chinooks were brought to the Mundra Port in Gujarat. Read More.

3) Baby With 70% Burn Injuries Dies As Hospital Didn't Have A Ventilator, Parents Told To Get It To Save Child

Cases of medical apathy are not anything new in this country. Most of the times on the receiving end will be poor patients and their relatives who are desperately trying to get some much needed medical attention.

The latest case of medical apathy, coming from Madhya Pradesh is no different. A doctor at the Bundelkhand Medical College in Sagar District refused to provide ventilation to a kid who was admitted there with 70 per cent burn injuries, resulting in her death. Read More.

4) Six-Year-Old Boy Beheaded In Medina In Front Of Mother, Locals Suspect Sectarian Violence

The recent murder of a six-year-old boy in the Islamic pilgrimage site of Medina has raised concerns over lack of public concern in the kingdom.

Zakaria Al-Jaber, around the age of six, was travelling with his mother in a taxi to the Prophet’s mosque. According to The Muslim Vibe, the taxi for some unknown reasons pulled over and then dragged the boy out of the car to a coffee shop. Read More.

5) Studies More Important Than Rallies, Says SC Rejecting BJP's Plea Against Loudspeaker Ban

The Supreme Court has rejected a plea by the BJP in West Bengal to allow the use of loudspeakers.

The West Bengal pollution control board had in 2013 banned the use of loudspeakers in the months of February and March in the residential area and near educational institutions because of school examinations. Read More.
