Queen Maxima follows Meghan Markle's lead in a colour-clashing purple and red outfit

Royal fans won't forget the moment the Duchess of Sussex stepped out in a colourful red and purple outfit for an official engagement in January 2019. But the moment has been refreshed in our memories after Queen Maxima, 48, wore a very similar colour-clashing ensemble for the Prince Claus Award ceremony in Amsterdam on Wednesday. The awards recognise individuals and organisations in the cultural field whose work has a positive impact on their society, and this year's winner was African Visual Artist Kamala Ibrahim Ishag.

As she was pictured with husband King Willem-Alexander of The Netherlands, 52, at the Royal Palace, Maxima looked every inch the Queen in the regal colours. She wore a purple midi dress from Claes Iversen's SS 2017 Couture collection which had a black and red print and red floral detailing around the neckline. Drawing attention to the red accents of the dress, she draped a bright red coat around her shoulders and added a pair of matching heels with see-through panels.

MORE: Pantone Colour of the Year 2020: Royals wearing Classic Blue

With such a statement outfit, the mother-of-three kept the rest of her look simple. She wore her blonde hair loose around her shoulders and opted for minimal makeup. Alongside his wife, Willem opted for a less eye-catching blue suit with a white shirt and a pale blue tie.

While it may seem like an unusual colour combination, a number of other royals have been seen rocking it in the past. Meghan wore a red coat by Sentaler over her purple Babaton dress and red high heels, but unlike Maxima, she did not stick to the colour-scheme for her bag. While Maxima opted for a red clutch, Prince Harry's wife accessorised with a subtle Gabriela Hearst Nina bag in tan. Meghan's late mother-in-law Princess Diana also nailed the vibrant colours in the past with her purple pencil skirt and red jacket making an appearance during her visits to India and Hong Kong.

READ: Pippa Middleton wraps up warm in a festive green Mango coat - with a matching bag
