premium drinks: USL’s premium volume hits 50% mark, Retail News, ET Retail

Sale of costlier drinks contributed more than 50% to United Spirits’ ( USL ) total volumes in the last fiscal. It’s the first time this has happened, showing that the effort towards premiumisation by the country’s largest spirits maker is succeeding.USL classifies its brands under two categories: Prestige & Above segment, which includes the likes of Johnnie Walker, Vat 69 and McDowell’s No 1 whiskey, and the Popular segment, which includes White Mischief vodka and Bagpiper whiskey.The former contributed 51%, or about 41 million cases (of 9 litres each) to the overall volume sales, up from 30% in 2014-15, as per the latest annual report. In comparison, the popular segment’s contribution has dipped to 49% from 70% during the same period. USL sold 81.5 million cases last year.The company has been focusing on premium drinks , which fetch higher margins, ever since British giant Diageo took control of the company a few years ago. “Since 2014, as part of our transformation journey, we set a clear strategy to grow our brands with a strong focus on premiumisation. Reinforcing this premiumisation trend, last year, the Luxury segment grew faster than the Premium segment, which in turn has grown faster than Prestige,” chief executive Anand Kripalu told TOI. The trend is expected to continue as more young Indians, with higher disposable income, enter the legal age of drinking.A large thrust to the volume growth has come from McDowell’s No 1 whiskey, which sold about 27 million cases, or 66% of the total premium volume sales, as per data from drinks research firm IWSR. While McDowell’s also straddles across the rum and brandy segments, the presence there is in the value category, where prices are less and thus yield thinner margins. USL has been working to repackage, rebrand or redesign several of its power brands since 2015, and McDowell’s was one of the first to undergo the process.The move is part of USL’s effort to compete better with French rival Pernod Ricard, which operates exclusively in the premium category through its brands like Blenders Pride, Imperial Blue and Chivas Regal whiskey. Abneesh Roy, executive VP of Edelweiss Securities, said though advertisement spends and packaging for the premium brands have increased, Pernod is more aggressive, and its growth rate is stronger in the category helped by Seagram brands. “Pernod’s prestige and above segment is bigger and stronger,” he added.While volumes have improved, the premium segment already contributes two-thirds to the topline by value and USL has long term plans to increase this to 75-80%. “The future profit pool of this industry will be in prestige and above and a lion’s share of our business will be in (that segment),” Kripalu said last year.In an effort to go premium, USL also started franchising some of its popular brands a few years ago, and till date has done it in 13 states such as Rajasthan Himachal Pradesh and Delhi . The company says the move helps it move towards an asset-light model, besides ensuring “stability of margins in the segment, reduce working capital requirements and enable management to focus on higher margin products.” according to the annual report.
