Panipat Movie Review

critic's rating: 3.5/5

Maratha pride rules!

Shadashivrao Bhau (Arjun Kapoor), is a commander in his cousin Nanasaheb Peshwa’s (Mohnish Bahl) army. After he wins a decisive battle down South against the Nizam of Udgir, Sadashiv is appointed as the finance minister by Nanasaheb. Troubled by the news that kings up North aren't prompt in paying taxes due to them, he proposes to send a general to teach them a lesson. Najib-Ud-Daula (Mantra) forms an alliance with Afghan chieftain Ahmad Shah Abdali (Sanjay Dutt), and now Sadashiv has to take up the field himself. He's forced by Nanasaheb to take his son and heir Vishwasrao (Abhishek Nigam) on the campaign. His cousin, Shamsher Bahadur (Sahil Salathia) and his captain of armoured guns Ibrahim Khan Gardi (Nawab Khan) are also with him. His newly-wedded wife Parvati Bai (Kriti Sanon) and a host of women and pilgrims too tag along. Sadashiv plans to utilise the services of Maratha chieftains settled along the way, asking them for rations and men, strengthening his army. He also counts in the support of Sikhs and Rajputs against the Afghan invader.

His plans almost work. He's successful in taking Delhi. But he's still short of men and rations. He refuses to reach a settlement with Abdali, preferring to fight till his last breath. Despite showcasing individual bravery, the Marathas ultimately lose the battle of Panipat, done in by the treachery of some selfish kings...

Ashutosh Gowariker has made a detailed war film, showing us how not only valour but also strategy that makes the difference between victory and defeat. Alliances are the backbone of war. Both sides use all kinds of tactics to draw as many heads of state to their side. The behind-the-scenes happenings are more intriguing than the actual war as they show the political climate of that era. The way horse-trading takes place, one feels nothing has changed. Abdali's character even remarks that the disunity between the Indian rulers will win the war for him.

Apart from this, palace intrigue in the Peshwa household is also brought into the limelight.. It's shown how one person's ill ambitions can be the source of destruction for all.

The intricately crafted war scenes take the pride of place in the film. You can feel the noise and the tremors go through you when the guns start blazing. The formation of troops, the deployment of various devices add drama to the story. Both Sadashiv and Abdali move their troops like pieces on a chessboard, trying to outguess each other. It's gripping despite the fact that you know the end is going to be tragic. Sadashiv is shown going down fighting like a lion, using every ounce of energy he has to take as many as he can along with him. Parvati Bai too is shown battling soldiers who raid their camp.

Gowariker has made a case for Hindu Muslim unity with the film. Bajirao's Muslim son by Mastani, Shamsher is Sadashiv's most trusted aide and goes down fighting alongside him. Ibrahim Khan Gardi is shown to be a crucial component in his war machine as well. There's no melodrama or jingoism involved thankfully. Abdali isn't shown to be a religious maniac but an able general. Nor is Sadashiv Rao fighting for the Hindu pride. He's defending an ideal that's all -- the idea of one nation. At the end, the film gives out the message that war hurts everyone and decimates our finest in the process.

Arjun Kapoor is sincere as hell in his role. One can feel his angst, his agony when he realises his own personal bravery isn't enough to turn the tide. He successfully brings out the personality of a warrior who knows the cost of war. Kriti Sanon isn't given a mere eye candy role but stands for women empowerment in the film. Her big moment occurs when she successfully negotiates with Zeenat Aman's character. Sanjay Dutt is as larger-than-life as ever and fills the screen with his presence in every scene. His Abdali isn't as volatile as Ranveer Singh's Khilji but one can sense the madness kept tightly on leash. Padmini Kolhapure, Mohnish Bahl et al remain as dependable like always.

Watch the film for its opulence, it's well-choreographed fight scenes, as well as a colourful lesson in history. It might not be all accurate and yet gives you a sense of place and time...

Trailer : Panipat
