[PHOTOS] Alia Bhatt goes au naturale and we can't help but crush over her radiant skin

Alia Bhatt gets papped in the city

Key Highlights Bollywood actress Alia Bhatt was recently papped in the city During her outing, she opted for a 'no fuss no muss' look Alia chose to ditch makeup and looked absolutely fresh and radiant

Who's doesn't like Alia Bhatt? After dipping her toes in showbiz with Karan Johar's Student of the Year, Alia took over the Hindi film industry by storm just after her second film. Earlier this year, the diva left everyone speechless with her spectacular performance in Zoya Akhtar's Gully Boy. Alia is now prepping to star in her first Sanjay Leela Bhansali movie. Earlier today, she was papped outside the filmmaker's office in Mumbai.

During her outing, the 26-year-old actress opted for a 'no fuss no muss' look. Teaming up a white crop top and blue harem pants with a blue denim jacket, Alia chose to ditch makeup and looked absolutely fresh and radiant. Pulling her hair back in a bun, she completed her look with comfy pink sliders.

Check out Alia Bhatt's latest photos below:

Talking about Alia's first collaboration with SLB, she will be headlining Gangubai Kathiawadi. The release date of the film has also been finalised and it will hit the screens on September 11, 2020. Earlier, Alia was cast to play the lead in Inshallah along with Salman Khan, but the movie was shelved before it went on floors.

Meanwhile, Alia was recently in Himachal Pradesh shooting for Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra. The movie, which is being produced by Dharma Productions, also stars Ranbir Kapoor, Amitabh Bachchan and Mouni Roy in key roles. Brahmastra will be Alia and Ranbir's first film together. It is scheduled for a summer 2020 release.

Apart from this, the actress has a lot of projects in the pipeline. She will be headlining her father Mahesh Bhatt's directorial comeback, Sadak 2. The diva will also be featuring in Karan Johar's Takht alongside Ranveer Singh, Kareena Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal and Janhvi Kapoor. Alia will also be seen in SS Rajamouli's RRR.

Stay tuned for fresh updates on entertainment, lifestyle, fashion and much more!
