Mumbai: Father kills daughter and wife, wanted to marry girlfriend; confesses after a week of arrest

Sayyed said that his wife had killed his daughter, which is why he slit her throat (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: An appalling incident took place in Mumbai when a father allegedly murdered his own daughter. The accused and his girlfriend had been arrested by the police on grounds of murdering his wife and daughter. A Mahim zari unit owner, the accused was arrested by the police for killing his daughter and wife.

More than a week after the arrest, the accused confessed to slitting his daughter's throat because he thought that she had brought him bad luck. Illiyas Sayyed, the 36-year-old accused even confessed that he and his girlfriend had tried to set his flat on fire to hide his crimes.

Also Read: Climate change seen as top threat, but US power a growing worry: Poll

According to the Times of India's report, the incident was highlighted when the residents noticed that smoke was coming out of Sayyed's flat. After seeing the smoke, they informed the Shahu Nagar police. When the police opened the door, they found the dead bodies of his wife and daughter lying in the kitchen.

During initial interrogation, Sayyed said that his wife had killed his daughter, which is why he slit her throat. However, on further interrogation, Sayyed revealed that he had suffered losses after her birth, which prompted him into believing that her birth had brought him bad luck.

According to the police, the accused has had an extra-marital affair with a woman since the past three years. The police also added that they recovered the knife and the blood-stained shirt of the accused. The accused also stated that he wanted to marry his girlfriend and live with her along with his elder daughter.

Allegedly, Sayyed went to work after committing the crime and called his girlfriend. The two accused had decided on setting the flat on fire. However, when Sayyed's girlfriend could not find kerosene, she covered the bodies in edible oil.
