Depression a reason behind mass family suicides, murders in Delhi NCR

File photo of the Ghaziabad family that was wiped out on Tuesday.

On Tuesday, a businessman, his wife and manager jumped to death from their eighth floor apartment in Ghaziabad's Indirapuram. Before taking the extreme step, the couple had killed their two minor children too.

The daughter was strangulated to death, while the son's throat was slit to kill him. The family's pet rabbit was also found dead in the same room as the children. Police said that the couple had suffered huge business losses.

The businessman had made an early-morning video call to a friend, showed him his two dead children and said that 'everything was finished'. "Around 5 am, residents in their building called the police when guards heard the sounds of the three bodies falling on the ground," said Ghaziabad's Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Sudhir Kumar Singh.

The quiet neighbourhood near the national capital woke up to shock and horror on a chilly winter morning, but it wasn't a one-off case in the region. In fact, a growing incidence of depression, caused by financial hopelessness, besides professional and relationship discords, has triggered a horrific spree of killings and mass suicides in Delhi-NCR families, top experts have found out.

Extreme steps

In Ghaziabad itself, a former director of a pharmaceutical company killed his wife with a hammer and poisoned his three daughters, including a three-year-old, to death before committing suicide in July.

In the same month, a senior staffer with a Hyderabad-based chemical factory slit the throats of his wife, who ran four schools in Haryana, young daughter and minor son while they were asleep at their residence in Gurugram. Later, he also killed himself. His suicide note read: "I am completely failed. Taking my family along with me. I am completely responsible for this. No one else.

In South Delhi's Mehrauli, a private tutor tried to kill himself in June after slitting the throats of his wife and three minor children, including an infant. He confessed that his wife's poor health was the reason behind what he did. "He feared that if she died, he won't be able to take care of the children. He had been in depression for the past few months," said a police officer.

In April, a software engineer in Ghaziabad killed his wife and three young children, an act he followed up with a confession video on a family WhatsApp group. "He had lost his job at an IT company in Bengaluru in January," said an investigator.

Diving deep

"Men have not shown mercy whether it's a two-month-old toddler or a 21-year-old daughter. This is a true sign that these men were totally in hopeless situations caused by depression.

When a person loses hope, he sees only a dead-end," said Rajiv Mehta, Vice-Chairperson, Department of Psychiatry, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital.

"Financial constraints, crises at professional front and relationship issues, including marital discords, are reasons that lead to depression. The suspicion that the wife is having an affair triggers man's self-aggrandisement. Out of revenge, he kills his wife and children. The person shows no mercy in such cases," he explained.

Mehta said that such men also kill themselves because they don't want to live due to the fear of punishment and the shame they will have to face.

Dr. Pratibha Sinha, a psychiatrist who runs a private clinic in South Delhi's Lajpat Nagar, also said that financial hopelessness is a prime reason a man kills his entire family and then commits suicide.

"In many cases, a man, who is the main bread winner of the family, wants to kill himself when he loses his job or is under huge debt. But fears that his wife and kids may not survive after he's gone force him to kill them as well. If promises have been broken, a man may also fear a loss of face among his peers," she said.

Dr. Nand Kumar, Professor, Psychiatry, AIIMS, said that there have been massive social changes and stress levels have spiked manifold in recent years. "Priorities have changed and so has the strength to cope up with difficult situations. Some men think of ending miseries once and for all. Killing wife and kids looks a solution to some," he said.

Crime of passion

Meanwhile, police said that of all murder cases, about 15 per cent are crimes of passion. "In almost all such cases, accused are found to be first-timers. And a sense of betrayal or a feeling of revenge precedes the act," said a police officer. "In most of these cases, sharp-edged weapons or firearms have been used to ensure death," he said.

He said that such cases are not very difficult to crack, as suicide notes are often left behind and relatives' testimonies are enough to substantiate reasons behind killings.

Mapping a horrific spree

Tuesday: A businessman, his wife and manager jumped to death from their eighth-floor apartment in Indirapuram. The couple had killed their two kids too.

July: A former director of a firm killed his wife with a hammer and poisoned his three daughters to death before committing suicide Ghaziabad.

July: A senior staffer with a chemical factory slit the throats of his wife, young daughter and minor son while they were asleep at their residence in Gurugram. Later, he also killed himself.

June: In South Delhi's Mehrauli, a private tutor tried to kill himself in June after slitting the throats of his wife and three minor children, including an infant.

April: An engineer in Ghaziabad killed his wife and three children. He had lost his job at an IT company in Bengaluru.
