Forest department orders to shoot Amreli’s ‘man-eater’ leopard

RAJKOT: The forest department has issued orders to shoot a leopard in Amreli district after killed a 50-year-old farmer on Wednesday night, the attack being the most brutal ever since in the region in the recent past.The farmer Vaju Board, who was sleeping outside his hut after watering the cotton farm in Mota Munjiyasar village, was dragged by the leopard for quite some distance. The leopard tore apart his abdomen and other body parts. Forest officials strongly suspect that the leopard even ate some of the body parts as pieces of flesh were found scattered near the bushes where Board’s body was found.This is the second incident of leopard killing a human in the same village. Earlier in September, a 70-year-old woman had died in a leopard attack here.A team of 56 forest department staff including trackers from Sasan, Junagadh , Gir (east) and Shetrunji range are scanning the area to trap leopard which is now suspected to have become a man-eater.Deputy conservator of forest Amreli, Priyanka Gehlot told TOI, “We have set up 10 cages to trap the leopard and a camouflage to trap it. If this leopard is not captured alive, we have issued instructions to shoot the animal.”The villagers only came to know about the incident in the morning. Ramesh Satasia a resident of Mota Munjiyasar said, “This is the second incident leopard attack in the village. This has occurred because of utter carelessness of PGVCL and forest department. We had demanded electricity during the day time so we don’t have to come to the farm during night time.”“On Tuesday also, we had informed the forest department about leopard movement near the village, but they did not take it seriously,” alleged Satasia.Two months ago, the forest officials had captured four leopards from near this village. In last eight months, nine people have been killed by leopards in the villages of Visavadar , Dhari and Bagasra talukas.Looking at the high number of leopard attacks, the forest department had decided to make these three talukas bordering Junagadh and Amreli districts leopard free and had set up 25 cages. They have been able to cage 14 leopard captured in last one month.
