All 4 accused in Hyderabad vet gangrape case shot dead in encounter, say cops

All 4 accused in Hyderabad vet gangrape case shot dead in encounter, say cops

The accused had been taken to the scene of the crime on Thursday to collect evidence of the crime. The reports of the encounter surfaced on Friday morning.

news Encounter

In a sudden development in the gangrape and murder case of a vet in Hyderabad, the four accused in the case – Areef, Shiva, Naveen and Chennakeshavulu – have been shot dead by the Telangana police in a reported encounter. Police said that the accused, who were taken to the scene of the crime for a reconstruction of the crime attempted to escape. Two policemen were also injured in the incident, they said.

The spot where the four where shot dead around 50 kms from Hyderabad pic.twitter.com/sLfuu2NHCv — Dhanya Rajendran (@dhanyarajendran) December 6, 2019

The accused were shot dead in the same place where Disha's (name changed) body was burnt after she was gangraped and murdered. They had been taken to the scene of the crime at Chatanpally, nearly 50 km away from Hyderabad, on Thursday to collect evidence of the crime. The reports of the reported encounter surfaced on Friday morning. Additional DG Law and Order, Jitender, told TNM that the incident happened after 6 am on Friday.

DCP Prakash Reddy, who is at the scene of the incident, told TNM that there was crossfire as the accused took the guns of the policemen and attempted to escape. The incident happened between 6 and 6.30 am, he said.

On Wednesday, the Shadnagar court had remanded the four accused to seven-days police custody. The Hyderabad police on Monday had filed a petition in a local court at Shadnagar seeking 10-day custody of the accused for a more comprehensive interrogation. The court, on Wednesday, had granted a seven-day police custody of the accused.

On November 27, Disha, a 26-year-old veterinarian doctor from Hyderabad was gangraped and killed allegedly by the four-member gang, who are natives of Narayanpet district, at Thondupally toll gate on Outer Ring Road, Shamshabad.

The gang who were driving a lorry had trapped her by deflating one of the tyres of her two-wheeler which she had parked near the toll gate. Around 9 pm, when she reached the spot to take her vehicle she noticed that the tyre was punctured. The men approached her saying they would help her fix the tyre. They forcibly took her to nearby bushes, assaulted and killed her.

After killing her, they burned her body at Chatanpally village under Shadnagar police station limits, a few kms away from the place where she was murdered.
