Four accused in Telangana doctor's rape-murder killed in police encounter during failed escape bid

The spot near Shadnagar where police found the victim's body | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused were trying to flee as the police took them to recreate the scene of the crime All four accused were lodged at the high-security in Cherlapally A court allowed remanded the accused to seven-days in police custody on Thursday

Hyderabad: In a startling turn of events, all four accused in the horrific rape and murder of a female veterinarian in Telangana have been killed in an encounter with the police. They were arrested earlier this month after locals found the charred body of the 27-year-old woman under a bridge near Shadnagar town under the limits of the Cyberabad police commissionerate. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has ordered its officers to conduct a spot inquiry in this regard.

In a press release, the Commission said that a lack of 'Standard Operation Procedure' to immediately respond in situations of panic by police sends a wrong message to society. Meanwhile, police said that the accused tried to flee and were killed during the attempt. This happened when the police were trying to recreate the timeline of the crime early Friday morning. Reports in sections of the media suggest that two of the accused even tried to attack police officers at around 3 AM.

They were shot dead about 100 metres from the spot where the victim's body was found. Police were trying to recreate the events that took place on the night of November 28 during the early hours of night owing to the heavy presence of locals and media persons outside the Cherlapally jail during the daytime. All four accused were sent to police custody for seven days starting Thursday. They were arrested first on November 29.

Shamshadabad deputy commissioner of police Prakash Reddy said that Cyberabad police had brought the accused to the crime spot for re-construction of the sequence of events. Police fired in self-defence after the accused snatched a weapon and fired on police, adds Reddy.

Telangana rape case: Police encounter site video

Cyberabad Commissioner VC Sajjanar arrived at the spot. The post-mortem of the accused will be conducted at Mahbubnagar district hospital. The commissioner has confirmed that all of the four accused were killed between 3 AM and 6 AM at Chatanpally near Shadnagar. On Thursday, an announcement was made that a Special Court is being set up at the Mahbubnagar District Court to hear the case against the accused after Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao told the public that the matter will be decided by a fast-track court. The sheer brutality of this crime continues to grip the nation to this very day.

Hyderabad: Senior Police officials arrive at the site of the encounter. All four accused in the rape and murder of woman veterinarian in Telangana were killed in an encounter with the police when the accused tried to escape while being taken to the crime spot. https://t.co/TB4R8EuPyr pic.twitter.com/7fuG87MP0m — ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

Following their arrest, all of the four accused namely Jollu Shiva (26), Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu (20), Mohammed Arif (26) and Jollu Naveen (20) were being held at the high-security jail in Cherlapally. Their families had also disowned them with the mother of one of the accused telling media outlets that the punishment for her should be the same as he did to the innocent veterinarian who was returning home when she found that the tire of her scooter was punctured near Tondupally toll plaza in Ranga Reddy district.

A preliminary investigation led police to believe that on the day of the crime, the victim went to Kolluru village. She rode back towards her home on her scooter which she parked at a spot near the toll plaza and took a cab to her appointment with a dermatologist in Gachibowli. Investigators said that the victim took a cab back to the spot where she had parked her two-wheeler and returned only to find one of the tires of her scooter deflated.

She called her sister and apprised her of the situation while adding that a few people had offered to help with the tire. This was the last anyone heard from her. When they could not reach her, family members of the victim approached the police and a missing person case was registered in this regard. A team of personnel found her footwear and pieces of her clothing not far from the toll plaza. They also found her scooter abandoned at a separate spot. On the morning of November 28, her charred body was found near Chatanpally bridge near Shadnagar at a spot 25 kilometres from where she had parked her scooter the night before. Police later revealed that she had been gang-raped and murdered before the culprits burnt her body in order to destroy any evidence that would lead investigators back to them.
