Priyanka, Rahul slams Narendra Modi government during Lucknow roadshow

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra made her debut in active politics on Monday with the massive roadshow in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. Priyanka was accompanied by Congress president Rahul Gandhi, and general secretary Jyotiraditya Scindia.

Priyanka along with Rahul and scindia greeted thousands of well-wishers gathered along the path of their roadshow in Lucknow.

“Lucknow is filled to the brim with Congress supporters that have gathered to see Congress President @RahulGandhi & GS Incharges UP East & West @priyankagandhi & @JM_Scindia during their roadshow,” Congress tweeted.

After the roadshow, Rahul Gandhi addressed the crowd at Lucknow’s PCC office.

Rahul said, “I’m very happy to be here. I express my gratitude for this reception filled with your love. I assure you that Congress party will not be on the back foot anymore.”

He urged the people of UP to topple the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government in the state.

Rahul said, “I have given the responsibility of strengthening Congress party in UP to @priyankagandhi and @JM_Scindia. The Congress party must form the govt in UP.”

He further said, he has appointed Priyanka and Scindia as the General Secretaries of UP and they both have been instructed that they should fight against the injustice meted out against UP.

“We will not rest until we form a government that belongs to the youth, farmers and the marginalised. This is an ideological battle. On one hand there is the Congress ideology of love, harmony and brotherhood. On the other, there is BJP-RSS ideology of dividing and weakening the nation,” Rahul said.

Rahul further said, “Uttar Pradesh has witnessed what Narendra Modi did for the last 5 years in the country. Youth are saying that @narendramodi failed his promise to provide employment and benefited only people like Anil Ambani.”

Rahul slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi over Rafale and said that PM Modi desired to be a chowkidar, “@narendramodi said he wants to be a ‘Chowkidar’. The truth has now surfaced that he conducted parallel negotiations in the Rafale deal. The clause that enabled investigation in case of corruption, was waived off by Modi.”

“The hollow promises of Modi have come to light. Congress workers must fight this battle with issues that concern the youth, farmers. There are no dearth of issues. Congress party will fight to transform UP and the nation,” Rahul said.
