Warangal acid attack encounter in 2008 similar to killing of accused in Disha rape case by Telangana police

Cyberabad commissioner of police VC Sajjanar (File Photo) | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjanar was Warangal SP in 2008 Sajjanar was hailed as 'Encounter Cop' after police shot the three acid-attack accused dead in an encounter while foiling a failed escape attempt At the time, Sajjanar had claimed that the accused attacked cops with crude bombs during re-enactment at crime scene

Hyderabad: On Friday morning, the nation woke up to the news of the four accused in the sensational rape-murder case of a veterinarian in Telangana's Cyberabad, being killed in a police encounter. Senior officials said that the cops opened fire in self-defence after one of the accused snatched a policeman's weapon and fired it.

The 27-year-old victim's family has welcomed the police action and so have others who are lauding it as "speedy justice". Speaking to a news agency, the father said that his daughter's soul may now be at peace. Telangana police have solved the case in record-time and have set an example for the rest of the country, said the victim's sister.

Who is VC Sajjanar?

However, this is not the first time Cyberabad commissioner of police VC Sajjanar is caught up in the middle of a storm over an unsanctioned encounter which seems to have bypassed prevalence over the rule of law. In 2008, he was the superintendent of police in Warangal when a similar incident took place.

In December 2008, police in Andhra Pradesh shot dead three men accused of throwing acid on two women. Both of the victims were engineering students of the Kakatiya Institute of Technology. Reports at the time had suggested that they were attacked with acid after one of them turned down the proposal of one of the accused. Srinivas Rao, aged 25, was identified as the main accused along with his accomplices P Harikrishna (24) and B Sanjay (22).

In his defence of the police action, Sajjanar had claimed that personnel fired at the three accused during a re-enactment of the crime scene after the accused attempted to attack the police by throwing crude bombs at them. Similar to the case from Cyberabad in Telangana, the accused in Warangal were also arrested within 48 hours and killed within days of the arrest. Sajjanar was hailed as the 'encounter cop' by social media users and the police action was lauded by the acid attack victims and their families.

It is still unclear whether the police action in Telangana will be subjected to an inquiry. However, the deaths of the four accused will now vapourise any chances of a court of law declaring them the culprits and not merely the accused.
