8 killed, 13 hurt in road, rail mishaps

Malkangiri/Rourkela/Balasore: Even as the country is celebrating the 30th National Road Safety Week, at least eight persons were killed, while more than 13 were left with grievous injuries in separate road accidents in the state, Monday.

In the first incident, four persons were killed and about 11 others sustained critical injuries after a pick-up van they were travelling by turned turtle near Kathiguda in Malkangiri district.

The identity of the deceased is yet to be ascertained.

Sources said about 15 people from Sananayakguda village under Pangam Gram Panchayat were travelling in the pick-up van to attend a political programme at Mathili. The incident occurred after the driver of the pick-up van lost control over the vehicle, following which it overturned.

As per latest information, all the injured have been admitted to Mathili Community Health Centre (CHC) for treatment.

The driver of the vehicle has been detained. “A case has been registered and investigation into the incident is underway,” said Malkangiri SP Jagmohan Meena.

In Rourkela, two girls lost their lives after the scooter they were travelling on was hit by a speeding truck near TCI Chowk under Brahmani Tarang police limits in Rourkela of Sundargarh district.

As the identities of the girls have not been ascertained, their bodies have been stored in the morgue of Rourkela Government Hospital (RGH) after post-mortem.

While the driver of the truck fled the spot after the mishap, Brahmani Tarang police have seized the vehicle and initiated a probe into the matter.

In Balasore district, a person was killed, while two others sustained critical injuries after two trucks crashed into another truck on NH-16 near Bhagia Chhak under Simulia police station.

The deceased, who was a driver of one of the trucks, is yet to be identified.

The incident took place when the three trucks that were going to Balasore from Bhadrak collided against each other from the rear. While one truck driver died on the spot, drivers of two other vehicles were admitted to hospital at Simulia in critical condition.

The accident occurred due to rash speed driving, said an onlooker. On receiving information, police rushed to the spot and initiated an investigation into the incident.

In Keonjhar district, an unknown youth was run over by Tata-Vishakhapatnam superfast passenger train about 100 meters from the Banshapani railway station in Keonjhar district Monday.

Locals noticed the decapitated body on the rail tracks near the platform No 1 and informed the Government Railway Police (GRP) and the Banshpani railway station authorities. The deceased, who is yet to be identified, is suspected to have committed suicide by jumping on the rail tracks.

The incident occurred after the body was found lying on the railway tracks after the train crossed the Banshapani railway station at 4.30 pm. GRP sent the body for post-mortem and have started an investigation.

PNN
