'Kar Doon Ek Fire': In UP's Chitrakoot, Man Shoots Woman In Face After She Stops Dancing At Function

New Delhi:

In a chilling reminder of Jessica Lal murder case, a woman was shot in face by a man in inebriated condition after she stopped dancing at a function. The incident took place in Uttar Pradesh’s Chitrakoot on December 1st. it came to light only after the shocking video went viral on Friday. In a tweet, the Chitrakoot Police said that it is trying to nab the accused. The police have registered a case under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code. The 42-second video shows the dancer on the stage. Suddenly the music stops.

A woman dancer was shot at after she stopped dancing in the marriage ceremony of a Gram Pradhan's daughter in Chitrakoot on December 1. Live video is available to police now and media now. There is a shameful tradition of calling women dancers.

pic.twitter.com/Ngj0SkrKbZ — Salman Khan's Fans (@StayAwayHaterz) December 6, 2019

A voice can be heard from the crowd of a man who demands the performer to dance again. He asks his friend – ‘kar doon ek fire (Should I open fire)’. "Sudhir bhaiya, aap goli chala hi do (Brother, you should fire the gun)," another man then says. Then suddenly a gunshot can be heard. The young woman loses balance and the co-dance is seen holding her. The shocking video is being shared widely on social media amid the outrage over growing number of crimes against women.

According to an NDTV report, the incident took place at the wedding of Tikra village chief Sudhir Singh Patel's daughter. On Sunday, the groom's paternal uncle Ram Pratap filed a first information report against an unknown man, an NDTV report said. In 1999, the nation was shocked with the Jessica Lall murder. Lall was shot dead by Manu Sharma, son of ex-minister, after she had refused to serve him liquor at the Tamarind Court restaurant owned by socialite Bina Ramani at Qutub Colonnade in South Delhi's Mehrauli area on the night of April 30, 1999.

Sharma, son of former Union Minister Venod Sharma, was awarded life imprisonment by the high court in December 2006 for killing Jessica Lall in 1999. The trial court had acquitted him, but the Delhi High Court had reversed it and the Supreme Court had upheld the life sentence in April 2010.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
