Makers of Kamal Haasan's Indian 2 claim the posters going viral are 'fake'

Makers call out fake poster of Indian 2

Key Highlights Posters of Kamal Haasan's next film, Indian 2 has been going viral on social media The makers of the film now claim that the posters are fake They wrote, "This poster of #Indian2 circulating online is not an official one!"

Kamal Haasan's acting prowess and on-screen brilliance is known to make aspiring actors want to work harder to make a mark in the industry. Apart from his beautiful and elegant Bharatnatyam moves, Kamal is one of the finest performers the country has ever seen. After wowing his fans in films like Ek Duje Ke Liye and Chachi 420, Kamal has been selective with his Bollywood films, but he continues to be a reigning superstar in the Southern film industry. Apart from all the controversies that constantly follow the superstar around, it's his next film that fans have been waiting for.

Kamal will next be seen in Indian 2, a sequel to the 1993 blockbuster film, Indian, fans have been waiting with bated breath for an update on the sequel. The film also stars Kajal Aggarwal, Rakul Preet Singh, Priya Bhavani Shankar, Siddharth, Vidyut Jamwal, Delhi Ganesh, and Nedumudi Venu in pivotal roles. After leaked pictures from the sets of the film going viral, it's the posters of Kamal that fans have been loving.

The makers of the film now claim that the posters that are going viral aren't the official posters. Taking to Twitter, the production house wrote, "This poster of # Indian2 circulating online is not an official one! Neither the production house nor the director & team is involved in this!"

Check out the post here:

This poster of #Indian2 circulating online is not an official one!



Neither the production house nor the director & team is involved in this! pic.twitter.com/ebkqS1r8hq — Lyca Productions (@LycaProductions) December 5, 2019

Bankrolled by Lyca Productions, the team is expected to wrap up the shoot in Bhopal in 20 days and head to Taiwan and Europe to shoot the flashback scenes. Directed by S.Shankar, the film will now also star Vijay Sethupathi. Music is being composed by Anirudh Ravichander.

The vigilante action thriller is already being declared a hit even before the makers could finish the shooting of the film.

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on Kamal Haasan and Indian 2.
