Tired of being harassed, Mumbai man's two wives murder him

The two accused women have been identified as Savita and Sarita (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man named Raju Waghmare was murdered at his residence in Goregaon West, Mumbai Allegedly, Raju's two wives killed him The two accused were tired of being harassed and tortured by their husband

Mumbai: Two women in Mumbai's Goregaon West allegedly murdered their husband on Thursday. The deceased has been identified as Raju Waghmare. Raju was allegedly addicted to alcohol and was unemployed. He had been living in the same house with his two wives and children.

The two accused women have been identified as Savita and Sarita. At around 1 am on Thursday, the two women allegedly tied Raju's hands and feet to his bed. According to the Indian Express, the two women used a pillow to smother Raju to death.

A police officer familiar with the case said that Raju used to harass his two wives after getting inebriated. Tired of Raju's behaviour, the two women decided to murder him. Raju's body has been sent for post-mortem and the two accused have been arrested.

Man with two wives thrashes two-year-old son for removing his phone from charging

In August this year, the first wife of a man from Greater Noida demanded police protection after he brutally thrashed his son over a trivial issue. The accused, Hasmuddin beat up his minor son after the latter removed his phone from charging.

An investigation revealed that Hasmuddin lived in a house with his two wives. His first wife was identified as Muneja. Muneja alleged that her husband's behaviour towards her and her children changed after he got married to his second wife. Muneja said that half of the house was occupied by Hasmuddin and his second wife while she stayed in the other half with her two children.

According to Muneja, Hasmuddin lost his temper after his two-year-old son removed his phone from charging. Hasmuddin allegedly used the charging cord to beat up his son. The two-year-old child had marks on the backside of his body. After the incident, the police booked Hasmuddin under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
