Unnao: Indian Woman Who Planned To Testify Against 2 Rapists Is Set On Fire

A 23-year-old woman from Unnao, Uttar Pradesh, was set on fire when she was on her way to testify against 2 men who raped her.

The incident happened in Unnao earlier this week.

The 23-year-old woman was dragged by 5 men into an open field where they doused her in oil and set her on fire.

The woman is now admitted in a hospital in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.

According to the police, the 23-year-old woman sustained 90 percent burn injuries and is currently in a critical condition.

Out of the 5 men, 2 of them were the ones who raped her earlier this year.

One of the men who raped the woman was out on bail and the other one was on the run from the police.

An FIR was registered against the men in March 2019.

When the incident happened, the woman was on her way to enter a railway station.

The woman will be airlifted to a hospital in New Delhi, the capital of India, for better medical care.

The police said the woman was in a relationship with one of her attackers last year.

The man reportedly promised to marry the girl and started to have a physical relationship with her. He then raped her with another friend.

Supriya Sule, a member of parliament for the Nationalist Congress Party, said, “Extremely sad and shocked to hear that the Unnao rape victim was burnt earlier this morning.”

Supriya added, “If the culprits were not shielded and prosecuted on time this wouldn’t have happened. Complete state of lawlessness in the state of Uttar Pradesh,”

The local government and residents of Unnao were outraged with the fact that one of the rapists was roaming free after being released on bail.

SK Bhagat, a police officer, said, “The two men set fire to the 23-year-old alive to take revenge.”

Sakshi Maharaj, the MP from the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party) for Unnao, said the incident was unfortunate.

The ruling party said the rapists should face capital punishment for the crimes that they committed.
