No mercy petitions for brutal rapes, indicates President Kovind: What is a mercy petition?

President Ram Nath Kovind | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The president’s remarks came amid growing outrage over the brutal Cyberabad rape and murder case and other such incidents of sexual violence against women in recent days Pranab Mukherjee has the record of rejecting the most mercy petitions amongst all presidents barring R Venkatraman, who had reportedly rejected 45 such pleas President Abdul Kalam disposed of only two mercy petitions - rejecting one and commuting the other

President Ram Nath Kovind suggested on Friday that rapists who have been convicted under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act should lose their right to seek a mercy plea.

The president’s remarks came amid growing outrage over the brutal Cyberabad rape and murder case and other such incidents of sexual violence against women in recent days.

Ironically, hours before the president made the comments during an event in Rajasthan, the four accused in the Cyberabad case were killed in an encounter by the Telangana police.

“Women safety is a serious issue. Rape convicts under the POCSO Act should not have the right to file mercy petition,” President Kovind said. “Parliament should review mercy petitions.”

Meanwhile, the Union Home Ministry has sent to the president the Delhi government’s recommendation rejecting the mercy petition of one of the convicts in the 2012 Nirbhaya gang rape -- another case that had shocked the nation.

What is a mercy petition?

Once the Supreme Court announces its final judgment in a case involving capital punishment, the death row convict may file a mercy petition by approaching the president – directly, or through prison officials, or through the governor of the state where he is imprisoned or via the union home ministry.

The president, in turn, seeks the opinion of the union cabinet via the union home ministry.

Article 72 of the Constitution says the president “shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence where the sentence is a sentence of death”. While the state governor also has pardoning powers, death sentences are not part of these.

The president may, if he or she wishes, return the home ministry’s recommendation to get further clarifications. The ministry can also itself recall its recommendation to provide a fresh input.

The president has to decide on the recommendation of the ministry of home affairs. But there is no fixed time frame within which a president must act.

Past precedents on mercy petitions

During his tenure as president, Pranab Mukherjee disposed of 34 mercy petitions. While he rejected 30 mercy pleas, he accepted four such petitions. Mukherjee has the record of rejecting the most mercy petitions amongst all presidents barring R Venkatraman, who had reportedly rejected 45 such pleas.

President KR Narayanan on his part did not act on any mercy petition in his term and President Abdul Kalam disposed of only two mercy petitions - rejecting one and commuting the other.

What happens after President rejects mercy petition?

Does a high court have the authority to review the rejection of a mercy plea by the president? In 2008, Sonu Sardar from Chhattisgarh was sentenced to death for killing five members of a family. After the president rejected his mercy petition, Sonu Sardar moved the Delhi high court challenging the rejection. In 2017, the high court commuted his sentence to life imprisonment. But this was challenged by the Centre. According to the central government, only the Supreme Court should take up such petitions against the decision by the president to reject a mercy plea.
