Dancer is shot in the face at a wedding in India after she stopped for a break

A female dancer was shot in the face during a wedding in India after she stopped for a break between songs.

The 22-year-old, named only as Hina, was performing at a ceremony for the daughter of a village leader in northern Uttar Pradesh province on Saturday when someone in the crowd opened fire.

Two men, identified by police as Sudhir Singh and Phool Singh, were arrested on Friday after video of the shooting was widely circulated on social media.

A 22-year-old dancer, identified only as Hina, was shot in the face during a wedding in India after she stopped for a break between songs

The footage shows Hina and a fellow dancer, named in local media as Naina, performing on stage with a row of people sitting behind them.

As the song stops the pair stop dancing, at which point the crowd can be heard shouting at them.

An initial gunshot can be heard, but nobody in the crowd seems to react.

Hina and Naina then turn around to face the row of people sitting behind them, and appear to be talking to someone out of shot.

One voice can be heard saying 'shots will be fired', according to Indian news site NDTV, before another voice replies: 'Brother, you should fire the gun.'

A second, louder gunshot can then be heard as Hina grabs her face and staggers around the sage before the video stops.

She was taken to hospital in critical condition with a wound to her jaw, but has since stabilised and is now recovering.

Hina (right) and her dancing partner Naina (left), were dancing at the wedding for a daughter of a village leader in northern India on Saturday when the shooting took place

The groom's maternal uncles, Mithilesh and Akhilesh, who were on the stage at the time, were also injured in the shooting.

The incident was first reported to police by the uncles, who said they had identified the alleged shooters as a relative of the bride's father.

Deliberate shootings and accidental deaths are relatively common at weddings in India, where guests often bring guns to fire in celebration.

Kulwinder Kaur, a 25-year-old pregnant dancer, was shot in the stomach while performing on stage at a wedding in 2016. She died on the spot.

In November the same year, a self-proclaimed god-woman killed three including the groom's aunt after firing celebratory shots at a wedding in the state of Haryana.

And in 2018, Punjab police arrested a man after he allegedly shot dead his neighbour by mistake during a pre-wedding party.
