Lawyers demand strict action against police personnel involved in killing Cyberabad case accused

The petition has been filed by lawyers Gunratan Sadavarte and Jayshree Patil. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Two lawyers from Mumbai have written to the CJI, Telangana High Court, NHRC and DGP Telangana, in relation to the killing of the four men who were accused of gang raping a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Cyberabad In their petition, the two lawyers have demanded legal action against VC Sajjanar, Cyberabad commissioner and other police personnel who were present during the incident The petition has been written by Gunratan Sadavarte and Jayshree Patil

Mumbai: Lawyers from Mumbai have submitted a petition to the Chief Justice of India, Telangana High Court, National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and DGP Telangana, demanding the registration of an FIR against the police personnel who were involved in killing the four accused in Cyberabad gang-rape and murder case.

The petition has been filed by lawyers Gunratan Sadavarte and Jayshree Patil. In the petition, the two lawyers have demanded strict action against the police personnel who were involved in the exchange of gunfire that killed the four gang-rape and murder accused.

The two lawyers requested the said authorities to ensure that the investigation of the case is conducted by the Special Investigation Team (STI) of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). They also requested the authorities to conduct the trial of the case near Maharashtra.

The petition read, "The law permits for every accused, fair trial and thereafter punishment shall only be by due process of law which is by the spirit of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. " The two petitioners referred to the killings as "criminal conspiracy" and held the Director General of Police Telangana, superintendent of police Rangareddy and Sub-Inspector Shadnagar as well as Home Minister Telangana State responsible for the same.

"The said brutal act is not allowed in the present three layers Judicial System in the Nation and without due process of law such punishment is against the spirit of Constitutional thought of this nation," the petition further mentioned. The two lawyers also accused the commissioner of Cyberabad of disguising the "brutal murder" as an "encounter".

The petition read, "When accused were having hand cuffs it was quite impossible to do such act to harm the police in such high profile investigation case and all this is a story created by the conspirator accused (Police and State)." Jayshree Patil and Gunratan Sadavarte also said that strict action should be taken against the ones involved. The petitioners also wrote that compensation must be provided to the families of the four deceased.
