Cheers greet encounter killing of Hyderabad rape accused

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

BHUBANESWAR: The killing of the four accused in the gang rape and murder of the 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Hyderabad by its state police drew widespread support from the people of Odisha, including law minister Pratap Jena and leaders of opposition parties.“In my personal opinion, I don’t find anything wrong with the encounters. The Hyderabad police shot the four accused when they were trying to escape. The accused deserved this punishment. Had they been not killed by the police, they would have surely got death penalty by the court one day,” said Jena.The Hyderabad police were hailed as heroes and showered with rose petals by its locals who poured into the streets and saw the move as only way of punishing the culprits for their gruesome crime.“There are countries where the rape accused are shot or beheaded in full public view. We should develop a stringent, exemplary and expeditious punishment system,” Jena added.Asked whether the state police should take a cue from Hyderabad while punishing rape accused, Jena said, “It depends on the situation.” With the state government already under pressure to bring rapists to justice, senior BJD leader and former minister Debi Prasad Mishra was quick to praise the action taken by the Hyderabad police. “Rapists and convicts of other heinous crimes should meet this fate if they challenge police and try to escape from their custody,” Mishra said.Some students of Gangadhar Meher University in Sambalpur also celebrated the men’s deaths. “We are happy that justice was quick. It teaches a lesson that the judicial system should not wait for long when it comes to hearing such sensitive cases,” said Sushree Sangita, a student.BJP leader and Bhubaneswar Lok Sabha member Aparajita Sarangi echoed similar sentiments. “The Hyderabad police took the right decision,” she said. Senior Congress MLA Suresh Rautray congratulated the Hyderabad police and said the state police should learn from their southern counterparts. He added, “All rapists should be shot dead. Odisha has been witnessing an alarming rise in rape cases owing to police leniency.”However, police also faced flak for allegedly taking the law into their own hands. Congress legislature party leader and former law minister Narasingha Mishra suspected it to be a fake encounter. “A judicial probe should be ordered to find out whether it was a genuine encounter. Though they have the right to use firearms for self-defence, a judicial probe should be conducted to bring out the truth. If the situation really warranted them to gun down the four rape accused, there is no problem,” Mishra said.“Encounters take place when instead of asking for a better criminal justice system society puts the entire accountability on police. Wish we get faster justice in court rooms rather than on the streets,” Arun Bothra, a senior IPS officer and the CEO of the Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odisha, said in a Twitter post.Social campaigners felt that the killing would not prevent rape and said police had no right to deliver justice in this manner. “Let the courts do their jobs. It is clearly a fake encounter and violation of human rights,” Sanjay Swain, an activist, said.
