Chris Hemsworth films a commercial for Hugo Boss in New York

He's an ambassador for Hugo Boss' range of fragrances.

And Australian actor Chris Hemsworth looked every inch the A-list star as he filmed a commercial for the brand in New York on Friday.

The 36-year-old covered his buff frame in black active wear and jogged down an inner-city street.

Scroll down for video

And action! Chris Hemsworth, 36, looked every inch the A-list star as he filmed a commercial for Hugo Boss in New York on Friday

Chris sported a black hooded top, matching sweatpants and black trainers.

The Thor star was groomed to perfection, showing off a bronzed tan and a small amount of product in his brown hair.

Chris picked up the pace as he jogged down a street in New York City and later stopped to pose for photos.

Attire: The Thor actor wore a black hooded top and matching sweatpants

Light on his feet: Chris added black trainers and showed off a bronzed tan

Chris was announced as Hugo Boss' new global fragrance ambassador in 2017.

While he often dons the brand's tailored suits on the red carpet, he admits that he's most comfortable in board shorts and T-shirts.

'My wife [Elsa Pataky] says I have more board shorts than most females have shoes,' Chris told The National in October 2017. 'I have a strange kind of addiction to them.'

Working up a sweat: The Australian-born star picked up the pace as he jogged down an inner-city street

Top gig: Chris was announced as global ambassador for Hugo Boss' range of fragrances in 2017

Low-key style: Chris admitted to The National in October 2017, that while he enjoys wearing suits on the red carpet he's most comfortable in board shorts and T-shirts

He explained: 'Growing up, I never thought about fashion too much. No, maybe that's not true. I was very particular about what board shorts I wore, or what T-shirt'

Backdrop: Chris is pictured jogging with the Brooklyn Bridge in the background

'Growing up, I never thought about fashion too much. No, maybe that's not true. I was very particular about what board shorts I wore, or what T-shirt. But to be able to wear beautiful clothes because of my work is a real luxury,' he added.

Chris wed Spanish actress and model Elsa, 43, in 2010, and the couple share three children, daughter India Rose, seven, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five.

The family are believed to have just moved into a $20million mega-mansion in Byron Bay, Australia.

Grateful: 'But to be able to wear beautiful clothes because of my work is a real luxury,' Chris added

Family: Chris wed Spanish actress and model Elsa, 43, in 2010, and the couple share three children, daughter India Rose, seven, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five
