Bangalore Turf Club raided, cops recover Rs 96 lakh unaccounted cash

Bangalore Turf Club raided, cops recover Rs 96 lakh unaccounted cash

Police officials from the Central Crime Branch (CCB) detained 40 men, including private bookies, for questioning.

news Raids

The Bengaluru Police on Friday raided the Bangalore Turf Club (BTC) and recovered unaccounted cash belonging to private bookies amounting to Rs 96 lakh.

According to TOI, police officials from the Central Crime Branch (CCB) detained 40 men, including private bookies, for questioning. The CCB raided the premises after several members of the turf club complained to the police that bookies have been involved in illegal activities, including GST evasion.

CCB officials say that the raids revealed that only 10% of the bets placed were entered in the books. The CCB has registered a cheating case against these bookies for causing loss to the state exchequer, The Hindu reported. The CCB sleuths said that they would write to the GST Department and submit a report on the probe.

CCB sleuths, who raided the club say that most of the cash was from private bookies. The CCB sleuths also issued notices to the turf club’s management, asking them to appear for questioning.

Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime 1), Sandeep Patil said that the bookmakers were allegedly suppressing bets in order to evade taxes.

“The bookmakers are supposed to pay 28% GST for bets they win. After the ruckus at the turf club in November, several members had accused bookmakers of evading taxes and indulging in fraudulent activities. The main allegation was that these bookies were misusing funds,” Sandeep Patil said.

A team of over 30 CCB officials headed by two DCPs, four ACPs and 20 inspectors raided the club, The Hindu reported. CCB officials said that there were allegations of horses being drugged during races, which are also being investigated.

Police said that the complaints from members came after the ruckus at Bangalore Turf Club on November 15, which was the first race on the opening day of the winter season — November Plate. There was chaos at the BTC after three horses fell down 200 m before the finish line.

Horses Aceros, Will To Win and Sir Piggot fell. Will to Win was euthanised after it broke a leg following the incident. The BTC announced the results of the race despite the accident. This led to a fight between the members and the bookies, who demanded their money back. Over 6,000 people had vandalised the turf club and the High Grounds Police registered a case of vandalism. CCB officials say that it was during this investigation that several complaints were made regarding the bookies evading taxes.
