Police say body found Wednesday was murder victim, suspect sought

Police say an elderly man whose body was found Wednesday night in Orchid Isle Estates subdivision in Puna was murdered.

Police say an elderly man whose body was found Wednesday night in Orchid Isle Estates subdivision in Puna was murdered.

In a statement this evening, they identified the man as 75-year-old Shingo Honda, a well-known artist. His deceased body was found several hundred yards from his home and studio in the Glenwood subdivision.

ADVERTISING

Police Lt. Rio-Amon Wilkins said police are not releasing how Honda, who was identified by fingerprints during an autopsy today, was killed. He added police are looking for a suspect he identified as Michael Cecil Lee, a 55-year-old man.

He’s described as 5-foot-11-inches tall, 150 pounds with grayish-brown hair and brown eyes.

Police cautioned the public to not approach Lee, who should be considered armed and dangerous.

According to Amon-Wilkins, Honda’s wife, writer Lynne Farr, said her husband was home about 1:30 p.m. that afternoon when she left the house.

“The wife said he typically would take a nap in the afternoon, then get up and go for a walk,” Amon-Wilkins said. “She said when she got back she thought he was still sleeping.”

When she checked, however, he was missing, Amon-Wilkins said. He said Farr canvassed the neighborhood and called police to report Honda missing at about 7:18 p.m. Wednesday.

Anyone with information is asked to call the police non-emergency line at 935-3311 or Detective Todd Pataray at 961-2382 or todd.pataray@hawaiicounty.gov.

ADVERTISING

Those who anonymity may call Crime Stoppers at 961-8300 and may be eligible for a reward of up to $1,000.00. Crime Stoppers is a volunteer program run by ordinary citizens who want to keep their community safe. Crime Stoppers does not record calls or subscribe to any Caller ID service. All Crime Stoppers information is kept confidential.

Email John Burnett at jburnett@hawaiitribune-herald.com.
