Prepare yourself to face Pakistan-sponsored terrorism: Rajnath Singh to cadets at IMA passing out parade

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh at IMA passing out parade | Photo Credit: ANI

Dehradun (Uttarakhand): Speaking at the passing out parade of the Indian Military Academy (IMA) in Dehradun on Saturday, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday asked cadets to prepare themselves for the challenge of terrorism emanating out of Pakistan.

Rajnath told cadets that Pakistan has faced defeats in all the wars that it has fought with India but still is not ready to accept the reality.

“Pakistan has made terrorism its state policy. They have fought four wars and lost all of them but they are a strange neighbour and are not mending their ways. So, you (cadets who are passing out) have to prepare yourself to face terrorism,” the Defence Minister said.

Rajnath made the remarks after witnessing the passing out parade of IMA here.

Uttarakhand: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh at the passing out parade of Indian Military Academy (IMA) in Dehradun. pic.twitter.com/eZsBrnxiDg — ANI (@ANI) December 7, 2019

India has been accusing Pakistan of failing to curb terrorism emanating from its soil. In fact, the Indian leadership has rightfully blamed Pakistan for making terrorism its state policy.

The roots of all major terrorist attacks in India – whether on civilian targets or military – have been traced back to Pakistan.

Chiefs of major terrorist groups that operate in Pakistan – Hafiz Muhammad Saeed (Lashkar-e-Taiba), Maulana Masood Azhar (Jaish-e-Mohammed) and Sayeed Salahudeen (Hizb-ul Mujahideen) – have been seen openly moving around in the country and spewing venom against India.

Both Saeed and Azhar are now United Nations designated terrorists. In fact, Hafiz Saeed is the mastermind of the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks in which 166 people were killed.

India’s most wanted man, underworld don Dawood Ibrahim too continues to find safe sanctuary in Pakistan despite the country denying it. Indian intelligence agencies suspect Dawood - the mastermind of the 1993 Mumbai serial blasts – lives in Karachi’s posh Clifton area.

Despite repeated calls by India and the world, including the United States, Pakistan has failed to show concrete action against these terrorist leaders and their groups. And PM Imran Khan’s resolve to act against these groups and improve relations with India continues to appear to be a hollow promise.
