After Controversy, BJP's Sakshi Maharaj Deletes Birthday Tweet For Unnao Rape Accused Kuldeep Sengar

New Delhi:

On the day a girl was chased, set on fire in Unnao, BJP leader from Parliamentary constituency was busy in tweeting a birthday wish to Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a rape accused in a separate case. After much furore, Sakshi Maharaj has now deleted the birthday post. Ironically, Sakshi Maharaj’s tweet came just hours after he had denounced the attack on the girl in another case, in which the alleged rapists had poured kerosene on the survivor after coming out on bail. The lawmaker from Unnao posted a birthday message in Hindi on his official Twitter handle, with his own photo, on Thursday. But now the birthday post is missing from his Twitter feed.

"The Unnao incident is really unfortunate. I have used all my power so that the investigation is done and the accused get punishment. The accused in such heinous crimes should get capital punishment," he was quoted as saying by ANI on that day.

In October, the CBI filed a chargesheet against former BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his associates for criminal conspiracy and intimidation but dropped murder charges against them in the Unnao rape victim accident case in which two aunts of the girl were killed, officials said. The CBI in its FIR had booked Sengar and nine others under IPC sections related to criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation.

In its chargesheet filed before a special CBI court in Lucknow, the agency charged Sengar and all others named accused in the FIR under IPC sections related to criminal conspiracy and criminal intimidation.

Sengar is accused of raping a girl at his residence in Unnao in 2017. The victim was 17 years of age at the time of the incident. A case was registered after she tried to immolate herself outside the residence of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in April last year.

A day after the self-immolation bid, her father died in police custody. After the Supreme Court took notice of the letter written by the victim's family, expressing apprehensions over their security, Sengar was shifted to the Tihar Jail in Delhi and the victim was sent to AIIMS, New Delhi, for better treatment.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
