Mumbai bar forces girls to perform obscene dance; 23 held including customers

Police say they are searching for the owner of the bar identified as Suresh Shetty. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights 17 customers and six bar staffers arrested for forcing girls to perform obscene dance Police let off 12 women from the bar after a warning Customers were found showering notes on the girls when police raided the bar

Mumbai: The city police have arrested 17 customers and six staffers of a bar for forcing girls to perform obscene dance. The incident took place in Matunga (west) on Friday. The same premises-Tandoor Bar and Restaurant, was raided in 2018 as well.

According to a report in Times of India, the customers were found showering notes on the girls when the Shivaji Park police raided complex.

During the raid, the police arrested 23 persons including six staffers. The police also let off 12 women from the bar after a warning.

The arrested persons also include bar manager. A music system and Rs 84,000 were seized by the police during the raid. The accused have been remanded to police custody after they were presented before a local court.

Police say they are searching for the owner of the bar identified as Suresh Shetty. But the civic records reveal Sukumar Shetty as the owner of the bar, said police.

Police have received repeated complaints about the misconduct in the bar. It was also alleged that the bar did not have valid documents to run the bar and that it remained open outside permissible hours.

Last month, the Mumbai Police's Anti Narcotics Cell (ANC) raided a dance bar in suburban Malad and arrested 22 persons, including 14 customers. The police seized a cash of Rs 93,930 and musical instruments from the premises.

According to a police official, Kaka Bar and Restaurant was known to be frequented by so-called police informers on Poddar Road. The police rescued 10 bar girls who were forced to perform on a makeshift dance floor. A report said the bar is owned by a police informer named Mahendrakumar Bhandari. In 2015, the police had arrested 28 people for indecent behaviour from the same bar.
