Will meet Saryu Roy to clear differences: Arun Singh

After State food and civil supplies minister and Jamshedpur West MLA Saryu Roy questioned the Government style of functioning for last few years in a letter submitted at Amit Shah’s Delhi office on Friday, BJP National General Secretary, Arun Singh on Monday said that he will meet Roy to clear differences.

Singh, who was in the city to attend BJP Kolhan level party workers meet at Agrico ground, said, “We are a democratic party and we can have difference of opinion. We are not like Congress where voices of opposition are expelled. I will meet Saryu Ji soon and am confident he will understand our view. However, I feel party leaders should not go to media with their grievances and instead sort it out in the party. Our party leaders have right speak but on right platform. It is time for everyone to be united and ensure that Modiji as Prime Minister work for development of country and the state,” said Singh.

Saryu Roy has been speaking against Government’s style of functioning for last few years in a letter submitted at Amit Shah’s Delhi office on Friday, had sought advice by February end whether to continue in the State cabinet, as it was not possible for him to continue as a minister in the cabinet with his dignity intact.

The Minister had in his letter to Amit Shah had also informed that he had informed Prime Minister Narendra Modi in August 2017 about the unsatisfactory working style of Jharkhand Government.

However, the BJP national secretary expressed satisfaction over functioning of Raghubar Das led Government.

“Raghubar Das led Government has played key role in the progress of the State. The State Government has taken some good initiatives like registration of land at a price of Rs 1 for women, providing 1 lakh Government jobs, taking the GDP rate to 8.2 per cent, which is the second in the country and opening of five new medical colleges,”

said Singh.

The BJP leader expressed confidence that party will win more seat than the 2014 elections. “We are confident of winning all the Lok Sabha seats from Jharkhand this time than the 12 in 2014. People are very much aware of the parties in the mahagathbandhan and the performance of Centre and State Government will yield dividends in the elections. We have increased our party base in the State and from only 3 lakh members in 2014 we have increased to 21 lakh members now,” added Singh.

Arun Singh, who is also BJP in-charge for Odisha since 2014, said that they are working on a mission of winning 121 Assembly seats in Odisha in the next assembly polls. He also attacked Mamta Bannerjee for killing of innocent BJP workers.
