Protesters clash with cops after UP ministers visit Unnao rape victim's residence

Members of NSUI clash with police in Unnao | Photo Credit: ANI

Protests break out in Unnao after cabinet ministers from Uttar Pradesh arrived this evening to meet the family of rape victim who breathed her last at the Safdarjung Hospital at 11.40 pm on Friday.

Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had instructed Kamal Rani Varun and Swami Prasad Maurya to visit the family members of the rape victim.

Members of the National Students’ Union of India (NSUI) clashed with police personnel deployed there against UP ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj visiting Unnao rape victim's residence.

The rape victim who sustained 90 percent burns after being set ablaze by the accused in Unnao on Thursday, died in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital on Friday after suffering a cardiac arrest. The victim who was airlifted to Delhi from Unnao had been kept on a ventilator and remained critical.

“Whatever investigation the victim's family wants, we will do it. The names that have been taken by the victim, action will be taken against them. No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics,” said Maurya after meeting the relatives of the victim at her residence.

The 23-year-old was attacked Thursday morning while she was on her way to the court by the accused Shivam Trivedi and Shubham who allegedly raped her in December.

The UP government had directed the police to strict action against the accused after which the two accused and three of their accomplices were quickly nabbed by the police.

Unnao MP Sakshi Maharaj after visiting Unnao rape victim's residence said “I along with my party are in support of the victim's family. I have been vocal about it in the Parliament as well. Culprits will be arrested. None will be spared. Unnao's name has been maligned”.

The UP chief minister said he was “extremely saddened” to hear about the victim’s death and assured that the case will be head by a fast track which will quickly bring the accused to book.

The protesters said questioned the ministers’ “too little-too late” approach in reaching out to the family members.
