Hyderabad Encounter: 'Justice loses character if it becomes revenge,' says CJI SA Bobde

Chief Justice of India (CJI) Sharad Arvind Bobde on Saturday pitched in on the debate that has sparked following the encounter of all four accused in the Hyderabad gangrape and murder case by the Telangana police. Referring to the mixed reactions over the incident, the CJI admitted that it must be considered that the criminal justice system must consider its position and attitude.

"Recent events in the country have sparked off the old debate with new vigour," CJI SA Bobde said, "There is no doubt that the criminal justice system must reconsider its position and attitude towards laxity and the eventual time it takes to dispose of criminal matters."

However, he also said that justice can never be 'instant', nor must it ever take the form of 'revenge'. "I believe justice loses its character of justice if it becomes an act of revenge," the CJI said.

#WATCH: Chief Justice of India (CJI) Sharad Arvind Bobde: I don't think justice can ever be or ought to be instant. And justice must never ever take the form of revenge. I believe justice loses its character of justice if it becomes a revenge. pic.twitter.com/oKIHKecHqt — ANI (@ANI) December 7, 2019

Speaking on the need to reform the judiciary, the CJI said, "There is a need in the judiciary to invoke self-corrective measures. Whether those measures are to be publicized or not can be a matter of debate, but the institution ought to correct itself as it did during the much-criticised press conference. That was a self-corrective measure."

For context, certain members of civil society have claimed that the police, by taking the accused to Shadnagar on Friday morning without media's knowledge and conducting the encounter thereafter, had actually displayed a predilection for 'taking the law into their own hands'. However, several others have also celebrated the act by claiming that it was swift delivery of justice in a highly sensitive case, where the due process would have kept the accused unpunished for a long time. Even protesters demanding 'Justice for Disha (the name given to the Hyderabad vet to protect her identity)' supported the act, along with the victim's family.

All four accused in the Hyderabad gangrape and murder case were killed in an encounter by the Telangana Police in an encounter in the wee hours of Friday. The Cyberabad Police Commissioner said the accused snatched their weapons and fired on police and hence, in self-defense, the police fired back, in which the accused were killed.

The 26-year-old woman was allegedly raped by four men on November 26. They later set her on fire and dumped her body in Chatanpally, Shadnagar, around 60 km from Hyderabad. Her charred body was recovered a day later by the police, following which the police launched the manhunt and arrested the four accused.
