Vijay's Thalapathy 64 to be shot in a prison in Karnataka for 40 days

Vijay and team will be shooting in Karnataka | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Vijay is currently shooting for his upcoming film titled Thalapathy 64 The actors will be shooting for 40 days in a Karnataka prison Reportedly, after their Karnataka schedule, the cast and crew will move on to Kerala for their final schedule

Kollywood's favourite hero Vijay aka Thalapathy Vijay recently completed 27 years in the film industry. After his latest hit Bigil, Vijay is currently shooting for his upcoming film directed by Lokesh Kanagaraj, tentatively titled,Thalapathy 64.

The film has already completed three schedules, and according to the latest reports the team has already headed to Karnataka for their fourth after wrapping up the Delhi schedule.

The two actors Vijay and Vijay Sehtupathi will be shooting for important scenes at Shivamogga prison in Karnataka. The shooting will continue in the prison and nearby places for 40 days.

Vijay's look from the film has already been leaked on social media and makers are trying their best to remove it. One of the photos sees Vijay wearing sunglasses, bracelet in his right hand, sporting a moustache and a beard.

Check out the photo here:

The team was very upset with the leaked photos and requested the removal of the pictures. Reportedly, after their Karnataka schedule, the cast and crew will move on to Kerala for their final stint.

The film will be produced by Xavier Britto under the banner XB Film Creators. The music of Thalapathy 64 will be composed by Anirudh Ravichander while the cinematography will be handled by Sathya Sooran.

Actor Arjun Das joined the cast recently. The makers took to Twitter and made the exciting announcement. They wrote, "Team #Thalapathy64 welcomes the super Talented @iam_arjundas on board! #ArjunDasJoinsThalapathy64"

Confirming the same, Arjun Das, in an interview to ETimes revealed that he will shoot for Thalapathy 64 from the second week of December.

The movie also stars a bevy of actors like Andrea Jeremiah, Shanthnu, Antony Vaghese, Gauri Kishan, Sriman, and others. However, the main attraction of the film will be watching Vijay Sethupathi and Thalapathy Vijay in one frame. The movie is slated for a 2020 release.
