Bihar: 12-year-old girl raped by engineer at aunt's house; no arrest made

The police also conducted a raid at Raju's house but he was not there (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An assistant engineer working with the Bihar state government allegedly raped a 12-year-old girl The incident took place at the rented accommodation of the 12-year-old girl's aunt The survivor's aunt and the engineer are on the run

Patna: A 12-year-old girl was allegedly raped in Bihar's Patna on November 2 by an assistant engineer. The accused has been absconding since the incident. He has been identified as Raju Kumar. The engineer raped the minor girl at the residence of the survivor's aunt. The police confirmed on Saturday that the survivor's aunt is also absconding.

An FIR in relation to the incident was lodged on Wednesday, nearly after a month of the incident. The accused allegedly fled after learning about the same. The police said that they raided the accused woman's residence in Takiapar, Danapur but failed to find her.

The police also conducted a raid at Raju's house but he was not there either. The police also wrote a letter to the accused's department, asking them to cooperate in arresting him. A senior police officer familiar with the case said that they are making constant efforts to arrest the two accused. The officer told the Times of India, "More details on his background and family were being gathered by police.

The police have not been able to track the location of the two accused.

14-year-old held captive, gang-raped by relatives; video uploaded on social media

In another incident from December this year, a 14-year-old girl was allegedly held captive and gang-raped by three minors in Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh. The accused were well-acquainted with the survivor. An associate of the three minors allegedly recorded a video of the incident and uploaded it on social media.

Allegedly, the minor girl had gone to a field to fetch some vegetables when the accused approached her. They allegedly held the minor hostage and gang-raped her. One of the accused filmed the video and posted it online The survivor's uncle lodged an FIR in relation to the case. The police arrested all of the four accused.
