Congress MP demands Duleep Singh’s remains be brought from England: The last Sikh emperor and his tragic life

A photograph of Duleep Singh | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Following his father's death in June 1839, Duleep Singh, who was just five at the time, was thrust upon the throne, with his mother, Rani Jindan made the Regent Singh was encouraged to become a Christian and converted from Sikhism shortly before he departed India to begin his exile in Britain Despite Singh’s pleas to have his mother cremated near her husband’s samadhi, the British did not allow Singh to enter Punjab

On November 3, Congress MP Pratap Singh Bajwa forwarded a demand in the Rajya Sabha to exhume the remains of Maharaja Duleep Singh, often referred to as the last ruler of the Sikh empire, and return them to Amritsar. Bajwa asserted that “history should be corrected”, and the Maharaja’s last rites be conducted in India.

The unusual and tragic story of Maharaja Duleep Singh began with the death of his father, the “Lion of Punjab” Maharaja Ranjit Singh, who is not only known for unifying the warring factions of the Sikh community successfully but also for protecting the sovereignty of Punjab from British invasion in the early 19th century. However, following his death in June 1839, his son, Duleep Singh, who was just five at the time, was thrust upon the throne, with his mother, Rani Jindan made the Regent.

Described as “a woman of great capacity and strong will”, the British viewed Jindan as a threat following the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1846 and moved to depose and imprison her. A 10-year old Duleep Singh was then made to sign the Treaty of Lahore which saw him cede his title, and “any claim to the sovereignty of Punjab”, as the East India Company sought to complete the annexation of the state.

Young Duleep Singh was brought under the guardianship of Sir John Login who had recently been installed as the Governor of the Lahore Citadel. According to the memoirs of John Login, Duleep lived comfortably with his new guardians in the town of Fatehgarh, a hotbed of Christian missionary activity at the time. Singh was encouraged to become a Christian here and converted from Sikhism shortly before he departed India to begin his exile in Britain.





In Britain, Duleep Singh was groomed to become an “English country gentleman” inculcated in art, shooting, music and coursing. Duleep Singh lived in various parts of Britain, but it was in Scotland where he built his reputation as the “Black Prince of Perthshire” known for his lavish shooting parties and proclivity to don Highland dress. It is also reported that Queen Victoria took an instant liking to Duleep Singh, with the young Maharaja spending his summers with the Royal Family at the Osborne House in the Isle of Wight. His friendship with the Royal Family even led to him naming his first two children (Prince Victor Albert Jay Duleep Singh (born 1866) and Prince Frederick Victor Duleep Singh (born 1868) after the Queen.

However, Duleep Singh soon developed a burning desire to return to his homeland. His efforts to do so though were always quashed until he was finally permitted to visit his ailing mother for the first time in 13 years, in Calcutta. Duleep Singh escorted his nearly-blind mother to England, and over the next two years, Rani Jindan, reportedly, educated Duleep Singh of his lineage, before her passing two years later in August 1863. She is said to have died peacefully in her sleep at her house in Kensington (UK). Cremation was illegal in England in those days.

Despite Duleep Singh’s pleas to have his mother cremated near her husband’s samadhi in Lahore, the British did not allow him to enter Punjab, and he was forced to conduct her last rites and raise a memorial (samadhi) to her near Nashik in Maharashtra.

Duleep Singh soon began to grow disillusioned with the British aristocracy and his demands for the appropriate payment of his allowance and the restoration of his ancestral treasures to him (including the Koh-i-noor diamond) fell on deaf ears. His relationship with the British had soured, and when he tried to escape to Lahore with his wife and six children, he was stopped and arrested in Aden. Although his wife and children returned to England, Duleep Singh re-converted to Sikhism in Aden in a low-profile ceremony, and chose to live in Paris. By April 1887 though, he had made his way to Russia.

In Russia, he wrote several letters to Alexander III requesting the Czar for military and financial support to invade India and tear down the British rule. He also used his personal messenger to seek alliances with the rulers of Kapurthala, Jind, Nabha, Awadh and Patiala to overthrow the British. However, his hopes were dashed when Alexander III did not respond to his pleas.

A broken man, Duleep Singh returned to Paris where he lived out the remainder of his life. The last ruler of Punjab died in October 1893 in the Grand Hotel, Paris.
