Delhi: Police use water cannons on protesters demanding justice for Unnao victim

The Delhi Police on Saturday resorted to using water cannons on a group of protesters who were demanding justice for the Unnao victim. The demonstrators had held a candle march from Raj Ghat to India Gate demanding justice for the rape and murder victim who died late Friday night.

According to sources, the police resorted to using force after protesters tried to jump the barricades put in place by the cops. MS Randhawa, Public Relations Officer (PRO) of the Delhi police, later said that the cops had to use water cannon since protesters were "throwing fire" at the police personnel. The protesters, according to the police, did not have the permission to go beyond the area near Arun Jaitley Stadium. Therefore, when they attempted to do so, the police stopped them and tried to convince the demonstrators to return to the protest site.

The tragic fate of the Unnao victim has created a massive outrage in the country with demands for strict punishment to the culprits. The incident resonated in the Parliament, with Rajya Sabha chairman Venkaiah Naidu assuring the House that he has spoken to UP chief secretary on the matter.

State Minister Kamal Rani Varun, too, on Friday declared that the District Magistrate will give a cheque worth Rs 25 lakhs to the Unnao rape victim's family as financial assistance and compensation. Also, as per the family's demand, a house will be allotted to them under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, she said.

Protests are being held in several states following the rape and murder incident of the Unnao victim, the brutality of which has severely rattled the collective conscience of the nation. She passed away at 11:40 PM on Friday after suffering a cardiac arrest at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital where she was undergoing treatment.

On Thursday, the rape survivor in Unnao, some 60 km from state capital Lucknow, was set ablaze by those accused who are out on bail. She suffered 90% burns in her body, doctors had informed.
