Proud dad Aamir Khan wishes Ira Khan all the luck for her debut play as a director, Medea

Aamir Khan wishes daughter Ira Khan all the luck

Key Highlights Aamir Khan's daughter Ira Khan is all set to make her directorial debut with a theatre production, Medea The play will premiere tonight and will be played a couple of times this month Sending his best wishes to his daughter, Aamir Khan recently took to social media and shared a cute post

With her intriguing Instagram posts, Aamir Khan's daughter Ira Khan often makes headlines. The star kid is all set to make her directorial debut with a theatre production, Medea. The play will premiere tonight and will be played a couple of times this month. Sending his best wishes to his daughter, Aamir Khan recently shared a cute post on social media.

Sharing a poster of Ira's theatre production, Aamir wrote, "Break a leg @khan.ira Proud of you. Love. a." Euripides' Medea is woven around the character Medea, whose husband Jason leaves her for a Greek princess of Corinth. She takes revenge by murdering Jason's new wife as well as her own children, after which she heads to Athens to start a new life. It stars Aamir's son Junaid Khan and Hazel Keech among others.

Earlier, talking about why she chose to make her debut with a theatre production and not movie, Ira told IANS, "There wasn't any particular reason why I picked theatre first and not a movie. I want to do both of them in my life. I just happen to be working backstage and I saw the stage and I thought let's do this. There was no particular reason why I wanted to do a play first and not a movie," Ira said while explaining her thought behind making her directorial debut with a play."

Talking about the play, she had said, "I haven't changed the play a lot. I cut out some bits, and made it slightly shorter but essentially I have kept it the same. We are doing shows in Mumbai and Bengaluru, and we are going to see how it goes. We are hoping to go in some other cities as well."

Meanwhile, Aamir is currently busy with the shoot of his film Laal Singh Chaddha. Helmed by Advait Chandan, it is the Hindi remake of Tom Hanks' popular movie Forrest Gump. Co-starring Kareena Kapoor Khan, the first schedule of the movie is being shot in Punjab. Laal Singh Chaddha is scheduled to hit the screens on Christmas 2020.

Stay tuned for fresh updates on entertainment, lifestyle, fashion and much more!
