Police conduct raid on Manoli Island in Gulf of Mannar, recovers metal box

MADURAI: Manoli Island in the Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park that has been used for long as a transit point to smuggle contraband items between India and Sri Lanka has come under the police scanner. A surprise raid conducted by a police team led by superintendent of police (SP) of Ramanathapuram district V Varun Kumar and Ramnad sub-collector N O Sukhaputra found evidences for recent movement of contraband substances through the island.“A metal box suspected to be containing explosives was also recovered from the island. On the yellow box that has 50 cm height, 30 cm length and 10 cm breadth, it was written ‘830 kgs’. We did not want to take any chance by opening it in the island as it is against the standard operating procedure. It was safely brought to the shore and handed over to the bomb detection and disposal squad (BDDS),” the SP told TOI.The BDDS will coordinate with the Indian Coast Guard and Navy to examine the contents of the box. “The suspicious box will be scanned to see if there is any detonator circuit and will also be studied whether it contains any evaporable material, following which we will take a call on drilling or other means to open it,” Varun said adding, it could also be a box with insignificant materials. According to the SP, they also found a few sacks having traces of ganja.Early on Saturday morning a team of 16 cops comprising 10 constables, four sub inspectors and the SP and the sub-collector set off from Sundaramudayan coastal village in Rameswaram on a fishing boat. “It was based on a tip-off we received in the helpline number ‘9489919722’ that ganja and gold are being smuggled from Manoli Island and that there will be a movement on Saturday,” he said.The team reached the place in two batches about two hours later. Rough sea and rocky terrain at the island’s periphery made it a safe haven for transit of contraband items. After covering the 7 km stretch to the periphery the team had to walk on the rocky shores for about a kilometre to reach Manoli Island that has a circumference of 7 km. The interior of the island could not be screened much due to heavy rain. The raid continued for about six hours till 5 pm, after which they returned to Rameswaram as the sea was turning rough and visibility became low. Since the island is under the control of the forest department, the police plan to collaborate with them and the coastal security group to monitor the uninhabited island.
