Mumbai Parking Authority, BMC clash over Rs 10k fine

Parking Authority

BMC

Mumbai Parking Authority

Gautam Chatterjee

Praveen Pardeshi

Untitled Carousel E-challans more than double in 10 months; most violations related to unauthorised parking, riding without helmet Most violations relate to unauthorised parking, riding without helmet; traffic officials attribute this to increased vigilance.

The’s new headis on a collision course with the BMC over the latter’s Rs 5,000 to Rs 10,000 fines for illegal parking on roads. While Chatterjee, who took over as head of MPA in November, is of the view that the power to penalise owners of illegally parked vehicles rests only with the RTO and the traffic police, BMC Commissioneron Friday said the fines will continue.The BMC on July 7 began fining vehicles parked on five arterial roads and those parked within 500 metres of a public parking lot on other roads. The fines range from Rs 5,000 for two wheelers to Rs 10,000 for cars.The fines, aimed at decluttering roads, have met with resistance from residents of certain areas, who have been parking their vehicles on roads outside their housing societies for decades.Chatterjee, who met Pardeshi last week, said while the Motor Vehicles Act empowers the traffic police and the RTO to collect fines for vehicles parked illegally on roads, the BMC Act has no such provision.However, the BMC has found a way around this by defining the fines as “parking charges” on roads it controls. And by charging a steep Rs 5,000 to Rs 10,000, it has turned it into a punitive measure.The BMC collected over Rs 66 lakh in fines in a month after it introduced the steep charges. During this period, it fined 1029 vehicles for parking within 500 meters of a public parking lot.Chatterjee said sections Section 326 A and 326 B were added to the BMC Act in the 1990s, allowing it to charge parking fee for vehicles parked on roads. But these sections do no mention the term ‘penalties’. And as far as parking charges are concerned, Chatterjee said, these cannot be arbitrarily set.Chatterjee, who currently heads housing regulator MahaRERA, has previously held charge as additional chief secretary of the transport and housing department.In August this year, the BMC announced that five key city roads -- Maharshi Karve Road, Gokhale Road, LBS Road, SV Road and New Link Road -- off limits for parking. Motorists who parked on these roads were fined up to Rs 10,000.In other parts of the city, the BMC began fining vehicles parked on roads within 500 meters of a public parking lot. This was aimed at not only decluttering roads but also to encourage parking at public parking lots. The occupancy of some of the 18 public parking lots functional is as low as 5 per cent. These 18 lots can collectively accommodate 11,086 vehicles.In October, the BMC’s Rs 10,000 fine for parking in noparking zones in Dadar was dropped after protests by residents. All no-parking signs on a stretch of Gokhale Road and L J Road were removed overnight.Late on Friday, Pardeshi said the BMC will not revise parking fines. “The fines on five arterial roads will continue. On other roads, fines will be reduced once there is a visible behavioural change,” he said. Pardeshi also said that the MPA’s suggestion that there should be digital enforcement of parking fines has been accepted. “We will soon have cameras at these spots and the collection of fines will be digitised. So that there is no question of corruption,” Pardeshi said.
