Gujarat: Alert in Amreli villages as ‘rogue’ leopard kills one more

cap

RAJKOT: With three leopard attacks on humans in revenue area in as many days, the state forest department has issued alert for people living within 10-km radius of Munjiyasar village in Bagasra taluka of Amreli on Saturday.A team of 150 officials comprising of foresters, police and revenue officials, have begun search for the ‘rogue’ leopard that killed a farm labourer sleeping inside a hut in wee hours of Saturday. Of the three persons attacked by the leopard, two have died while one is under treatment at a local government hospital. Forest officials said that all three attacks since Thursday have occurred within 5km radius of Munjiyasar village. Forest officials have placed 30 cages to capture the leopard.Top forest officials from Gandhinagar and other districts are camping in Bagasra to monitor the mega operation to capture the ‘man-eater’ leopard dead or alive. Half-a-dozen sharp-shooters with instruction to shoot the ‘killer’ leopard at sight have already been deployed at strategic locations in forest and revenue areas of Munjiyasar village.On Saturday, the leopard attacked farm labourer from Rajasthan Chagan Barjod, when he was asleep in a hut around 3am along with two other labourers.Forest officials said that the leopard entered the hut from the broken roof and grabbed Barjod by the neck. Seeing the leopard, two other in the hut started shouting for help scaring away the wild animal. Barjod was rushed to nearby hospital where doctor declared him dead on arrival.On Friday, the leopard had attacked an farm labourer on outskirts of Shapar village in Bagasara taluka and injured him. A day before, a farmer Vaju Board in Munjiyasar village, who was sleeping outside his hut after watering the cotton farm, was dragged by the leopard for quite some distance. It tore apart the farmer’s abdomen and other body parts and even preyed on it.“We have started survey using drone to monitor water bodies which the potential spot where leopard is likely to visit. The leopard also hide behind the standing crop of cotton and tur, so we are searching all those places,” conservator of forest, Rajkot, Ashvin Parmar told TOI.he also added that “We have team of six veterinary doctors to tranquilize the leopard and if it’s not possible and we feel that it’s same leopard we have instructions to shoot at sight.”
