Youth held for Dadu Majra firing

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, February 11

A day after miscreants opened fire at Dadu Majra, the UT police arrested a 25-year-old youth, one of the suspects in the case. The Mahindra Bolero in which the suspects had come was found to have been stolen from Gurugram.

Panic had gripped Dadu Majra last night after some miscreants, who had arrived in the Bolero, escaped after thrashing two persons and opening fire. The suspects left the Bolero at the spot, which was impounded by the police.

The arrested youth has been identified as Amandeep Singh (25), a resident of Ludhiana. The three other suspects have been identified as Baldev, Sunny and Raju. The police said Baldev had fired the gunshots. The police said raids were on to nab the other suspects.

During investigation, the police found that the suspects had affixed a fake number on the Bolero. “The number turned out to be that of a scooter and the jeep was stolen from Gurugram,” said a police official.

The police said investigation revealed that the suspects, who hailed from Punjab, had come to purchase liquor from a vend at Dadu Majra. A few local residents, who are bouncers, were already present there. The suspects had an altercation with the local residents. The suspects thrashed two youths and were escaping from the spot when someone pulled the keys out of the Bolero’s ignition. The suspects then got down from the jeep and opened fire before escaping from the spot.

A case under Sections 147, 148, 149, 323, 341, 336, 307 and 506 of the IPC and under Section 24, 54 and 59 of the Arms Act has been registered against the suspects on a complaint of Gurpreet Singh, who was thrashed by the suspects.

Somnath Rana, whose brother Ravinder Kumar was also thrashed by the suspects, said the police had not included the names of people who were behind this attack. “My brother has seen the suspects; he can identify all of them,” he said.

What triggered the incident

The police said investigation revealed that the suspects, who hailed from Punjab, had come to purchase liquor from a vend at Dadu Majra. A few local residents, who are bouncers, were already present there. The suspects had an altercation with the residents. The suspects thrashed two youths and were escaping from the spot when someone pulled the keys out of the Bolero’s ignition. The suspects then got down from the jeep and opened fire before escaping from the spot.
