Delhi Anaj Mandi fire: Owner, manager of building where 43 people died in fire, arrested

Delhi: Fire fighters and security personnel outside the building where 43 people were killed in fire on Sunday | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The fire broke out at a factory in Anaj Mandi in New Delhi Most of the people who died, were local workers, who were sleeping at the time of the fire

New Delhi: 43 people were burnt to death when a massive fire broke out at a house in Anaj Mandi, Rani Jhansi Road in New Delhi in the early morning hours of Sunday. 15 fire tenders were rushed to the spot and the fire was doused by about 9 am. President Ram Nath Kovind, PM Narendra Modi, Union Home Minister Amit Shah, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal expressed grief over the incident. Kejriwal also visited the incident site and announced Rs 10 lakh for the family members of the deceased. PM Modi announced Rs 2 lakh for the kin of the victims.

Delhi Anaj Mandi fire tragedy: As it happened

6.27 pm: Owner, manager of building arrested: Police

"Owner of the building Rehan and his manager Furkan have been arrested. We are investigating the matter. From the information we have, more or less there is no possibility of more bodies being recovered," said Delhi Police DCP North Monika Bhardwaj.

6.04 pm: Police arrests owner of Anaj Mandi building

#UPDATE Delhi Police have now arrested Rehan, the owner of the building where a fire broke out earlier today, claiming lives of 43 people. A case has been registered under section 304 of Indian Penal Code against him. #DelhiFire https://t.co/8C2KicbjdN — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

5.56 pm: Union Minister Harsh Vardhan visits site of fire

Union Minister & BJP MP from Chandni Chowk Dr Harsh Vardhan visits the site of the fire in Anaj Mandi. "What has happened today is very painful. I'm now going to meet the injured at LNJP Hospital. We are trying that the best possible care is provided to the injured," he told reporters.

5.31 pm: MoS Ashwini Choubey met injured persons at LNJP Hospital today

Ashwini Choubey, Union Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare met the injured at LNJP hospital, today. #DelhiFire pic.twitter.com/WLKlHYczVn — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

5.22 pm: Delhi Police have detained Rehan, the owner of the building where a fire broke out earlier today, claiming lives of 43 people. A case has been registered under section 304 of Indian Penal Code against him.

3.38 pm: Rehan (in pic), the owner of the building where a fire broke out earlier today, claiming lives of 43 people. A case has been registered under section 304 of Indian Penal Code against him and he is currently absconding- reports news agency ANI.

Rehan (in pic), the owner of the building where a fire broke out earlier today, claiming lives of 43 people. A case has been registered under section 304 of Indian Penal Code against him and he is currently absconding. #DelhiFire pic.twitter.com/LBGx0msMED — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

3.35 pm: Vice President Venkaiah Naidu expresses grief over Anaj Mandi fire tragedy. "Deeply saddened to learn about the loss of lives in a fire accident in Delhi's Anaj Mandi. My condolences to the members of the bereaved families. I pray for the speedy recovery of the injured." Naidu's tweet read.

3.24 pm: AAP MP, Sanjay Singh: If a factory was operating illegally at a house, then, it was the responsibility of Municipal Corporation of Delhi to shut it. How did MCD allow the factory to run? Delhi Fire Service has clarified that it didn't give a no-objection certificate to the factory.

2.27 pm: Atul Garg, Chief Fire Officer, Delhi Fire Service (DFS) on fire incident at Rani Jhansi Road: The building did not have fire clearance from DFS and no fire safety equipment were found installed in the premises.

2.13 pm: Union Minister and BJP MP from Chandni Chowk Dr Harsh Vardhan: Extremely saddened at the fire incident that took place in my parliamentary constituency, earlier today. Constantly in touch with the local administration. Immediately returning to Delhi from Jhansi.

2.08 pm: Chief Minister of Bihar Nitish Kumar has announced financial assistance of Rs 2 lakhs each to the victims of Delhi Fire incident who hail from Bihar.

1.53 pm: Full list of patients at LJP Hospital-

1.40 pm: Aditya Pratap Singh, Deputy Commandant of NDRF ( National Disaster Response Force): Rescue operation is still underway, we are still searching the building.

1.18 pm: I do not wish to indulge in politics but there must be an investigation into the incident. Someone has to take responsibility, it is a tragic incident, says BJP MP Gautam Gambhir.

12.45 pm: Prime Minister's Office: PM Modi announced an ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakhs each from Prime Minister's National Relief Fund (PMNRF) for next of kin of those who have lost their lives due to tragic fire in Delhi. PM has also approved Rs 50,000 each for those seriously injured in the fire

12.38 pm: "Rehan, the owner of the building against whom a case has been registered under section 304 IPC, is currently absconding," says Delhi Police DCP North Monika Bhardwaj.

12.19 am: "One injured person has received more than 50% burns, 8 others admitted to hospital due to smoke inhalation. Around 15 people are injured in the incident," says Delhi CM Kejriwal.

12.13 am: "Saddened to hear about the devastating fire in Delhi. My heartfelt condolences to the families and friends of the deceased. I wish the injured a speedy recovery," says West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee on her Twitter handle.

12.08 am: MS Randhawa, PRO Delhi Police says, "43 people dead, injured admitted to LNJP & Lady Hardinge hospitals. Prima facie it appears short circuit caused the fire. Plastic material at the spot caused a lot of smoke. Case transferred to Crime Branch, forensics team to arrive at the spot soon."

11.51 am: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi expressed grief over the deaths of 43 workers in Delhi fire. "Saddened at the news that a massive fire in the Anaj Mandi area of Delhi has claimed many lives and left several people injured. I extend my deepest condolences to the families of those killed and wish for the speedy recovery (of the injured)," he said in a tweet.

11.42 am: "Deeply saddened by the loss of valuable lives due to massive fire near Anaj Mandi, Sadar Bazar, Delhi. My thoughts and prayers are with the bereaved family members of the deceased. Wish for the safety and speedy recovery of injured," tweets Delhi Lt Governor.

Deeply saddened by the loss of valuable lives due to massive fire near Anaj Mandi, Sadar Bazar, Delhi.

My thoughts and prayers are with the bereaved family members of the deceased. Wish for the safety and speedy recovery of injured. — LG Delhi (@LtGovDelhi) December 8, 2019

11.31 am: "It is a very sad incident. I have ordered a magisterial inquiry into it. Compensation Rs 10 lakhs each to be given to families of those dead and Rs 1 lakh each to those injured. The expense of medical treatment of those injured to be borne by the govt," Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal on Anaj Mandi fire tragedy.

11.22 am: Chief Minister of Delhi Arvind Kejriwal arrives at the spot of fire incident on Rani Jhansi Road; 43 people have lost their lives in the incident.

Chief Minister of #Delhi Arvind Kejriwal arrives at the spot of fire incident on Rani Jhansi Road; 43 people have lost their lives in the incident. #DelhiFire pic.twitter.com/I0foxyfUX7 — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

11.21 am: BJP MP from North East Delhi, Manoj Tiwari visits Delhi fire incident site, says, "It's a sad incident. As per initial info,fire broke out due to short circuit.BJP will provide financial assistance of Rs 5 lakhs each to families of those who have lost their lives and Rs 25000 to injured"

Background:

Earlier, Dr Kishore Kumar, Medical Superintendent, Lok Nayak Hospital said that there were 14 casualties. "Our team of doctors are attending to the injured," he told ANI. Shortly later, a team of NDRF rescue officials reached the spot.

Extremely sad to hear the tragic news about fire in Delhi’s Anaz Mandi. My thoughts and prayers are with affected families. Wishing an early recovery to those injured. The local authorities are doing their best to rescue people and provide help. — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) December 8, 2019

"The fire in Delhi’s Anaj Mandi on Rani Jhansi Road is extremely horrific. My thoughts are with those who lost their loved ones. Wishing the injured a quick recovery. Authorities are providing all possible assistance at the site of the tragedy," PM Modi said in a tweet.

"Extremely sad to hear the tragic news about the fire in Delhi’s Anaz Mandi. My thoughts and prayers are with affected families. Wishing an early recovery to those injured. The local authorities are doing their best to rescue people and provide help," said President Ram Nath Kovind.

"Death toll rises to 43 in Delhi fire incident," news agency ANI quoted Delhi Police as saying. "The condition of those injured is not serious, have been kept under observation. 34 people were brought dead to the hospital... Deaths have been mostly due to smoke inhalation and suffocation," said Kishore Singh, Medical Director, Lok Nayak Hospital, Delhi.

"Have instructed concerned authorities to provide all possible assistance on an urgent basis," said Shah. "V v tragic news. Rescue operations going on. Firemen doing their best. Injured are being taken to hospitals," said Kejriwal. " Rescue operations are going on. Injured are being taken to hospitals," he further added.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi: The fire in Delhi’s Anaj Mandi on Rani Jhansi Road is extremely horrific. My thoughts are with those who lost their loved ones. Wishing the injured a quick recovery. Authorities are providing all possible assistance at the site of the tragedy. pic.twitter.com/gK4z7nTJI5 — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on #delhifire incident: Have instructed concerned authorities to provide all possible assistance on urgent basis. pic.twitter.com/AvqWx9DRE2 — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

Death toll rises to 43 in #Delhi fire incident, according to police. pic.twitter.com/FAYd3LNoOB — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

"It is a tragic incident. An investigation will be conducted and action will be taken against whoever is responsible for it," said Delhi Minister Imran Hussain.

50 people, most of whom were affected by the smoke, were rescued, Delhi Fire Service officials told agencies earlier on Sunday. The cause of the fire has yet not been determined. According to reports, the fire broke out at a factory in the crowded central Delhi area. Most of the people who were burnt to death were local workers sleeping at the factory.

Meanwhile, people have been asked to avoid Rani Jhansi road for commuting, by the Delhi Police.

#UPDATE- Delhi Police: 35 people dead in fire incident at Anaj Mandi, Rani Jhansi Road https://t.co/DWmD55nnq4 — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

"Fire has been doused, 15 people rescued so far; Rescue operation underway, 27 fire tenders engaged in the operation," Sunil Choudhary, Deputy Chief Fire Officer, Delhi Fire Service said at about 8.15 am.

#Delhi: 32 people dead in fire incident at Rani Jhansi Road, says Delhi Police pic.twitter.com/bSFKc98btO — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

Shortly later, Atul Garg, Chief Fire Officer, Delhi Fire Service said that 50 people were rescued by the Fire Service till 9 am. "Till now we have rescued more than 50 people, most of them were affected due to smoke," he was quoted as saying by ANI.
