The big news: At least 43 dead in fire at Delhi factory, and nine other top stories

A look at the headlines right now:

Forty-three dead in fire at Anaj Mandi, Narendra Modi calls it ‘extremely horrific’: Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal called it ‘very, very tragic news’ and said firefighters were doing their best at the site.

If you do something wrong and cruel, there will be an encounter, says Telangana minister: Meanwhile, CJI Bobde said, ‘Justice must never take the form of revenge.’

‘GST collection was inadequate, will honour the compact with states,’ says Nirmala Sitharaman: The finance minister said GST rate reductions distorted the tax structure and credit became miniscule. Protest in Unnao against ministers’ visit to rape complainant’s family, NSUI members detained: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Adityanath said a fast-track court will hear the case, while Opposition leaders criticised the state government and called for speedy justice to the woman’s family. Second phase of Jharkhand Assembly polls ends, one dead, two injured in police firing in Sisai constituency: The police said the incident took place when a group of men tried to snatch their arms and pelted stones at security personnel. UK Sikh couple who were told they cannot adopt a white child win case against racial discrimination: The court awarded them nearly £120,000 (approximately Rs 1.12 crore) in damages.

‘Man running the country believes in violence,’ says Rahul Gandhi on rising crimes against women: The Congress leader said the reason for increasing lawlessness is the breakdown of the institutional structures. An auto driver was arrested for allegedly kidnapping and raping a five-year-old girl in Bihar’s Darbhanga district. US to accept H-1B visa applications from April 1: Under a new system, employers will have to first register their proposed H-1B beneficiaries and pay a processing fee of $10. Kerala man acquitted in the Walayar sisters’ rape-murder case attacked by mob, left on road: People said the Telangana incident, in which four men accused of rape and murder of a veterinarian were shot dead by the police, had triggered the assault. Greta Thunberg joins climate protest in Madrid after three weeks of Atlantic voyage: World leaders gathered in the Spanish capital for a UN conference to discuss the 2015 Paris agreement.
