TMC leader Insan Mallik shot dead in Bardhaman by unknown assailants, party blames Opposition

TMC leader Insan Malik was allegedly killed on his way home (representative image) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Last week, another TMC leader was killed in the area While the police have arrested a BJP leader in last week's murder case, no arrests have been made so far in Mallik's case

Kolkata: A Trinamool Congress leader was shot dead in West Bengal's Purba Bardhaman district when he was returning home from the office. According to reports, Insan Mallik, treasurer of Kalna No. 1 Panchayat Samiti, was shot when he was riding his two-wheeler and returning home around 8.30 pm. According to the police, Mallik was shot below the waist and was rushed to the hospital in Kalna. He was further referred to a hospital in Kolkata but died on the way to the hospital.

The TMC blamed the Opposition parties and sought probe into the matter. "I have told the police to probe the incident and arrest those behind the killing," said TMC district president Swapan Debnath. Mallik's wife Shiuli, who is also a TMC leader, however, blamed infighting within the TMC for her husband's alleged murder. She also blamed a 'gang' in Nandai area and claimed that they have been arrested for her husband's alleged murder.

Debnath, however, said that the law will take its own course and refused to comment on the allegations made by Malli's wife. Meanwhile, hundreds of protesters blocked the Bardhaman-Kalna road for about an hour, demanding arrest of individuals behind the act.

While the police have questioned a few individuals in the matter, no arrests have been made so far. "Will take necessary action if a complaint is lodged," Dhruba Das, Additional Superintendent of Police said.

This is the second killing of a TMC leader within a week. Earlier last week, another TMC leader Anil Majhi was killed in Madhubani area of the district. A BJP leader was arrested in connection with the murder, the police told news agency PTI.

Killings of TMC and BJP workers have been fueling a political war-of-words between the two parties in the recent past, more so, in the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections earlier this year.
