Hadapsar corporator offers free night drops to women

The car ride will be secured with police-verified volunteers on board, with full support from the cops



With emotions running high since the gang rape and murder of the veterinary doctor in Hyderabad, a Pune Municipal Corporation corporator has stepped forward to offer his two-bit in securing late night travels of women in his jurisdiction. He has offered a chauffeur-driven hatchback to transport the women for free between 9 pm and 6 am, with a police-verified volunteer on board to supplement the security.



Shiv Sena corporator for Hadapsar, Pramod Nana Bhangire, admitted that his gesture has been prompted by the recent upheaval in the country over rapes. “The Hyderabad incident was gruesome and I want to do my bit. As I have a spare car, I thought I could deploy to offer this free transportation service furnished with a trustworthy and punctual driver,“ he told Mirror.



Interestingly he has roped in police support for his endeavour and the service that can be availed by any woman living in and around Hadapsar may also have a police van in tow to reinforce the security. The small car can accommodate three passengers at any given time. “I am not accessing any government fund for this and will be paying for driver and petrol from my pocket. Though I wish could scale up on this endeavour, this is the best I could do to start with. I am hoping it will help the women, particularly those working in the IT sector in Magarpatta City and other parts of Hadapsar,” he added.



Confirming his involvement in the initiative, Kranti Kumar Patil, police inspector at Wanawadi police station, informed, “I had suggested to the Hadapsar corporator that we need to introduce some kind of service so women can travel safely, at least in our jurisdiction. We have verified volunteers who will be travelling in the cab throughout the night to ensure safety. Our marshals will also be involved in the exercise.”



Abhijit Pujari, who lost his wife Nayana Pujari to gang rape and murder by a cabbie and his accomplices in 2009, welcomed the move. “This is a good move by the corporator. We need more people to come up with such initiatives. Though this is on a very small scale, at least a handful of women will benefit from it,” he pointed out. He even volunteered to spread the word around on the service. “I will ensure I circulate the number and recommend it so it reaches as many women as possible in and around Hadapsar,” he offered.



Bhangire’s service already has takers. Divyanjali Matta, an IT professional working at Magarpatta told Mirror, “My company has no cab or bus service. Though our office hours are supposed to end at 8pm, it often stretches to 9.30 pm or even 10 pm. This late the campus grows still and these days I have to ask my husband to pick me up as I’ve had a few nasty experiences with the cabs, deterring me from using them. Such a service will definitely help people like me.”


