Unnao rape victim's family refuses to cremate body until CM Yogi Adityanath visits them

The Unnao rape-murder's victim's family has demanded that Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visits them and has refused to cremate the 23-year-old woman's body until then.

The family is adamant on not cremating the body that reached the Unnao village on Saturday evening until the chief minister promises action. The woman passed away on Friday night after suffering from 90 per cent burns. She was set on fire by five men on Thursday while she was on her way to Raebareli for a hearing of the rape case she had filed against the same men.

The family has decided to bury the body of the woman instead of cremating her. The body, wrapped in a white cloth and surrounded by family and heavy security cover, reached the village around 9 pm on Saturday.

The sister of the victim said on Sunday, "We demand that Yogi Sir should visit us and give an immediate decision. I also demand that I should be given a government job."

Emotions ran high as her brother and other family members brought back the body from Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital where she breathed her last on Friday night.

Father wants Hyderabad-like death for killers

The father of the Unnao rape-murder victim has demanded that CM Yogi Adityanath himself visits the family instead of ministers and promises action against the culprits. Speaking to India Today TV, the father demanded that the five men who killed his daughter should also be chased and gunned down like the Hyderabad case.

The Telangana Police on Friday morning killed four of the accused in the gruesome Hyderabad rape-murder case in an encounter.

Rs 25 lakh compensation

Two Uttar Pradesh ministers visited the family in Unnao on Saturday and were faced with violent protests. Labour Minister Swami Prasad Maurya handed over a cheque of Rs 25 lakh as ex-gratia compensation to the father of the Unnao rape victim.

The two ministers met the family members and while condoling their daughter's death, assured them of all possible helps in future.

Postmortem report

Postmortem report of the Unnao rape-murder victim said she died of extensive burn injuries. The young woman suffered 90 per cent burns when the group of five men dragged her outside the village and poured petrol on her before burning her alive. She was rushed to a local hospital in a critical condition from where she was shuttled to Lucknow and later Delhi.

After a 40-hour battle for survival, the Unnao woman breathed her last on Friday night after suffering a cardiac arrest.

The doctor at Safdarjung said, "According to the postmortem report the victim died of extensive burn injuries."

"There was no indication of the presence of any foreign body, poisoning or suffocation on the body of the woman during postmortem conducted this morning," the doctor said.

Protests in Unnao, Delhi

UP ministers Swami Prasad Maurya and Kamal Rani Varun along with local BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj reached the village of the Unnao gangrape victim and met her family on Saturday and were faced with violent protests.

A number of protesters including some local Congress leaders sustained injuries as police used force to disperse the crowd which gathered outside the residence of the victim, shouted 'Vaapas Jaao, Vapaas Jaao' (Go Back) and raised slogans against the state government and Sakshi Maharaj.

The sloganeering continued for 15 minutes. Police used force to drive away the protesters after which the two ministers and the MP were taken to the victim's home, villagers said.

In Delhi, a candlelight march for the Unnao victim turned into a clash between police and protesters when the cops resorted to using water cannon on the crowd. An altercation took place when the police stopped them on their way. Police used barricades to stop the protesters.

(With inputs from Shivendra Shrivastava and PTI)
