Compensation For Families Of 17 Victims Of Delhi Hotel Fire; 2 Arrested

Hotel Arpit Palace Fire: At least 17 people died after a fire broke out in the Karol Bagh hotel today.

At least 17 people were killed and three injured after a fire at a hotel in Delhi's congested Karol Bagh area early this morning. A woman and a child, among those dead, were killed when they tried jumping from a window after the Karol Bagh hotel fire, reports said. More than two dozen fire engines were sent to the spot after the fire broke out at Hotel Arpit Palace around 4 am. Most people in Hotel Arpit Palace were sleeping at the time. Video recorded on cellphones by eye-witnesses showed huge flames crowning the terrace of the large, white building. A person is seen dangling from the terrace and then jumping off. Most of the deaths took place due to suffocation, the police said. Karol Bagh, in central Delhi, is popular with tourists and lined with hotels and markets. A short circuit is suspected to be the cause of the fire that broke out in Karol Bagh's Arpit Palace hotel in the early hours today, a senior civic official said.

Here are the LIVE Updates of the fire at Hotel Arpit Palace in Delhi's Karol Bagh:

Feb 12, 2019 20:19 (IST) The manager of the hotel, Rajender, and an employee have been arrested. The case has been transferred to the crime branch.



Feb 12, 2019 18:57 (IST) The Delhi Police has registered a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

Feb 12, 2019 17:15 (IST) Tragedy struck a Kerala family on Tuesday when three of its members died in the fire. The family was a native of Kochi and was visiting the city to attend a wedding.



Feb 12, 2019 16:39 (IST) Union Tourism Minister KJ Alphons has said that the emergency exits of the hotel were closed every night. "We just took a look at the emergency exits. It's all illegal. These are very narrow, not according to specifications. And they were closed at night. According to information we have, those gates are closed at night and a guard sits outside. But we don't know if the guard was there or not," Mr Alphons told reporters.



Feb 12, 2019 15:37 (IST) Tara Ram, a cook, is among the dead. He is survived by 4 children, who are between the age of 5-10 years of age. He had been working at the hotel for two years.


