Shilpa Shetty expresses her concern over women's safety, pens a note to PM Narendra Modi on Instagram

Shilpa Shetty penned a note on Instagram asking for changes in the judiciary | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Women's safety has become a concern in India Asking for judicial changes, Shilpa Shetty penned a note on Instagram The actress shared news reports of horrific crimes against women

The country is boiling with anger over women's safety in India. While an Unnao rape survivor was burnt and beaten to death, another woman in Hyderabad was raped and her body was burnt. With the increasing rapes in the country, B-Town celebs are expressing their anger and asking for a change in the judiciary system. Actress Shilpa Shetty took to Instagram and expressed her anger and anxiety over the increasing crimes against women.

Taking to Instagram, Shilpa shared screenshots of a couple of news reports, one which talks about the Unnao rape survivor set ablaze and another alleged rape and murder of a woman in West Bengal. The actress wrote, "The position and dignity of women in our country are in dire straits... it’s been so for a while now. Stepping out every day has become an ordeal for most, one that is unavoidable. As a woman, I can't even express how disgusting it is to see the apathy towards rape victims, survivors, and their families. It is highly disappointing to regularly read the news stating that an offender/culprit has been granted bail and is out... What for? To be given another chance to commit a more heinous crime?"

Check out Shilpa's Instagram post here:

She further continued saying, "Reading about girls of all ages being abused and the brutality involved in each case makes my skin crawl. I'm a mother to a son, but I don't think I can bring myself close to imagining the fear that mothers of daughters feel every day."

Tagging Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the post, Shilpa wrote on the Beti Bachao campaign. She said that having a mere campaign is of no use if it can't be put into action. She urged the authorities for a stricter law that will not only deter future perpetrators but also severely punish the offenders undergoing trials.

She ended the note with the words, " Justice delayed is justice denied"

Meanwhile, the 23-year-old rape victim in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao district died on Friday night. The victim was attacked outside Sindupur village in Unnao when she was on way to a Rae Bareli court to attend a hearing in the rape case.


