fire in karol bagh: 17 killed as massive fire breaks out at hotel in Delhi's Karol Bagh

Video: Fire at Karol Bagh's Arpit Palace Hotel, rescue operation on https://t.co/6ANOiuszIX — TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1549938656000

Fire at hotel in Delhi's Karol Bagh https://t.co/YQJdzoWwqL — TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1549940586000

Delhi: Fire breaks out in Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh. Fire tenders rushed to the spot. More details awaited. https://t.co/YH2CZO6u3D — ANI (@ANI) 1549932658000

Karol Bagh hotel fire: People jump off the window to save themselves https://t.co/aRNDEs4QSx — TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1549940828000

Delhi Home Minister Satyendra Jain inspected the Karol Bagh Hotel in which 17 casualties took place due to fire. Or… https://t.co/Tgx8qRkW0N — TOI Delhi (@TOIDelhi) 1549948537000

Delhi government orders probe into hotel fire

(With inputs from PTI)

Delhi: Fire breaks out in Karol Bagh hotel, 17 dead

NEW DELHI: At least 17 people were killed in a massive fire which broke out at a hotel in central Delhi's Karol Bagh on Tuesday morning.The fire service and police officials pulled out around 50 people from the hotel in a four-hour long rescue operation. Many people were severely injured and have been admitted for treatment. Around 35 people were rescued safely.Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has announced Rs 5 lakh compensation to the next of kin of those killed in the fire incidentKejriwal announced the compensation after visiting the spot.The figure of casualties was shared by sources at the RML hospital. The official figures have not been released yet.The incident was reported from Arpit Hotel around 4.35am. In all, 22 fire tenders were sent to the spot and the fire was brought under control by 7.30am. Fire officials said cooling operations were launched around 8am.The police have registered an FIR in connection with the incident and are probing if there was any negligence on part of the hotel.The cause of fire is yet to be ascertained though officials suspect a short circuit may have triggered it. The fire department will conduct an inquiry as well.Meanwhile, in the wake of the fire incident in Karol Bagh that killed 17 people, Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia has ordered cancellation of an event to mark the fourth anniversary celebration of the AAP government in Delhi on Tuesday.Bollywood singer-composer Vishal Dadlani was to perform during the event to be held at Talkatora Stadium.The Delhi government has ordered a magisterial probe into a massive fire at a hotel in central Delhi's Karol Bagh area on Tuesday in which at least 17 people were killed, its Home Minister Satyendar Jain said.Jain, who visited the Arpit Palace Hotel where the fire broke out in the early hours of the morning, told reporters that he has also directed the fire department to inspect buildings which are five floors or more and submit a report on their fire safety compliance within a week."We have ordered for a magisterial inquiry into the case. Seventeen people have died, most of them of suffocation. Apparently, there were lapses (from the hotel administration's side) and action will taken against those found guilty," he said.Generally, four floors are allowed for such establishments, the minister said."We saw a canopy was put up on the terrace and tables and chairs were laid out. Inside in the rooms, wooden panels were there on the walls," Jain said."So I have also directed the fire department to inspect such multi-storeyed buildings which have five floors or more and submit a report in a week's time," he said.
