Delhi Fire Tragedy: Factory Was Running Illegally, AAP Asks Why BJP-Led MCD Didn't Shut It

New Delhi :

The blame game has started over the tragic fire incident in Delhi, which killed at least 43 people, with the ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) questioning the role of BJP-led Municipal Corporation of Delhi. The factory, where the massive fire broke out, was being operated from a house and didn’t have fire clearance or safety tools. Senior AAP leader and Rajya Sabha MP Sanjay Singh said that it was MCD’s duty to shut the factory that was running illegally.

"If a factory was operating illegally at a house, then it was responsibility of Municipal Corporation of Delhi to shut it. How did MCD allow the factory to run? Delhi Fire Service has clarified that it didn't give a no objection certificate to the factory," Singh said.

A massive fire swept through a factory in Anaj Mandi area of north Delhi on Sunday morning, leaving more than 40 people dead and many others injured, police said. The latest reports put the toll at 43. The death toll is likely to climb as many of the injured have suffered grievous injuries. According to officials, the building did not have fire clearance from Delhi Fire Service.

At least 59 people were inside the factory operating from a residential area when the blaze broke out, reported PTI. The fire was reported at 5:22 AM following which 30 fire tenders were rushed to the spot. More than fifty people trapped inside were rescued and rushed to LNJP, RML and Bara Hindu Rao hospitals. The officer further said the fire was of "medium category" and had been completely doused.

Also Read | Delhi Fire: 'Hero' Fireman Hailed For Saving 11 People Trapped In Anaj Mandi Building

The Delhi government ordered a probe into the fire incident in Anaj Mandi area and sought a detailed report within seven days. Revenue Minister Kailash Gahlot directed district magistrate (central) to conduct an inquiry and submit a report within seven days. During his visit to the site, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said he has ordered a magisterial inquiry into the incident.

Kejriwal also announced compensation of Rs 10 lakh each to be given to families of those dead and Rs 1 lakh each to those injured. The expense of medical treatment of those injured to be borne by the government. Prime Minister’s Office also announced ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakh each for the kin of the deceased and 50,000 each for those seriously injured in the fire.
