5-year-old missing girl's body found with head smashed; police suspect rape

A case of murder has been registered under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The deceased was found after being missing for around one-and-a-half-day Prima facie someone has smashed her head with a stone, say police A case of murder has been registered under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code

Nagpur: A five-year-old girl was found murdered with her head smashed on an agriculture farm in Linga village in Maharashtra's Nagpur district. The minor's body was found after she remained missing for around one-and-a-half-day. The police officials are suspecting it to be a case of sexual assault while the post-mortem report in the case is awaited.

An officer at the Kalmeshwar police station said that prima facie someone smashed her head with a stone as the body of the girl was found with a serious head injury at the agriculture farm. The minor had gone to her grandmother's place on Friday and did not return home.

When the minor was untraceable, villagers and family members reached out to the local police on Saturday and registered a missing person's complaint. Following this, a search operation was launched by the police. The minor's body was found by a police warden at Linga. A case of murder has been registered under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

A police official further added that the parents of the minor live on one side of the agriculture farm while her grandmother on another side. A small path connects both the houses. Her parents work as farm labourers. Further probe in the matter is underway.

UP man held for raping minor daughter

In a similar incident, a man in Uttar Pradesh's Bahraich district was held for allegedly raping his minor daughter under the influence of alcohol. The incident took place in a village under Kotwali Dehat police station. The 13-year-old girl was allegedly raped by the accused on Saturday night after which the girl's mother filed a police complaint.

The complainant alleged that her husband had tried to rape the girl earlier but was thrashed by his children. The accused was arrested by the police and booked under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act.


