Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EST

Estimated read time: 3-4 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

MONTGOMERY, Ala. (AP) — Alabama's near-total abortion ban will remain blocked by a federal judge. The attorney general's office confirmed the state is not appealing the October injunction issued by U.S. District Judge Myron Thompson. The injunction prevented the ban from taking effect Nov. 15 while Thompson hears a lawsuit challenging the ban as unconstitutional. A spokesman for Alabama Attorney General Steve Marshall says the state did not appeal because it wants time to build a record in the ongoing lawsuit to try to argue that previous cases guaranteeing abortion rights were wrongly decided.

WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) — A volcano has erupted on a small New Zealand island, and a number of people were missing and injured. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said about 100 tourists were on or near White Island when the volcano erupted and some of them were missing. Medical responders said they believed 20 people were on the island who needed treatment. There will be questions asked to why tourists were still allowed on the island after scientists noted an uptick in volcanic activity. The GeoNet agency said a moderate eruption had occurred and raised its alert level to four, on a scale where five represents a major eruption.

WATERLOO, Iowa (AP) — Pete Buttigieg is facing intense scrutiny for the first time as his outsider Democratic presidential campaign continues to roll in early-voting Iowa and New Hampshire. He is responding in his characteristic unflappable style, saying, “The more heat there is, I welcome that." He is being pressed, especially by rival Elizabeth Warren, to disclose corporate clients he served at a top consulting firm and open his fundraising events to the media. Buttigieg is asking McKinsey & Co. to release him from a non-disclosure agreement and is weighing whether to disclose more about his key donors.

WASHINGTON (AP) — Elizabeth Warren's campaign says she was paid at least $1.9 million for legal work stretching back three decades. Sunday's disclosure comes amid calls from a Democratic presidential rival that the Massachusetts senator should be more forthcoming about her past corporate clients. In May, Warren released a list of 56 cases she worked on as an attorney going back to the 1980s. Fifteen pages of newly released data show what she was paid in nearly 40 of those _ more than $1.9 million. Warren has criticized Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Indiana, for holding closed-door fundraisers. Buttigieg has responded by calling on Warren to release tax returns detailing what she was paid representing past corporate clients.

DUBUQUE, Iowa (AP) — Cory Booker says the Democratic party's process for determining who gets on the debate stage puts “elites" and “money" in control. His Sunday remarks come as he fights to hit the polling thresholds to be on the Dec. 19 debate stage in California. The qualifying deadline is Thursday. Booker says the requirements that are for now keeping him off the stage don't reflect the enthusiasm he's seen from Iowa voters over a four-day tour across 12 counties. A Democratic party spokeswoman says the qualifying thresholds have remained low and saysthe party's process has been inclusive.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
