Boy among five caught in Delhi shootout

(L-R) The accused identified as 21-year-old Sunil alias Bhoora, 34-year-old Ravinder, 24-year-old Sukhvinder alias Sanju, and two others.

The Special Cell of Delhi Police has arrested five suspected members of infamous Neeraj Bawana gang, including a juvenile, after a brief search operation across Rohini area on Monday.

The accused were identified as 21-year-old Sunil alias Bhoora, 24-year-old Sukhvinder alias Sanju, 34-year-old Ravinder, 20-year-old Arpit Chillar and a juvenile.

On February 1, the accused had allegedly killed a person identified as Vilash Chauhan alias Vicky in an Eeco van, near Mann Public School located at Narela industrial area. Sukhvinder and two of his accomplices - Sonu Chidi and Nishant - were also involved in the murder of Mohit on January 20, 2019.

The incident was reported from an area which comes under Shalimar Bagh police station.

Sanjeev Kumar Yadav, DCP of Special Cell, said, "Sonu Chidi and Sukhvinder have close ties with the Neeraj Bawania gang. They are the shooters. The other accused are indirectly connected to the gang and are accomplices of Sonu and Sukhvinder."

Neeraj Sehrawat, who is popularly known as Neeraj Bawana, is a wanted criminal involved in more than 100 criminal cases. He has a strong hold and is very active in Rohini and other outer districts of the national capital. His gang is directly involved in illegal activities such as extorting money from industrialists in Narela and Bawana areas.

The Neeraj Bawana gang has rivalry with Jitender alias Gogi and Manjit Mahal gangs. Gangster Neeraj Bawana is currently serving a jail-term in Tihar. More than 150 youths are associated with him, including juveniles.

"We received a tip-off about the active members of the Neeraj Bawana gang, who were said to be active in Sector 10 on Monday morning. So we planned a trap in that area. We tried to stop the accused persons' vehicle after our informer identified their car. However, they opened fire at the police personnel. Special Cell's head constable Bharat and constable Manjit got hit during the incident," an officer said.

"Thankfully, they were wearing bulletproof jackets that saved their lives. We have admitted the officers in a hospital for medical help," the officer added.

In retaliation, officers also fired at them, leaving three of the accused with gunshot injuries, and they surrendered later on. "Apart from the car, we have seized five weapons and 10 cartridges from them," he said.
