[NEWSWRAP] India Top News, December 8, 2019: From Delhi's massive fire tragedy to Unnao victim's last rites

43 people were charred to death when a massive fire broke out at a bag manufacturing unit in West Delhi’s Anaj Mandi in the early morning hours of Sunday (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Scroll down for the biggest news events in India and more.

New Delhi: On Sunday, 43 lives were lost in the national capital after a bag manufacturing unit in Anaj Mandi caught fire. Meanwhile, the deadline for linking one's Aadhaar card and PAN card was pushed to December 31.

Delhi Anaj Mandi fire tragedy: 43 lives lost, factory owner arrested; politics heats up

43 people were charred to death when a massive fire broke out at a bag manufacturing unit in West Delhi’s Anaj Mandi in the early morning hours of Sunday. PM Modi announced an ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakhs each from Prime Minister's National Relief Fund (PMNRF) for next of kin of those who have lost their lives due to tragic fire in Delhi. PM has also approved Rs 50,000 each for those seriously injured in the fire.

Apart from this, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal also announced Rs 10 lakh ex gratia to families of the deceased. The Anaj Mandi inferno is the most severe fire in the national capital after the Uphaar Cinema tragedy which claimed 59 lives and leftover 100 injured. Read More

Unnao rape victim's family agrees to conduct her last rites after police commissioner's assurance

The family members of the Unnao rape victim on Sunday have agreed to perform her last rites following an assurance given by the Lucknow Divisional Commissioner Mukesh Meshram. Commissioner Meshram said that one of the family members will be provided with a government job, along with police security for the family. While as per the demands made by the victim's kin, the officials also agreed that the family will be provided with a house under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana. Earlier, the family members demanded that they will perform the last rites only if the state's chief minister Yogi Adityanath will visit them. Read More

Your opinion not changing mindsets of rapists or law: Saina Nehwal hits back at film critic

Saina Nehwal hit back at a film critic after she criticised the ace Indian shuttler for applauding the Telangana Police over the encounter of all four alleged accused in the brutal rape and murder of a female veterinarian. The accused were killed in an encounter by the Cyberabad Police around 2-3 am on Friday after they reportedly tried to flee. The four men were taken to the scene of the crime by police to recreate the incident. However, the accused tried to escape from the spot and were eventually killed in an encounter. Read More

Alia Bhatt gets upset and uncomfortable after father Mahesh Bhatt loses his cool at book launch event

At Alia Bhatt's sister Shaheen Bhatt's book launch, Mahesh Bhatt lost his calm during the question-answer round. The filmmaker got emotional while answering a question that pertained to his daughter Shaheen whose book, I've Never Been Unhappier, talks about her depression phase. While Mahesh Bhatt got carried away and started screaming, Alia Bhatt interrupted him and said that she knew this would happen. Read More

PAN-Aadhaar linking deadline December 31: Consequences of not linking; how to link via SMS, online, paper mode

The deadline to link PAN (permanent account number) with Aadhaar is December 31, 2019, earlier the last date to link was September 30, 2019, as per the notification of the Ministry of Finance dated September 28, 2019. As per the notification by the finance ministry, all the individuals who have been allotted a PAN and is eligible to get an Aadhaar number have to link the two together. Earlier this year, the Supreme Court also upheld the section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 which makes PAN-Aadhaar linking mandatory. Also, it is already mandatory to quote the Aadhaar number while filing income tax returns (ITR). Read More

Galaxy S11 to be first to use Snapdragon 865 SoC: What this means

The Galaxy S11 smartphone is expected to be the first phone to feature the Qualcomm Snapdragon 855 SoC. The chipset in itself is quite powerful and brings wit itself features that will be used on a number of flagship phones in the coming days. Read More

Go 'Dopamine fasting' now to reset your brain
