Gangster opens fire at man form moving bike in busy Ludhiana market

Ludhiana: Gangster opens fire at man from moving bike in busy market

LUDHIANA: A local gangster Shiva Bhatti along with his three accomplices opened fire at a man from moving bike outside his tavern in broad day light in busy Daresi area on Sunday afternoon. Four accused came on one bike and one scooter and opened fire as a result of which one bullet hit the victim on his thigh.The incident has been captured in a CCTV camera installed near the spot in which the accused are captured opening fire form a moving bike.The accused fled from spot, while the injured was rushed to CMC Hospital , said his father who was also there.The injured has been identified as Mohit Kumar Goru, 25, who along with his father Pawan Kumar, 58 runs a tavern in Daresi area. According to Pawan Kumar, old rivalry is the reason behind the attack.The incident occurred at around 2.45pm on Sunday in busy Daresi market when Pawan Kumar along with his son Mohit was at tavern. While Pawan was inside the shop, his son was standing outside while he was shot at.Pawan, an eyewitness to the attack on his son said, "I was in shop while my son was standing outside the shop when four accused on one scooter and one motorcycle came there. I identify one accused Shiva Bhatti who is a gangster. Shiva who was pillion riding on bike, opened four fires and fled. One bullet hit my son and he fell down. I raised alarm and then rushed my son to a hospital where his condition is stated to be critical.”"Shiva has old rivalry with my son. Four months ago, Shiva had a fight with my son when he tried to attack Goru, my son in his defence attacked him back. A case was then registered against my son under charges of attempt to murder. But later on, the matter ended on compromise. However, Shiva nurtured rivalry against Goru and now attacked him", said Pawan.The accused Shiva Bhatti, a local gangster of Killa Mohalla was arrested by Ludhiana police with illegal weapon. He was lodged in jail and came out on bail a week ago. Assistant commissioner of police- central Waryam Singh said that, the police have registered a case under sections of 307 (attempt to murder), 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of IPC and Arms Act against Shiva Bhatti and his three unidentified accomplices. The police have also found four bullet shells form the spot.ACP added that, the police have got the CCTV footage from the cameras installed in the market in which the accused have been captured. Other accused are being identified.
