Crime branch officials bust prostitution rackets operational in Maharashtra

The police allegedly sent a decoy customer to nab the accused (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Saturday, a team of crime branch officials in Aurangabad busted two sex rackets The rackets were operational in two parts of the Beed Bypass A total of eight persons were arrested during the two raids

Aurangabad: The crime branch officials of the Aurangabad Police busted two sex rackets on Saturday and arrested eight persons. The officials also rescued four women from the locations. The crime branch confirmed the raids in a press release. One of the rackets was being run by a woman.

The first raid was conducted in Rajeshnagar area of Beed Bypass. The police allegedly sent a decoy customer to nab the accused.

After the decoy customer sent a signal to the police, a team of officials raided the building and arrested the accused. According to news agency ANI, the police arrested the woman who was running the racket along with four other persons who were visiting the spot.

The arrested persons were identified as Ajay Salve, Dineshwar Jarhad, Sanjay Kapse and Mohammed Arshad. During the raid, 480 liquor bottles were also seized from the spot. The total price of the liquor is said to be Rs 1,44,930. The police also rescued three women who were being forced into prostitution.

The second raid was conducted in Yashwant Nagar area of Beed Bypass. At the second spot, a man identified as Vinod Tekchand Nagavane and a woman were forcing another woman into the flesh trade. Both the accused were arrested during the raid.

The four rescued women were taken to a remand home after the raids. The police have registered cases at the Pundalik station in relation to the rackets.

Nine women among 19 arrested after police bust prostitution racket in UP

In October this year, the Indirapuram Police busted a prostitution racket and arrested 19 persons. The prostitution racket was allegedly being run in three spa centres. Out of the 19 persons, nine were women. The arrests were made under the Human Trafficking Prevention Act. The three spa centres sent photographs of women to their customers on WhatsApp.
