Gurpreet Singh: I can feel the pain of George Takei

1 of 2 2 of 2

Today marks 78th anniversary of Pearl Harbour attack that prompted the governments in the U.S. and Canada to go after people of Japanese ancestry through no fault of their own.

Thousands of Japanese, including those born here, were forcibly sent to internment camps after being branded as enemies.

While on the face of it, this was done in retaliation for the Japanese attack. In reality it was done by design to scapegoat another minority group and polarize the dominant society in return for political dividends.

That’s what I have understood from George Takei’s 208-page graphic novel, They Called Us Enemy. Recently released in Canada, it is a moving first-hand account of someone who, along with his family, was uprooted from his home. He was sent away to live in a camp as a young child—like a political prisoner—even though he wasn’t even remotely connected with what happened at Pearl Harbour.

I had an opportunity to go and see the former Star Trek actor in Vancouver at a book signing, but since the lineup was too long, I had to leave without getting his autograph.

The graphic novel is a must read for those who are unaware of what people of Japanese ancestry faced in the aftermath of December 7, 1941.

It will also be an eye-opener for Sikhs and Muslims of Indian origin living in this part of the world. What they have witnessed in their home country bears some similarities to the experiences of the young Takei.

The powerful illustrations try to recreate the horror of violence that innocent Japanese people had to go through. Their cars were smashed by mobs, they were denied entry to public places, humiliated by teachers at schools, and were treated like aliens within their own country only because of their ethnicity.

The internment camps were no less than jails where they were incarcerated under inhuman conditions.

Star Trek alumnus George Takei held book-signing events in B.C. earlier this year. Gurpreet Singh

Parallels can be drawn with modern-day India

This all reminds a reader like me of what minorities have faced and continue to face in India.

In 1984, for instance, thousands of Sikhs were murdered all across India after then prime minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards. The Sikhs were seen as traitors by the mobs and the police. In the national capital of New Delhi alone, close to 3,000 Sikhs were slaughtered with impunity.

Likewise, in 2002 thousands of Muslims were killed by mobs in the western Indian state of Gujarat after a train carrying Hindu pilgrims caught fire. The train wreck left more than 50 people dead.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was the chief minister of Gujarat at that time. He instantly blamed the incident on Islamic fundamentalists although one commission of inquiry found that it was an accident. Many believe that Modi was complicit in the massacre of Muslims, though he's denied this and he was never charged.

The politics of scapegoating minorities was repeated in India early this year when a suicide attack left 40 soldiers dead in the disputed region of Kashmir. As a result, mobs began targeting Kashmiri Muslims all over India.

This stood in sharp contrast to the lynching of 50 Sikh soldiers among the thousands killed by mobs in 1984. The outrage over the killings of 40 soldiers in Kashmir was missing when the mobs mercilessly murdered Sikh soldiers travelling on public trains.

I can therefore feel the pain of Takei and find lot of connections between his story and the stories of Sikhs and Muslims in India. That said, there has been some honest acknowledgment by the Canadian government in admitting those wrongs, whereas in India, we are still waiting for that to happen.

However, Takei’s story isn’t just relevant for India. It is relevant for the U.S. and Canada too despite all those official apologies.

Let’s face it: President Donald Trump is going after Muslims and Mexicans by "othering" them and continually stoking fears about them in the name of security.

In Canada, the far right People’s Party of Canada and the Conservatives, too, indulged in fear mongering against Syrian refugees and immigrants during the recently concluded federal election.

This all reminds us that the fight isn’t over yet and Takei’s story is meaningful to keep the struggle alive against racism and bigotry anywhere around the globe.
