Bengaluru to get 11 mini fire stations soon

fire stations

Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy

Bengaluru

NICE Road

Bannerghatta National Park

By Y Maheswara ReddyIf all goes well, the proposal to have 11 miniin the city is set to get approval from the state government within a few weeks. It may be recalled thathad allocated Rs 5 crore in the State Budget for implementing Emergency Response Support System in the State.“We have prepared a plan to open 11 mini fire stations in. The proposal is with the higher authorities. We are expecting directions from Director General of Police and Director General of Fire and Emergency Services. We will open the mini fire stations soon,” says Deputy Director (Admin) HS Varadarajan.The fire and emergency services authorities have identified the following locations for opening mini fire stations: KR Puram, Silk Board Junction,Junction (Kengeri), Kannminike,, Harohalli Industrial Area, Attibele, Sarjapura village, Dodda Dunnasandra, Marathahalli Junction, and Gandhinagar.According to reliable sources, a meeting was held on December 6, 2018 with the Director, Fire and Emergency Services to chalk out the plan for opening Fire Outposts (Mini Fire Stations) in east Bengaluru and west Bengaluru.“No additional expenditure is required to open 11 mini fire stations in the city. We have already advised the district fire officers to send the excess vehicles lying at the district headquarters. We will depute firemen from the existing fire stations in the city to the mini fire stations,’’ says Varadarajan.The mini fire stations will be crucial for Bengaluru given the fact that the city’s traffic is chaotic and its roads congested. Although Bengaluru has 20 fire stations at strategic locations in the city, the mini ones will help in immediate response.“Each of the mini fire stations will have one quick response vehicle which will be equal to a normal fire tender. These are either Bullet bikes, jeeps or water tankers mounted on Tempo Travelers. These vehicles can weave through traffic and narrow streets. The firemen from mini fire stations either extinguish the fire on their own or alert the nearest fire station,” Vardarajan said.
