Gujarat: Leopard terror continues in Bagasra, woman attacked

RAJKOT: Bagasara taluka in Amreli district has been under the siege of man-eating leopards that have not only left villagers terrorized, but are keeping an entire administration on its toes.Continuing to strike on unsuspecting villagers, a big cat on Saturday night attacked a woman in Lundhiya village inside her home leaving her severely wounded and battling for life.According to the forest officers, a dramatic turn of events led the leopard to barge into 45-year-old Jaya Malvi’s house.According to case details, the forest department was given orders to cage or shoot the big cats after two farmers in Bagasara taluka were mauled to death.To execute the orders, the department set up 30-odd cages on the outskirts of these villages. On Saturday when foresters were keeping a watch on the baits set in these cages, a leopard suddenly preyed upon a calf.“When we saw the big cat attack the calf, we started chasing it with our jeep. At this, the leopard panicked and started running towards Lundhiya village and broke into the house of Malvi. Here it found the woman and attacked her.“The neighbours rushed in to save Malvi after hearing her cries for help, but by then the big cat had already extracted flesh from her chest, throat and ribs. The woman was taken to Junagadh Civil Hospital, where she is battling for her life,” said a senior forest officer.On Saturday, leopard attacked Chagan Barjod, a farm labourer from Rajasthan when he was asleep in his hut along with two other labourers at around 3am. Forest officials said that the big cat entered the hut from the broken roof and grabbed Barjod by his throat. The other two labourers saw the leopard and scared the animal away and rush Barjod to nearby hospital where doctors declared him dead on arrival.On Friday, leopard had attacked another farm labourer on the outskirts of Shapar village in Bagasara taluka, injuring him. A day before that the leopard dragged away farmer Vaju Board in Munjiyasar village, who was sleeping outside his hut after watering the cotton farm. The animal took Borad to a distance where it tore apart the man’s abdomen and is also suspected to have eaten body parts.State forest minister Ganpat Vasava said that the state government had made elaborate arrangements to cage the man-eater leopards. He said that if required, the rogue big cats would be shot dead.“The forest department has sought services of eight policemen who are sharpshooters. If the animals are not caged, they will be shot dead,” said the minister, adding that shoot at sight orders to kill the leopards had been issued on October 26.Vasava further said that the CM was monitoring attempts to curb the leopard menace and 40 big cats had already been caged in two districts. “A team of 200 personnel are working round the clock, using drones and night vision cameras to trace the man-eating leopards. If a man-eating leopard evades being caged, the state government has the powers to shoot and kill it,” he added.
