Chris Hemsworth continues shooting scenes for upcoming Hugo Boss campaign

He's the global ambassador for Hugo Boss' range of luxury fragrances.

And on Sunday, Chris Hemsworth looked every inch the male model as he continued filming a commercial for the brand in New York City.

The 36-year-old actor was in his element as he jogged along Pier 1, with the idyllic setting of lower Manhattan and the iconic Brooklyn Bridge as a backdrop.

Lights, camera, action! Brooding Chris Hemsworth continued shooting scenes for an upcoming Hugo Boss fragrance campaign in New York on Sunday

Chris was groomed to perfection for the occasion, flaunting a bronzed tan and a slicked back hairstyle that showed off his chiseled jaw.

He covered his buff frame in an all-black ensemble, wearing a tight-fitting hooded top, matching sweatpants and running trainers.

In one scene, an intense looking Chris was seen emerging through atmospheric smoke effects as he picked up the pace and ran down an inner city street.

So hot: Chris was groomed to perfection for the occasion, flaunting a bronzed tan and a slicked back hairstyle that showed off his chiseled jaw

In the zone: In one scene, Chris looked intense as he was seen emerging through atmospheric smoke effects and running down an inner city street

The sighting comes after Chris was spotted shooting scenes for the TV spot in Manhattan's Wall Street area, earlier in the week.

Chris was announced as Hugo Boss' new global fragrance ambassador in 2017.

And while he often dons the brand's tailored suits on the red carpet, Chris confessed to The National that he's most comfortable in board shorts and T-shirts.

'My wife [Elsa Pataky] says I have more board shorts than most females have shoes,' Chris told The National in October 2017. 'I have a strange kind of addiction to them.'

Superstar: Chris was announced as Hugo Boss' new global fragrance ambassador in 2017

'Growing up, I never thought about fashion too much. No, maybe that's not true. I was very particular about what board shorts I wore, or what T-shirt. But to be able to wear beautiful clothes because of my work is a real luxury,' he added.

Chris wed Spanish actress and model Elsa, 43, in 2010, and the couple share three children, daughter India Rose, seven, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five.

The family live together in a $20million mega-mansion in Byron Bay, Australia.
