Photograph of emperor penguin family wins wildlife award

Advertisement

A heartwarming picture of an emperor penguin family huddled together in Antarctica has won an international bird photography competition.

Snapper Thomas Vijayan beat off thousands of entries from all over the globe to land the top prize in the Society of International Nature and Wildlife Photographers Bird Photographer of the Year 2019.

Other stunning images of our feathered friends include bald eagles scrapping, moorhens fighting, a colourful kingfisher and gannets gobbling fish underwater.

Photographer Thomas Vijayan beat off thousands of entries from all over the globe to land the top prize with his snap of an emperor penguin family huddled together in Antarctica

Thomas, 50, an architect from Ontario, Canada, said: 'A female emperor penguin lays one single egg then leaves.

'Each penguin egg's father balances it on his feet and covers it with his brood pouch, a very warm layer of feathered skin designed to keep the egg cosy.

'There the males stand, for about 65 days, through icy temperatures, cruel winds, and blinding storms.

'Finally, after about two months, the females return from the sea, bringing food they regurgitate, or bring up, to feed the now hatched chicks.

'The males then eagerly leave for their own fishing session at sea and the mothers take over care of the chicks for a while. '

Runner-up: Other entries caught on camera closer to home included a picture of a great crested grebe with two chicks on its back and a fish in its mouth, which was taken by freight train driver Michael Erwin from Stoke, Staffordshire

Third place: Feargal Quinn from County Meath in Ireland caught this graceful shot of a heron looming out of its surroundings

The runner-up in the competition was caught closer to home as the snap of a great crested grebe with two chicks on its back and a fish in its mouth was taken by freight train driver Michael Erwin from Stoke, Staffordshire.

Michael, 53, said: 'The image captured was taken in Staffordshire and shows a great crested grebe with its chicks on the back which both parents take in turn doing till they are old enough to be safe on their own.

'The fish was offered to the chicks but was obviously too big so the adult had it instead.'

And Feargal Quinn, from County Meath in Ireland, claimed third place with a graceful shot of a heron looming out of its surroundings.

Sandi Little, 67, received a highly commended certification for her shot of a pair of bald eagles fighting over a dead chicken in Halifax in Nova Scotia, Canada

Tracey Lund put her camera in a waterproof holding operated by a pole to get a shot of gannets feeding underwater in the Shetland Islands of Scotland

Hundreds of entrants submitted their works to the competition and many received a highly commended certification.

These included a shot of a pair of bald eagles fighting over a dead chicken in Halifax in Nova Scotia, Canada.

The photographer in this instance, Sandi Little, 67, said: 'Two eagles saw a dead chicken carcass in an open field.

'They each flew in to catch the carcass with their large talons.

'My photo capture was a lucky one.

'One eagle had landed and took the carcass to a small crevice to enjoy his lunch when he sensed the other eagle was approaching to steal it from him.

'He turned around, in full wing span and eyes wide open to protect his lunch and I captured his look of "don't you dare" to the approaching threat.

'It was worth standing for over three hours in minus 10 degrees to capture this shot of wildlife's amazing beauty.

'I feel this photo shows wildlife at its barest bones. It is raw and it is real.

'The need for food and the fight for the strongest to win the prize makes us realise that wildlife just can't go and pick up food at the grocery store, they have to hunt and be strong and smart about it even among the same species.'

Another highly commended piece was that from award winning amateur photographer Tracey Lund.

The 45-year-old customer experience engineer for KCOM in Hull put her camera in a waterproof holding operated by a pole to get a shot of gannets feeding underwater in the Shetland Islands of Scotland.

She said: 'There were thousands of gannets circling the RIB where I was sat on the side as they started to dive into the sea.

'It was an unbelievable spectacle just to witness let alone photograph.'

The competition proved that it is not always the big birds that make for dramatic pictures as shown by one shot that saw a robin tussling with a cuckoo in Dumfries and Galloway in Scotland

The award for Judge's Choice was given to David Godfrey's snapshot of two moorhens mid-way through a fight which was captured at the Slimbridge Wetland Centre in Gloucestershire

The competition proved that it is not always just big birds that make for dramatic pictures as shown by one shot that saw a robin tussling with a cuckoo in Dumfries and Galloway in Scotland.

Photographer Iain McFadyen, 60, a company director in a manufacturing business from Paisley, said: 'The robin had a nest nearby and was not amused when the cuckoo came close by.

'After a few minutes the robin's aggression certainly worked as the cuckoo flew off.'

The award for Judge's Choice was given to David Godfrey's snapshot of two moorhens mid-way through a fight.

The 62-year-old retiree from Kent managed to capture the image during a visit to the Slimbridge Wetland Centre in Gloucestershire.

He said: 'The two male moorhens were battling to impress a female which was watching nearby.'

Ajit Huigol caught an oriental dwarf kingfisher on camera as it grappled with a small lizard in the village of Chiplun in Maharashtra, India

Gary Spicer, who runs a roofing company in Shaftesbury, Dorset, travelled to Hungary to take his shot of a Hoopoe with a grub in its beak

One of the more prominent themes to be displayed throughout several entries in the competition was that of birds snapping up food.

Kidney transplant surgeon Ajit Huigol, from Bangalore, caught an oriental dwarf kingfisher on camera as it grappled with a small lizard.

He said: 'The species is one of the smallest kingfishers in the world. Even though it is endemic to most of India, it is very difficult to even sight one, let alone photograph one.

'I decided to go to a small village called Chiplun in the Indian state of Maharashtra, a tiny hamlet situated in the middle of a thick forest.

'Both parents are active in bringing back food for the chicks. I got to see geckos, skinks, spiders and frogs being brought by the adults every 10-15 minutes or so.

'As it sat on a perch for a few seconds with a skink, I managed to get this shot.'

Similarly, Gary Spicer, who runs a roofing company in Shaftesbury, Dorset, travelled to Hungary to take his shot of a Hoopoe with a grub in its beak.

He said: 'The bird was busy bringing food back for its young and for whatever reason on this occasion he stopped on his perch and looked down at the ground.

'I guess he must have seen another potential food source but with his bill already full gave it a miss.'

The theme was also continued by a photograph of black stork delicately holding a fish in its beak which was captured by Csaba Tokolyi in Hungary

Wedding photographer Ann Aveyard, from Hampshire, went into the sea to get her highly commended shot of a pair of pelicans clashing bills in Florida

The theme was also continued by a photograph of black stork delicately holding a fish in its beak which was captured by Csaba Tokolyi in Hungary.

He said: 'The bird just caught a small catfish and in the next moment it lifts it out of the water and consumes it in a single gulp.

'Sometimes it takes some juggling to position the prey in the right position to fit the beak and throat of the bird.

'The image captures the last moments of the fish and show the drama of prey looking at its predator from eye to eye.'

Another recurring focus was pelicans.

Wedding photographer Ann Aveyard, from Hampshire, went into the sea to get her highly commended shot of a pair of them clashing bills in Florida.

She said: 'It was taken on Estero Beach on the west coast of Florida.

'The pelicans like to land on the old pier posts to dry off, and these two, having a bit of a fight over the post, caught my eye.

'I had waded into the sea, up to my knees, to get closer shots of the birds.'

This was echoed by Italian Giovanni Frescura who went to Lake Kerkini in Greece to get his shots of the species as they began to take off from the surface of the water

Another entry by Tracey Lund was also taken at the same lake as a group of pelicans grouped together to fight over a fish

This was echoed by Italian Giovanni Frescura who went to Lake Kerkini in Greece to get his shots of the species.

He said: 'The shoot was made by a boat of a fisherman shipping near the birds.

'Those are Dalmatian pelican and the red colour is so particular only in mating time.'

Another entry by Tracey Lund was also taken at the same lake.

She said: 'I wanted to capture the way they grouped together to fight over the fish.

'The way they use their enormous beaks is extraordinary. I love these pelicans, each one has their own personality and unique hairstyle.'

There were still many entries in the competition that echoed old-fashioned bird portraiture including a a shot of a snowy owl swooping into the landscape in Canada taken by Giovanni Frescura

Barry Kettell, retired and from Norfolk, managed to capture a pair of Arctic terns interacting mid-flight on the Farne Islands off Northumberland

There were still many entries in the competition that echoed old-fashioned bird portraiture including a a shot of a snowy owl swooping into the landscape in Canada taken by Giovanni Frescura.

He said: 'The shot was taken on a very cold day. The owl was flying in front me so the photo has a very particular point of interest.'

Likewise, Barry Kettell, retired and from Norfolk, managed to capture a pair of Arctic terns interacting mid-flight on the Farne Islands off Northumberland.

He said: 'The trip was to photograph the puffins, but the terns were more appealing and this pair seemed to be quite happy displaying.'

The judges were originally presented with anonymised versions of all the images and it took them weeks to whittle down the entrants.

There was a minimum one pound entry fee which was donated to the bird charity RSPB which has helped raise more than £2,850.
