Two CoBRA jawans injured in IED blast triggered by Maoists

RANCHI: Two CoBRA personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were injured on Sunday morning when Maoists exploded an IED near Piyakuli hills in Tamar constituency. The incident happened around 7.30am when the jawans were returning to their base on completion of poll duty.The injured personnel, identified as Pranay Das and Jignesh Choudhary, both around 25 years of age, were part of a CoBRA team engaged in surveillance during the second phase of election in the constituency held on Saturday. Doctors at Medica Hospital here, where they are taken for treatment, declared both the injured as stable but referred Das to AIIMS in New Delhi after which he was airlifted to the national capital in an air ambulance. Das sustained injuries on his right leg and pelvic bone, the doctors said.Anand Srivastava of Medica Hospital said, “Das has been referred to AIIMS in New Delhi for further treatment on recommendations of the doctors and airlifted to the national capital. Chaudhary, on the other hand, suffered contusion on the head and has undergone CT scan. Both are out of danger and their vitals are stable.”CRPF IG Sanjay Anand Lathkar, who visited the injured at the hospital, said: “The CoBRA jawans were deployed in nearby areas of Tamar to provide security cover to poll officials. After completion of the process on Sunday, the personnel were being withdrawn to relocate them in other constituencies which will go to polls in the third phase.”On the presence of rebels in the area, Lathkar said, “The injured jawans have not been able to provide details about the incident. We will ascertain the type of IED used in the attack and will be able to comment on their presence only after the commanding officer gives his briefing. However, the nature of the impact indicates that it was a directional IED and there hasn’t been any exchange of fire after the incident.”Ranchi SP (rural) Rishab Jha said the jawans were camping atop the hills in the locality to secure the booths and the polling parties. Notably, Ranchi SSP Anish Gupta was also camping with a team in Vijayagiri hills located near Piyakuli hills. As part of sanitising the area, police had deployed a large number of security personnel in the constituency and had conducted air surveillance using helicopters and drones to check movements of the extremists.Sunday’s incident was the second attack in last 12 hours by Maoists. On Saturday evening, the rebels had also attacked a polling party in the same constituency when officials were returning to their base after the polling in booth number 132 of Arki block in neighbouring Khunti district. There was no causality in the incident.
