DG office eyes space in Nariman Point, authorities want to rent space in Mittal Tower

Mittal Tower

Nariman Point

Colaba

DG office

Edinburgh

Legislative Council

This building was amongst first to be designed by [English architectural engineer] Frederick William Stevens, who also designed the BMC and CST buildings Abha Narain Lambah, architect

Parts of the director-general of police’s office and the state intelligence department will partially move toinas the state police headquarters outside Regal undergoes a makeover.The state police HQ inwants to partially move its offices to the third floor of Mittal Tower’s B and C wings. As of now, 9,215 square feet of theneeds to be vacated. The authorities want 11,400 square feet at the new premises at a cost of Rs 29.21lakh per annum. Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Sanjay Kumar said: “They will have to undergo a massive renovation and will have to hire new premises.”The renovation will take at least three years, according to officials. "We are examining the costs and sending IPS officer Krishna Prakash, who is dealing with the makeover," Kumar said. "The PWD issued the tenders and the contract has been awarded. Our conservation architect needs a lot of vacant space and wants the state intelligence department on the second floor to move with some other staff. Since Mittal Tower is nearby, we have chosen this site," said Prakash. Last week, the Home Department sanctioned Rs 17 crore for the project. Architect Abha Narain Lambah will be doing restoration. During the restoration, certain concrete structures added later would be removed and the building would be restored to its original form.""This building was amongst first to be designed by [English architectural engineer] Frederick William Stevens, who also designed the BMC and CST buildings," Lambah said.The police HQ moved into what was known as the Royal Alfred Sailors’ Home, in 1982. Work on the building began in early 1872 and was finished four years later. As its name suggests, it was made to accommodate 20 officers and 100 sailors. However, the building was actually conceived to commemorate the visit of the Duke ofin 1870. The duke laid the foundation stone during his visit.The state government acquired the building in 1928 to house the Bombay. The police department subsequently moved in after it was vacated in 1980s. Ever since then, it has been the office of the DG.
