Paika memorial will be an epitome of valour of Odisha’s great heroes: President Ram Nath Kovind

BHUBANESWAR: The Paika Rebellion Memorial will be an epitome of the valour and courage of the great heroes of Odisha and will serve as a source of inspiration for generations to come. This was announced by President Ram Nath Kovind while laying the foundation of a memorial dedicated to the uprising of 1817 at the foothills of Barunei hills in Khurda district on Sunday.“A major part of nation building is to sensitise people to our glorious history and make the young generation understand the value of the sacrifice of our forefathers. The memorial will be as popular as a place of pilgrimage and will attract tourists from across the globe,” Kovind said.Recalling the past glory of Odisha’s Paikas, Kovind said, “This land of Lord Jagannath presents a unique combination of devotion and rebellion. Peasant soldiers who were known as Paikas displayed tremendous courage and gallantry and fought with the British. We all are feeling thrilled to be present on the land of those heroes who sacrificed their lives for their motherland.”He congratulated the Centre and the state for celebrating the 200 years of the Paika Rebellion in 2017 and taking various steps for its promotion and to familiarize people with it.To be built on 10 acres of land, the memorial will commemorate the armed rebellion by Paikas under the leadership of Buxi Jagabandhu against the British in 1817, claimed to be the first war of independence.On the occasion, chief minister Naveen Patnaik also proposed to the Centre to start a new special train in the name of Buxi Jagabandhu and to declare Paika Bidroh as the first war of independence. “The patriotism and valour of the great Paikas kept Odisha unconquered by the British till 1803. The Paikas were the first to launch a rebellion against the British. Odisha has been long been demanding the declaration of Paika rebellion as the first freedom movement of India. I am hopeful that president Ram Nath Kovind Ji will consider the state’s demand,” Naveen added.To commemorate the 200 years of Paika Rebellion, the then finance minister Arun Jaitley had announced the Centre’s plans in his budget speech in 2017. A postage stamp and a commemorative coin on Paika Rebellion were also released earlier. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had felicitated the descendants of Paika rebellion. A chair on the Paika Rebellion was also set up in Utkal University.Speaking on the occasion, Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan said, “It’s a day of pride and honour for me as an Odia. The sacrifice of the brave Paikas of Odisha will be remembered for years to come through this grand memorial and will keep on inspiring the youngsters.”Residents of the locality where the memorial is set to come up were visibly excited. “Today is a memorable day for the people of Khurda as we had long been demanding a memorial for the brave Paikas. This will not only be a fitting tribute to the brave Paikas, but will also help develop the area into a tourist destination,” Mrutyunjay Chhotray Dalbehera, a resident of Khurda, said.Among others, governor of Odisha Ganeshi Lal, governor of Andhra Pradesh Biswabhushan Harichandan, Union ministers Pratap Sarangi and Prahlad Singh Patel were also present during the foundation laying ceremony.
