Hyderabad encounter: Main accused Areef had most bullet injuries

Encounter killing of four rape accused in Disha's case (File photo)

HYDERABAD: During Friday’s encounter at Chatanpally village near Shadnagar, among the four accused in veterinary doctor’s gangrape and murder case, prime accused Mohammed Areef was found with most number of bullets. Areef had at least four bullet injuries. “He was shot thrice in chest and another round pierced him on right side of his lower ribcage,” said an official who was part of the probe team that visited the encounter site. Most of the accused were shot in the chest.

Areef was accused of opening fire at special police party after snatching pistols from them on Friday. “Whether the bullets were lodged in his body or not would only be known after the post-mortem report is out,” a source associated with the investigation told TOI.

Apart from Areef, police also gunned down the other three accused — Chennakesavulu, J Naveen and J Shiva — early on Friday. Chennakesavulu, too, like Areef, had tried to snatch a pistol from the police. Naveen was shot twice by the police team. He had two bullet injuries — on the neck and chest. Shiva and Chennakesavulu, too, had at least two bullet injuries.

Meanwhile, Telangana police continued to maintain that they were still unsure about how many bullets were fired during the encounter that lasted for about 30 minutes.

“We are still scouring the site for missing bullets and shells. Since the exchange of fire took place in an agricultural field, some bullets are still missing, and a search is on,” said a source. The police, on the day of the encounter, reportedly carried both assault rifles and pistols.

After the encounter on Friday, four tehsildars conducted inquest on the bodies of the accused at the site. Family members of the accused were not brought to the encounter site during the inquest procedure, as thousands of people had gathered there, cheering the police action.

Bodies of the four accused have been preserved at a morgue in Mahbubnagar. Cops are expecting to get a clarity on Monday about when the bodies can be handed over to the family members of the accused.

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


