Case cracked! Mumbai Police solve suitcase murder mystery; daughter had hacked victim

The headless corpse was stuffed in a suitcase and left to rot.

Key Highlights Citizens at the busy Mahim beach in Mumbai were shocked to come across a suitcase stuffed with human body parts. Police teams launched an extensive investigation and got to the bottom of the case in less than a week. The identity of the perpetrators was revealed and came as a shock to family and friends.

Mumbai: The Mumbai police department cracked the infamous suitcase murder that had rocked the Maximum City last week after chopped parts of a man were found on Mahim beach. The headless corpse was stuffed in a suitcase and left to rot.

Talking to Mirror Now, an eyewitness said that policemen came within minutes of them being informed. “We could see a portion of a human body part in the suitcase and foul stench was emanating from it,” the eyewitness said. Soon after, police arrived at the scene of crime and opened the bag, confirming the presence of human body parts.

Subsequently, the police launched an investigation into the sensational case that made headlines across the country and managed to identify the deceased as Bennet Rebello. Upon further investigation, they zeroed in on the victim’s daughter and her boyfriend.

During questioning, the two broke down and the girl allegedly confessed that it was her who had killed Rebello with the help of her boyfriend. She also alleged sexual abuse at the hands of the father who had adopted her. He had also major objections to their relationship.

Irked by this, the 19-year-old daughter, along with her minor boyfriend, decided to take the extreme step and murder her father in a gruesome manner.

The incident has left the family of the deceased in a state of shock as they could never fathom that such brutal violence would come from his own daughter's hands.

The friends of the deceased, talking to Mirror Now, expressed hope that the corresponding investigation would shed more light in the case and refused to jump to any conclusions yet.

In the meanwhile, further investigation is being carried out after police had registered a case of murder under section 302 (murder), 201 (causing the disappearance of evidence of offence) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).


