Woman shot in the face 'because she stopped dancing' at wedding in shock footage

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

A woman is in a critical condition after being shot at a wedding in India because she stopped dancing.

Footage of the horrifying incident has gone viral on Twitter.

In the short video, two women can be seen dancing on a stage.

They stop dancing as the music suddenly ends, reportedly due to a problem with the sound system.

A voice can suddenly be heard threatening "shots will be fired".

(Image: @alok_pandey / Twitter)

Seconds later, a gunshot is heard and a woman is seen falling to the floor clutching her face.

The other dancer rushes to her side.

Reports say the woman was struck in her jaw by the bullet in the attack during a wedding in the village of Chitrakoot, Uttar Pradesh.

According to Indian media, two people have been arrested a week after the shooting, and police are still hunting for another suspect.

Cops have been slammed on social media for acting too slowly.

India Today editor Shiv Aroor tweeted: "This belated action is thanks to media attention on the viral video."

"The suspect is on the run but we are confident that we will arrest him soon," police told the BBC.

(Image: @alok_pandey / Twitter)

It isn't the first incident of its kind at a wedding in India.

In 2016, a woman was shot in a chest by a stray bullet after wedding-goers let off their guns in celebration.

The woman, who was reportedly performing, died at the scene.

Four other guests, including the woman's 11-year-old daughter, were injured in the gunfire and hospitalised.

(Image: @alok_pandey / Twitter)

In November 2016, a gun-toting woman calling herself a god killed three people including the groom at a wedding in the northern Indian state of Haryana.

While in 2018, Punjab police arrested a man after he allegedly shot dead his neighbour by mistake during a pre-wedding party.

The man had fired shots into the air to celebrate his daughter's upcoming wedding but accidentally hit his female neighbour in the forehead, killing her instantly.
