Chittoor Police to set up 'Mahila Mithra' committees for women and children

Women from different walks of life will also be members of the committee (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Committees called 'Mahila Mithra' will be formed by the Chittoor Police The intention of the committees is to ensure that any crime against women and children is dealt with on priority Women police officials, representatives of NGOs and women from different sects of life will be members of these committees

Tirupati: The Chittoor Police have announced that they will be forming 'Mahila Mithra' committees to look into crimes against women and children. The decision has been taken to ensure that crimes relating to women are dealt with on priority. The Mahila Mithra committees will comprise women cops and representatives of NGOs. Women from different walks of life will also be members of the committee.

The Mahila Mithra committee will also concentrate on crimes against children. To commence the process of forming the committee, the Chittoor Police organised a workshop for women police personnel and formed a road-map for the Mahila Mithra committees.

While addressing the participants of the workshop, S Senthil Kumar, superintendent of police, Chittoor said that women cops will coordinate the committee. He said that women from different walks of life along with representatives of NGOs will be part of the committee to ensure that the plan is executed efficiently.

Senthil Kumar told the Times of India, "Once the committees are in place, a series of awareness programmes would be held at schools, colleges and rural areas to sensitize women and children on the existing laws which ensure the safety of women and children. "

Senthil also said that the Chittoor Police has always aspired to reduce the number of crimes against women and children. He said that they will be able to achieve their goal by conducting awareness camps and by setting up committees like the Mahila Mithra. He said, "Other issues including human trafficking, child marriage etc would also be covered by the Mahila Mithra committees to bring about a change in the society. "

The Chittoor Police made this announcement days after reports of several rape cases surfaced from different parts of the country. The gang-rape and murder of a veterinarian in Cyberabad had shocked the nation and police personnel faced flak from all quarters for allegedly delaying their response to the distraught family of the victim, thereby losing the crucial advantage of quick response.
