TRS joins opposition in going against CAB; Shiv Sena seeks 25-yr ban on voting rights

New Delhi: Congress led opposition parties in the Lok Sabha in opposing the Citizenship Amendment Bill by insisting it violated the basic structure of the Constitution. While DMK, Trinamool, NCP, TRS, BSP and others opposed the bill and criticised its provisions, Shiv Sena made a set of demands during the debate, including a 25-year ban on voting rights for those given citizenship under CAB.Congress MP Manish Tewari said: “The bill is against Articles 14, 15, 21, 25 and 26 of the Constitution. It is unconstitutional and against the Fundamental Right to Equality. The Constitution prohibits religious discrimination.” He also hit out at home minister Amit Shah for alleging Congress partitioned India on the basis of religion. “Today, the home minister said Congress was responsible for Partition on the basis of religion. I want to make it clear that the foundation for the two-nation theory was laid in Ahmedabad in 1935 by Savarkar at a Hindu Mahasabha session, and not the Congress.”Sena MP Vinayak Raut said: “How many refugees from the six communities mentioned in the bill live in India? The home minister has not answered how much our population will increase when they get citizenship. Will that add to the existing economic problems of the Indian people? What about Tamils from Sri Lanka?” He also demanded that the government explain steps taken to rehabilitate Kashmiri Pandits in the Valley after the Centre rendered provisions under Article 370 redundant.Trinamool’s Abhishek Banerjee said: “Swami Vivekananda will be shell shocked if he was here to see this bill as it is against his idea of India. BJP’s idea of India is divisive. It will be disastrous if we ignore the words of Mahatma Gandhi and not heed advice of Sardar Patel.” DMK leader Dayanidhi Maran said: “Probably the fear of the West, the fear of being isolated by West has crept in and you included Christians in this bill. What if Muslims from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir want to immigrate? What law do you have for that?” NCP MP Supriya Sule said: “The entire ethos of our democracy is equality and talking about Article 14 and 15, I am not convinced by the home minister. It will be struck down by the Supreme Court. I request him to rethink it and please withdraw the bill.” BSP leader Danish Ali said “the amendment is against the Constitution”.
