Congress issues whip for Rajya Sabha MPs ahead of Citizenship Bill tabling

Congress has issued a three-line whip to its Rajya Sabha MPs to be present in the House on Wednesday for the introduction of the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill that will be tabled in the House on Wednesday.

The Citizenship Bill, already passed by the Lok Sabha, will be tabled in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday. The Bill sailed through Lok Sabha after a 12-hour-long debate on Monday with 311 votes in favour of it and 80 against.

BJP has already issued whip to all the members of Rajya Sabha to attend the sessions on December 10 and December 11. Now NDA will require the support of at least 121 MPs in the 240-member Rajya Sabha to pass the Citizenship Bill.

Members who defy the party whip are likely to face action.

The numbers as they stand now have 121 MPs favouring the Bill and 100 against it while a bunch of others haven't made their stand clear.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill seeks to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955, to make illegal migrants who are Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, excluding Muslims, from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan eligible for Indian citizenship.

The bill relaxes the requirement of residence in India from 11 years to six years for these migrants.

Home Minister Amit Shah tabled the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, in Lok Sabha on Monday assuring that "the bill has nothing to do with Indian Muslims" and that it "only intends to provide protection to the persecuted minorities in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh."

The home minister claimed that there was no fear among the minorities in India. "Even if some fear has risen after the statements by the opposition, I must assure every Indian that, under the Narendra Modi government, minorities have no reason to fear," he said.

Launching a blistering attack on the government, AIMIM president and MP Asaduddin Owaisi tore a copy of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in the Lok Sabha, saying that the bill tries to divide the country.

As the bill was passed in the lower house, reactions from the top leaders started to pour in even as the Opposition continued to dub the bill as "unconstitutional".

Congress leader Shashi Tharoor called tweeted: "Today is a black day for our Constitution because what happened was unconstitutional. It very clearly targets the Muslim community, it is very shameful."

Meanwhile, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said: "Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan all are Islamic states. Followers of Islam cannot be persecuted there on the basis of religion. This bill only gives citizenship to those who are persecuted on the basis of religion in these three countries."

Massive protests across Assam were held as the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was passed in the Lok Sabha. Various organisations and students of Assam including All Assam Students' Union (AASU) protested across the state against the bill and termed it as unconstitutional and communal.

The protesters burnt effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home minister Amit Shah, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal, state minister Himanta Biswa Sarma and the leaders of Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) an ally of the BJP-led Assam government in different places of the state.

On Tuesday, the North East Students' Organisation (NESO) called for an 11-hour Northeast bandh from 5 am on the same issue.

The Assam Administration has imposed section 144 in several districts of the state including Sonitpur, Lakhimpur and Tinsukia ahead of the protest by NESO.

Assam Police has asked all districts police to take appropriate security measures to tackle any untoward situation. The security deployment has also been increased at the offices of BJP, AGP in many places in the state.

Also Read | Federal US commission seeks sanctions against Amit Shah if CAB passed in Parliament

Also Watch | Lok Sabha passes Citizenship Amendment Bill
