2 CRPF jawans including one from Kerala shot dead allegedly by a colleague

2 CRPF jawans including one from Kerala shot dead allegedly by a colleague

One of them was identified as 28-year-old Sahul Harshan from Kerala. The identity of the second jawan is not known yet.

news Death

In an alleged fratricidal incident, two CRPF jawans were shot dead, allegedly by one of their colleagues, on Monday. According to a PTI report, the incident took place in the 'Charlie' company of the 226th battalion of the force at Bokaro in Jharkhand. One of the two deceased has been identified as 28-year-old Sahul Harshan, an Assistant Commandant rank officer, hailing from Aluva in Ernakulam district. The identity of the second jawan is not known yet.

The company was deployed for election duty in Jharkhand. As per ANI, a constable in the unit deployed for the duty, identified as Deepender Yadav, allegedly shot dead Sahul Harshan and an Assistant Sub Inspector. The incident happened around 9.30 pm on Monday and as per reports, two troops have also been injured in the attack.

Sahul Harshan who hails from Muppathadam in Aluva is survived by his father Balan, a retired employee of Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore (FACT) Ltd and his mother Leela. The mortal remains of the jawan will be brought to his hometown in Muppathadam on Tuesday.

As per the reports, the constable who allegedly shot the officers has also been injured in the incident. The injured officers were evacuated to Delhi.

As per PTI, senior CRPF officials said that an inquiry has been ordered into the incident. The officials also said that they are at present not aware about the reason for such an incident. Meanwhile reports also state that the constable who allegedly shot the two senior officers, was drunk when the incident happened.

Incidentally, a similar incident was reported from the state on the same day where a constable of Chhattisgarh Armed Force (CAF) shot dead his senior officer and then killed himself. The officers were also deployed for election duty in Jharkhand. Reportedly, the constable is identified to be Vikram Rajwade and the officer whom he shot has been identified as Melaram Kurray, the company commander of the 4th battalion of CAF, Manaraipur.
