Nitish Kumar is afraid of BJP, RSS, says Tejashwi Yadav after Bihar CM votes for Citizenship Bill

RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Tejashwi Yadav said Nitish Kumar is afraid of BJP and RSS, and has betrayed the people of Bihar by supporting the Citizenship Bill Reportedly, Nitish Kumar was against the citizenship bill till recently but voted in its favour in the Lok Sabha

Patna: Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) leader Tejashwi Yadav on Tuesday launched a blistering attack on Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar for supporting the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. He said that Nitish Kumar has betrayed the people of Bihar by supporting the bill because he is afraid of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS).

Tejashwi Yadav's comments have come a day after the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was passed in the Lok Sabha. 311 lawmakers voted in favour of the bill while only 80 voted against it in the Lower House. Nitish Kumar-led Janata Dal United (JDU), which is an alliance partner of NDA, also voted in favour of the bill.

Tejashwi Yadav, RJD on #CitizenshipAmendmentBill: We will strongly oppose the bill. It is a bill that will divide the country. We will fight against it. Nitish Kumar has again betrayed the people of Bihar by supporting the bill. Nitish Kumar is afraid of BJP&RSS. pic.twitter.com/PGwItF1ojK — ANI (@ANI) December 10, 2019

The Citizenship Bill, which aims at granting citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh living in the country, will now be tabled in the Rajya Sabha. It should be noted that the government is in minority in Rajya Sabha and it will need all the support it can get to pass the legislation.

While speaking to media, Tejwashwi Yadav said, "We will strongly oppose the bill. It is a bill that will divide the country. We will fight against it."

"Nitish Kumar has again betrayed the people of Bihar by supporting the bill. Nitish Kumar is afraid of BJP and RSS," added the former Bihar CM.

Nitish Kumar has come under fire from his own party leaders after he voted in favour of the controversial bill. It is being reported that the Bihar CM was critical of the bill but changed his stance during the voting in the Lok Sabha.

Prashant Kishor and JDU general secretary Pavan Varma have expressed their displeasure at Kumar's decision to support the bill.

Varma took to his official Twitter handle saying, "I urge Shri Nitish Kumar to reconsider support to the #CAB in the Rajya Sabha. The Bill is unconstitutional, discriminatory, and against the unity and harmony of the country, apart from being against the secular principles of the JDU. Gandhiji would have strongly disapproved it."
