Trailer for Deepika Padukone Starrer ‘Chhapaak’ Is Out & It Will Shatter You

The trailer for Chhapaak is out and it will unnerve you. Starring Deepika Padukone alongside Vikrant Massey, it follows the true life story of Laxmi Agarwal who had her face disfigured when a 32-year-old man threw acid on her face for rejecting his advances in 2005. She was only 16 years old.





Releasing the trailer on social media, the makers of the film wrote, “Malti (Deepika Padukone) was attacked with acid on a street in New Delhi, in 2005. Through her story, the film makes an attempt to understand the on-ground consequences of surviving an acid attack in India, the medico-legal-social state of affairs that transpires after the acid has been hurled."

Directed by Meghna Gulzar of Razi and Talvar fame, the film is also Deepika’s first foray as a producer. Just from the trailer itself, you can see the empathy for the fate of the acid attack survivor, Malti. From the moment you see Malti being attacked in broad daylight to the moment she jumps out of court triumphant, it is evident that the movie has come from a female perspective.

The only two mentions of her disfigurement is from the doctors, who advise that Malti should not see her face until she had undergone plastic surgery, and the second mention comes from Malti herself, who defiantly says, “He scarred my face, but not my spirit.”

Deepika Padukone put her heart and soul into the role

Deepika has been constantly posting about the movie ever since she accepted the role last year. This will be her first film since her marriage to Ranveer Singh and it looks like it is going to be one of her most impactful.

When she unveiled the first look from the movie in May this year, many applauded how true to reality the depiction was. There was no attempt to hide the level of damage acid does to a woman’s face.

Earlier in April, Deepika had posted about how she was doing thorough research on the topic of acid attacks and on the inspiring life of Laxmi Agarwal, on whose life the movie has been based. Laxmi went on to receive the International Women of Courage Award in 2014 from the (then) first lady of the United States, Michelle Obama, for her relentless crusade against the sale of acid and her fight for the rights of acid attack survivors.

Attacking women with acid is far too common a way for men to exact revenge on women who circumvent patriarchal ideas of how a woman should behave. As the lawyer in the trailer says, most of the acid attack survivors are women who are studying or who want to pursue a career. Disfiguring them is a way to keep them locked up inside the house, away from the outside world, just as patriarchy would have it for women.

Chhapaak is a movie that should have been made decades ago but we are so glad that a star of Deepika’s calibre has taken it on not just a leading actress but as a producer. We’re equally excited that it is a woman who is directing it. Movies about women’s struggles are best done by women themselves. The star power of Deepika Padukone will hopefully raise awareness about the heinous crime of disfiguring women with acid.




