'Strangled her with scarf as others held her down', says murderer arrested in UP's Sambhal

UP police with the four accused (Picture Courtesy: @sambhalpolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The victim was an equal partner in the ownership of the diagnostic centre I strangled her with a scarf as the others held her down, said the main accused Police nabbed the accused on Tuesday in the car they used to flee the crime scene

Lucknow: Two days after her dead body was found in a diagnostics centre in Uttar Pradesh's Sambhal district, police solved the murder of a 24-year-old woman on Tuesday. Four people have been arrested for planning and executing the crime while raids are underway to nab two others identified by the suspects.

The matter came to light on Sunday night when a man alerted hospital authorities and the local police about the body being found inside a diagnostic centre in Babrala town. A case under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) was filed against unknown accused and an investigation was launched into the matter by Gunnaur police. Teams were constituted at the directions of the superintendent of police, Sambhal district, to identify and nab the culprits.

A surveillance team stationed at the Noorpur tri-section caught a break on Tuesday when it spotted the car that was allegedly used by assailants to flee the scene of the crime in Babrala. The Maruti Swift car was apprehended and its four occupants detained for questioning. Police also recovered countrymade liquor and a countrymade pistol from the men.

(The countrymade pistol recovered from the accused)

During interrogation, one of the accused, Ashok Kumar Rana admitted to the murder of the 24-year-old victim. He told police that he first met the victim when the two were working at a pathology lab in Babrala. They later entered into a relationship and opened a diagnostics centre in the city where they worked and lived together.

When Kumar's wife and in-laws caught wind of the affair, they pressurised him to 'get rid' of the woman. According to Kumar, he asked her to return to the man she had entered into a court marriage with a few months earlier but she refused. Under duress owing to the pressure from his in-laws, Kumar roped in his cousin Bobby and Bobby's friends Shivam and Narendra to help him murder the victim.

On the intervening night of December 7 and December 8, the accused went to the diagnostics centre where the victim was sleeping. They damaged the lock from outside and gained entry. One of them held her legs while the other locked her arms as Kumar strangulated her to death with a scarf. It was one of them who later informed police and hospital authorities that a woman's dead body is lying at the scene of the crime.
