Hyd gangrape and murder: Bodies of four accused shifted to Gandhi hospital

Hyd gangrape and murder: Bodies of four accused shifted to Gandhi hospital

The Telangana High Court had directed authorities to preserve the bodies till December 13.

news Crime

The bodies of four men killed in an alleged exchange of fire with police on December 6, were on Tuesday shifted to the state-run Gandhi Hospital here from Mahabubnagar district. The four were accused in the gangrape and murder of the Hyderabad veterinarian.

"The bodies of the four people were brought to Gandhi hospital and are preserved in the hospital mortuary on Tuesday," a senior hospital official told PTI.

After the alleged extrajudicial killing of the four men by the Cyberabad police, their bodies were kept at the government hospital at Mahabubnagar after autopsy following the alleged encounter on December 6.

However, the Telangana High Court on Monday had directed authorities to preserve the bodies till December 13. The court had ordered that the bodies can be shifted to Gandhi Hospital only if the government hospital at Mahabubnagar did not have the facility to preserve them till that date.

A representation was received in the office of the Chief Justice alleging that the 'encounter' was extra-judicial killing and requested judicial intervention. The High Court treated representation as a petition.

The four accused were arrested on November 29 for allegedly gangraping and killing the woman by smothering her on November 27 near the Shamshabad toll booth. They would allegedly carry her body to the Chattanpalli underpass near Shadnagar and burn it.

The four were gunned down by the Cyberabad police on December 6 at Chattanpalli near the underpass where they had allegedly burnt the doctor’s body. The four were taken to the spot as part of evidence collection to recover her phone, wristwatch and others pertaining to the case.

The Cyberabad police had said its personnel resorted to "retaliatory" firing after two of the accused opened fire at their personnel after snatching their weapons besides attacking them with stones and sticks, resulting in injuries to two policemen.

(With PTI Inputs)
