Jharkhand HC grants bail to 7 accused of murder in Tabrez Ansari lynching case

Protests held against the killing of Tabrez Ansari earlier this year (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Ansari was held by a crowd under suspicion of being a motorcycle thief and thrashed mercilessly in Seraikela district of Jharkhand Police had filed murder charges against 11 accused, all residents of Dhatkidih village A video of the accused thrashing Ansari and forcing him to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' had gone viral

Ranchi: The Ranchi bench of the Jharkhand High Court on Monday and Tuesday granted bail to seven of the 13 people accused in the Tabrez Ansari lynching case. The incident dates back to April of this year when Ansari, a 24-year-old welder by profession, was thrashed by a mob in Seraikela district of Jharkhand. He succumbed to fatal injuries less than a day after he was attacked.

A total of 13 people were arrested and charged with murder among other sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) by the Seraikela-Kharsawan police. Out of these, 12 had applied for bail and if recent reports are to be believed, seven have been granted bail this week. They include Kamal Mahato and Bhim Sen.

During its preliminary investigation, police had claimed that Ansari was mobbed on the suspicion of stealing a motorcycle. In September, Jharkhand police submitted a supplementary charge sheet. Through this, they sought punishment under Section 302 of the IPC (murder) against the 11 accused. This decision was taken after investigators came under fire for claiming that Ansari died of a cardiac arrest and not due to the severe wounds incurred during the assault which was caught on camera.

Medical experts, in their report, revealed that Ansari's cardiac arrest was caused by the violence caused by the accused. In a statement, the Jharkhand police itself said that a video of the incident where the accused can be seen forcing Ansari to chant 'Jai Hanuman and Jai Sri Ram' was in no way altered or doctored. The victim's family even alleged that police failed to provide Ansari timely medical attention which could have saved his life. A welder based in Pune, the victim had returned to his native village of Kadamdia to get married when he was attacked by residents of Dhatkidih village who took him for a motorcycle thief. His fiance had even threatened self-immolation by citing alleged police inaction in the case.
