Kalyan: Father arrested a day after woman's dismembered body found at railway station

father

murder

Kalyan station

Accused Arvind Tiwari and daughter Princey (Photo by Prashant Narvekar); CCTV grab from Kalyan station

Untitled Carousel Body parts of woman with upper half missing, found at Kalyan station The Mahatma Phule police on Sunday morning found a woman's body

Untitled Carousel Suitcase with body parts found on Mahim beach The Mahim police have registered a case of murder against unknown persons after a suitcase stuffed with chopped body parts of an unidentified man washed ashore on Mahim beach on Monday evening. According to the police, the suitcase was spotted by a passerby

She had consumed poison and was unconscious;chopped her into two.The Thane Crime Branch has solved theof the woman whose dismembered body was found outsideon Sunday morning. The victim has been identified as 22-year-old Princy, who was allegedly killed by her father, Arvind Rameshchandra Tiwari, 47, for wanting to marry someone from another caste. The accused, who has been arrested, has confessed and told the police that she had consumed rat poison after an argument with him on December 6. He, however, didn’t take her to the hospital but chopped her body into two parts and disposed of the bags.An autorickshaw driver had on Sunday questioned a man for carrying a bag emanating foul smell.The accused, on being stopped, had fled the spot. When the police opened the bag, they found the lower half of the body of a woman.“Through CCTV footage, the police managed to trace the bag back to Titwala station, from where the accused had boarded the train. When further traced back, we found he started his journey in Manda, Titwala West,” a police official from Thane Crime Branch said.A team headed by police inspector Nitin Thakare and Sanju John was formed. By showing Titwala residents grabs from the footage, the team located Tiwari within 24 hours.In the footage from the station, another man was seen helping the accused carry the bag. “We located him as well and found that he was a commuter whose help the accused had sought to hold one side of the bag,” the official said, adding that the accused is from Jaunpur in Uttar Pradesh and lived alone in a flat in Titwala.He works with Pawan Hans Logistics in Malad as a manager. Police officials said his daughter Princy – eldest among four daughters – had finished graduation this year and started working for a private firm in Bhandup. She fell in love with a man from another caste and wanted to marry him. Cops said the accused tried to convince her but she didn’t relent.On questioning him, police officials found that the victim consumed rat poison after an argument with him on December 6. He, however, didn’t take her to the hospital but chopped her body into two parts while she was still unconscious. While he disposed of the upper body in a river at Titwala, he planned to dispose of the lower body in Bhiwandi but an alert autorickshaw driver caught him at the station and he had to flee.The police said they will produce Tiwari before a court to seek custody and then launch a search operation for the upper body.
