FIR against Aligarh Muslim University students for protesting against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

The police say the students did not seek permission from the city administration

An FIR has been filed against 20 named and 500 unnamed students of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) in connection with their protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 on Tuesday night.

Superintendent of Police (City) Abhishek said the students did not seek permission from the city administration. “When the protesters crossed the campus gate and tried to enter the city, they were stopped at the University Circle. Some of the student leaders misbehaved with the officers and heckled some constables. Hence, an FIR was registered under Sections 188 and 353 of the IPC,” he said.

There was no damage to public property. “We have deployed extra force outside the campus to meet any eventuality,” he added.

Those named in the FIR include outgoing students’ union president Salman Imtiaz and former AMUSU president Faizul Hasan.

“It is our democratic right to protest against the violation of the Indian constitution. We call upon police administration to revoke the FIR or face mass protests,” said Mr. Imtiaz.

Local sources said hundreds of students participated in the protest. Students were holding torches and burning copies of the bill during the protest.

A parallel protest was organised in the AMU Girls’ College and it witnessed the participation of hundreds of students.

On Wednesday, students boycotted hostel food in protest. “Students have not eaten their last three meals, but they appeared for their exams,” said Mr. Imtiaz. The future course of action would be decided after the general body meeting of the members of the AMUSU to be held at Bab-e-Syed, the university entrance, on Wednesday night. “We have also invited intellectuals and alumni to address the students,” he said.

Earlier, hundreds of students participated in the protest on Wednesday evening shouting slogans such as “Inquilab Zindabad”.

A section of students appealed to the teachers and the Vice-Chancellor to join the protest. Najmul Islam, Honorary Secretary, AMU Teachers’ Association, said though the teachers supported the cause, they could not join the protest. “We appeal for a peaceful protest within the ambit of the law. We also appeal to the district administration to quash the FIR against the students,” said Mr. Islam, adding that the Association had written a letter to the Rajya Sabha members appealing them to reject the bill as it was “unconstitutional.”

AMU proctor Afifullah Khan said classes ran peacefully on Wednesday and examinations were conducted as per schedule. “The protests have been peaceful so far. However, as the campus is porous, there is always a danger of anti-social elements with vested interests merging with the students during the protest.”
