NHRC panel quizzes policemen involved in Cyberabad 'encounter'

The NHRC team has been camping in the state since the shootout took place on December 6. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights NHRC panel grills 8 cops involved in the Cyberabad shoot out Probe into the case came after questions were raised over the credibility of the encounter Supreme Court has also proposed a probe into the case by a former judge of the court

Hyderabad: After visiting the site of the encounter, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has quizzed eight policemen who were involved in the shootout that killed four accused in the rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Cyberabad.

The cops were grilled at Telangana Police Academy in Rajendranagar on Tuesday.

According to a report in Times of India, there was no word on what transpired between the cops and the NHRC team members.

The NHRC team has been camping in the state since the shootout took place on December 6. Four accused in the heinous rape and murder case were killed by the police, who alleged that they were attacked by the men.

According to police, the shootout took place when they took the accused at the crime spot for the reconstruction of the scene in the case at Chatanpally.

On Tuesday, Cyberabad Police Commissioner VK Sajjanar flew to Delhi to brief his lawyers who are likely to argue against the Public Interest Litigations (PIL) filed in the Supreme Court demanding an independent probe into the alleged encounter.

On December 8, a non-governmental organisation (NGO) filed a written complaint with Rachakonda police seeking a murder case be lodged against Police Commissioner VK Sajjanar for the encounter.

The complaint was filed by an NGO called Nenu Saitham that alleged the four accused were killed in an alleged fake encounter by Cyberabad police.

The shootout came following a hue and cry over the rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor on the intervening night of November 27 and 28 at Chatanpally in Cyberabad.

Earlier, the special investigation team (SIT) formed by the Telangana government began its probe into the case. The SIT is being headed by Mahesh Bhagawat, the Rachakonda police commissioner. The post-mortem of the four accused will be preserved until December 13. Initially, the Telangana High Court had asked the authorities to preserve the bodies until December 9.
