Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury criticises CAB, says it's 'divisive', taking India towards danger

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury in Lok Sabha | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said CAB is divisive and has been introduced to break India Referring to the Bill as half-baked, half-boiled and divisive, he said Rajya Sabha should not pass it

New Delhi: Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury on Wednesday, criticised the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB), 2019 calling it “divisive” and said it has been introduced to “break” the country.

Launching a stark attack on the ruling government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Chowdhury as quoted by news agency ANI, said, "The Bill was brought to break India. Consolation price is given to smaller states in the Northeast. This Bill is half-baked, half-boiled and divisive. That's why people of Assam are angry. The Bill should not be passed in the Rajya Sabha. We will also raise our voices against it. This Bill is taking India to the danger side so everyone should worry about this."

CAB seeks to grant citizenship to all non-Muslims who are members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan and entered India before December 31, 2014.

Opposition parties including the Congress, the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), the Trinamool Congress, and the DMK are protesting against the Bill citing that it is discriminatory in nature and against the Constitution. The Opposition says making religion as the basis of granting citizenship is an attack on the secular nature of Indian state and defeats the principles of equality enshrined in the Indian Constitution.

People in some northeastern states like Assam are strongly opposing the Bill, saying that it will distort their linguistic and cultural identities by altering the status of illegal Bengali speaking Hindu settlers from Bangladesh to legal Indian citizens. The people fear that this will alter the demographics of the region.

The Bill was passed by Lok Sabha with a majority of 311 votes in favour and 80 voted against it with no abstentions.
