3 Sanskrit deemed universities to become central

A bill to set up central Sanskrit universities was introduced in the Lok Sabha on Wednesday. The bill, moved by HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', seeks to convert three Sanskrit deemed universities presently functioning in the country into central universities.

The three Sanskrit deemed universities that will be converted into central universities including:

1. Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan

2. Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth

3. Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth in Tirupati

Earlier there were no central Sanskrit universities in the country.

About Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan

The Sansthan was established in 15th October 1970 as an autonomous organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (Act XXI of 1860) for the development and promotion of Sanskrit all over the country. It is fully funded by Government of India. It functions as an apex body for propagation and development of Sanskrit and assists the Ministry of Human Resource Development in formulating and implementing various plans and schemes for the development of Sanskrit studies.

Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth

The Akhil Bharatiya Sanskrit Sahitya Sammelan established a Sanskrit Vidyapeetha in Delhi on Vijaya Dashmi on in1962 and appointed Dr Mandan Mishra as the officer on-Special-Duty and the Director of the Vidyapeetha. In accordance with the decision of the Sammelan, a separate society under the name of Akhil Bharatiya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha was established with the late Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri as its founder President. The inspiration and guidance of Late Shastriji had been the impetus for the development of this Vidyapeetha. Shastriji in his capacity as the Prime Minister of India declared to develop this Vidyapeetha as an International Institution.

Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth in Tirupati

The Vidyapeeth was established at Tirupati (AP) in 1961 by the Govt. of India on the recommendations of the Sanskrit Commission (1957) as an autonomous body under the name of Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha Tirupati Society. Dr S.Radhakrishnan, the then Vice President of India laid the foundation stone of the Vidyapeeth on January 4, 1962. The basic objective of setting up the Vidyapeetha is to impart and improve Sanskrit pedagogy, to accelerate the pace of higher Sanskrit learning and to combine the traditional Sanskrit education with modern scientific research.

Also read: This peon is teaching Sanskrit at a government school for 23 years

Also read: Sanskrit will be promoted in schools, but won't be mandatory to study: Recommendations made by panel
