Tihar authorities seek executioners from UP, fuelling speculation over endgame for Nirbhaya's rapists

Tihar in Delhi is South-Asia's largest prison complex (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights One of the six convicts, Ram Singh, allegedly killed himself in Tihar in 2013 Another convict, a juvenile was sent to correction centre and granted bail after he served his sentence Four remaining convicts await their fate as they have exhausted all legal remedies

New Delhi: The administration of Delhi's Tihar jail has written to the state of Uttar Pradesh, seeking two executioners for the jail. The state has responded by saying that it will make the executioners available whenever needed. This development has further fuelled speculation that the four convicted in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case are likely to be executed in the coming days.

Earlier this month, Tihar authorities directed officials at the Buxar jail in Bihar to prepare 'Manila' ropes which are used for executions. The jail in Buxar was once the only jail to manufacture these ropes but a number of jails have now joined the suit. Owing to the special quality of these ropes, they have to be manufactured a specific time before they are put to use or they start deteriorating.

The decision to shift the fourth convict in the Nirbhaya (name changed) rape and death case from Delhi's Mandoli jail to Tihar also prompted speculation that the four remaining convicts in the Nirbhaya case may meet their end soon. They have already exhausted their legal options. One of them, Akshay Kumar Singh moved the Supreme Court earlier this week, seeking a review petition into the verdict that sentenced him and the others to death.

In his plea, he had stated that the air and water in Delhi are toxic enough to reduce one's life expectancy and replaces the need for a death penalty. Another convict, Vinay Sharma had sent a mercy plea to the Delhi LG who referred it to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the same was sent to the President of India with a recommendation from the MHA to turn down the request. The horrific 2012 gang-rape of a 23-year-old girl on board a moving bus is one of the most appalling instances of criminal behaviour to have ever been reported in India.
