JD(U)'s RCP Singh defends CAB in Rajya Sabha, ingore party leader Pavan Varma's demand

PATNA: Ignoring the demand and suggestion of its national general secretary and national spokesperson Pavan K Varma, Bihar ’s ruling JD(U) strongly supported the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill (CAB) in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday.Speaking in support of the Bill in the upper house, former bureaucrat and JD(U) leader in the Rajya Sabha Ram Chandra Prasad Singh said, in India a lot of help was given to the minorities to reach the top of power. The country had three presidents from the minority community. “But what is the status of minorities in neighbouring countries? Their participation in legislative is very negligible there,” he said.Earlier on Tuesday, Varma had urged the JD(U) president and Bihar CM Nitish Kumar to consider support to CAB in the Rajya Sabha. But the party completely ignored his advice and its Rajya Sabha member Singh strongly spoke in favour of the CAB on Wednesday.“I urge Shri Nitish Kumar to reconsider support to the #CAB in the Rajya Sabha. The Bill is unconstitutional, discriminatory, and against the unity and harmony of the country, apart from being against the secular principles of the JDU. Gandhiji would have strongly disapproved of it,” Varma had said on Tuesday.Speaking in favour of the controversial Bill, Singh said, “I am amazed at the opposition's stand on this Bill. A different kind of atmosphere is being created across the country. It is being said that the BIll is not in the minority’s interest. There is no discussion about the minorities of this country in this Bill. The issue is a matter of granting citizenship to minorities of neighbouring countries. The discussion is going on a different thing. ---- This is the citizenship bill. Several bills have already been created to grant citizenship in the country. This bill is an extension of that. A separate atmosphere is being created by the opposition to oppose it in the Rajya Sabha.”Singh said that the NDA government came to power in Bihar under the leadership of Nitish Kumar in 2005. “Since then, we are saying this because the morality of JD(U) has been questioned. In 81 years of the Madarsa Act, only 1128 Madarsas were constructed in Bihar, while after the Nitish government came under the rule, the NDA government recognised 2460 Madarsas at a time,” he said.“Earlier, the Madarsa teachers in Bihar used to receive an honorarium of Rs 2,000 to 3,000 per month. We have done the job of giving them Rs 50,000 to 60,000 per month to those teachers. The seventh pay scale is being implemented for them. The Nitish government has cordoned off more than 6,000 graveyards in Bihar,” Singh said.Referring to the budget for minority welfare, he said, “In the previous governments in Bihar, a budget of Rs 2.75 crore was for minority welfare, but after the formation of the Nitish government, the budget has gone up to Rs 900 crore. If we are doing the welfare of the minority, we have become communal. Our morality is being questioned.”
