India approves controversial legislation granting citizenship to non-Muslim migrants

Advertisement

Indian legislators have approved a bill granting citizenship to non-Muslims who migrated illegally from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, despite fierce protests in the country's remote north east.

The upper house of parliament passed the bill 125-105 on Wednesday night, after the lower house had approved it on Monday.

It now needs to be signed by the president, a formality, before becoming law.

The Citizenship Amendment Bill was introduced by the Hindu nationalist-led government of prime minister Narendra Modi after his resounding election victory in May.

However, it has triggered fury in the states of Assam and Tripura in the north east of the country with protesters claiming that migrants who came to the country illegally will move to the border region and dilute the culture and political sway of indigenous tribal people.

A police officer catches fire during the protest against the Indian government's Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Agartala, the capital of India's northeastern state of Tripura

The passing of the bill will give Indian citizenship rights to refugees from India's neighbouring countries - who could number in the millions

Police use water cannon to disperse demonstrators during a protest against Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), that seeks to give citizenship to religious minorities

The Citizenship Amendment Bill was introduced by the Hindu nationalist-led government of prime minister Narendra Modi after his resounding election victory in May

Police officers clash with opponents of the bill Guwahati in the north eastern state of Assam following fierce protests from citizens

Authorities in India's northeast called in troops on December 11 as demonstrators went on the rampage in protest at new citizenship legislation

The law gives Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsi and Christians who migrated to India from the three Muslim-majority neighbouring countries before December 31 2014.

The total number is expected to run into the millions.

Protesters burned tyres and blocked major roads and rail lines for a second day on Wednesday.

Police fired rubber bullets and used batons and tear gas to disperse protesters in Dibrugarh district in Assam state, the Press Trust of India news agency said.

State police official Mukesh Aggarwal said a curfew was imposed in Gauhati, the state capital, and soldiers were standing by in case the violence escalated.

Street protests continued in Guahati, with young demonstrators making bonfires across the city. Police used tear gas and batons to disperse hundreds of protesters who tried to march to the office of the state's top elected official.

A bus stand in flames after demonstrators set it on fire as they protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) in Gauhati

Supporters of India's main opposition Congress party shout slogans during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB), a bill that seeks to give citizenship to religious minorities persecuted in neighbouring Muslim countries, in Ahmedabad

Police officers try to detain demonstrators during a fierce protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill in India today

To tackle the situation, the police had to fire rubber bullets, water jets and resort to mild batton charge on the protestors

The Press Trust of India said the federal government was airlifting nearly 5,000 paramilitary soldiers to the region.

Introducing the bill in the upper house, home minister Amit Shah said it was not anti-Muslim because it did not affect the existing path to citizenship available to all communities.

It seeks to address the difficulties of Hindus and other minorities who suffered persecution in Muslim-majority Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, he said.

Anand Sharma, a leader of the main opposition Congress party, said the bill was discriminatory because India's constitution provides equal opportunities to all communities.

Some opposition members complained the the bill excludes Tamil Hindus who fled Sri Lanka during its civil war.

Troops were drafted in to try and deal with the civil unrest following the passing of the bill. The Press Trust of India said the federal government was airlifting nearly 5,000 paramilitary soldiers to the region

The US Commission on International Religious Freedom criticised the bill as going against 'India's rich history of secular pluralism and the Indian constitution'

Protesters have burned tires and blocked highways and rail tracks in India's remote northeast for a second day in opposition to the bill

Anand Sharma, a leader of the main opposition Congress party, said the bill was discriminatory because India's constitution provides equal opportunities to all communities

The US Commission on International Religious Freedom criticised the bill as going against 'India's rich history of secular pluralism and the Indian constitution', and sought American sanctions against Mr Shah if the bill is approved.

Indian External Affairs Ministry spokesman Raveesh Kumar said the US commission's statement 'is neither accurate nor warranted'.

'The bill provides expedited consideration for Indian citizenship to persecuted religious minorities already in India from certain contiguous countries. It seeks to address their current difficulties and meet their basic human rights,' he said in a statement.

'Such an initiative should be welcomed, not criticised, by those who are genuinely committed to religious freedom.'
