Labour election candidates held meetings with figures from Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front

Prospective Labour MPs have developed close links to a controversial separatist group, it can be revealed.

Parliamentary candidates held meetings with UK-based figures from the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF).

The group in the Kashmir Valley was banned under anti-terror laws in India in March. It wants to create an independent state.

In 1985, two of its militants were jailed for life for the brutal kidnap and murder of Indian assistant high commissioner Ravindra Mhatre in Birmingham.

Within ten years, Jeremy Corbyn called for the envoy’s murderers to be freed.

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured in London on Wednesday) has called for two militants from the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front to be freed within ten years

Shadow foreign secretary Emily Thornberry (pictured at Hoxton Docks in London on Wednesday) has also hosted JKLF figures in her Commons office

Shadow foreign secretary Emily Thornberry has also hosted JKLF figures in her Commons office.

Dr Neeraj Patel, a member of Labour’s BAME executive committee and an ex-mayor of Lambeth, has written to party general secretary Jennie Formby expressing his ‘deep concern’ over the growing links to the JKLF – but he has had no reply.

The JKLF wrote to Mr Corbyn congratulating him on his manifesto and assuring him of the ‘complete support’ of the ‘Kashmiri diaspora’ in Britain.

Since then both Labour candidates in Luton have posed with copies of the letter alongside JKLF activists. Three Labour candidates in Stoke-on-Trent also met JKLF members.

A Labour Party spokesman said: ‘The Labour Party has no formal relationship with the JKLF. Labour supports a peaceful resolution of the political situation in Kashmir.

‘We also support the longstanding UN position that the political status of Kashmir is for India and Pakistan to resolve together on a bilateral basis, while ensuring that the Kashmiri people retain the right to have a say in their own future.’
