Wanted Delhi killer was addicted to a ‘medicine’

SURAT: New Delhi-based high profile businessman and gymnasium owner Hemant Lamba, who was arrested for alleged double murder in Haryana and Rajasthan, was addicted to some drug which he frequently injected even in police custody.Sarthana police officials told TOI that Lamba was not taking any narcotic, but some medicine to which he was severely addicted.“Lamba could not even stand properly and took the injection several times during police custody saying that if he did not take it, he would collapse. He also told us that he was not taking any narcotic. We also checked the medicine bottle from which he was taking the injection and verified it from medical experts,” said a senior police official from Sarthana.In fact, Alpesh Vaghasiya, the used-car dealer whose alertness had helped police nab Lamba, also told TOI that the latter started feeling uneasy while discussing the deal and went into his car to take the shots of injections. Vaghasiya, who already smelt something fishy looking at Lamba’s urgency to sell the SUV, got even more suspicious, seeing him take the injections twice within an hour.“I have never seen anyone taking two injections one after another. He had a big dark circle on left hand where he took both injections,” Vaghasiya told TOI.After arriving at Vaghasiya’s used-car dealership at around 11am, Lamba introduced himself as an army officer and was dressed in camouflage trouser. “He said he was Indian Army officer and wanted to sell the car immediately. He was sent at my dealership by other used car dealers since I trade in cars registered outside Gujarat too,” said Vaghasiya.Later, while checking the car, Vaghasiya noticed a wireless set in the car and a sticker of ministry of corporate affairs, Government of India with symbol of Ashok Stambh on the SUV’s bonnet. He also had applied symbol of Indian Army which has crossed sword with Ashok Stambh on the front glass of the car. The symbol had ministry of defence and Government of India written.Lamba had tried to erase the painted number on rear wind shield of the car but he could not remove it completely. To verify if the car belonged to Lamba, Vaghasiya had dialled the number which turned out to be that of a company running taxi service in New Delhi. The taxi was hired by Lamba’s friend Dipti Goyal, whom he had allegedly killed by shooting her four times and dumped the body in limits of Dharuhera police station in Rewari of Haryana on December 6.He then asked the driver Devendra Kumar to continue driving and killed him too by shooting him below his ear.
