CAB is a medieval idea

Amit Shah

Constituent Assembly

Jawaharlal Nehru

jus soli

Hindu

historical evidence

It entrenches the notion that religion can dictate a person’s citizenship.After six years of broadcasting unsound and tendentious arguments to bolster its decisions, the Indian government gave up all pretence this week as it railroaded the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill through Parliament by taking refuge in outright lies. Speaking before the Bill was passed by the lower house, Home Ministerclaimed it would simply follow on from the decision made at Partition to split the subcontinent along religious lines.Ironically, many of the questions raised in his Bill were debated in a congregation whose spirit haunts the 17th Lok Sabha – the. The document produced by this assembly de-linked citizenship from religious identity. This was not because the India of 1947 was a more open and harmonious place than the India of 2019, when the Bill seeks to institute a religious test for citizenship for the first time in modern Indian history. Nor was it because the BJP’s bugbear,, pulled an Amit Shah on his fellow assembly members and bullied them into imposing an unpopular vision on the republic. In fact, the paranoia, bigotry and deep disquiet of those years is well reflected in the debates. Niraja Gopal Jayal’s wide-ranging scholarly work, Citizenship and Its Discontents: An Indian History, offers an excellent analysis of how the assembly tried to reconcile the catastrophes generated by Partition with their hopes for the future.The question of whether citizenship was granted– in respect of birth on national soil – or jus sanguinis – in respect of birth within an ethno-national group – vexed the assembly, many of whose leaders had been thinking about the problem for years. “The Indian constitution adopted a secular jus soli conception of citizenship,” Jayal explains, “but the idea of the ‘natural’ citizen, usuallyand male, strongly inflected the debate on it.”The violent exchange of populations in north India had created a historic refugee problem. But there were also Indians who had left their homes to migrate to the new country, only to come back, for various reasons, with a resettlement pass. Most people in the former category were non-Muslims; most in the latter were Muslims. Right from 1947, Jayal explains, the difference in religious identity was “encoded” in the language of the debates: “refugees”, involuntarily expelled and with a claim on humanitarian efforts, were Hindus. Migrants, implied to have moved back and forth voluntarily, were Muslim.Each class of people posed distinct questions about everything from passports to property rights. Yet the outcome of the debates bolstered, rather than weakened, the broad view that India would be home to all its religious communities, and that citizenship would be religion-neutral. This, as is now well-known, occurred in spite of the example set by the Hindu Mahasabha in agitating for a majoritarian state.India chose jus soli, Jayal explains, “not only because this was the principle inherited from Britain, but also because jus sanguinis would have been an implausible principle on which to base citizenship in a multi-ethnic society”. This is not to say that Indians have not turned to ethno-nationalism time and again for political gains. Over the years, successive Indian governments sought to restrict or amend citizenship ideals: Jayal identifies the 1980s, and the conflagration over native identity and immigration in Assam, as a turning point in particular.It’s not surprising, then, that a time of expanding economic opportunity and hardening political visions turned Indians to an increasingly conservative view of citizenship over the 1990s and 2000s – ripe for electoral harvests in the 2010s, the era of global right-wing opportunism. Jayal’s book, which came out in 2013, warns us against the “smug shibboleths” of dewy-eyed liberal visions of constitutional promise. This, of course, is what makes the book so enlightening at this moment: in describing the debate and challenge over citizenship, it indicates how broad and deep the principle at stake is – and how sharp a break the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill represents.No matter how fast and loose Shah and his allies play with, there is no other way to see it: the Bill isn’t merely a clerical confirmation of some inevitable civilisational vision. It is the entrenchment of the medieval idea that religion can dictate a person’s access to their rights. In spite of Shah’s assertions, this is the opposite of what the people’s representatives decided after Partition. The vast majority of Indians, of any religion, are descended from people who quite naturally assumed the dignity of citizenship in a free India. In dealing such a severe blow to this idea, the government is ensuring that we will have to fight this vital battle all over again.
