'Government's lies exposed,' says Congress leader Kapil Sibal

'Government's lies exposed,' says Congress leader Kapil Sibal

India

oi-Deepika S

New Delhi, Feb 12: Just hours before the crucial CAG report on Rafale deal is taken up in the parliament today, Kapil Sabil in a tweet has once again launched an attack at the centre.

Taking to twitter Sibal wrote: "It seems Airbus , French Government , Anil Ambani all knew that the PM will sign an MOU on his visit to France between 9th and 11th April , 2015 ," tagging an attachment of a mail that spells out the details.

"The government's lies are now exposed," Sibal adds.

CAG report on Rafale deal likely to be tabled in Lok Sabha today

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) report on the Rafale deal in Parliament today.

The significance of the report lies in the fact that the CAG has reportedly conducted a thorough review of the Rafale deal- looking into various aspects of the procurement process including pricing, the request for proposals received from all vendors and comparative pricing of other fighter jets - vis-a-vis the Rafale - available globally.

Sibal had on Sunday alleged conflict of interest and asked CAG Rajiv Mehrishi to recuse himself from auditing the deal as he was the finance secretary when the Rafale deal was negotiated.

"Rafale Deal took place during current CAG Rajiv Mehrishi's tenure as Finance Secretary. Since it's a corrupt deal probe should be done. But, how will CAG investigate against himself? First he will shield himself and then the government. This is conflict of interest," Sibal said.

Congress has been accusing the Modi government of corruption in the deal, alleging that the price of the aircraft was raised and the offset deal was taken from state-owned aircraft maker HAL and given to businessman Anil Ambani's newly formed Reliance Defence, which had no experience. The government and Anil Ambani have repeatedly refuted all allegations of irregularities and corruption.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Tuesday, February 12, 2019, 11:52 [IST]
