dr t k suma: Lymphatic Filariasis should be covered under Universal Health Coverage: Dr T K Suma, Health News, ET HealthWorld

Shahid Akhter, editor, ETHealthworld, spoke to Dr T K Suma , Prof, Dept of General Medicine, T D Medical College, Kerala to know more about the prevalence of Lymphatic Filariasis and efforts being made to combat and eliminate this neglected disease.Lymphatic Filariasis is a neglected tropical disease and before the elimination started, we used to say that the most neglected part of the Lymphatic Filariasis is the patients.Normally, Lymphatic Filariasis patients have chronic manifestation like Lymphedema and Hydrocele . They come to the hospital when they get an acute attack which is a bacterial infection. When a bacterial infection or acute attack occurs, the patient will have to suffer for about 4 to 6 days. There will be a high fever, pain and swelling of the leg etc.Each time when the patient gets an acute attack, the edema increases. There are several episodes of acute attack where the lymphedema grows. As the lymphedema grows or the swelling in the lymph increases, that will give the chance to more acute attacks, so that becomes a vicious cycle.When patients have lymphedema and hydrocele, then it is also associated with lots of stigma. Psychologically, these patients suffer a lot. Another thing is that because of edema, they will not be able to walk properly. Another concern is that these diseases affect mostly low socio-economic group of people.The morbidity management and disability prevention is to alleviate the suffering of patients.The second pillar of the programme this Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention (MMDP) and the recommended minimum package of care for this is treatment of acute attack. As mentioned earlier, when a patient gets an acute attack otherwise called as ADL, the edema increases and as edema increases the ADL attack also increases. Therefore, it is very important that you give correct treatment for ADL attacks.The first one is treatment of ADL attack. The second one in the recommended minimum package of care is management of lymphedema. The most important thing is hygiene.in management of lymphedema. Hygiene means every person will have bacteria on the skin surfaces.Normally, when there is an injury and the bacteria enters into the body, this bacteria will be thrown out by the lymphatic system or removed by the lymphatic system. In Lymphatic Filariasis patients, it's lymphatic system which is affected, so it will not be removed. Whenever there is a break in the skin, the bacteria enters into the skin inside and it goes to the lymphatic system and lymph cells are dilated and there will be a lot of lymph fluid.Actually, this lymph fluid is a good medium for the growth of bacteria, so they get an infection. There will be pain at the site, swelling and fever. When a patient has edema, on one leg and the other limb is normal, suppose there is the same sort of injury on either leg, then the leg with edema will have all these problems.To avoid this what we advise is that the patient should have hygiene practices. They should keep the limb clean every day. One of the most important andre lesions is the fungal infections. If the limb is not dried, then the patients can have fungal infection. For example, when lymphedema occurs usually the toes will be very big, there won’t be any space between the toes. There won’t be any aeration.When the patient washes it through the water, there will be water remaining in between the toes and that will remain there which will stimulate the growth of fungus. When there is a fungal infection the patient will have itching, so they scratch, that means there is an injury to the skin and through that skin the bacteria enters.Drying is very important.If there are fungal infections, any fungal ointment should be given and if there is an abrasion or any injury antiseptic ointment and if needed antibiotic ointment should be done, that is the part of hygiene.It is not only hygiene which has to be done for the management of lymphedema, the patient can do some exercises. There are several exercises like standing on toes, standing on heels and rotating the ankles, those sorts of exercises are there which will promote the flow of the lymph fluid.The third is elevation of lymph which is when the patient is lying down at night, they can keep the foot under the bed elevated. It is not like putting the pillow, but they have to either elevate the foot or the pillow may be underneath the mattress. When the leg is kept elevated that will also favour’s the flow of the lymph.Then finally are the appropriate shoes because I told that whenever there is an injury they can go in for an acute attack so it is always good that the patient will have shoes. The problem here is that sometimes the leg may be big, they might not be getting a shoe from the shop, then you can go in for a customized shoes. All these methods can improve the lymphedema.Sri Lanka and Bangladesh are on the path of elimination. In India, each state is different because some states are doing very well in the management of the MDA as well as the mobility management and some may not be doing well. Even the MDA, the acceptance may be less so it is difficult. For the validation of elimination, we should have mastered administration as well as morbidity management and disability prevention.Actually, the morbidity management should be integrated with the primary health care system. Suppose you want to do it in the whole India, it will take a lot of time. It has started in many places and its being done, but the certification of the validation comes for the country not for the state.WHO is now thinking about some national certification also. Suppose a state, does very well, then it may be very difficult that they have done all the things and they have to wait till the whole country passes the MDA as well as the morbidity management and disability prevention.For us, In India the problem is varied level of education status of people, or the economic status of the people. There are certain places where you won’t be able to reach also, so it takes more time than the smaller countries.Around 40% of global burden of the disease is in India , so we know how much time it should take or how difficult it is to reach everywhere. There's a definite progression in the process of elimination and we also will be able to achieve that.There have been efforts to put the disability clause and to give pension for patients with lymphedema. The problem is that when you give disability certificate,then there are certain criteria that how we are going to assess the disability, how many people are suffering from this disability because in Lymphatic Filariasis that is difficult. As the disease affects many things, it’s not a skin disease alone. It affects the muscles, their movement and also it affects the other aspects like social stigma, psycho-social problem. Therefore, we don’t have a definite tool to assess all this point together and say that the person is disabled.In Tamil Nadu, they have started giving pension for these patients. I’m not sure about how they are assessing it, but it’s also not using any tool of the assessment .It should be a policy decision. The government should decide that if such problems are there, then they can be economically assisted. This is a disease, as I said, usually affect the low socio-economic people and they are suffering a lot. Therefore, any financial assistance is good for them. Lymphatic Filariasis should be included under Universal Health Coverage and all the requirements like antibiotics, their medicines and all this could be included under the Universal Health Coverage also.
