Voting for third phase of local elections underway in India's Jharkhand - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-12-12 13:48:19|Editor: Yurou

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, Dec. 12 (Xinhua) -- Voting for the third phase of local elections in India's eastern state of Jharkhand began Thursday morning amid tight security and adequate arrangements, officials said.

Polling in the 17 constituencies spread over eight districts started at 7:00 a.m. (local time) and would go on until 3:00 p.m (local time) except for five constituencies where voting will conclude at 5:00 in the evening (local time).

"The third phase of Jharkhand Assembly elections is underway peacefully in 17 constituencies spread over eight districts," an official said.

Reports pouring in from the poll-bound areas said voters including women and the young were in queues outside the polling stations waiting for their turn to cast the votes.

Authorities have deployed adequate security personnel, including paramilitary troopers in poll-bound areas to ensure free, fair and peaceful polling.

According to the officials, over 5.6 million voters are eligible in the ongoing phase to decide the electoral fate of candidates in fray.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi ahead of elections urged voters in Jharkhand to come out and exercise their franchise.

"The third phase of Jharkhand polls will take place today. Urging all those whose seats go to the polls today to vote in large numbers. I particularly urge my young friends to vote," Modi wrote on twitter.

The first and second phases of voting in the state were conducted on Nov. 30 and Dec. 7 respectively.

During the second phase, one person was killed and two others wounded after the police fired upon agitating people at a polling station in village Baghani in Gumla district of the state.

As per India's election commission, voting in Jharkhand would be completed in five phases until Dec. 20 and counting of votes is scheduled on Dec. 23.

The ruling BJP, which is seeking a second term under the leadership of incumbent Chief Minister Raghubar Das, is facing a tough challenge from the opposition alliance of the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM), the Congress party and the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD).
