IUML Moves Supreme Court Against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

New Delhi: The Indian Union Muslim League (IUML) moved the Supreme Court on Thursday challenging the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. On Wednesday, the Bill was passed in the Rajya Sabha, completing the legislative process for giving Indian citizenship to non-Muslim migrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

IUML alleged that the Bill violates the fundamental right to equality – Article 14 of the constitution.

The Bill, which was cleared in the Rajya Sabha on Wednesday, saw 125 MPs voting in its favour and 99 against it. It was passed in the Lok Sabha on Monday.

Several opposition leaders have brought up the Article 14 violation in parliament, even arguing that the Bill should not have been tabled in the first place. However, both Houses passed it.

Also read: CAB and NRC: Why I Will Register Myself as a Muslim

Speaking in the Lok Sabha, AIMIM leader Asaduddin Owaisi asked home minister Amit Shah why he “hated Muslims” so much. He also tore a copy of the Bill to show how strongly he disagreed with it.

“Don’t include Muslims. But why do you hate Muslims so much? What is our crime?” Owaisi said. “This law is aimed at a second partition. It’s worse than Hitler’s law.”

He also asked why Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and China-occupied Kashmir were not included. “Have we given up Aksai Chin,” he asked, adding that there are so many Muslims among Tibetans and said they should be brought under the Bill’s ambit.

Congress leaders too had suggested that they would be questioning the Bill’s validity in the Supreme Court, but have not done so yet.

Questioning the Bill, P. Chidambaram had said it was an “arbitrary executive fiat”. He said since it was bound to land in court due to its contentious clauses and that its future would ultimately lay in the hands of “unelected judges and unelected lawyers” and thus it was “a slap on the parliament.” Chidambaram also exuded confidence that the law would be “struck down” by the judiciary.

Chidambaram also questioned if the Centre went by the advice of the law ministry or the solicitor general given to the home ministry in the matter. “I dare the government to lay the opinion of the law department,” he said, accusing the government of “wrecking the constitution from within”.

Congress’s Anand Sharma had strongly criticised the Bill and called it unconstitutional in parliament. “This Bill is an assault on the very foundation of the Indian constitution, it is an assault on the Republic of India. It hurts the soul of India. It is against our constitution and democracy. It fails the morality test,” he said.

(With PTI inputs)
