Mumbai: 344 more trees to be slaughtered for Metro expansion

The location where the trees will be cut is near Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray's house Matoshree (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The BMC will be cutting 344 trees in Bandra East The trees are being cut to make way for the Metro 2-B project of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA) The area is located near the house of CM Uddhav Thackeray, Matoshree

Mumbai: Months after residents of Mumbai raged against the felling of trees in Aarey forest, the Brihanmumai Corporation (BMC) has taken another controversial decision. The BMC has decided to fell 344 trees in Bandra (East) to pave way for the Metro 2-B project.

The project is part of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA). When the BMC took the decision of cutting down trees in Aarey, Shiv Sena's leader Aaditya Thackeray took to Twitter and criticised the move. While the Shiv Sena condemned the felling of trees in the past, its reaction on the BMC's recent decision is awaited.

The location where the trees will be cut is near Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray's house Matoshree. When Uddhav Thackeray became the chief minister of Maharashtra, one of his first decisions as the CM was to put a stay on the felling of trees in the Aarey forest.

Recently, notices were pasted on the trees planted on the footpaths in the Bandra-Kurla Complex avenue. If the said number of trees is felled in the area, the ecological balance of the area will be disturbed. Siddharth Pardhe, secretary of 10 residents' associations, told The Times of India that green cover of the area will be lost if the BMC fells the trees.

In October this year, residents in Mumbai protested against the felling of over 2,000 trees in the Aarey forest. The trees were being cut to make way for a Metro car shed. The construction was to be done by the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation (MMRC). Known as the 'green lungs' of Mumbai, the trees in Aarey were cut down even as the government and civic body were aware of the rising levels of pollution.

While on one side, the residents and locals protested vehemently against the BMC's ignorant decision, the then chief minister Devendra Fadnavis gave a controversial statement and justified the move. The Tree Authority was also criticised for giving its approval for the BMC's decision.
