Absconding since murders of his girlfriend and cab driver, Delhi-based gym owner arrested from Gujarat

Hemant Lamba (File Photo) | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Hemant Lamba shot his girlfriend four times in the head in Haryana's Rewari He then shot his can driver Devendra and hijacked the car The gym owner was arrested from Valsad in Gujarat

Chandigarh: Quick thinking on the part of a car dealer in Gujarat's Valsad led the police to a gym owner who was the target of a high-profile search operation by the police. An international-level bodybuilder and fitness expert, Hemant Lamba has been arrested for the murder of his girlfriend and a cab driver.

Following his arrest from Valsad on Wednesday, police revealed that Lamba shot his 22-year-old girlfriend as many as four times on her head in Haryana's Rewari district on December 7. He then tried to cover his tracks and transported the body to an isolated area where he dumped it before fleeing the spot in a rented cab. He then asked the driver of the cab, Devendra at gunpoint to take him to Jaipur in Rajasthan.

A scuffle ensued between the two and resulted in Devendra allegedly shooting the cab driver dead. He then disposed of the second victim's body and drove the car himself to Valsad where he got in touch with a car dealer to sell the four-wheeler and tie all loose ends. However, Alpesh, the car dealer, suspected Lamba's involvement in something illegal owing to his urgent need to sell off the vehicle. Alerted by Alpesh, the police tracked down and nabbed Lamba from Valsad.

Police identified the first victim as a 22-year-old from Hanumangarh in Rajasthan. She was living in a relative's home in Rohini area of Delhi along with her father. Her post-mortem was conducted on Sunday following which the police registered a case of murder against Lamba. On his social media pages, the accused describes himself as the Managing Director at Glamrs Fitness Productions Pvt Ltd and also mentions that he was a former student of the Delhi University. In fact, his social media profile is filled with pictures of him and several politicians and bureaucrats.
