Onion dilemma takes new turn as farmers warn of production glut

Farmers are worried that arrival of fresh onions will clash with January imports and could ultimately result in excess supply. (Photo: Reuters)

Onion prices are decreasing gradually as fresh imports have started entering wholesale and retail markets around the country after a period of uncontrolled rise.

Prices of the bulb crop have reduced drastically in Gujarat, Maharashtra and Rajasthan as Agricultural Produce Market Committees (APMC) in the country have received fresh imports.

Onion prices, which had crossed Rs 150-200 per kilogram in some cities, are back to Rs 100 per kg while lower quality onions are retailing at around Rs 60 per kg. The situation is expected to improve further in the coming weeks as inflated supplies are expected to send prices crashing across all parts of the country.

Though it is a good development for retail buyers, farmers warn of another likely problem over the next two months: a supply glut.

Farmers and traders who spoke to business daily Economic Times said the record-high prices of onions witnessed over the past few days could lead to large-scale cultivation of onions, leading to a production and supply glut.

In such a scenario, a lot will depend on the quantity of onions the government has imported from Turkey and Egypt in the wake of rising onion prices.

According to a Business Today report from December 5, India has ordered over 36,090 metric tonnes of onions to battle the shortage, which was triggered by crop damage due to unseasonal rains.

Of this 21,090 metric tonnes of onions - 15,000 metric tonnes from Turkey and 6,090 metric tonnes from Egypt - have already been contracted. An additional 1,500 to 2,000 metric tonnes of onions are on their way from Afghanistan, noted an Economic Times report.

With the fresh surge in onion imports, the levels for the same have reached a five-year high.

India has also authorised additional onion imports from Turkey, the European Union, and Global Tender, but is yet to place orders. It may be noted that the imports from Egypt have already arrived in the markers and further imports from Turkey will arrive in the last week of December.

That, however, is not good news for India's onion farmers.

Farmers and traders have warned that excess imports combined with fresh harvests could lead to a glut in onion supply if there are any imports signed up after January end, especially when traders have been barred from exporting their produce till February.

Many experts and APMC directors said the government may have to introduce reverse policies to allow exports from February as further delay could send prices crashing to very low levels.

LATE IMPORTS VS FRESH HARVESTS

Much of the onion imports will arrive in India by the end of this month or by early next month. Harvesting of fresh onions is expected in full flow in major onion producing states. The fresh harvests are expected to collide with the arrival of fresh imports that have been ordered now.

But this will lead to a further problem for farmers, who are neither benefitting from the current high prices nor will they make any extra penny in January due to a glut in supply.

Not only the farmers will have to sell their produce at lower prices in such a scenario, but they could also face heavy losses as prices of onions will remain lower than usual.

Trade experts have a solution for the government to counter the problem which Indian onion farmers face almost every year.

Instead of a complete ban on exports and stock limits, traders advise the government to increase its own stockpile and use export restrictions to sail through periods of shortage. Traders said that such bans and limits on harm farmers, who always end up making losses.

Traders argue that exports are one of the reasons which help farmers recover their losses and that the government's abrupt price control measures have weakened them.

According to data, onion farmers in India have not had a good run for a long period of time with prices falling as low as Rs 7 per kilo in the Lasalgaon market in Nashik, Maharashtra. With the sudden surge in prices, farmers have also accelerated production efforts to make the most of the situation.

However, experts are of the view that fresh onion crops expected by end of the month or early January could clash with the arrival of imports and ultimately lead to prices crashing.

They have appealed to the government to act quickly to avoid another price crash and help onion farmers escape the vicious cycle of losses.
