Pankaja Munde clears the air, says won’t quit BJP; Eknath Khadse launches veiled attack on Devendra Fadnavis

Maharashtra Bharatiya Janata Party leader Pankaj Munde | @Pankajamunde | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Former Maharashtra minister Pankaja Munde said it is for the BJP to decide whether to let her remain in the party Pankaja Munde will hold a Mashal Rally in Maharashtra from January 2020 Senior BJP leader Eknath Khadse launched a veiled attack on former Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis

Mumbai: Clearing the speculation over her next political move, Maharashtra Bharatiya Janata Party leader Pankaj Munde on Thursday said she would not leave the party. The former minister, however, added that she is no longer a member of the BJP’s state core team.

While addressing a rally in Maharashtra’s Beed district today on the occasion of the birth anniversary of her late father Gopinath Munde, Pankaja said it is for the BJP to decide whether to let her remain in the party.

"Loss of one election does not bother me. Circumstances are being created that I should quit. But I am not going to leave the party. However, if the party wants to 'leave' me, it can take a decision," she said in the presence of many top BJP leaders, including Maharashtra BJP chief Chandrakant Patil.

She also announced holding a Mashal Rally in Maharashtra from January 2020.

“I will start my work through the Gopinath Munde Pratishthan from Mumbai office on January 26…I will also hold a token fast on January 27 at Aurangabad to grab the attention of the government to issues of Marathwada region,” announced Pankaja.

Meanwhile, senior BJP leader Eknath Khadse, who also spoke during the event, launched a veiled attack on former Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis.

"We trusted some people but they betrayed us. In a just one-month period, Maharashtra saw an 80-hour chief minister. The time, at times, does some miracles," he said.

Khadse also claimed that there was a "conspiracy" behind the defeat of his daughter Rohini Khadse and Pankaja Munde in the October 21 Maharashtra Assembly Elections.

"My victory in the Assembly elections was sure, but I was denied the ticket. On the contrary, my daughter was not interested in fighting the polls but she was forced to contest," he alleged.

He further claimed that those who worked for the growth of the BJP were not only being sidelined but also ridiculed by the party. He, however, asserted that he was "not unhappy" with the BJP.

Notably, Pankaja Munde has been organising this annual rally for the last five years. However, this year’s event has generated a lot of interest due to speculation that Munde was quitting the BJP after her defeat in the October 21 Assembly polls.

During the rally, Pankaja Munde made a veiled reference to reports that she faced defeat in the Parli constituency at the hands of her cousin and NCP leader Dhananjay Munde because some BJP leaders (read Devendra Fadnavis) did not want her to register a victory from the seat.

Munde had on Tuesday skipped the state BJP core committee meeting in Mumbai.
