Veteran Telugu actor Gollapudi Maruthi Rao passes away at the age of 80

Veteran Telugu actor Gollapudi Maruthi Rao passes away at the age of 80

As per hospital sources, Gollapudi Rao had been undergoing treatment for age-related ailments.

news Death

Veteran actor, writer and screenwriter Gollapudi Maruthi Rao passed away at the age of 80 on Thursday at a private hospital in Chennai. He was undergoing treatment at Lifeline Hospital in T Nagar after falling ill and succumbed at around 12 noon.

As per hospital sources, he had been undergoing treatment for age-related ailments.

Gollapudi Maruthi Rao was born in 1939 in Vizianagaram in Madras Presidency, in present-day Andhra Pradesh. He attended Andhra University in Visakhapatnam. The late actor is not only known for the innumerable roles he has portrayed, but also for the many works of literature he has penned.

The actor debuted in the Telugu film industry with the film Intlo Ramayya Veedhilo Krishnayya which released in 1982 in which he starred alongside Chiranjeevi and Madhavi. He had also penned the dialogues for the film.

The actor also starred in numerous films with some of his most memorable roles coming in Kallu, Samasaram Oka Chadarangam, and Challenge.

He went on to act in over 250 films and also wrote several books, novels and plays. The actor had earlier also worked as a host and station incharge for All India Radio, which he continued to do so even after he moved into the theatre circuit.

He has received several awards, including state awards for his literary works such as Rendu Rellu Aaru, Patita, Karuninchani Devatalu, Mahanatudu, among others.

Condolences have poured in over the senior actor’s death.

“He was known for his inimitable style of dialogue delivery and power-packed phrases in his short stories, plays and essays, the multifaceted Gollapudi, has earned a space of pride in the literary and cultural fields,” stated Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy, offering his condolences to the bereaved family members.

Expressing grief over the actor’s passing, former Andhra CM Chandrababu Naidu stated that it was a big loss to the Telugu film industry and literary world. He said, “As an actor and writer, his services were commendable. As a radio presenter, editor, commentator, author and actor, he was a man with multiple talents. Deep condolences to his family and fans."

“Gollapudi Maruthi Rao gaaru, one of my favourites. The way he spoke and the way he acted always felt so familiar and family like. You will always be remembered sir,” actor Nani tweeted.
