Death penalty in India: Did you know shooting by firing squad is an execution method?

When it comes to executing death sentences in India, hanging by rope till death has been the most common method adopted by agencies concerned since Independence. But with increasing awareness of human rights over the decades, many have argued that hanging by rope is an inhuman method as it involves prolonged mental and physical torture of the person who is to be hanged.

While hanging by rope is the popular method of execution in India, Indian laws also allow a death-row convict to be shot dead by a firing squad. This is however allowed in limited circumstances and can be carried out only by the Army, the Navy and the Air Force.

The Army Act, the Navy Act and the Air force Act allow the forces to execute a person awarded the death sentence by a court martial. These Acts give the discretion to the court martial tribunal to decide whether the condemned person will be hanged to death or whether he/she should be shot to death.

Section 163 of the Air Force Act states: "In awarding a sentence of death, a court-martial shall, in its discretion, direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or shall suffer death by being shot to death."

Similar sections are present in the Army Act and the Navy Act as well.

But India is not alone in having shooting as a legal method to execute a death sentence. Russia, China, Thailand and some states in the US like Utah and Oklahoma have shooting to death as one of the modes to execute death sentences.

Countries world over have adopted different methods for executing death sentences and these methods range from hanging, public hanging, burning at stake to guillotine, firing squad, gas chamber, lethal injection and even electrocution.

LAW COMMISSION ON EXECUTION SHOOTING

In India, shooting as a method of execution was analysed in detail by the Law Commission of India in its 187th report on 'Mode of execution of death sentence and incidental methods'. Based on a 10-point comparison between three methods of execution - hanging, firing squad and lethal injection - the Commission opined that being shot to death was a relatively more humane and less torturous method of execution.

The Commission in its recommendation said firing as a method of execution should be retained in the Army Act, the Navy Act and Air Force Act. It also recommended that the Act should include lethal injections and exclude hanging to heath as a method of execution.

"The Law Commission is of the view that in these Acts, execution of death sentence by being shot to death may be retained and the other mode of execution of death sentence by hanging by neck prescribed by these Acts should be substituted by the words administering lethal injection," the report said.

THE LARGER DEBATE

The debate on whether death penalty should be abolished in India has been on for the past several decades with concerns of convicts' human rights and arguments for justice to the victims being passionately debated. The gruesome rape and murder of a 26-year-old vet in Hyderabad along with the delay in the hangings of the Nirbhaya case convicts has rekindled this debate.

The last few weeks have seen people voicing strong opinions in favour of death penalty, claiming it is the "only way to teach culprits a lesson" and that such punishment will act as a "deterrent" for others.

Seven years after Nirbhaya was gangraped in New Delhi, the case has yet not reached a closure. The Supreme Court will be hearing a review petition filed by one of the four convicts on December 17. All four have been awarded the death sentence.

There have also been reports suggesting that the government is preparing for their execution. The Uttar Pradesh jail administration has said they have received a letter from the Tihar jail requesting hangmen to be sent there. All convicts in the Nirbhaya case were recently moved to this jail.

It however remains debatable whether death sentence is an effective deterrent, especially in absence of any concrete empirical data.

(Note: This story was originally published on December 12, 2019. The four men convicted in the 2012 Nirbhaya gang-rape and murder case were executed at 5:30 am on March 20 at Delhi's Tihar Jail)

ALSO READ | Is death by hanging dignified?

ALSO READ | PIL asks Supreme Court abolish hanging as death penalty, bring in shooting or lethal injection

ALSO WATCH | What goes on behind a hanging
