Kolkata Police bust sex racket in New Town, 16-year-old girl rescued

16-year-old minor girl rescued in Kolkata; three held (Representational Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Three persons, Suparna Mondal, Abhijit Mondal and Payel Heera have been arrested on a charge of carrying out the sex racket in the two-room apartment A 16-year-old girl was rescued from the flat; police say that due to poor economic background, the minor girl was forced into this business The Biddhannagar Police Commissionerate, assisted by an NGO International Justice Mission, came to the girl's rescue

Kolkata: In a shocking incident, another incident of minor being lured in a sex racket came into light when an eighth standard dropout was forced into this trade, owing to her dire poverty. The 16-year-old girl was forcibly pushed into this business and was rescued by a special branch of Biddhannagar Police Commissionerate after the apartment was raided in New Town area of Kolkata. The operation was carried out with the help of an NGO - International Justice Mission. Three persons, including two women and one man, have been sent to judicial custody for their involvement in the case.

International Justice Mission is an excellent NGO which have been saving the minors from all sorts of trafficking rackets. The police reported that the minor girl involved in the incident was a class eighth dropout and her parents had separated at a very young age. All these consequences made the girl stay with her grandparents. Due to poor economic background, the girl was forced into this business. It was also reported that the girl was lured with a promise of a job but she eventually landed up in this trade.

Three persons, viz. Suparna Mondal, Abhijit Mondal and Payel Heera have been arrested on a charge of carrying out the sex racket in the two-room apartment. A case has been registered against the three of them under various sections of IPC which deals with selling, buying, trafficking of minor girls. Moreover, for using the premise as a brothel, charges were also registered under 3, 4, 5, 7 (ITPA), Section 17r/w 4 Pocso.

According to the police officer, Suparna Mondal, aged 42, was a former sex worker and she would strike deals with her customers. She would even use her rented apartment to carry out the racket.

The Biddhannagar Police Commissionerate, who was assisted by an NGO International Justice Mission came for the girl's rescue. According to the police officer, the girl made a shocking revelation where she said that she had been taken to New Town by her friend, who too was a minor.

An IJM spokesperson says that “Sex trade has evolved over the years. Those running the rackets now use technology and messaging applications, like WhatsApp, to strike deals with clients. The exploitation of minor girls has increased,” according to the Times of India. The IJM official also made a point saying that the minor girls today are lured, or blackmailed and pushed into this trade.




