2 cities, 2 murders: Police arrest national bodybuilder in double murder case

It all started when body of young woman living in Delhi was recovered from Haryana | Photo from Aaj Tak via social media

A girl was killed in Rewari, Haryana. Just after that a cab driver was murdered in Rajasthan. These two murder cases were related to Delhi. And there was connection between the deceased.

When the police revealed this bloody conspiracy, everyone was taken aback. This double murder conspiracy was hatched by Hemant Lamba, a national-level bodybuilder and fitness expert who received the National Award. Whom the police arrested from Gujarat.

GIRL'S BODY WAS FOUND IN REWARI

It is on the last Friday ie; December 7, when the body of a young woman living in Rohini area New Delhi was recovered from Rewari, Haryana.

Her body was riddled with bullets. The body was found in Rewari, Ramnagar area of Nandrampur, Dharuhera. The girl was 22 years old. She was killed by four bullets. Once the girl was identified, the police called her family members and it was found that she was originally from Hanumangarh, Rajasthan. But for some time, she was staying with her father at a relative's house in Rohini, Delhi.

BOARD OF DOCTORS DID POSTMORTEM

DSP Jamal Khan of Rewari police had informed that the postmortem of the girl's body has been done by a board of doctors.

The postmortem did not confirm a case of rape. Her viscera report has been sent to Madhuban Laboratory. The police was investigating the case by registering a murder case against the unknown. The police were all prepared to arrest those who were accused by the girl's father.

NATIONAL AWARD WINNER TURNS OUT TO BE THE MURDERER

While giving the information, ADGP of Haryana, Dr RC Mishra said that new revelations have been revealed in this case. The deceased girl has a boyfriend Hemant Lamba, who is an international bodybuilder and fitness expert.

Hemant Lamba, a resident of South West Delhi, is also a National Awardee. On the morning of December 7, he took the girl from Rohini in a rented cab. This cab was booked for Jaipur from the girl's mobile number.

FROM LOVE TO MURDER

The owner and driver of this cab was Devendra, a resident of Delhi. Devendra had put many of his cars in Ola service. While coming to Dharuhera, suddenly there was a dispute between the girl and Hemant. And this lead to her murder. Hemant killed the woman with four bullets shot in her body near Ramnagar in Dharuhera.

CAB DRIVER'S MURDER

Cab driver Devendra saw Hemant killing the girl. He got nervous. But Hemant, holding the gun, threatened the cab driver and told him to drive all the way to Jaipur.

Hemant was well aware Devendra can rat him out so he decided to hide kill him too. While the cab was passing through the highway in Jaipur, Hemant killed Devendra too at a deserted place. Hemant threw his body on the side of the highway and escaped with the cab.

HOW POLICE NABBED HIM

Hemant drove the cab all the way to reach Balsad in Gujarat. He approached a dealer named Alpesh to sell the cab. When the dealer suspected something was off, he quietly called the owner's name and phone number written on the cab.

Devendra's wife picked up the phone. When the dealer said that it had come for sale, the wife told him that the person who came to sell the car is a convict in double murder. She asked Alpesh not to let him go and hand him over to the police. The dealer immediately called the police and handed Hemant over to the police.

The Gujarat Police informed the Rewari police about the case. The Rewari police team left for Gujarat soon after that.

POLICE REMAND

The surprising thing in this whole case is why the killer Hemant Lamba murdered his girlfriend.

The police came to Rewari with Hemant and now they are ready to present him in court. The police want to know the truth from Hemant, so they will seek his 14-day remand from the court.

The police want to find out if anyone else along with Hemant was involved in this conspiracy.

HEMANT LAMBA IS KNOWN AS A BODYBUILDER

Hemant Lamba (27), who murdered his girlfriend and driver, is identified as a bodybuilder and fitness expert.

He is a BTech civil engineer and chairman of Body Sterone Health Care Pvt Ltd along with national general secretary of the National Body Building and Sports Federation. He also organised the largest sports and fitness championships.
