Jharkhand assembly elections: BJP goes ballistic on national issues, minority voters focus on local affairs

RANCHI: BJP ’s campaign for the state polls, which has so far focused on the achievements of the central government under Prime Minister Narendra Modi , has not been able to shift the attention of the electors from local issues.More than the abrogation of Article 370 Ayodhya verdict or the passage of Citizenship Amendment Bill in Parliament, local issues such as unemployment, failure of the state government to conduct regular JPSC examinations and the state residents’ policy played on the minds of urban electorate of Ranchi and Hatia assembly constituencies, which went to the hustings on Thursday.Imtiaz Ali, a shop-owner at Daily Market who voted at a booth in Milat Middle School in Hindpiri, said: “This government was able to provide regular water supply and electricity. But waste collection is still a problem. Drains here are not cleaned for months together.”Imtiaz’s uncle, septuagenarian Hamid Ali, said: “How does Ayodhya verdict or the decision on Kashmir affect us? Infact, the key issue is our domicile policy. My ancestors settled in Ranchi before 1932, but the residents’ policy was drafted keeping 1985 as the base year.” Muhammad Haidar, a resident of Tharkpakhna, said: “The government managed to bring down law and order flare ups. I am happy that there were far lesser incidents of communal clashes in Ranchi in five years.”Among the youth, unemployment remained the biggest issue. Satish Minz, a voter at a booth in Purulia Road’s St. Alosyisius School, said: “We are unhappy with the Raghubar Das government because he could not conduct JPSC exams on time. Moreover, we locals are not preferred in recruitments and we are still jobless. His policy of merging schools has caused trouble to students in rural areas and attendence is falling.”Another resident, Samuel Erick Ishan said, “Neither had he done well for us nor bad. His anti-conversion law was good, but he could not manage to safeguard locals’ interests. He could not bring in investments after spending huge amount on Momentum Jharkhand.”
