These were India’s top trending business tycoons of 2019 according to Google

Representative Image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Google’s 2019 Year in Search results shows who were India's top business tycoons this year Chairman Emeritus of the Tata Group, Ratan Tata was ranked number one in the most searched list for business tycoons by Google Despite so many billionaires in the country, Tatas to the Birlas and the Ambanis have always garnered interest from people who want to know more about them, their families, their wealth and net worth etc.

New Delhi: The year 2019 is coming to an end and Google has released the Year in search just like every year. According to its data, Disney Plus, Hurricane Dorian, Notre Dame Cathedral, Area 51 raid, Antonio Brown were some of the most trending searches in 2019.

Note that India is home to 953 billionaires and family business tycoons. Despite so many billionaires in the country, Tatas, Birlas and the Ambanis have always garnered interest from people who want to know more about them, their families, their wealth and net worth etc. Most of the times, Google is their biggest source of information on the Internet. Google’s 2019 Year in Search results shows who were India's top business tycoons this year.

According to a Business Insider report, these were India's top trending business tycoons of 2019:

1. Ratan Tata: Chairman Emeritus of the Tata Group, Ratan Tata was ranked number one in the most-searched list for business tycoons by Google. The industrialist had his name in almost every other richest, influential lists in India and globally. According to the IIFL Wealth Hurun India Rich list, Tata’s net worth is Rs 5,700 crore. Note that Tata is known for this philanthropy and business ethics. The billionaire recently joined Instagram and made headlines as he moved away from his shy and reserved nature to join the social media platform.

2. Azim Premji: Asia's most philanthropic person according to Forbes, Premji was also searched a lot on Google this year. The Czar of Indian IT industry and founder of Wipro, Premji stepped down from his post of executive chairman and managing director of Wipro in July this year, following which he attended his last annual general meeting and addressed the employees and shareholders.

Premji will continue to be on the board of the company where he served as the executive chairman of Wipro for a long period of 53 years. His retirement was not the only reason why he made headlines in 2019, This year, Premji also announced an increased contribution to his charity, setting aside 34 per cent of Wipro shares worth $7.5 billion. His total contribution to philanthropy now stands at a whopping $21 billion.

3. Lakshmi Mittal: The chairman and CEO of steel group ArcelorMittal was also one of the most-searched Indian business tycoons on Google. According to the Hurun India Rich list 2019, Mittal and his family hold a net worth of Rs 1,07,300 crore, making them the fourth-richest in the country. As per the BI report, Mittal has peaked Google search several times this year, especially because of his $6 billion bid for Essar Steel.

4. Cyrus Poonawala: Billionaire Cyrus S Poonawalla is the chairman of Poonawalla Group, which includes Serum Institute of India. Often known as India’s vaccine king, Poonawalla’s net worth is Rs 88,800 crore. According to Forbes, his net worth has multiplied by five times in the past 10 years. Poonawalla is known for his fancy lifestyle with mansions in Mumbai and horses and the latest cars.

5. Anand Mahindra: Anand Mahindra is one of the most active Indian business tycoons on social media. The chairman of the Mahindra Group is in the news almost every other day because of his witty tweets and also the job offers he hands out through his Twitter account. With a net worth of Rs 8,200 crore, he is one of the most social media savvy billionaires in the country. This year, Mahindra made headlines when he announced his decision to ban plastic bottles in the boardrooms of his company.

Other business people who were searched a lot this year were the founder and chairman of HCL, Shiv Nadar. With a net worth of Rs 43,500 crore, he is one of the richest people in India. Nadar has made a mark with his philanthropy. He was in the news recently for holding the top spot in Edelgive Hurun India Philanthropy list 2019.

Gautam Adani with a net worth of Rs 94,500 crore, according to Hurun Rich List, is the fifth richest person in India. He jumped eight spots in the list within a year. Adani was in the spotlight several times this year -- from of his bid for the now bankrupt DHFL, to winning the rights to develop its Charmichael coal mine in Queensland, Australia after a decade-long court battle.

Interestingly, India's richest man and RIL chairman Mukesh Ambani was absent from the list and was not one of most search Indian business personalities this year.
