Mohit Malik on quitting Kullfi Kumar Bajewala, 'I do not want to play a father to grown-up girls'

Mohit Malik with Aakriti Sharma and Myra Singh from Kullfi Kumar Bajewala | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Mohit Malik played the role of Sikander in Kullfi Kumar Bajewala The actor will be quitting the show after the leap since he does not want to play a father to grown-up kids Mohit opens up about playing the lead role and his journey in the show

Mohit Malik plays the role of Sikander in Kullfi Kumar Bajewala, an onscreen father of two little girls. The turmoils that Sikander goes through along with his daughters Amyra and Kullfi connected with the audience really well. The show even enjoyed high ratings. However, Mohit will now be quitting the show since it is set to take a leap where the girls will be grown-ups. The actor revealed that he does not want to play a Dad to grown-up daughters since it will not look very convincing.

That Mohit is quitting the show was news that had been doing the rounds for months. The actor is still shooting for the show and is quite emotional about leaving it, too. Mohit has opened up earlier about how his financial situations improved after he landed the role of Sikander since he was out of work for a very long time. The actor is in a much better phase and even plans to have his own kids now.

Speaking to Bombay Times, Mohit said, “It has been an emotional journey for me. I started working on the show exactly two years ago and it’s time now to say goodbye. As they say, all good things come to an end. The show explored the father-daughter bond beautifully and I guess the makers felt a leap was necessary. I liked the fact that they focused on the father-daughter bond and did not try to introduce a romantic angle for my character Sikandar (Mohit Malik) after Nimrat (Shruti Sharma) died in the show. Though he married Loveleen, the show only revolved around Sikandar and his two daughters. I was fine with playing father to two small girls in the show. But I do not want to play a father to grown-up girls because I don’t think it will look convincing.”

Stay tuned with us for more updates.
