Dog shot with air gun in Powai society, search on to nab accused

air gun pellets

BARK-iNN

Happy Tales Veterinary Specialty

Brownie was admitted to hospital by animal caregiver, Shwetali Mulik, after his condition worsened (right) a pellet that was removed from the dog’s body

point-blank range

medical issues

maiming cattle

Brownie, who lived in the society, euthanised after his condition worsened.Powai police are looking for an unidentified person who shot a dog twice with an air gun, leading to his death.An animal caregiver in Powai had recently got a dog from her society admitted in a hospital after she found him unwell. The doctors at the hospital after performing an X-ray on the dog were shocked to discover that the animal had twoinside his body.The dog passed away on Wednesday after which the woman lodged a complaint with the police stating that someone had shot the dog using an air gun. The police are now checking CCTV footage of the society and nearby areas to get leads about the culprit.According to the police, a complainant about the assault on the dog was filed by Shwetali Mulik, a resident of Lake Florence Housing Society in Powai. Mulik runs, a home stay facility for dogs.“Brownie is what we used to call him fondly. He had been staying in our complex for the past eight years. We have a group of dog owners and dog lovers who donate and collect funds for the welfare of these community dogs or strays. Since 2016, we have been vaccinating these street animals for rabies and other diseases,” Mulik told Mumbai Mirror.She said that on November 25, she found Brownie unwell. He was losing a lot of weight, and she took him to a private vet, Mulik said. He was brought back after being given medicines. During the treatment, he was initially showing progress but since December 5, Brownie could just not move. Nor would he eat or drink anything. “Two days later, we took Brownie to an animal shelter at Khar and from there he was taken toat Khar,” she said.Mulik said on further diagnosis, his Xray scans showed two air gun pellets lodged in his dorsum and abdomen.He had to be euthanised on Wednesday. During post-mortem, the doctors could only remove one pellet from his body. The other pellet was so deeply lost inside his ribs that they could not remove it. There is a possibility that the animal was shot from a, she said quoting the doctors.Brownie had previous, but after the pellet injuries his health started deteriorating rapidly, and he went immobile. Such inhumane act surely hindered his chance of possible recovery, said Mulik.As per Mulik’s complaint, the shooting was probably linked to an incident wherein the rear glass of a car parked in the society complex was shattered, on December 1. Probably, an air gun was used in the incident.A case under sections 427 (causing mischief) and 429 (mischief by killing or, etc, of any value or any animal of the value of Rs 50) of the Indian Penal Code and section 11 (treating animals cruelly) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act has been registered in the matter against an unknown person. The police are taking the necessary steps to trace the culprit, said a police officer.
