Japanese PM Shinzo Abe’s India visit delayed, mutually convenient date to be decided later: MEA

PM Modi with Shinzo Abe

Key Highlights Assam has been witnessing massive protests in the last two days over the Citizenship Amendment Bill In the past decade, India-Japan relations have grown into a close strategic partnership Japan is the only country allowed by the Indian government to take up developmental projects in the sensitive North-Eastern region

Tokyo: Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s three-day India trip for annual summit talks with his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi from December 15-17 has been delayed due to the deteriorating security situation in Guwahati, which is the planned venue of the meeting.

Making the announcement MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that both sides have decided to defer the visit to a mutually convenient date in the near future.

Assam has been witnessing massive protests in the last two days over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, with thousands of people defying curfew and hitting the streets to demand scrapping of the bill.

At least two people succumbed to their injuries on Thursday after police opened fire on protesters in Guwahati.

According to Japan's Jiji Press, it was earlier reported, that Abe was considering cancelling his trip to India as the security situation has deteriorated in Guwahati, however, reports have emerged saying that the trip might be delayed.

Yesterday, External Affairs Ministry Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar when asked whether the government will go ahead with the India-Japan annual summit in Guwahati from December 15-17, said that they don’t have any update to share.

When asked whether the government was contemplating shifting the venue, Kumar said that he is not in a position to clarify it.

In the past decade, India-Japan relations have grown into a close strategic partnership with regular annual summits between their leaders.

Keeping PM Narendra Modi’s Act East Policy in mind, the summit was set to take place in Assam’s Guwahati. Japanese organisations are actively involved in multiple projects in the North-East under the Act East Forum that was set up during Abe's visit to India in 2017.

The Act East Forum has brought together various agencies from both sides to identify specific projects for the development of the NE region.

The forum is aimed to expand cooperation between Japan and India in the North-Eastern region. Japan is the only country allowed by the Indian government to take up developmental projects in the sensitive North-Eastern region.
