Convicts are few steps closer to death, says Nirbhaya's Father

New Delhi [India], Dec 13 (ANI): Nirbhaya's Father on Friday said that the death-row convicts are few steps closer to the death and hoped that decision on issuance of their death warrants is passed soon.

"I am glad that things are being wrapped up fast by the court. The convicts are now few steps closer to death," Badri Nath told ANI.

He said that one of the convicts, Akshay Kumar Singh, filed the review petition with an aim to further "delay the process". The Supreme Court is slated to hear his petition on December 17.

"Nevertheless, we are happy because each of our steps is towards the security of the women of the country", he added.

Nirbhaya's mother, Asha Devi also expressed similar sentiments and said that she has waited for seven years and is willing to wait for a week more to get justice.

"On December 18, their [convicts in the case] death warrant will be issued and they will be hanged. We lost her in December and hope that they are hanged in December only," she said.

The counsel representing the kin of the victim asserted that Akshay's review petition will be rejected as there is no merit in it. "The convicts have exhausted all their legal remedies," she added.

The lawyer appearing for the four convicts, however, claimed that they have yet not exhausted their remedies and said, "We hope that the court allows Akshay's review petition. If the things do not go our way, Akshay, Vinay Sharma, Pawan Kumar Gupta will file the curative petition."

He added, "If it is not allowed, we will file mercy petition. The rumors regarding the mercy petition filed by Akshay are false. The plea did not have his signature or thumbprint on it. We have challenged this in the High Court".

He also said that Pawan was minor on the day of the crime and a petition in this regard is also pending before the High Court.

The case pertains to gang rape and murder of a 23-year-old paramedic student on December 16, 2012. The six accused were apprehended by the police.

Out of six persons, one was a minor and appeared before a juvenile justice court, while another accused committed suicide in Tihar jail.

The four convicts had then approached the Delhi High Court but it upheld the lower court verdict. Later, the Supreme Court, too, upheld the death penalty in May 2017. The rest of the convicts are facing the gallows.

One of the convicts, Vinay, moved a mercy petition last month but has now sought to withdraw it. (ANI)


