Abhishek Kapoor to helm film based on 2019 Balakot airstrike; Sanjay Leela Bhansali to co-produce

Abhishek Kapoor set to helm a film based on 2019 Balakot Airstrike

Bollywood filmmaker Abhishek Kapoor, who has films like Rock On!!, Kai Po Che, Fitoor and Kedarnath to his credit, is now all set to helm a film based on the 2019 Balakot airstrike. While the National award-winning director will helm the film, the likes of Sanjay Leela Bhansali, Bhushan Kumar, Mahaveer Jain and Pragya Kapoor will produce the film and pay tribute to the sons of India.

In the official announcement, the makers describe the film as a "story that celebrates the accomplishment of the Indian Air Force".

The Balakot airstrike in Pakistan was conducted on February 26. The airstrike was conducted after a suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who shot down a Pakistani fighter jet during an aerial engagement with the Pakistan Air Force, suffered a hit on his MiG-21 and was captured by the Pakistani army after ejecting from his downed fighter jet. The days following his capture by Pakistan had united the nation as citizens unanimously prayed for the braveheart's well-being and safe return to India.

More details on the ambitious film are yet to be announced, but till then, the announcement is sure to get cine-goers intrigued about what all the makers will show in the film.

Abhishek last directed Sara Ali Khan and Sushant Singh Rajput in the much-loved film, Kedarnath. The film marked the former's debut and even though the film had to face its share of controversies before the release, things were well after it hit the big screen.

The film announcement is also sure to make the fans of Bhansali extremely happy, who were in despair when the filmmaker decided to shelve Inshallah, co-starring Alia Bhatt and Salman Khan. The director, however, had announced another directorial, Gangubai Kathiawadi, featuring Alia soon after.

Stay tuned for more updates on entertainment and lifestyle.
