Uttar Pradesh: Jaw blown off, long haul for dancer shot in face

Villagers pool in Rs 7 lakh for treatment as kin struggle to meet expenses

AGRA: Till the other day, she was a beautiful dancer, a popular performer at weddings and events in various cities and towns of UP. Just 20 years old, Heena Devi's earnings were her family's primary livelihood. On November 30, when a panchayat head shot at her face, blowing off her jaw during a performance, all of that suddenly changed.But her agony may have only just begun. She will need multiple surgeries to fix her face and the hospital bills are piling up. There's been little help for her along the way."As soon as Heena was shot, we rushed her to Swaroop Rani government hospital in Allahabad, 80 km away. But staff told us there was no surgeon as it was a Sunday. So we had to bring her to a private hospital in Lucknow. There was no help from police either," said Radha , among eyewitnesses of the shooting.Dr Firoz Khan, who operated on Heena, said, "The greater portion of her jaw was blown off. It will take months for recovery." The injuries are such that she runs the risk of never making a complete recovery. The next surgery will be six months later. Her extended family of nine has already spent Rs 7 lakh with funds for Heena's treatment contributed by villagers and relatives. "One bullet has killed nine of us," her sister said.Heena, of Tajganj area in Agra district, married Puran Lal of Kamlaganj, Farrukhabad, exactly a year ago on December 10. Both belonged to the Nat (acrobat) community. Heena became the family's primary performer. They live in Bharmau Sumerpur village of Hamirpur district."She was our family's most beautiful woman and we easily got bookings for shows at weddings, birthdays and other family events. Her earnings ran our daily expenditure. She is the kind of woman who harmed no one, but took care of everyone's needs such as medical bills. But we are unable to bear her medical bills even after mortgaging our valuables and borrowing money from relatives," said Vimla Devi, 59, Heena's mother-in-law.
