Bhushan Kumar, Sanjay Leela Bhansali and others collaborate for an upcoming project titled '2019 Balakot Airstrike'

A story of grit, determination and valour! Proud to announce #2019BalakotAirstrike, a tribute to the brave hearts o… https://t.co/SpYnRCgb9z — Bhushan Kumar (@itsBhushanKumar) 1576216586000

Popular filmmaker Bhushan Kumar has come together with producers Sanjay Leela Bhansali , Mahavir Jain and Pragya Kapoor for an upcoming project titled '2019 Balakot Airstrike. Kumar took to his Twitter profile to announce the film which will be helmed by Abhishek Kapoor . The story will celebrate the accomplishments of the Indian Air Force The producer shared a picture and wrote, "A story of grit, determination and valour! Proud to announce #2019BalakotAirstrike , a tribute to the brave hearts of our country. Written & directed by @Abhishekapoor Talking about the film, maestro Sanjay Leela Bhansali says, “It is a story of bravery, patriotism and love for the country. This film is my way of giving tribute to the heroes who have made India their priority. We endeavor that their story and bravery reaches to everyone in the right way.”Bhushan Kumar reiterates his commitment to the project, and says, “This will be one of our biggest projects for next year. It's extremely close to all of us at T - Series because of the sentiment it carries. I have always been a patriot and it gives me immense pleasure to present the story of bravado of our IAF officers. Wing Commander Abhinandan is a national hero and the Balakot Airstrike 2019 happens to be an event of immense pride for the entire nation. There are some stories in the history of India that need to be retold. This is one of them."Director Abhishek Kapoor feels, "To be entrusted with one of India’s bravest stories is an honor for me. I remember the emotions that ran through the entire country when the strike was carried out. I am determined to do justice to this story in my endeavour to bring it to the silver screen.”Adding to that, Mahaveer Jain, says, “We are extremely honoured to be associated with this meaningful project and happy to be part of this wonderful team. The film is being planned for a pan-India release in languages and the top talent from the industry will be coming on board.”Pragya Kapoor added, “This film will be made on an epic scale and knowing Abhishek, he will leave no stone unturned. It will be a film the entire country will be proud of.”For the uninitiated, the Balakot airstrike was launched on 26 February 2019, Indian Air Force's fighter jets launched smart bombs that targetted Jaish-e-Mohammad's main terror location Balakot.The attack was carried out two weeks after a Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorist bumped a car full of bombs into a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir 's Pulwama Bhushan Kumar, Sanjay Leela Bhansali and others collaborate for an upcoming project titled '2019 Balakot Airstrike'
