Yes, Sri Lankan woman did offer prayers at Sabarimala temple. CCTV footage released

The Supreme Court in its September verdict, threw open the Sabarimala temple gates to women of menstruating age. The judgment was, however, met with violent protests soon after across the state and neighbouring states. (File photo: Reuters)

The confusion over the entry of a Sri Lanka woman into the Sabarimala shrine is now over as government sources have released a CCTV footage that substantiates early morning claims of the woman's entry.

The Sri Lankan woman, Sasikala, had earlier refuted such reports, mentioning she was not allowed to enter inside the abode of Lord Ayyappa. This happened, she told India Today, despite her furnishing a medical certificate, saying she had reached menopause.

Reports now say that the 46-year-old was asked to hide details of her visit and to totally refute reports in view of security concerns.

So now that she is at a much safer place, the government sources released the footage and validated her visit.

Sasikala was earlier reported to have entered the temple around 9.30 pm on Thursday night.

All this panned out a day after Kerala saw violent protests over two women of menstruating age entering the hill shrine.

On January 2, two women -- Bindu and Kanakadurga -- entered the temple resulting in protests across the state. After the news became public, the head priest closed the temple for an hour for "purification rituals".

For the unversed, women have been being traditionally barred entry at the shrine, citing the celibate nature of Lord Ayyappan.

The Supreme Court, however, in its September verdict, lifted this ban and threw open the temple gates to women of menstruating age. The judgment was met with violent protests soon after across the state and neighbouring states.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and state Congress sparred over the turn of events and attacked Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan for breaking the age-old tradition.

No woman between 10 to 50 years had been able to visit the temple until January 2.

In the aftermath of Bindu and Kanakadurga, both in their early 40s, visiting the temple, a dawn-to-dusk hartal was called by several Hindu outfits.

As per reports, a 55-year-old man, who was seriously injured in stone throwing at Pandalam, died late Wednesday night. A Kerala government-run hotel in Tamil Nadu was also attacked on Wednesday night by unidentified persons.

Agitators even hurled a crude bomb at a local beedi manufacturing unit managed by the CPI(M) in Thalassery in Kannur district, but it did not explode, police said, adding 10 right-wing activists were arrested.

Another crude bomb was thrown at Nedumangadu police station about 17 km from there.
