Samples collected from Disha's body match with four accused: Forensic reports

Samples collected from Disha's body match with four accused: Forensic reports

Tests conducted on the victim's garments concluded that the four accused, who were gunned down on December 6, were indeed the perpetrators.

news Crime

The Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) has concluded that the body recovered at Chatanpally was of Disha’s (name changed), and also established that the four accused— Mohammed Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen and Chintalakunta Chennakeshavulu — who were gunned down by police, were indeed the perpetrators.

According to reports, the DNA of the sternum bone of Disha’s body matched with the DNA of her parents. Earlier, police had verified that the body which was burnt beyond recognition was Disha based on her gold chain and a piece of cloth, which was identified by her family members.

“The DNA of the victim matched with that of her family members. From the DNA test report and by looking at the evidence found at the two crime scenes — including footwear, jewellery and clothes of the victim — it is now confirmed that the burnt body was Disha’s,” a police officer told The Times of India.

Tests concluded that the semen stains found on her undergarments and her scarf that were recovered from the crime spot also matched with the DNA of the four accused.

“The DNA of the accused was matched with the sperm stains on her undergarment recovered from the scene of offence near Tondupally toll gate, and a piece of scarf found near Chatanpally underpass,” The Hindu quoted a police officer as saying.

On November 27, 26-year-old Disha, a veterinary doctor was raped and killed by the four accused at Tondupally toll gate, Shamshabad. The accused, who had parked their lorry near the toll booth, deflated the tyre of Disha’s bike. Disha, a resident of Shamshabad, had parked her two-wheeler near the toll booth and took a cab to visit Gachibowli. When she returned, she found her bike punctured. The accused, under the guise of helping her, forcibly took her to nearby bushes and then raped and killed her.

Subsequently, on December 6, all the four accused were killed by police during an alleged encounter, when they allegedly snatched pistols of police and attacked them. The Supreme Court has appointed a judicial commission under former SC judge VS Sirpurkar to probe the claims of the police. The commission has to complete its investigation within six months, the apex court has ordered.
