Internet Shutdown In Aligarh, Saharanpur After Northeast As India Pushed To Edge After Citizenship Bill

The anger against Citizenship (Amendment) Bill spilt to Uttar Pradesh (UP) as the protest in Aligarh and Saharanpur area intensified today. The UP government snapped internet services in Aligarh and Saharanpur after Assam.

Police and administrative vigilance continues in some districts of UP, as citizens protested against the contentious citizenship law. Internet services have been discontinued until further orders. The district administration has not given any reason behind the shutdown in both the districts.

Meanwhile, the situation in the Northeast states of India remains critical. The Guwahati-Shillong Road which proselytized into a mini-war zone as protestors vandalised shops and buildings, burnt tyres and clashed with security forces.

At least two persons were killed and about nine were injured on December 12, Thursday, after the police opened fire on protesters in Guwahati in Assam.

The internet services remain shut since the last 48 hours in the region.

The Centre has withdrawn 10 CRPF companies from Jammu-Kashmir and deployed them in Assam. 5000 paramilitary personnel have also been airlifted to the region.

What is Citizenship Bill?

The Centre gave the Citizenship Act a religious colour by granting citizenship to the non-Muslims. Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Buddhist, Jains and Parsis — from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh who arrived in India and have been persecuted in their respective countries before December 31, 2014, shall be granted Indian citizenship.

Why Is Assam Protesting?

Assam is protesting against the CAB as people in Assam feel concerned and believe that the bill violates the Assam Accord 1985, which was signed between the then government of India and student unions of Assam.

The bill is not applicable in areas that fall under the Inner Line Permit system to safeguard the rights of indigenous people of Northeast. Regions that come under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution too have been placed beyond the purview of CAB. However, only seven out of 33 districts in Assam meet the criteria under the Sixth Schedule. CAB will be applied to the rest of Assam.

Also Read: Two Dead, Nine Injured, Shops Vandalized: Assam’s Protest Against CAB Intensifies
