Rahul Gandhi should take charge of Congress if he's willing: Chidambaram exclusive

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi should take charge of the party again if he's willing to do so, his senior party colleague and former Union Minister P Chidambaram has told India Today TV.

But he also pointed out that if Rahul Gandhi "says he's unwiling to take the responsibility, obviously you can't ask him to take the responsibility".

"The last he told us was he's not willing," he told India Today TV Consulting Editor Rajdeep Sardesai and National Affairs Editor Rahul Shrivastava.

"What we need to find is leaders in the party -- people who can lead at state level...and at the national level."

He expressed confidence that the party could be built back "rung by rung".

He said the index of opposition unity must improve, and expressed confidence that the BJP could be defeated in states such as Delhi and Jharkhand.

On the ongoing Jharkhand election, he said he wished Babulal Marandi had come with the Congress.

Marandi quit the BJP and formed the Jharkhand Vikash Morcha (JVM) more than a decade ago.

NRC AND CITIZENSHIP ACT 'SIAMESE TWINS'

Chidambaram described the National Register of Citizens and the Citizenship (Amendment) Act as "Siamese twins".

"If you apply NRC first, you will exclude. And under the CAB*, you will bring in all the non-Muslims. If you apply CAB first you will include all the non-Muslims, and then NRC will exclude only the Muslims," he said.

"The net result of CAB plus NRC is only Muslims will be excluded," Chidambaram said.

"And how does the Home Minister [Amit Shah] say, without blinking an eye, [that] it is not an exclusionary law?"

Chidambaram said reversing illegal immigration was impractical. "So, perhaps, what will they do? They'll identify them, and disenfranchise them. They will not give them a vote."

He expressed confidence that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act would be struck down by the judiciary.

"The final word rests with the court," Chidambaram said.

He said he was "pretty confident" that on grounds of equality and constitutional morality, the bill would be struck down.

*NOTE: CAB is short for Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, which has now become an Act after being signed into law.
