Security focus shifts from Anti-militancy to law & order in J&K

Srinagar, Dec 13: The anti-militancy operations by security forces and gunfights between militants and security men in Kashmir have witnessed a considerable decline since August 5, when the Centre scrapped Jammu and Kashmir’s special status and bifurcated the state into two Union Territories.

According to data, only 18 militants were killed in gunfights with security forces in Valley this year in over four months period since August 5. Among the militants killed was Hameed Lone alias Hameed Lelhari, chief of Ansar Gazwat-ul-Hind (AGH), an Al-Qaeda affiliate in Kashmir.

Lelhari along with two of his associates was killed in a gunfight with security forces in south Kashmir’s Pulwama district on October 22.According to the data, 136 militants were killed in gunfight with security forces from January 1 to August 5 this year. Among them were top commanders of Hizbul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Toiba, and Jaish-e-Mohammad, and AGH.

A security official conceded that pace of anti-militancy operations slowed down after August 5 because the focus of security agencies shifted from anti-militancy front to maintaining law and order in the Valley.

He said since security forces were focusing on foiling protests, the anti-militancy operations took the backseat. The official, however, added that with the improving situation in J&K, the forces have resumed such operations.

Another security official said suspension of mobile and internet services in Valley immediately after August 5 slowed down the anti-militancy operations as “information from ground was difficult to reach the officials. And by the time information was being received, militants had changed their location by then”.

The official said in view of continued suspension of internet, militants are using satellite phones to communicate with one another. “We have recovered satellite phones during encounters recently,” he said.

‘Action taken as needed’

Inspector General CRPF Ravideep Singh Sahi said that encounters take place “when security forces receive information about location of militants, the operation is launched immediately.”

Security review by MHA on JK situation

New Delhi, Dec 13: The Ministry of Home affairs has deliberated upon the Jammu and Kashmir situation to further strengthen security grid in the union territory.

Top sources said during the review meeting, the MHA thoroughly discussed the Kashmir situation.

“The meeting took comprehensive review of security situation in various parts of the Jammu and Kashmir including the threat perceptions from across the borders,” they said.

Sources said security situation was discussed on the directions of home minister Amit Shah wherein he has directed the top authorities to take all the steps required to keep militancy under check in the Jammu and Kashmir especially in the valley.

They said top brass of the MHA especially those associated with the Internal Security deliberated on the series of aspects to keep security situation under control as has been done during the past two years.

“MHA top brass was satisfied with the progress of anti-militant operations,” sources said.

According to sources, the activities of the militants, infiltration bids across the border, strengthening security on all routes which the militants could take for infiltration came up for detailed review.

The MHA has directed the forces in Jammu and Kashmir to be in high alert off any possibility of attacks, they said.

An advisory has been issued to all para-military forces to maintain extraordinary vigil on their security establishments in Jammu and Kashmir including those located close to the Line of Control (LoC) and International Border (IB), to guard against possible attack.

Sources said the MHA top brass stressed for maintenance of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) during all search operations and called upon the troops to show zero tolerance towards infiltration and other militant activities.
