Two cops in ICU, 10 others injured after stone-pelting in Delhi over Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019

Two cops in ICU, 10 others injured after stonepelting in Delhi over Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (Representational image) | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: As many as 12 cops were injured including two who were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of a Delhi hospital after university students clashed with the police on Friday.

Violence occurred at the Jamia Millia University where students pelted stones and clashed with the police against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019.

“Situation in Jamia Milia Islamia University is under control now. The protesters pelted stones at police which has left 12 police personnel injured, two among them are in ICU,” Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East, Delhi told ANI.

Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East,Delhi: Situation in Jamia Milia Islamia University (where a protest took place against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct today) is under control now. The protesters pelted stones at police which has left 12 police personnel injured,two among them are in ICU. pic.twitter.com/iSsEyaJBlW — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

The protest was called by the Jamia Teachers’ Association (JTA) against the National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019.

The Centre is facing heavy flak from the opposition and the critics of the CAA who dub it “anti-Muslim” claiming the law discriminates on the basis of religion.

The contentious law seeks to give citizenship to persecuted non-Muslim immigrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who entered India before December 31, 2014.

While fielding questions in the Rajya Sabha, Union Home Minister Amit Shah denied all allegations of discrimination against the CAA. He said the bill seeks to give citizenship to those immigrants from the minority communities who were persecuted on the basis of religion in from these three countries.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was signed into law by President Ram Nath Kovind late Thursday amid violent protests in Assam and Meghalaya and some other parts of the country.
