Monkeys target people with glasses as they wreak havoc at sacred temple

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Monkeys in India have become increasingly aggressive over the past few years. And now they’re singling out a new target – people with poor eyesight.

The Bankey Bihari temple in Vrindavan, in the Mathura district of Uttar Pradesh, is overrun with feral langurs, often called leaf monkeys. They regularly attack visitors to the temple, sometimes in search of food, sometimes it seems out of sheer devilment.

The pesky simians seem to have taken a particular dislike to people who wear glasses.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

“These monkeys are experts targeting at those wearing spectacles.,” a local shopkeeper told the Hindustan Times,”Once a monkey has snatched the spectacles, it has to be lured with edibles, like mangoes, to let it go.”

“Most often, monkey drops the spectacle when it catches edibles thrown at it. To avoid such hassles, we have got a message written on walls saying that visitors should keep their glasses concealed,” he said.

Last month, President Ram Nath Kovind made a visit the temple. The president is a glasses wearer, and there were serious concerns that he might be mobbed by monkeys. There was at one point talk of arming his police escort with catapults but the Indian Wildlife Crime Control Bureau blocked the move, describing it as potential “cruelty to animals.”

The monkey population in the region is growing rapidly. Current estimates suggest there are around 60,000 of the specs-loving rascals in the town of Vrindavan alone.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

Hema Malini, a member of parliament for the Bharatiya Janata Party MP raised the issue of Mathura monkey menace in Mathura in the Indian Parliament oat the end of last month, calling for prompt action to tackle the “alarming’ situation.”

Feral specs-hating monkeys might seem funny, but it’s a serious business: Two women were killed in a monkey attack in Mathura earlier this year.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

A year ago this month, another woman died in a similar attack in Mathura. A 40-year-old man in the nearby town of Firozabad died after monkeys attacked him in November 2018. Several deaths have also been reported in the larger city of Agra.

The current plan is to relocate the pests in a 25-acre nature reserve on the outskirts of town. But unless there is ample food for them to eat there, and sufficient pairs of glasses to keep them amused, there are fears that the beats may return.
