Elderly couple found murdered at home

CUTTACK: An elderly couple was found murdered with throats slit at home in Beleswar village under Madhupatna police station limits of Cuttack on Thursday night. The double murder has sent shockwaves in the area with locals questioning the security set up.The deceased were Srinath Samal (70 ), a retired employee of FCI, and his wife Bidulata Samal (64). They have four daughters and a son, all of whom stay outside the state.Police said one of the daughters, who stays in Bangluru, called them around 8 in the evening but the call went unanswered. She dialled again an hour later and the result was the same. And when repeated calls went unanswered, she dialled a neighbour’s number and requested him to check on her parents.Neighbour Banamali Sahu went to the Samals’ home and found the door open. The entrance to the bedroom was also open and inside the couple was lying in a pool of blood. The almirah in the room was also wide open. Sahu called the police who reached the spot around 10.45 pm. They took away the bodies and sealed the house.Police said their throats were slit with some sharp weapons and they were lying in a pool of blood. Several injury marks were spotted in different parts of the body.“A forensic team visited the spot and collected samples. The bodies have been sent for post-mortem. A probe is on,” said DCP Akhileshvar Singh. “Prima facie, it looks like someone known to the couple may have committed the murders,” he added.This theory was supported by Trinath Samal, brother of the deceased. However, he ruled out previous enmity as reason for the murder. “They were both happy. Their children are all working outside the state. They had no enmity with anyone,” the brother said.Meanwhile, local residents blamed the police for the gruesome murder. “The police have become careless regarding the safety of citizens. There’s hardly any patrolling in the area and as a result such an incident has happened in our locality,” said Sanjay Behera, a local resident.
