How Congress contaminated its own idea of India

At the outset, let's be clear about the collective sentiments of minorities -- religious, ethnic, racial and linguistic. Persecution or exclusion of one group is bound to generate sympathy and empathy among the others in this large bouquet of the populace.

If policymakers think that any cosmetic favours to one set of minorities, as is the case with the new religion-based amendments in India's citizenship law, will obliterate mutual solidarity among them, they are in for an error of judgment.

"FIRST THEY CAME FOR..."

When Americans protested President Donald Trump's executive order restricting immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries, their slogans were drawn on the prophetic lines of the Lutheran pastor, Martin Niemöller.

An outspoken foe of Adolf Hitler, Niemöller spent the last seven years of Nazi rule in concentration camps. He is perhaps best remembered for his post-war words, "First they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out." The same words resonated in the US as American activists opposed Trump's order two years ago.

That explains that communities, more so minorities -- wherever they are, let alone India -- don't really ignore the dangers of political apathy in any shape or form. Minorities are aware of the cycle of persecution. They are aware that if one among them is targeted today, it could be the other minority in line tomorrow.

The Gandhis and other Congress leaders fiercely opposed the Modi government's move to grant accelerated citizenship to Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Christian or Buddhist refugees from neighbouring countries - Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh -- but not Muslims.

But in doing so, they sought to own up the "idea of India" as a family legacy.

"The [Citizen Amendment] Bill fundamentally challenges the idea of India that our forefathers fought for and, in its place, creates a disturbed, distorted and divided India where religion will become a determinant of nationhood," declared Congress president Sonia Gandhi.

"...India's tryst with bigotry and narrow minded exclusion was confirmed as the CAB was passed in the Lok Sabha. Our forefathers gave their lifeblood for our freedom," her daughter, Priyanka, said in a tweet, recalling her great-grandfather Jawaharlal Nehru's speech on the midnight of August 14-15, 1947.

"The CAB," said Rahul Gandhi, "is an attack on the Indian Constitution." "Anyone who supports it is attacking and attempting to destroy the foundation of our nation."

But who set the precedent of vicious and brutal attacks on India's secular Constitution in the first place?

THE DIVIDING LINE

Since the Gandhis have chosen to invoke their forefathers apparently to appropriate the "idea of India", let's go back in time when boundary commissions were appointed with Cyril Radcliffe as chairman in the run-up to the subcontinent's bloody Partition.

When Radcliffe drew the line, half the population of the Sikhs was robbed of its most fertile lands, properties and more than 150 historical shrines in what is now Pakistan. Hundreds of thousands of them lost their lives in the killings that followed.

"From having been the most prosperous community, the Sikhs were reduced to the level of other Indian communities," wrote Khushwant Singh in "A History of the Sikhs".

Nevertheless, the Sikh peasants from West Punjab transformed a largely-barren East Punjab into a surplus region within years of the Partition. Sikh traders were as much resolute in rehabilitating themselves in jobs and business.

"NO REASON TO FEAR CONGRESS"

In 1931, Mahatma Gandhi offered assurance to the Sikhs and a piece of advice to the Congress party. "Sikh friends," said the Mahatma at Delhi's Sis Ganj gurdwara, "have no reason to fear that the Congress party will betray them. For, the moment it does so, the Congress would not thereby seal its own doom but that of the country too."

Less than 20 years later, the Congress unfortunately consigned the Mahatma's advice to the trash bin and sacrificed the principles of equal treatment, which is what secularism in India means, at the altar of majoritarian politics.

Sikhs had trekked into India for an uncertain future primarily because they trusted the Congress.

But independent India under Jawaharlal Nehru dealt one of its first blows to the Sikhs by attacking one of the community's primary livelihoods.

NEHRU'S "IDEA OF PUNJAB"

"The government," wrote Khushwant Singh, "showed little imagination in dealing with the Sikhs. Road transport, over which the Sikhs had virtually a monopoly, was nationalised. Their control over taxi and bus services in Calcutta was also ended in order to provide employment to Hindu refugees from what was then East Pakistan."

By the mid 1950s, Punjab was declared a bilingual region, with Hindi and Punjabi as its languages.

It's worth reminding the Gandhi-Nehru heirs apparent that successive Congress governments kept rejecting the Sikh proposal for a Punjabi-speaking state -- with 57 per cent Hindus and 43 per cent Sikhs -- on linguistic lines of Andhra formed in 1953, Kerala and Karnataka in 1956, and Maharashtra and Gujarat in 1960.

The policy of denial continued from Nehru to his successors Lal Bahadur Shastri and Gulzarilal Nanda, in order to appease the communal agenda of the Arya Samaj and the Jan Sangh, which bitterly opposed the Sikh demand.

The Aryas and the Sangh even launched a successful campaign to persuade Hindu Punjabis to disown Punjabi as their mother tongue in census exercises, a language they have spoken for generations.

Then Congress chief minister, Partap Singh Kairon, in office from 1956 to 1964, told the sitters-on-the-fence in the Punjab assembly to make unequivocal declarations disavowing the Sikh state.

The Congress government's open hostility towards the statehood of Punjab ended only after the 1965 war with Pakistan. The Akalis shed their differences with the national government and the Sikh soldiers crossed swords with the enemy gallantly. "Of all states of the Indian Union, Punjab's contribution in aid of defence was the highest," says Khushwant Singh in his book.

It was the geographical position of Punjab and the Sikh role in the military conflict with Pakistan that eventually forced Indira Gandhi to accept the Sikh demand for Punjab state -- and not the principles on which other states were created.

Punjab was truncated for a second time after the Partition. The Congress government of a free Republic carved Himachal and Haryana out of it on November 1, 1966. Uttar Pradesh, seven time its size back then, was left untouched.

CENTRE-STATE RELATIONS

Fast forward to 1973: The Working Committee of the Shiromani Akali Dal met at Anandpur Sahib and asked the Central government to recast the Constitution on "real federal principles".

In what came to be known as the Anandpur Sahib Resolution, the charter of demands called upon the national government to restrict its intervention mainly in defence, foreign relations, currency and general administration. Let all other departments of governance remain in the jurisdiction of Punjab and other states.

"Some of these claims were new; but their substance went back several decades, to the division of India by religion in 1947," wrote Ramachandra Guha, historian and biographer, in an article in 2005. "In this division the Sikhs had suffered most of all. They lost millions of lives, millions of acres of land they had made fertile in the 'canal colonies', and some very sacred shrines, left behind in what was now Pakistan."

Punjab state was finally granted in 1966, but its extent was not what had been hoped for, he said. "Thus the Anandpur Sahib resolution, which sought to make real the promise of states' autonomy merely hinted at by the Indian Constitution."

There's no doubt that the Anandpur Sahib Resolution was couched in religious phraseology in parts, which could well have been avoided. In spirit though, the document aimed at empowering states and curtailing central encroachments.

But because it came from a purely Sikh group, which the Shiromani Akali Dal was at the time, and because it used religious phraseology in explaining the party's objectives, the Resolution was branded as theocratic by the powerful Congress rulers for years.

As part of their accord in July 1985, then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Akali leader Harchand Singh Longowal cleared a point that the Anandpur Sahib Resolution would never be construed as a demand for secession or separatism but as a document for greater autonomy of Punjab. They readily agreed to submit the Resolution to the Sarkaria Commission.

In the summer of 1989, the PM, however, declared that the same Anandpur Sahib Resolution smacked of "separatism and disintegration" and equated it with the Muslim League resolution which demanded Pakistan.

"Notwithstanding the historical merits of the argument, the signals that the outburst sent out did not fit into the strategy of reconciliation Rajiv has been trying to project. In fact, it smacked of the kind of attitude that has bred alienation in the past," said an article in the India Today magazine dated May 15, 1989.

Had there been a will to grant greater autonomy to states in the real sense of federalism, both sides could have worked on the language and improved the content in order to readjust centre-state relations. An amended Anandpur Sahib resolution, if implemented with sincerity, could have then ensured balance of power in the world's largest democracy.

But the Rajiv Gandhi government instead chose to push the Sikhs and their party to the wall.

USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE

The culture of military deployment in internal security situations is also a legacy of the Congress party. Then PM Indira Gandhi unleashed the might of the Indian Army on Darbar Sahib (the Golden Temple) to flush out a few hundred militants from inside. (The militant leader, Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, who was slain in Operation Blue Star, had originally been discovered by the Congress leadership, which wanted to use him as a pawn against the Akalis.)

The Rajiv Gandhi government, ironically, didn't exercise the Army option when the anti-Sikh massacre broke out in the aftermath of his mother's assassination.

MAINSTREAMING STATE EXCESSES

Another culture that the same Congress introduced in statecraft was the negation of human and civil rights.

Between the 1980s and the 1990s, rights groups alleged that during this time thousands of Sikhs were "disappeared" by security forces or killed in staged encounters.

In 1991, Amnesty International reported how the governments led by Rajiv Gandhi and his successor, VP Singh, had denied it access to Punjab.

"The previous Congress (I) government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, in office from 1984 until late 1989, categorically denied Amnesty International access to Punjab," wrote Amnesty.

"Although (then) Prime Minister Vishwanath Pratap Singh's National Front coalition government announced in July 1990 that Amnesty International representatives could come to India for private visits or to meet the government, no dates were set for such meetings, nor was Amnesty International granted permission to visit Punjab before the government fell in November 1990.

Heirs apparent of the Gandhi-Nehru family are welcome to credit their forefathers for the "idea of India". But history is harsh -- and it doesn't exonerate the dynasty for what has become of our country in the second decade of the 21st century.
