As violent protests grip Northeast, US, UK issue travel advisory, ask citizens to 'exercise caution'

Protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights You should exercise caution if you're planning to travel in North East India: UK On Thursday night, President Ram Nath Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 into Act In view of the violent protests, the United States has also cautioned its citizens, asking them to avoid areas with demonstrations and civil disturbances.

New Delhi: As the northeastern states have been witnessing widespread violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act, several foreign countries including the United States and the United Kingdom have issued travel advisories for their citizens, asking them to "exercise caution" while travelling to the region.

The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), in a statement said: “Demonstrations against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) are taking place in some parts of the country. There have been reports of violent protests in North East India, especially in Assam and Tripura. An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati (Assam) and mobile internet services have been suspended in 10 districts of Assam.”

“Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. You should exercise caution if you're planning to travel in North East India, monitor local media for the latest information, follow instructions of the local authorities and allow more time for travel,” the advisory further stated.

On Thursday night, President Ram Nath Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 into Act, triggering massive protests in Northeast, majorly in Assam, where two people were killed.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act will grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains from three neighbouring countries – Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who fled their respective countries and came to India before December 31, 2014, due to religious persecution.

In view of the violent protests, the United States has also cautioned its citizens, currently staying in the northeastern states, asking them to avoid areas with demonstrations and civil disturbances.

"US citizens in the northeastern states of India should exercise caution in light of media reports of protests and violence in response to the approval of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. Government curfews are in place in some areas. Internet and mobile communications may be disrupted.

“Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. Protests have also been reported in other parts of the country. The US government has temporarily suspended official travel to Assam," the statement read, ANI reported.



Besides the UK and the US, France has also issued travel advisory and suspended air transport, asking its citizens to "stay away" from any gathering.



"Following the voted on new Citizenship Law (CAB), general strikes, demonstrations and scuffles with the police broke out in several cities in the states of Assam and Tripura. Air Transport to Assam is suspended for the moment. It is recommended to stay away from any gathering to regularly follow the news and to records of the Indian authorities," it added.



Likewise, Canada has also issued a similar advisory, asking its citizens to exercise caution while travelling to the northeastern states of India. Them. “Check with your airline or tour operator to determine if the situation will affect your travel plans,” it said.
