Cyberabad rape and murder case: Forensic report confirms alcohol traces in Disha's body

The toxicology report was submitted to Shadnagar police by Telangana Forensic Science Laboratory. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Forensic report confirms alcohol traces in Disha's body Police: Accused force-fed liquor to Disha while raping her Disha's family claims she was a teetotaller

Hyderabad: The autopsy report of the Cyberabad rape and murder victim Disha has confirmed the presence of alcohol in her body.

Shadnagar police, while presenting the remand case diary before a court, said that the accused forced the veterinary doctor to consume soft drink laced with alcohol while raping her near a toll plaza at Chatanpally in Telangana on November 7.

According to a report in Times of India, the liver tissue of the victim contained alcohol traces which establishes that the accused forced her to drink liquor.

The revelations came after forensic experts examined the viscera of the victim during the autopsy. According to the family of the victim, the doctor was a 'teetotaler'.

"The victim got into a cab for Gachibowli after parking her scooter at Tondupally toll plaza at 6pm. After completing her work, she returned to the spot at 9.30 pm without halting anywhere on the way that night. So, this suggests that the liquor was force-fed to her by the accused as they raped her," the report quoted a police officer as saying.

The toxicology report was submitted to Shadnagar police by Telangana Forensic Science Laboratory. Shadnagar police is probing the rape and murder of the 27-year-old veterinary doctor.

Shadnagar police also received another FSL report that established that the seminal stains found on Disha's undergarments and scarf belonged to the accused. Despite the killing of the accused in the shootout, police say it will file a charge sheet in the court.

Four accused-Jollu Shiva, Mohammad Arif, Jollu Naveen and Chennakeshvulu- allegedly raped the veterinary doctor on the night of November 27 near Tondupally toll plaza.

All the four suspects in the rape and murder case were killed in a shootout at the Shadnagar in Telangana's Ranga Reddy district on December 6. The police claimed that the accused attacked cops while they were taken at the spot for crime reconstruction.
