BJP MPs to reach out to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Christian refugees to explain Citizenship (Amendment) Act

JP Nadda | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Several northeastern states have been witnessing violent protests against the amended Act On Thursday night, President Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 into Act The party has also planned to hold a conference of intellectuals in all the districts to discuss the key points of the Act

New Delhi: As the amended Citizenship Act came into effect following President Ram Nath Kovind’s assent, the Bharatiya Janata Party MPs have been tasked with reaching out to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain and Christian refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan, in their respective constituencies from December 14 to 31.

BJP national working president JP Nadda, on Friday, asked party's MPs to speak to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain and Christian refugees from three neigbouring countries and inform them about the amended Act. Nadda, in a letter, to BJP legislators in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha also directed them to hold press conferences for the purpose.

The party has also planned to hold a conference of intellectuals in all the districts to discuss the key points of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. National Secretary Satya Kumar has been assigned the responsibility of overseeing the program, news agency ANI reported.

On Thursday night, President Kovind signed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 into Act, a day after it was passed in Parliament.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Act will grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains from three neighbouring countries – Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who fled their respective countries and came to India before December 31, 2014, due to religious persecution.

Meanwhile, several northeastern states and other parts of the country have been witnessing violent protests against the amended Act. On Thursday, two people were killed in Assam after police allegedly opened fire to disperse agitators, who were protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, defying the curfew.

On Friday, several people were injured after clashes broke out between police and students of Jamia Millia Islamia University who were stopped from marching to Parliament House to protest the amended Citizenship Act. Police allegedly baton-charged the students and also used tear gas to prevent them from carrying out the march. They also detained at least 42 students after they allegedly broke barricades and indulged in stone-pelting.
