6 days on, cops clueless about accused in Raikot murder

Ludhiana: Six days after a woman and her specially-abled son were brutally murdered by unidentified miscreants at Basraon village near Raikot, the police seem to be clueless about the accused persons and are yet to identify them.

55-year-old Gurjeet Kaur of Basraon and her son Pardeep Singh were found brutally murdered at their one-room house in the village. Following the incident, the police booked unidentified accused persons for double murder.

SHO Sadar Raikot police station, inspector Nidhan Singh, said they were investigating the matter and the accused were yet to be identified and arrested.

In the meanwhile, a senior police officicial said the incident might have happened between 7am and 11am December 7 as a neighbourer of the deceased heard them speak at 7am. He said they tried to get clue from the CCTV installed in the area, but the accused were not captured in the CCTV.

The officer further said a day or two before the incident, the deceased persons got Rs17,000 from a person who had taken their 6.5 kanal land on contract.

He said the money was yet to be found and it was being suspected that the accused might be knowing about the family having money and committed the crime.

The police officer said they were probing all angles.

The police said Gurjeet and her specially-abled son were living in the one-room house in the village as her husband had died. One of her daughters was married and other another daughter lived with her paternal aunt.

The police said on December 7, the duo didn’t come out of their house till 11am and Pradeep’s aunt came to meet them, but the mother-son due did not open the door despite repeated knocks.

The police said the woman later sought help of Gurmeet Kaur, supervisor of MNREGA. They said Gurmeet entered the house from an open space and found the outer door of the room bolt. Later, she went to the window of the room and found the woman on the bed and her son on the floor.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
