Saligrama village in Mysuru's KR Nagar tense after caste clashes erupt

Former minister and JD(S) MLA SR Mahesh had a tough time at Saligrama, Mysuru, on Friday as angry villagers complained to him about the violence

MYSURU: Tension gripped a village in Mysuru district's KR Nagar taluk after an altercation between a biker and a pedestrian touched off stone-throwing and arson incidents on Thursday and on Friday.

Police sources said the biker, Chandru, a Dalit, allegedly brushed past Srinivas, a Vokkaliga, in Saligrama late Wednesday evening leading to fierce arguments between the two. Later, Srinivas filed a complaint accusing Chandru of assaulting him. Saligrama police slapped an attempt-to-murder case against Chandru.

On Thursday, Ajay, a friend, was on his way to hospital to enquire after Srinivas when a group of six people allegedly manhandled him. Police filed a second case, this time against Dalit youths on charges of assaulting Ajay. Saligrama, a Vokkaliga-majority village with Dalits in sizeable numbers, is the home village of KR Nagar MLA and former minister SR Mahesh.

With the road accident case showing no signs of abating, the MLA's brother Raghu led a group of supporters to Dalit Colony in the village on a peace mission. Police sources said a handful of people who followed Raghu into the colony started hurling stones on houses, triggering off a free-for-all. Later, police booked a case against Raghu and his group on charges of damaging properties and also under SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act of 1989. Six people have been arrested and remanded in judicial custody.

On Friday, MLA Mahesh visited Ambedkar Colony and spoke to Dalit leaders, besides meeting Srinivas at the hospit al. Mysuru superintendent of police CB Ryshyanth, who's camping at the village, told TOI the situation is under control now.

Tension between Vokkaligas and Dalits was simmering in Saligrama village of KR Nagar in Mysuru district for a while now, according to police sources. A traffic junction on the way to Somwarpet was sought to be named after JD(S) supremo HD Deve Gowda. This was opposed by a Dalit group, which said it should be christened after Dr BR Ambedkar. A police officer said this was the genesis of the tension that later gripped the village after a trivial road accident.


