Citizenship (Amendment) Act: Long queues at markets as people rush to stock up

Security forces personnel who are manning each and every corner of the city, however, did not enforce closure of the markets and restrict movement of vehicles (ANI photo)

GUWAHATI: Goods flew off shelves as locals rushed to stock up essential items after shops and markets in Guwahati opened on Friday morning amid reports that curfew has been relaxed. These reports were later dismissed by the authorities.

Long queues were seen outside shops at the Uzan Bazar, Chandmari, Silpukhuri and Zoo Road areas, with people coming out in their cars and two-wheelers after some local channels reported that the prohibitory orders have been relaxed from 6 am to 1 pm. An Assam Police spokesman later clarified that there was no order about the curfew being relaxed and restrictions will be in force.

Security forces personnel who are manning each and every corner of the city, however, did not enforce closure of the markets and restrict movement of vehicles.

Long queues were seen outside grocery stores, shops selling poultry items and fish. Many said they were stocking items for at least three-four days in wake of the uncertainties amid the protests. Several people were heard saying they even got dressed for office after the reports of curfew relaxations. However, schools and offices remained shut.

Flag marches by the Army and personnel of the security forces are being conducted across the city. Also, civic workers were seen clearing barricades, bricks and stones, burnt tyres and other things that dotted the city roads after the pitched battle between protesters and police on Thursday that left two persons dead. Public transport, including buses, remained off the roads.

In Nagaland, where people have been busy all of last week celebrating the Hornbill Festival, were seen rushing to goods stores on Friday to hoard essential items, amid tension that curfew in neighbouring Assam might hit supplies. People said they were scared that they might have to face food and medicine shortage in the days to come, official sources said.

Long queues were also witnessed at fuel outlets in state capital Kohima and commercial hub Dimapur, with most of the pumps drying up by noon. Allaying fears, principal secretary (home) Abhijit Sinha said the Indian Oil Corporation depot in Dimapur has been stocked up to last a few days. “Petrol pumps may have dried up in several places due to the rise in demand, but the deposit in IOC Dimapur won’t run out of stock in the next few days,” he said.


