Mumbai police find head, torso of murdered musician in Prabhadevi; adopted daughter, boyfriend in custody

Mumbai police are currently interrogating the two accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The girl has claimed that her adoptive father, Rebbelo sexually assaulted her CCTV footage shows the couple buying gloves, garbage bags, room fresheners, hammers and knives The murdered musician's limbs were found on Mahim Beach on December 3

Mumbai: Over a week after parts of his body were discovered stuffed in a suitcase at Mahim Beach, musician Bennett Rebello's head and torso have also been found. These last missing parts of the murder victim's body were found in Prabhadevi on Friday, said Mumbai Police.

A resident of Vakola, Rebello was allegedly murdered by his adoptive daughter (19) and her minor boyfriend (16) on November 26. After they killed him with knives and hammers, the duo used the same tools to chop Rebello's body into eight parts and dump it in different places across Mumbai city. Investigators recovered two bags containing the victim's body parts from Mithi river and two from Mahim and Prabhadevi.

While the deceased musician's limbs were found in Mahim, his head and torso were spotted by locals in Prabhadevi. A police team was sent to verify whether it was Rebello's body and send all the parts to the Kalina forensic science laboratory (FSL) in Santacruz for testing. The case is being handled by unit 5 of the crime branch.

According to the events police have been able to piece together with the help of CCTV footage, the couple bought knives and hammers from a shop near the victim's home. They also purchased jumbo bags and tape from a grocer along with air fresheners and a dozen gloves from a nearby medical store. An investigator told media persons that the couple murdered Rebello, chopped his body into parts, stored those parts into garbage bags and dumped them across town.

Both were arrested and will continue to be in police custody until December 16. They have already confessed to plotting and executing the murder. In her statement, the girl said that she killed her 'adoptive' father following a heated argument between the two. She also accused him to sexually assaulting her multiple times.
