Anti-CAB protest: Mamata warns of strict action amid vandalism across Bengal

A woman shouts slogans during a protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Guwahati, Assam. (Photo: Reuters)

After a string of violent protests and subsequent disconnection of internet services in several parts of the Northeast including Assam, broadband services resumed in Guwahati on Saturday. However, mobile internet remains suspended.

Curfew has also been relaxed in Guwahati and Dibrugarh for a few hours.

The curfew has been relaxed in Guwahati from 9 am to 4pm and in Dibrugarh from 8 am to 2 pm, they said. Police are using loudspeakers to inform the public about the relaxations, they added.

This came after violent agitations rocked the Northeast since the passing of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

10.30 PM: Mamata warns of strict action amid vandalism across Bengal

Amidst the ongoing violence across West Bengal against the amended Citizenship Act, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Saturday warned of stern action against those involved in vandalising public property, and urged people not to resort to violence.

09.11 PM: NIA registers case against Akhil Gogoi for sedition under UAPA

NIA registers case against RTI activist and peasant leader Akhil Gogoi for sedition and under sections of UAPA for fomenting violence in Assam during the CAB protest.

08.20 PM: Vandalising public property is the wrong way of protest: Aparna Sen

Amid violent agitation against the amended Citizenship Act in West Bengal, eminent filmmaker Aparna Sen and other Bengali intellectuals on Saturday said vandalising public property is not the right path to register protests.

07:00 PM: CAB protest: Assam govt employees to cease work on Dec 18

Employees of the Assam government Saturday announced that they will go for cease work on December 18 in protest against the amended Citizenship Act.

Sadou Asam Karmachari Parishad (SAKP) President Basab Kalita told PTI that all employees of the state government across Assam will not attend offices on December 18.

05: 29 PM: Citizenship Act will not be implemented in Bengal, says Mamata Banerjee

"I request everyone to not create any disturbance or involve in any kind of violence. Be sure that. Citizenship Amendment Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC) will not be implemented in Bengal as we won't allow it. Please don't block roads and take law in hands," Mamata Banerjee said.

05: 29 PM: Protests in Assam

As per Assam government's notification, branches of State Bank of India (SBI) in Dibrugarh, Duliajan, Moran, Naharkatia, and Dibrugarh branch of United Bank of India (UBI) to remain open on Sunday (December 15).

05:10 PM: BJP slams Mamata Banerjee over CAB protests

The Bharatiya Janata Party slammed West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee over violent protests against amended citizenship act in state.

"Mamata Banerjee is the one who taught people to indulge in violent protests. So who will pay heed to her appeal? When they were not her vote bank she had raised her voice against illgegal infiltration. If state govt wanted they could have stopped this but they don't want it. It's evident from the way their leaders are speaking. Mamata Banerjee and her party leaders are provoking people. Bengal is burning for two days and nothing is being done," Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh said.

04.00 PM: Opposition hampering national interest: Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi

Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi slammed the opposition while blaming it for creating uproar in the nation over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and said that they were trying to hamper the national interest.

"I believe that some people are trying to hamper the national interest. The opposition always tries to attack the interest of the people and creates confusion in the nation. When the citizenship bill was passed they were given an opportunity to speak in the parliament but again they are trying to create chaos," Naqvi told ANI.

1:20 PM: Supreme Court may hear pleas related to CAB on December 18

The petition filed by the Indian Union Muslim League is likely to be heard by the Supreme Court on December 18. The court may also hear around a dozen petitions related to CAB on the day.

12:48 PM: Buses set on fire by protesters

Anti-CAB / NRC protesters have blocked the national highway near Salap in Domjur. Protesters have burnt tyres. Police and RAF have been deployed in the area. Protesters have also burnt effigies of PM Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah. Several private buses have been set on fire by angry protesters on Kona highway.

12:23 PM: Delhi: Jamia University students continue stir against Citizenship Act

Scores of students from Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University staged a protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 on Saturday in New Delhi.

The agitated students were heard sloganeering against Prime Minister Narendra Modi led Central government and demanded that the Act which has been passed and notified earlier this week, should not be implemented.

12:12 PM: Protest in Mumbai

Maharashtra: People of Assam, living in Mumbai, are protesting against Citizenship Amendment Act, at the city's Azad Maidan. Actor Dipannita Sharma is also present at the protest.

11:20 AM: 65 arrested, over 1000 detained for involvement in Assam violence

Sixty-five people have been arrested so far in Assam over their involvement in violence against the CAB. Over 1000 people have been detained for participating in the violence.

11:37 AM: Curfew relaxed in Shillong from 10 am to 7 pm

The curfew, imposed in parts of the city amid violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act, was relaxed on Saturday from 10 am to 7 pm as the law and order situation improved, officials said.

Offices and a few shops have opened in the state capital, said East Khasi Hills district deputy commissioner MW Nongbri.

"The curfew has been relaxed due to the improved law and order situation," Nongbri said. She said traffic has been normal since morning in the city and there was no report of any untoward incident in the past 12 hours. (-PTI)

11:16 AM: Upper Assam remains tensed

The city of Guwahati has been getting back on track but areas like Tinsukia, Dibrugarh and Jorhat in the Upper Assam region remained tense with cases of violence being reported there. In the Upper Assam area vehicles were burnt and mobs indulged in vandalising public property. On Saturday morning there was a relaxation in curfew in Guwahati and shops that had remained shut for the last three days finally opened.

11:00 AM: Anti-CAB protests continue in Bengal

Howrah: Anti-CAB / NRC protesters have blocked the national highway near Salap in Domjur. Protesters have burnt tyres. Police and RAF have been deployed in the area. Protesters have also burnt effigies of PM Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah.

Murshidabad: Protests continue in Murshidabad district. On Saturday morning protesters vandalized the Nimtita station under Suti Police Station. On Friday Murshidabad’s Beldanga witnessed mob violence with angry protesters vandalizing the Beldanga rail station, police station and even attacked ambulances. Even cops were injured

North 24 Pargana: Protesters blocked a road in Hasnabad in Basirhat sub-division under North 24 Pargana district. Muslim organizations burnt the effigy of HM Amit Shagh Train services disrupted on the Sealdah- Hasnabad route under Eastern Railway for some time.

Long queues were seen outside shops in Guwahati at several places, including Dispur, Uzan Bazar, Chandmari, Silpukhuri and Zoo Road.

Auto-rickshaws and cycle-rickshaws were plying across the city. However, buses were off roads. Petrol pumps in the city have also opened with vehicles waiting in lines to refuel.

Schools and offices, however, remained shut. After the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was cleared by Parliament, violent protests broke out across the state with agitators engaging in pitched battles with the police, forcing the administration to impose curfew in several places.

The legislation has put the entire Northeast on the boil where people fear that it may exacerbate the problem of illegal immigration.

10:00 AM: Schools, colleges shut in Nagaland amid six-hour shutdown call

Schools and colleges were closed, markets were shut and vehicles remained largely off roads in parts of Nagaland on Saturday amid a six-hour shutdown call given by the Naga Students' Federation (NSF), protesting against the amended Citizenship Act, officials said.

No untoward incident has been reported so far from the Naga inhabited areas where the shutdown began at 6 am, they said.

9:00 AM: NSF calls 6-hour band to protest against CAB

The Naga Students' Federation (NSF) has called a 6-hour bandh on Saturday to protest against the amended Citizenship Act. The bandh will begin at 6am.

"Pursuant to the resolution adopted in the Emergency Executive Council Meeting of NSF, held on Friday at the Federation's Headquarter, it was unanimously decided to call for a six-hour total bandh in all the Naga inhibited areas, starting from 6am to 12 noon on December 14," a NSF statement said.

The NSF directed all its federating units and subordinate bodies in Manipur, Assam and Nagaland to take up all necessary measures to ensure that the total bandh is carried out successfully in their respective jurisdictions.

However, NSF said students appearing for examination, healthcare professionals on duty, media personnel and marriage parties, provided the wedding card is produced, will be exempted from the proposed total bandh.

Read | Citizenship Amendment Act protest: Delhi Police, protesters clash at Jamia

Read | Exclusive: Citizenship Amendment Act highly vulnerable law, will be struck down by SC, says P Chidambaram

Watch | Anti-CAB protests: Ground reports from Thiruvananthapuram, Kolkata
