Rape-rituals in India

Credit: Google

I can totally understand the feeling/anger/frustration. All of us are infuriated. But the problem with this kind of anger is — they are temporary! Once the incident passes, we forget and stop talking about it. Look at every other rape which has happened in the past, what happens afterwards — is another rape!

India is full of rituals. We have rituals in everything we do. We have rituals for praying to God, we have rituals for getting an education, we even have rituals for living our lives. Once a child is born, all he/she has to do is, follow those rituals of living. By the way, I am sure all of you know the meaning of the ritual. But still, I want to write it down here as well. This definition is extracted from Wikipedia:

A ritual is a sequence of activities involving gestures, words, and objects, performed in a sequestered place and according to set sequence.

In short, its a sequence of activities! The problem with ritual is that we do not even think about those activities which we are doing. We simply tend to do what other people do. But it is not that rituals are completely of no use. For example, following ‘religion’ is hard for many people since it takes time and effort to understand any religion. Hence they made ‘rituals’ for those who do not want to learn it but just wants to be a part of that discipline — I will talk about ‘religion vs rituals’ some other time but for now, let’s come back to our discussion of rape.

The Ritual

As I was saying, we have rituals of everything. We even have rituals for “Rape”. Like, things to do once a woman gets raped are as follows:

News channels start broadcasting the news.

Few folks do candle march in the city.

Few folks even get into a fight with policemen out of anger.

Few celebrities comments and tweets on social media.

Few politicians make some nonsense statements on TV.

Police arrest some few folks.

The hearing starts in a few weeks or so.

Furious citizens start posting pictures of the rape victim on social media.

Post a month or so, then we forget and get back to our work.

A few weeks or months later, another rape happens.

So the next question that comes to our mind is, should we stop following this ritual, sit back and do nothing? I do not think so, what we are missing here in this ritual is, few steps which, I think we must add. Let me give you the context here.

I was watching news recently on the TV, about a young doctor who was raped and murdered brutally in Hyderabad. There were panellists who were discussing the case on what should be done to those who do such horrendous activities. The anchor was accepting phone calls from those who want to share their views about the incident. There was this caller who said, “Cut his (the rapist) limbs, strip him off and hang him in public.” Similar kind of responses I received from some of my friends when I enquired them about their opinion on the root cause of rapes happening in India — Everyone fears miserable death, so it might help to reduce such cases. But all these statements are said out of anger and solutions which comes in anger, are temporary. You talk and forget about it. Although, I completely understand, what they meant with those statements — “We have poor law enforcement by the government as long as rape is concerned” — but if you see what is considered as rape, as per law, then you might get the glimpse, why it is very hard and time taking for the court (or any third party) to give judgement on such cases. Let’s take a look.

What is considered as rape?

The court will decide that these acts are rape if [source]:

It happens without her consent, or

She agrees, but only because she, or someone she knows is in danger, or

She agrees, but because she thinks the accused person is her husband, or

She agrees, but she is drugged, or drunk, or mentally ill, or

She is under 18 — then it does not matter if she agreed or not, or

She is in no position to indicate whether she agreed or not — for example, if she is unconscious.

Now that you read the terms you can clearly see how difficult it would be to pass judgements. And when it comes to marital rape, which is not criminalized in India, it is even more complicated. Let’s have a look:

As long as the wife is above 15 years old, it is not considered rape, if the husband engages in sex with her without her consent.

To me personally, the above statement looks rubbish because it begs several questions:

Does it mean that women over 15-year-old are ‘okay’ to get raped and can’t log a complaint even if it did happen without her consent?

Or, does it mean that the moment you get married, you are supposed to be abused and have no rights to say ‘no’?

Or, does it mean that the institution of marriage is above all human rights and morality?

Or, does it mean that you are not even a human?

The institution of marriage is defined by we humans, nature does not define marriage — A man can go any women and a woman can go any man, provided he had the power and she had the will. If you go back even before the Upanishad, which is a part of Vedas, was written, there was a character called, Swetaketu who watched his mother go to several men right in front of his eyes — he wanted to know of which seed he was the fruit — but she had no answer. He even asked his father, “How is it that you have allowed my mother to go with another man?”. On that, the father replied, “Boy, that is the rule of the land.” Swetaketu did not agree and later he wrote Upanishad and he propounded the first theory of Uddalaka-Swetaketu principles wherein adultery was prohibited and the institution of a marriage built.
