Honey-trapping case: Indore Municipal Corporation destroys property belonging to Jitu Soni's brother

Indore Municipal Corporation demolished a property belonging to Mahendra Soni, the brother of Jitu Soni, owner of Sanjha Lokswami newspaper, who is currently absconding in connection with the Madhya Pradesh honey-trap case.

Jitu Soni has been booked under the IT Act for allegedly publishing news and videos related with the honeytrap incident. The FIR was filed by an employee of the Municipal Corporation of Indore. The police have announced prize money of Rs 1 Lakh for providing information about the absconding Jitu Soni.

Earlier on December 1, 2019, sealed the office of a newspaper publication, Sanjha Lokswami, in Indore and raided various locations including the residence of the owner of the newspaper, Jitu Soni, in connection with the honey-trapping case which surfaced in September.

"Raids are being conducted at various locations including the residence of Jitendra Soni, owner of the newspaper, Sanjha Lokswami in Indore in connection with the honey trap case," ANI quoted the police as saying.

Police sources stated that Soni had videos of political leaders and officials in compromising positions with women who are now in jail in connection with the honey-trapping case. However, no video evidence was recovered by the police in the raids.

The honey trapping case came to light after an Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC) engineer had filed a complaint alleging that two women were blackmailing him by threatening to make some objectionable videos viral.

The engineer was later suspended from the service by the IMC.

So far, more than 4000 files have been recovered from the laptops and mobile phones of the accused arrested in the case.

The recovered files include audio recordings, video clips, and screenshots of chats, with many of them, said to be objectionable in nature.

According to sources, the material was used to allegedly blackmail the bureaucrats, politicians, and businessmen from the state.

The state government had also ordered a Special Investigation Team (SIT) probe into the human trafficking charges in connection with the case.
