Reporters Without Borders Current Affairs, GK & News

Reporters Without Borders Current Affairs, GK & News

International NGO, Reporters without Borders has released the World Press Freedom Index 2019. The index is based on the assessment of the countries’ press freedom records in the previous year. The report is partly based on a questionnaire which asks questions about pluralism, media independence, environment and self-censorship, legislative framework, transparency, and infrastructure. World Press Freedom Index 2019 The ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2019

Category: Reports & Indexes Current Affairs

Topics: Asia • Bangladesh • China • Denmark • Ethiopia • Finland • Gambia • Netherlands • NGO • Norway • Pakistan • Press Freedom • Reporters Without Borders • Sweden • Turkmenistan • Vietnam • World Press Freedom Index • World Press Freedom Index 2019

India has slipped two places to rank 140th among 180 nations in the 2019 World Press Freedom Index (WPFI), report released by Reporters Without Borders (RWB), an international NGO based in Paris. The report notes that attacks against journalists by supporters of the ruling BJP increased in the run-up to the ongoing Lok Sabha elections.The ..

Topics: Activism • Freedom of the press • Human activities • Journalism • Organizations • Reporters Without Borders

Indian historian Sanjay Subrahmanyam has won prestigious Dan David Prize of Israel for the year 2019 for his work on inter-cultural encounters between Asians, Europeans and people of North and South America during the early modern era. Sanjay Subrahmanyam shares the award in the category of ‘past time dimension’ with Prof Kenneth Pomeranz of the University ..

Category: Awards, Persons & Places in News

Topics: Christina Figueres • Dan David Foundation • Dan David Prize • Prof Kenneth Pomeranz • Prof Michael Ignatieff • Reporters Without Borders • Sanjay Subrahmanyam • Tel Aviv University • University of Chicago

As per latest report of Reporters without Borders (RSF), Afghanistan is the most deadliest country for journalists in 2018, with 13 deaths, followed by Syria (11) and Yemen (8). India has emerged among the world’s fifth-most deadliest place for journalists alongside a first-time entrant in the list – the United States. The report titled ‘Worldwide ..

Topics: Journalism • Journalist • Mass media • News media • Observation • Reporters Without Borders • Safety of journalists

India has been ranked 138th out of 180 countries in the 2018 World Press Freedom Index (WPFI), which is compiled by Reporters Without Borders. As per index, India fared poorly on indicators such as hate speeches, attacks on journalists on social media, trolling them and targeting their reputation. The report also mentions that at least ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2018

Topics: Freedom of the press • Journalism • Journalist • Mass media • News media • Observation • Reporters Without Borders
