Woman found murdered, husband prime suspect

Ludhiana: A few hours after having drinks with her husband and son, a 50-year-old woman was found murdered at her house at Seerha village in Meharban in the early hours on Saturday.

Victim Savitri Devi’s 15-year-old son and 50-year-old husband were sleeping beside her, but they did not know how she died.

Police said there was an injury mark on the forehead of the woman. She was possibly attacked with some blunt or sharp weapon. As of now, husband is the prime suspect, police said. The police are questioning him. The police are suspecting that the couple must have fought in an inebriated condition after which the husband would have killed her.

Savitri, a native of Jharkhand, along with her husband Imail Munda and son Dilpreet had been living at Seerha for the past several years. The couple used to work in a factory.

Police said on Friday night, the trio had drinks together after which they fell asleep. Later at 2am, the man woke up and found his wife dead on the bed.

Inspector Kulwant Singh, SHO, Meharban police station, said the family lived in a one-room accommodation in a labour quarter.

During the initial inquiry, the police found out that Imail and Dilpreet brought a liquor bottle on Friday night and the trio had drinks together. They finished another bottle, had dinner and fell asleep, cops said.

“Imail woke up to go to the washroom at 2am when he saw Savitri lying dead on the bed. He raised the alarm after which the neighbours rushed to the spot,” he added.

The inspector said her husband and son claimed that they did not hear any noise.

Assistant commissioner of police (East) Devinder Chaudhary said, “There are six blunt injuries on women’s forehead and head. Both husband and son are our prime suspects. The police have also questioned neighbours, but they were too drunk and did not hear anything. During questioning, the police also came to know that the couple used to fight in inebriated condition. The suspects are being questioned.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
