Fog makes comeback amid cold wave

Ludhiana: At a time when residents are already experiencing the taste of harsh winters following two days of rain, fog made a comeback in the city on Saturday.

As a result, the visibility was down to 400 metres at 8.30am which improved to 1,100m at 11.30am as mist prevailed in Ludhiana. The visibility at 2.30 pm and 5.30 pm was recorded at --- m.

According to the meteorological department, the city might see dense fog in the next few days.

Meanwhile, cold wave continued its grip on the city even as rain stopped after two days on Saturday.

The meteorological department said the city received 15.2 mm of rainfall from 8.30am on Friday to 8.30am on Saturday.

The impact of rainfall was visible on the maximum (day) temperature in city as it was recorded at ---degrees Celsius, which was –degrees less than normal.

On Friday, the maximum temperature in the city was 14.3°C, which was whopping eight degrees below normal and lowest of this winter season.

The minimum temperature on Saturday was recorded at 9.8°C, which was –degrees below normal and 3.2 degrees lesser than the temperature recorded on Friday.

“The weather is likely to remain dry in the next few days, but the day temperature is expected to increase whereas night temperature might fall during this time. As weather will change from wet to dry and night temperature will fall, there are chances of dense fog in Ludhiana in the next few days,” said Surender Paul, director, meteorological department, Chandigarh.

“And fog might bring down the visibility to as low as around 50m in the morning and evening hours. Those driving vehicles should keep this in mind and drive with utmost care during these times,” Paul added.

The day temperature is expected to shuttle between 17 and 18°C in the next four to five days before dropping to 16°C on next Friday. The minimum temperature is likely to fall to 5°C till next Tuesday and then rise to 7°C till next Friday.

Meanwhile, residents had tough time battling the cold weather.

“Even as rain stopped, cold wave only got severe. It was so cold in the morning that I had to wear multiple layers of warm clothes before going out. At home and at office, we have been continuously using heating appliances to keep ourselves warm,” said Manish Jain, a professional from Civil Lines.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
