Man calls cop after ‘killing’ childless daughter

Ludhiana: A few minutes after carrying out a brutal assault on his 25-year-old daughter, a man from Kot Mangal Singh area called up cops at the police control room (PCR) to inform them on how he has “murdered” his daughter with an axe.

Though cops believed the man’s tale when they reached his house, they found the victim breathing soon after they started clicking pictures of the crime scene.

The police then took the women to the Christian Medical College and Hospital where she is struggling for life.

The Division number 6 police on Saturday arrested the father — Kulwant Singh, 55, who is into nut-bolt manufacturing business, and later booked him under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC.

According to cops, Kulwant had been embarrassed as his daughter Rupinder Kaur had failed to conceive after one-and-a-half-years of marriage. Rupinder’s husband Gurdeep Singh of Daba, Shimlapuri, said they were getting her treated for the same.

Gurdeep said two months back, Kulwant took Rupinder to his house, saying that he would get her treatment done. And on Friday night, he came to know that Kulwant has tried to kill Rupinder.

Inspector Amarjit Singh, SHO, Division number 6 police station, said on Friday night, Kulwant had called up the police control room saying that he had killed his daughter. The police immediately rushed to his house. “Believing Rupinder to be dead, the father took the body on the first floor and covered it with several mattresses.”

The official said when the mattresses were removed, cops who were clicking pictures of the crime scene realized that the woman was alive. Thereafter, the police rushed her to CMCH. But the woman’s condition is critical, he added.

The official said Kulwant, who used to feel ashamed that her daughter could not conceive, and he had to hear all the taunts over the same, had an argument with his daughter, pushed her and attacked her on her neck from the rear.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
