Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests: US, Singapore, Canada ask citizens to avoid northeast travel

GUWAHATI: The governments of the United States, Singapore and Canada asked its citizens to avoid travelling to Assam and the northeast as violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill continued in the northeast. This comes days after the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom had issued a travel advisory asking their citizens to “exercise caution” while travelling to the region for any purpose.The government of Canada, in their advisory asked citizens to “avoid non-essential travel” and said, “Demonstrations against new citizenship legislation are taking place in the northeastern states of Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura.There are violent clashes between demonstrators and security forces. Local authorities have imposed curfews in some areas and other movement restrictions may be put in place without notice. Internet service has been suspended in some areas. Expect transportation disruptions, including flight delays and cancellations.”The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), in its advisory that was updated on Saturday, stated, “Demonstrations against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) are taking place in some parts of the country. There have been reports of violent protest in North East India, especially in Assam and Tripura. An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati (Assam) and mobile internet services have been suspended in 10districts of Assam. Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. You should exercise caution if you’re planning to travel in North East India, monitor local media for the latest information, follow instructions of the local authorities and allow more time for travel.”The foreign affairs ministry of Singapore, reiterating the aforesaid points, said, “Singaporeans who intend to travel to parts of Northeast India should exercise vigilance and caution as there have been reports of violent protests in the region. An indefinite curfew has been imposed in Guwahati and curfews have also been introducedintermittently in other parts of Assam and Meghalaya. Travel conditions are difficult due to street protests and cancellation of some flight and train services. Mobile data have also been restricted in some areas.”The advisory added, “Affected Singaporeans are advised to check with their travel agents on the latest situation and allow more time for travel. Due to the evolving situation, they should also keep themselves updated on the latest developments through the local news and to take all necessary precautions to ensure their personal safety, including avoiding areas with crowds.”The travel alert by US Embassy and Consulates in India says, “US citizens in the northeastern states of India should exercise caution in light of media reports of protests and violence in response to the approval of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. Government curfews are in place in some areas. Internet and mobile communications may be disrupted. Transport may be affected in various parts of the region. Protests have also been reported in other parts of the country. The U.S. government has temporarily suspended official travel to Assam.”
