CISF seizes unaccounted foreign currency worth Rs 69 lakh at Kolkata airport, arrests two Syrians

The two accused were set to travel to Kunming in China by China Eastern Airlines flight scheduled at 6.35 in the evening. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Two men arrested at Kolkata airport with foreign currency worth Rs 69 lakh Two accused are identified as Syrian nationals Accused hit foreign currency in their socks

Kolkata: Two Syrian nationals were arrested and foreign currency worth Rs 69 lakh was recovered from the duo at the Kolkata airport on Saturday. The arrests and seizure were made by Central Industrial Security Force (CISF).

A CISF official observed that one of the Syrians identified as Mohd Al Sabbagh was behaving suspiciously while going through Door Frame Metal Detector.

According to a report in Times of India, the accused e was immediately taken aside and frisked. The CISF officials then recovered 400 notes of $100 denominations wrapped in a newspaper. The notes were hidden in the socks the accused was wearing.

Similarly, another Syrian identified as Mohd Bassam Al Sabbagh crossed the nearby metal detector, but by caught by CISF officials. He was frisked and officials found a similar number of foreign currency notes from him. Two more bundles of foreign currency were seized from the handbag of Al Sabbagh.

The two accused were set to travel to Kunming in China by China Eastern Airlines flight scheduled at 6.35 in the evening.

"We have checked their baggage but did not find any other suspicious item. The total value of seized US currency was valued at around $97,000 which approximately comes to Rs 69 lakh," said a Kolkata airport official.

Kerala: CISF seizes Rs 50 lakh in foreign currency from Dubai-bound passenger

In a similar incident, the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) seized foreign currency worth Rs 50 lakh from a Dubai-bound passenger at Cochin airport in Kerala on November 27.

The accused, identified as Ajmal Abdulkhader, a resident of Aluva, Kochi, was traveling to Dubai in United Arab Emirates (UAE) by an Air India flight.

According to CISF officials, the security personnel observed suspicious movements of a passenger and stopped him for checking. During the screening of his luggage, CISF officials spotted some suspicious images inside the bag. Later, the bag was taken out for a physical check which resulted in the seizure of the foreign currency.
