Noida: Woman hangs daughter, self after husband jumps before Delhi metro train

The family lived on the 7th-floor of Pavilion Heights Society in Noida’s Sec tor 128

NOIDA: A 31-year-old woman allegedly killed herself and her daughter in their Noida flat on Friday, a few hours after her husband, a general manager with a tea company, jumped in front of a metro train in Delhi.

Bharat J, 33, his wife Shivranjani, their daughter Jay Shrita, 5, and Bharat's younger brother Karthik, 31, had moved into the seventh-floor apartment at Pavilion Heights Society. Bharat worked with Golden Tea Company in Delhi, Shivranjani was a homemaker and their daughter a kindergarten student. Karthik is preparing to train as a commercial pilot. On Friday, Bharat headed for the metro station. Around 11.30am, he called up his wife. He got off the phone and, minutes later, jumped in front of a train.

When a police team reached, Bharat's phone was ringing. "It was a call from 'Big Boss', which we figured later was his wife. We told her he had fallen off the metro station stairs and asked her to reach Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital... She did come by at the hospital but did not meet us. Maybe, she had already come to know about the suicide," Delhi Police sub inspector Raghuveer Singh said.

Noida police, which is investigating Shivranjani's suicide and their daughter's death, said she did go to the hospital between 2pm and 3pm, did not find Bharat in the ICU and was redirected to the mortuary. "She saw the body and left. She then picked up her daughter from tuition and went home," a Noida police officer said. In the meantime, Karthik was informed about his brother's death. Karthik headed to the police station to start paperwork.

Around 7.30pm, he informed Noida police that Shivranjani had locked herself in the apartment. "We broke into the apartment and found the woman hanging from the ceiling fan in the living room. The child was found hanging in the bedroom. There was no suicide note and it appears the woman killed her daughter first before hanging herself," said Bhuvnesh Kumar, SHO of Expressway police station. Bharat's family lives in Bangalore while Shivranjani's family is from Tamil Nadu.

(With inputs from Somreet Bhattacharya)


