'Only interest is to restore law and order,' says top cop as Delhi Police, student protesters clash over Citizenship Act

Delhi Police's Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East, on Sunday told media that the police personnel acted only to control the situation as a mob of students of a prominent university turned violent while protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

"The mob was violent. Around 6 policemen have been injured in stone-pelting," Biswas told reporters.

"The campus is not unified, it is located on both sides of the road and while we were pushing the mob back they were going in the university, throwing stones from inside, so we were checking those places," the DCP said.

Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East on being asked 'did police fire at the protesters?': There has been no firing absolutely. It is a false rumour that is being spread. pic.twitter.com/kHtm816H09 — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019 ×

Biswas added that there has been no firing by the police in the process of trying to control the mob. He added that some people have been detained.

"The mob caused arson, set motorcycles ablaze, it pelted stones at us," Biswas said.

"Our only interest is to push the mob back, so law and order can be restored in the area. We have no problem with the university," Biswas was quoted by news agency ANI.

Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East: This mob was violent. Around 6 police men have been injured in the stone pelting. We are yet to ascertained the identities. pic.twitter.com/RHF3GCaCUy — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019 ×

Meanwhile, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal has called for peace and normalcy in the national capital and has asked people not to indulge in any act of violence.

Spoke to Hon’ble LG and urged him to take all steps to restore normalcy and peace. We are also doing everything possible at our end. Real miscreants who caused violence shud be identified and punished. — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) December 15, 2019 ×

"Spoke to Hon’ble LG and urged him to take all steps to restore normalcy and peace. We are also doing everything possible at our end. Real miscreants who caused violence should be identified and punished," Kejriwal tweeted out today evening.

Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East: Some people have also been detained, can only give more information later. https://t.co/kIwjRs6rJ5 — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019 ×

The national capital was the latest to hit by anti-Citizenship Act protests with students of a prominent university protesting against the Act that seeks to grant Indian citizenship to non-Muslim migrants and refugees from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan.

Correction Deputy Chief Minister of Delhi, Manish Sisodia: All schools to stay closed in Okhla, Jamia and New Friends Colony and Madanpur Khadar area of Delhi. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/dL5c56AnNg — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019 ×

The protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act entered its fifth day across various cities in India. Protests in the national capital turned violent on Sunday, four buses were torched.

Meanwhile, Delhi's Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia has directed all schools in and around Okhla, Jamia Nagar, New Friends Colony and Madanpur Khadar area to remain shut on Monday in the wake of protests. Exit and entry at over 10 stations of Delhi Metro will also be shut.
