Anti-Citizenship Act protests: Police couldn't differentiate outsiders from students, says V-C

Anti-Citizenship law protests [LIVE] | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: Jamia Millia Islamia's chief proctor on Sunday accused the Delhi police of forcefully entering the university premises and thrashing the students and staff inside. The police reportedly detained 30 people in the alleged crackdown.

"The situation is under control now, I will tell the people of Delhi to not pay attention to rumours. Delhi Police is monitoring the situation. We will soon identify the anti-social elements & take stringent action against them," MS Randhawa, PRO Delhi Police said.

Waseem Ahmed Khan told Times Now that police personnel entered the varsity campus in Jamia Nagar despite not being given the permission to do so. He alleged that the staff and students were beaten up and were forced to vacate the campus.

Anti-Citizenship Law protests: As it happened

12.45 am: Internet suspended in Meerut

Internet services have been suspended in the district from 12 pm of December 15 to 12 pm of December 16 in view of law and order maintenance.

12.13 am: Situation in Aligarh under control: Aligarh District Magistrate

"Our personnel are deployed and the situation is under control. All necessary steps will be taken to maintain law and order," Aligarh District Magistrate Chandra Bhushan Singh said.

11.35 pm: Protesters from nearby colonies entered varsity: JMI V-C

Najma Akhtar, VC of Jamia Millia Islamia said the students didn't call for today's protest. She clarified that police could not differentiate between protesters sitting in the library and couldn't take permission in the ruckus which ensued .

"I've been told that a call was given from colonies nearby Jamia to march towards Jullena. They clashed with police and got inside the campus after breaking the gate of University".

"Police couldn't differentiate between the protesters and students sitting in the library. Many students and staff were injured. There was so much ruckus that police couldn't take permission. I hope for peace and safety of our students," she said.

11.16 pm: Internet services to remain suspended in Aligarh till 10 pm tomorrow

The district authorities snapped internet connection in Sunday night after students clashed with the police at Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh. The internet services will remain suspended till 10 pm tomorrow.

#Breaking | Internet services in Aligarh to remain suspended till 10 PM tomorrow. | #CABRocksDelhi pic.twitter.com/23owizhqXG — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 15, 2019

11.08 pm: Curfew to be relaxed in riot-hit Dibrugarh in Assam tomorrow

Meanwhile, in Assam, the District Administration of Dibrugarh announced that curfew will been relaxed between 6 am - 8 pm in the district tomorrow.

10.50 pm: West Bengal top police brass in a huddle over anti-Citizenship Act clashes

West Bengal police have called a meeting of its top brass over violent clashes held in the states over the last two days.

#Breaking | Top West Bengal police officials held a meeting following the clashes in the state over the CAB.



TIMES NOW's Tamal Saha with details. Listen in. | #CABRocksDelhi pic.twitter.com/An8VY3bupt — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 15, 2019

10.46 pm: AMU declares winter vacations after Jamia Millia Islamia

Abdul Hamid, Registrar, Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) declared winter vacations till January 5 and examinations will be held after that.

"The situation in the campus is tensed, some boys and anti-socials elements came and pelted stones, so we have requested police to take action to control the situation".

"The University will reopen on January 5 and examinations will be held after that," Hamid said.

10.28 pm: Delhi Police clarifies on allegations over Jamia Millia Islamia clashes

On entering University without permission:

Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East: The campus is not unified, it is located on both sides of the road, and while we were pushing the mob back, they were going in the University and then were throwing stones from inside, so we were checking those places.

Our only interest is to push the mob back, so law and order can be restored in the area. We have no problem with the students. The mob caused arson, set motorcycles ablaze, it pelted stones at us

On allegations of firing at unarmed students:

Biswal: There has been no firing absolutely. It is a false rumour that is being spread.

On detentions during JMI clashes

Biswal: Some people have also been detained, can only give more information later.

10.05 pm: Clashes at AMU escalate

#Breaking | Clashes at Aligarh Muslim University escalate.

Police & Rapid Action Force have now entered the varsity campus. | #CABRocksDelhi pic.twitter.com/GrmDfGyFiu — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 15, 2019

9.59 pm: Schools to remain shut in southeast Delhi: Dy CM

All schools in southeast Delhi to remain closed on Monday, says Deputy CM Manish Sisodia after the violent protest near Jamia Millia Islamia.
