The difference between Abraham Lincoln and Narendra Damodardas Modi

Humans differ from ordinary animals in only one thing: We aspire to a moral lodestar, we prefer to direct our actions towards something greater than us. Some call this spirituality, others (like me) like to think of this aspiration as self-actualisation. Either way, at an unknown level, deep down inside each one of us, we have this barely-understood and often suppressed desire for higher ends.

It is true that just like the Germans who joined Hitler, or the rioters and lynching hordes who bay for the blood of other monkey tribes, we may momentarily exult in our chest-thumping tribal monkey-hood, but at some stage of our excitement, an inconvenient higher voice probably starts squeaking somewhere within us, asking us to stop and think.

That is why, even though we are repeatedly disappointed by them, we have a visceral but unstated preference for our leaders to be moral giants, not self-seeking moral pygmies. India did not go gaga about Anna Hazare a few years ago for nothing. He may well have fallen steeply in the national esteem since then but at that time he tapped into this huge latent urge within all of us. At some level, even though we now happily accept all kinds of brutality around us, we did want to be a clean nation, a nation that could hold its head high.

Unfortunately, such leaders are so rare that we might as well give up. This is increasingly the era of small men.

Small men are everywhere, each pointing fingers at other small men and at other tribes, each of them hustling us into becoming as lowly an animal as we can possibly be, chopping and slicing our soul and our aspirations into bits till our human soul no longer exists. We are told each day to lock ourselves into a narrow groove, for apparently, that’s all we are: petty monkeys that wear different dresses to other monkeys.

We may want to rise above all this pettiness, but that’s simply not on offer.

No wonder many of us are frustrated. Millions go on a fishing expedition every week for spiritual solace from lecturers who are swamped by us in person or on the TV. These “gurus”, “swamis” and “babas” provide mellifluent lectures in which they basically tell us that we can one day become good humans. Their “sat sang” is like water for our parched soul, deeply troubled by the contradictions around us.

But today survival, not self-actualisation, is the mantra of our leaders. We are asked each day, 24/7 on TV and on social media, to further narrow our mind and the circumference of our life. We are told that our survival itself is at stake unless we narrow down our identity into the tiniest possible dot on the tip of a pencil. No one talks to us about self-actualisation.

This was not the case a hundred years ago. At that time, a new nation was being awakened from deep slumber. Indians saw themselves as one nation. And they had many reasons to be hopeful about their future. We were a colonial nation in 1920 but we had hundreds of leaders of impeccable integrity and vision who put everyone else in the world to shame. While we were financially poor, we were rich in these leaders – each of whom could lead the entire world to greatness.

Of course, the West had borne some great men as well by then, but their great men had been few and far between. For example, they had managed one Abraham Lincoln. But we had a hundred Lincolns. And we had Gandhi, whose vision for peace and prosperity was shaking up the entire world.

All these visionaries, including Lincoln, are fondly remembered even today. We know by now that they were personally imperfect, but they took us forward as a species from the age of hooting monkeys to the gates of the angels. We may yet become something bigger, they said, if we try hard enough. They changed our definition of what it is to be human.

Then, from the shadows of eternal darkness, small men crept upon us. First, they latched on to the coat-tails of Nehru and distorted his goals for India. Perhaps he himself gave into them in the end. We will never know.

But of this, we can be sure – that after Gandhi, Nehru, Patel, Rajaji and Ambedkar had left us, India’s decline into civilisational insignificance took on a level of steep urgency. Indira Gandhi brutalised India in every possible way and attacked every institution. Despite that, the judiciary survived and continued to stand firm. And we could legitimately hold on to some hope while men like Jayaprakash Narayan remained.

But after her, it was a free fall. All great men, or budding great men, were ousted. Pygmies from her family were elevated.

I was very unfortunate to have joined the IAS in 1982, during its time of the rapid collapse. By now, the faintest sliver of integrity in the civil services and police has disappeared. My former IAS batchmates and colleagues have led the ongoing frontal attack on the liberties of Indians. And, in the meanwhile, India’s judiciary has collapsed.

Sadly, India’s big business has firmly supported the system’s collapse. Once there lived a giant named JRD Tata. But he is long gone and pygmies have taken his place. Today’s business leaders have – in my view without a single exception – actively supported corruption at the highest levels.

There is today no possibility either of the defence of liberty or of the most basic rights enshrined in India’s Constitution. We may not know whether our police is shooting down the guilty or the innocent in the early morning “encounters”. But this we do know for sure: that if we use large mobs to demolish ancient buildings, we are sure to be rewarded with that land.

Hinduism has this epochal concept: of Sat Yug and Kal Yug. I believe, however, that these epochs are real, living concepts: one or the other of these epochs come to life in each generation based on the way we lead our lives.

There was a moment in 1947 when India could aspire for Sat Yug. But that moment has passed. Our new leader’s vision is not to cajole us into becoming greater human beings but to make us into lesser and lesser beings, the more narrowly circumscribed the better.

In the end, our leaders’ dreams for us and for our nation, do matter.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
