India not pushing anyone into Bangladesh: Foreign Minister Dr Momen

Foreign Minister Dr AK Abdul Momen on Sunday said India is not pushing anybody into the country but some people are coming with the help of middlemen with the impression that one can have free food here.

He said the government will send them back if anybody other than Bangladesh citizens enters the country through the Bangladesh-India border without following the due process.

Dr Momen said he has requested India to give the list if there is any Bangladeshi living in India illegally.

"Let's know it (Bangladesh seeks info from India)," he told reporters at the Foreign Affairs Ministry, adding that there is a standard procedure to follow in that case.

Dr Momen said those who are Bangladeshi citizens have the right to come back but others will be sent back.

Responding to a question on the National Register of Citizenship (NRC), he said India termed it their internal matter and assured Bangladesh that it will in no way affect Bangladesh.

"The Bangladesh-India relations are normal. The relations won't be affected." said the Foreign Minister explaining reasons behind cancellation of his India visit.

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said the scheduled visit of Dr Momen was cancelled due to his 'busy schedule' at home ahead of Martyred Intellectuals Day and Victory Day.

India also termed its relations with Bangladesh "very strong" and brushed aside speculations over the last-minute cancellation of Dr Momen's New Delhi visit.

Bangladesh maintains good relations with India: Quader

Bangladesh Ruling Awami League general secretary Obaidul Quader said Bangladesh maintains good relations with India as the newly enacted Citizenship (Amendment) Act will have no effect between the two countries.

"We have good relations with the Indian government. The newly passed Citizenship (Amendment) Act,2019, is India's own internal affairs. The act will not affect our relations," said Quader while addressing a sub-committee meeting of the Swechasebak League at city's Bangabandhu Avenue this morning.



ALSO READ: Maximum immigrants from Pakistan and Bangladesh entered India more than 30 years ago

ALSO READ: Don't club us with Pakistan, Afghanistan, says Bangladesh PM's media adviser on CAB
