Doctor, druggist shot at in Odisha's Khurda district

BHUBANESWAR: A 61-year-old paediatrician, who was busy examining a child at a private clinic-cum-medicine store in Khurda town, was shot at by an unidentified miscreant on Sunday evening. The armed assailant, who had his face covered with a monkey cap, also opened fire on the medicine store owner.Manas Ranjan Das, the doctor, and Krushna Chandra Sahoo, the owner, are battling for lives at a private hospital in the city. Police said the motive behind the attack was yet to be ascertained.Though locals immediately rushed Das and Sahoo to the district headquarters hospital in Khurda, the doctors referred them to the private hospital in Bhubaneswar after their condition deteriorated.The clinic is located near a busy market at Badashankha in Khurda town, about 35 km from Bhubaneswar. “After inspecting CCTV footage, we found that the accused stormed into the doctor’s chamber by pushing a man and his minor daughter who were waiting outside the doctor’s room. The accused fired two rounds of bullets at the doctor and then came out of the room. One bullet hit the doctor’s upper abdomen and another his lower abdomen,” Khurda SP Ajay Pratap Swain said.Sawain added, “The accused appeared unperturbed while walking out of the chamber. He shot at Sahoo when he tried to stop him. Sahoo was hit by a bullet on his stomach.”Panic gripped the clinic where at least fifteen patients were waiting for their turn at the doctor’s. “We were shivering in fear and could not stop the accused as he was armed. We saw the accused escape on a motorcycle,” Panchanan Pradhan, who was present at the clinic, said.“We are trying to identify the attacker by examining CCTV footage. It appears to be a case of previous enmity. We will find out if the doctor or the owner had an altercation with any of their attendant,” Swain said.The Odisha medical services association (OMSA) condemned the attack. “We are shocked and concerned over the safety of our colleagues. The police should immediately arrest those involved in the case,” OMSA president Nirakar Bhatta said.
