Third-year BCom student of MS University found murdered in Chansad

VADODARA: A third-year commerce student of MS University (MSU), who was missing for three days, was found brutally murdered in a pond in her native Chansad village, around 15 km from the city. The girl Khushboo Jani (20) was missing from her home since December 11.

Late on Saturday night, a villager spotted the body which was wrapped in a quilt and plastic late on Saturday night. Some villagers having their farms near the pond became suspicious due to stench emanating from the pond. Some of the farm owners went to the pond and spotted the body floating there. They fished out the body and informed the cops.

When body was fished out, it was found wrapped in plastic and legs were visible. On unwrapping the plastic, the body was further wrapped in a quilt. “When we removed the quilt, the hands and legs were tied with a rope and a wooden log was also tied with the body,” said inspector S A Karmur of Padra. He added that the girl has a injury on her head caused by some sharp-edged weapon.

On December 11, Khusboo was last seen when she and her sister Tejal had gone to the bank. The two sisters had returned home together but later Tejal, who is married to a man from Chansad, left for her house. In the evening, when her mother Hema returned home from work, Khushboo was nowhere to be seen. In the afternoon too, when her mother called up on her cell, her phone was switched off. Hema then contacted Khushboo’s two friends to find her whereabouts. But both of them denied having met her on that day.

Later, suspecting that she may have gone to Vadodara city, Hema, Tejal and her husband waited at the village bus stop. But Khushboo did not come in the last bus too which came from Vadodara. Hema’s son-in-law and other relatives searched for her searched in Padra but when she was not found, a missing person complaint was lodged at Padra police station.

“We got her call detail records and mobile phone’s location and even checked at her tuition classes in Vadodara, but there was nothing much we could not find,” said a Padra police official.

Hema and Tejal identified Jani’s body at health centre in Padra from her clothes.

“We are not ruling out anything in the crime, be it involvement of a known person or the girl’s friendship with someone,” said Karmur.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
