Dry weather, dense fog forecast in Ludhiana for next few days

LUDHIANA: Even as weather was dry on Sunday, but the chill continued to prevail in the city. The Met department has predicted dry weather in the next few days but has added that dense fog may also appear during these days. Though the rainfall stopped two days ago, but it’s after effect continues to be witnessed in Ludhiana’s weather.As per the Met department, the maximum temperature in the city on Sunday was recorded at 19.9°C, which is two degrees less than normal. On Saturday, the day temperature in the city was recorded at 16.3°C, which was five degrees below normal. The minimum temperature in the city on Sunday was recorded at 8.9°C, which is two degrees more than normal but 0.9 degrees less than that of Saturday.Mist also appeared in the city and brought the visibility down to 2,000m at 8.30am on Sunday, which improved to 3,000m at 11.30am as haze still prevailed in the city. The visibility at improved at 2.30pm but decreased at 5.30pm with cold weather prevailing in the city for most part of the day on Sunday.“The weather is likely to remain dry in the next few days and day temperature is expected to decrease whereas night temperature is also likely to fall during this time. With change in weather and night temperature to fall further, there are chances of dense fog in Ludhiana in the next few days, which might bring down visibility to as low as around 50m in the morning and evening hours. Those driving vehicles should drive with care during these times,” said director, Met department, Chandigarh, Surender Paul.As per the Met department website, day temperature is expected to fall to 16°C by Saturday whereas the night temperature may fall to 7°C till Tuesday and then rise to 9°C by Thursday.Meanwhile, residents are battling the cold weather prevailing in the city. “Though the weather has been dry, it is cold. I had planned to bask in the sun post lunch but as a cold breeze started blowing, I decided against it and remained in my room with a heating appliance switched on. Besides, to keep my body warm, I had many cups of coffee and ginger tea since morning,” said Rakesh Kumar, a trader from BRS Nagar.
