‘Univs shouldn’t become political battlegrounds’

Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu at the convocation of SPU

Vadodara/Anand: Vice-President (VP) M Venkaiah Naidu on Sunday said universities should not be allowed to become political battlegrounds.

The VP also urged that university campuses should not be allowed to be used by extremist elements.

Without naming any institution, Naidu said a few universities in the country are in the news for wrong reasons.

“Out of 1,000 universities, 990 universities are maintaining peace. But a few are in the news for celebrating Afzal Guru, somebody trying to create unnecessary controversies, somebody trying to establish different systems of class between teachers and students. We are all one, teachers and students,” he said.

Afzal Guru was convicted for his role in the attack on Parliament in 2001 and hanged and buried in New Delhi's Tihar Jail on February 9, 2013.

The VP was addressing a gathering of students, their parents and officials at the 62nd annual convocation ceremony of Sardar Patel University at education town Vallabh Vidyanagar in Anand district.

“There should be no hatred… that is the culture of India. In fact, India was once known as Vishwaguru because of its world-class centres of learning like Takshashila, Pushpagiri, Nalanda and others. Historians came and wrote about the greatness of our universities. We need to maintain that culture,” he said.

Talking about the legacy of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, India’s Iron Man, he said that anyone who follows and believes in the path suggested by Patel, is truly following his legacy.

The VP said India aspires to be among the top 50 countries in Global Innovation Index by 2022.

“Innovation must be a mindset, a culture for your generation. You must never hesitate to find new and better ways of doing things,” he said.

The VP also stressed that India is today one of the top three startup friendly ecosystems. “It is heartening that this rise is powered by people from tier-2, tier-3 cities and even rural India. I am hopeful that many of you passing out today will become successful entrepreneurs who will run businesses that employ many more young people like you,” he said.


