Akhilesh vs Yogi: One cancelled flight later, dharna, rampage, save democracy outcry

Samajwadi Party workers said that party MP Dharmendra Yadav was among the partymen who were injured in the clashes with the police. (Photo: Neeraj Kumar)

Hundreds of Samajwadi Party (SP) workers went on a rampage across Uttar Pradesh, leading to clashes with the police shortly after their chief Akhilesh Yadav alleged that he was detained at the Lucknow airport.

Akhilesh said he was stopped from boarding a flight to Prayagraj to attend a function.

At the party office in Lucknow, Akhilesh Yadav said the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) deliberately precipitated the crisis out of fear that he would further expose the state and the Central government.

"I had informed the university about my programme in December last year. A letter was sent to the district administration on February 2 as I did not want any inconvenience during the ongoing Kumbh. But I was not informed about the problems that the government is now citing," he said.

As soon as the news spread that Akhilesh Yadav was prevented by the Yogi Adityanath-led government from flying to Prayagraj, SP leaders and workers, wearing red caps, took to the streets to protest and raised anti-Modi and anti-Yogi slogans. The protestors were led by Budayun MP Dharmendra Yadav, Phulpur MP Nagendra Patel and Gorakhpur MP Praveen Nishad.

Protests broke out in Allahabad, Jaunpur, Jhansi, Kannauj, Balrampur, Jalaun and Gorakhpur, among other places, where SP supporters smashed windscreens of vehicles and clashed with the police.

There were also reports of the police using force against the protestors.

Samajwadi Party workers said that party MP Dharmendra Yadav was among the partymen who were injured in the clashes with the police over the Yogi Adityanath's denial of permission to their leader.

Samajwadi Party legislators also sat on a dharna outside the Raj Bhawan after staging a noisy protest in the UP legislature. They had earlier raised the matter in both - the state Assembly and the Council - and shouted anti-government slogans. The ruckus in the Houses prompted the chair to adjourn the proceedings.

Mamata Banerjee condemns Akhilesh snub

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee condemned the incident and said it happened because of "arrogant attitude of so-called BJP leaders".

"I've already spoken to @yadavakhilesh. We all condemn the arrogant attitude of the so-called #BJP leaders who didn't allow Akhilesh to address the students. Even @jigneshmevani80 was not allowed," Banerjee wrote on her Twitter handle.

"Where is the democracy in our country? And they are giving lessons to everybody!" she said.

WB CM Mamata Banerjee: Jignesh was also stopped from attending a University event in Gujarat. He was threatened by BJP goons & they preach to us. They indulge in hate politics. Never before was this ever done in our nation. It's unfortunate, I condemn this. https://t.co/Y0XX5YApQo ANI (@ANI) February 12, 2019





High-handed behaviour of Lucknow authorities, says Naidu

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu also condemned the incident.

"Strongly condemn the high-handed behaviour of Lucknow authorities against Samajwadi Party leader Akhilesh Yadav. Another instance of BJP's intolerance against its political opponents. Really democracy is in danger," he posted on Twitter.
