Citizenship Act protests: Top developments

Here is a look at all the developments -

They will have to implement Citizenship Act over my dead body: Mamata Banerjee

Protests across Indian universities in support of Jamia students

Congress leaders sit on a

dharna

at India Gate

(Credits: ANI)

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee demands the withdrawal of the Citizenship Act

We'll address the students plea; the violence needs to stop first: Supreme Court

Read Also SC to hear pleas alleging police atrocities on students protesting against CAA A bench headed by Chief Justice S A Bobde on Monday also took serious note of the rioting and destruction of public property during protests against the Act and said this must stop immediately.

We demand inquiry, we will file FIR against Delhi Police: Jamia vice chancellor

Protests turn violent in Delhi

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES:

Protests in West Bengal and other parts of the country

Protests have rocked several parts of the country ever since the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. Here is a look at the chronology of events since the tabling of the Bill in Lok Sabha, earlier this month -

Bill passes Lok Sabha test

READ MORE:

Bill Passed in Rajya Sabha

Union government vs the opposition

The Bill gets President's assent

The members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship. The Citizenship (Amendment) Act

READ ALSO:

Protests erupt in Assam's Guwahati

READ ALSO:

(With inputs from agencies)

NEW DELHI: University campuses across the country expressed solidarity with students of Jamia Millia Islamia who were injured during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act due to lathicharge and tear gas shells being fired by the Delhi police inside the university campus.West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee addressing a rally in Kolkata said,"We will continue our protest till the Citizenship Amendment Act and National Register of Citizens are withdrawn. If you want to dismiss my government, you can, but I will never allow CAA in Bengal. If they want to implement CAA, they will have to do it over my dead body."Students across campuses from Delhi University, Nadwa College in Lucknow, Maulana Azad Urdu University in Hyderabad, Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi, Jadavpur University in Kolkata, Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai to Jawaharlal Nehru University organised protests against Delhi police crackdown on Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University students' protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act. On Monday, Delhi University boycotted exams and organised protests following which heavy force was deployed at the Arts Faculty. Another protest call is by the JNU students Union at 6 pm on Monday evening at India Gate.Congress leaders Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel among others gathered at India Gate to support students' protest in Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University.Addressing a press conference, Congress spokesperson, Randeep Singh Surjewala, said,"This is a government that has attacked the rights of youths and students of the country. That is why, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other senior Congress leaders have decided to sit on a symbolic protest at the India Gate from 4 pm, for the next 2 hours."The TMC chief said that she will continue the protest against the Act until it is withdrawn. "Only BJP will remain here and everyone else will be made to leave. It's their politics. It'll never happen. India is for everyone. Agar sabka sath nahi rahega toh sabka vikas kaise hoga? What is the Citizenship Act for? We're all citizens. Didn't you cast your vote? Don't you live here? she questioned during a rally in Kolkata.Senior advocate Indira Jaising mentioned Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University incidents before a bench headed by Chief Justice SA Bobde. Jaising asks SC to take suo motu cognizance of the issue saying'It's a very serious human rights violation all over the country.' "We will take up matter relating to alleged police atrocities on students in Delhi and Aligarh only if the violence, arson and damage to public property is stopped," Chief Justice of India SA Bobde said.Vice chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia Najma Akhtar demanded a high-level inquiry and added that the university will be filing an FIR against the entry of the police."I also appeal to everyone to not believe in any kind of rumours. We will file an FIR against the entry of Police inside the university campus. We demand a high-level inquiry," she told reporters.She also denied rumours circulating on social media that two people have died in the clashes with security forces."There has been a strong rumour that two students died, we deny this totally, none of our students died. About 200 people were injured of which many were our students," she added.On December 13, students of Jamia Millia Islamia University were stopped by the police as they tried marching towards Parliament. Two days later, protests turned violent in Delhi's Jamia Nagar area in which at least four buses and two motorcycles were torched. At least 50 people were injured in the protest, including cops. The police also detained at least 50 students who were later released.The violence went on for an hour after which police retaliated with more than 50 rounds of teargas shells and lathi charge. While police maintained that it did not open fire, one of the protesters admitted in the Holy Family hospital was found to have a bullet injury in the leg.Shortly after violent clashes in Jamia, hundreds of students from JNU and Jamia University staged a protest in front of Delhi Police Headquarters in the capital against the police "high-handedness".West Bengal remained on the edge for the second consecutive day as railway properties were set ablaze, staff attacked, houses torched and highways blocked on Sunday. Meanwhile, the death toll in Thursday's police firing in Assam climbed to four after two more injured people succumbed to their injuries. As many as 26 people are in hospital with bullet injuries.Protests were also reported from Moulana Azad National Urdu University in Hyderabad. Several districts in Uttar Pradesh remained tense and internet services have been shut down in six districts including Aligarh, Meerut, Saharanpur and Varanasi. While students in Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) clashed with the police late on Sunday night, students of the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama, an Islamic seminary, were also out on the roads after midnight in support of the students in the Jamia Milia and AMU. At least 60 AMU students were injured in clashes following which the university administration announced the closure of university till January 5.On December 9, the Lok Sabha passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill after a seven-hour-long debate with 334-106 votes.On December 11, the Rajya Sabha approved the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill thus completing the legislative procedure for giving Indian citizenship to non-Muslims migrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. The Bill was passed with 125-105 votes.During the debate, Union home minister Amit Shah made a vehement pitch for the religiously persecuted people in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan. The opposition, on the other hand, demanded that the legislation be made religion-neutral.“This bill is not even .001% against Muslims. It is against infiltrators," Union home minister Amit Shah said during the debate in Parliament.The controversial Act seeks to provide Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees belonging to Hindu, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist and Zorastrian communities coming from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan after facing religious persecution there.On December 12, President Ram Nath Kovind gave his assent to the Bill, turning into an Act.Shortly after the passage of the Bill in Parliament, protests erupted in Assam following internet services were suspended and a curfew was clamped in several districts of the state. Thousands of people took to the streets and clashed with security forces leading to widespread destruction of public property. The Bill, now an Act, sparked resentment in the northeast as the localsfeared that granting citizenship to foreign refugees will undermine the ethnic communities living in these regions.Protests were also reported from other northeastern states, Sikkim, West Bengal, Ludhiana, Hyderabad and several cities in Uttar Pradesh.
