CAA protests: Curfew to be completely relaxed in Guwahati from Tuesday 6 am, says Assam police

Angry protesters burnt tires and wrote "No CAB" with white chalk on a street as Assam witnessed widespread violence over the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) 2019; in Guwahati on Dec 12, 2019 | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: With most parts of the country facing violent protests over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, the BJP-led Central government came under sharp criticism on Monday with the Opposition blaming the Narendra Modi government for the widespread unrest. On December 12, President Ram Nath Kovind signed the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019 into law, sparking massive outrage in several parts of the country.

Several parts of the Northeast, including Assam and Meghalaya, and other states West Bengal has been on a boil and witnessed violent protests over the past few days. The amended citizenship law expedites citizenship applications from religious minorities from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

Protests against Citizenship (Amendment) Act - As it happened

12.07 am: The police in Kairana town of Shamli district in Uttar Pradesh patrolled and interacted with madrassa students in wake of the violence in Aligarh and Delhi over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019, officials told PTI.

The officers interacted with students at the Jamia Badrul Uloom and cautioned them against falling prey to rumours spreading through social media, they said.

12.01 am: Meerut District Magistrate, Anil Dhingra said internet services will remain suspended till 5 pm tomorrow.

11.34 pm: Hours after Mamata Banerjee reiterated that she won't allow NRC exercise in West Bengal, the Additional Secretary to West Bengal government wrote to Commissioner of Kolkata and Howrah Municipal Corporation and all District Magistrates.

"I am directed to inform you that all activities regarding preparation/updation of National Population Register (NPR) are hereby stayed in West Bengal," he wrote.

Additional Secretary to West Bengal govt writes to Commissioner of Kolkata&Howrah Municipal Corporation,&all District Magistrates:I'm directed to inform you that all activities regarding preparation/updation of National Population Register (NPR) are hereby stayed in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/L2d4YC2Joc — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

11.26 pm: The students of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University, its alumni and ex-students of students of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) petitioned the Supreme Court (SC) to seek protection from all coercive action against two universities.

The pleas also sought a probe by a retired SC judge in the alleged brutality against the students of the JMI by Delhi Police on Sunday.

10.51 pm: 20 trains were cancelled and 3 trains were short-terminated/short-originated, in view of the ongoing agitation and law & order problem on Krishnanagar–Lalgola section of Sealdah Division, New Farakka-Azimganj section of Malda Division of Eastern Railway & in NF Railway system

10.43 pm: Assam Police said curfew will be completely withdrawn from 6 am on Tuesday in the entire Guwahati City jurisdiction

"The situation in Guwahati having improved substantially, the curfew is being completely withdrawn from 6 am tomorrow (December 17th) in the entire Guwahati City jurisdiction. God bless people of Guwahati for making this possible," GP Singh, Additional DGP Law & Order, Assam, said in a statement on Twitter.

Situation in Guwahati having improved substantially, the curfew is being completely withdrawn from 6AM tomorrow (December 17th) in the entire Guwahati City jurisdiction. God bless people of Guwahati for making this possible. — GP Singh (@gpsinghassam) December 16, 2019

10.31 pm: Asom Gana Parishad, the ally of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Assam, which voted in favour of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, in Rajya Sabha, will move to the Supreme Court against it now.

“We are not going to support this. It violates the Assam Accord and makes the indigenous people of Assam a minority here. Asom Gana Parishad opposes the CAA. We will go to the Supreme Court," AGP founder Praful Kumar Mahanta told ANI.

10.12 pm: Broadband internet services across Assam to be restored on Tuesday morning, reported PTI quoting officials.

9.53 pm: IIT Delhi students march in solidarity with Jamia Millia Islamia students after Sunday police crackdown at the varsity campus in New Delhi.

Now IIT Delhi students take to streets in solidarity with Jamia and AMU students



“Dekh raftar e inqalab Firaq,

Kitni aahista aur kitni tez”#CAAProtests



pic.twitter.com/d3xMnhineA — Tarique Anwer (@tanwer_m) December 16, 2019

9.16 pm: Maharashtra Chief Minister and Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray on Monday said the questions asked by his party in Lok Sabha on the amended Citizenship law went answered.

“The questions we asked in Lok Sabha on Citizenship Amendment Bill were not answered. There is no clarity on the Citizenship Act,” Thackeray said in Nagpur today.

Yesterday, the Maharashtra CM said his party will take a stance on the Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 once the court rules on it.

9.05 pm: Two men who were apparently part of the demonstration by Jamia Millia Islamia students, were admitted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital with "gunshot injury" reported the PTI.

The Delhi police maintain that live bullet rounds were not fired during the crackdown on the varsity. They said the injuries could be due to the sharp end of tear gas shells.

8.39 pm: Students stage protest on Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) campus to express solidarity with students of Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU protesting against Citizenship Amendment Act, reported PTI.

8.32 pm: Historian Ramchandra Guha tweeted a vow that Mahatma Gandhi asked his compatriots to take in 1919.

A vow Gandhi asked his compatriots to take in 1919: "With God as witness we Hindus & Muslims declare that we shall behave towards one another as children of the same parents, that we shall have no differences, that the sorrows of each will be the sorrows of the other ..." (1/2) — Ramachandra Guha (@Ram_Guha) December 16, 2019

Let's take this vow afresh and resolve to keep it: in Jamia, in Varanasi, in Aligarh, in Mathura, in Meerut, in Srinagar, in Jammu, in Guwahati, in Murshidabad, and everywhere else in India too. — Ramachandra Guha (@Ram_Guha) December 16, 2019

8.16 pm: An undeclared curfew was imposed in Mau district of Uttar Pradesh after protesters went on a rampage setting vehicles on fire and throwing stones at the police. The police fired tear gas shells and lathi-charged students who held violent protests in the area.

OP Singh, the Director-General of Police, told IANS that curfew had not been imposed, but prohibitory orders were being strictly enforced.

7.48 pm: As many as 360 people from Howrah, Malda, Murshidabad were arrested in West Bengal on charges of indulging in arson and vandalism during the violent protests in the state over the weekend. Many railway coaches and entire railway stations were set ablaze in the wake of anti-Citizenship law stir in the state.

7.31 pm: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee in Kolkata spoke out against the new Citizenship Amendment Act. "Why will there be a divide and rule policy? Why will there be hatred? I am not going to bow down before hatred politics. I am confident people who believe in hatred politics will go out, and we the people who love this country will stay here," she said.

7.14 pm: Internet services suspended in Aligarh (city) till tomorrow midnight. The internet services were also shut down in Malda, Murshidabad, Howrah, North 24 Parganas and parts of South 24 Parganas districts of West Bengal in wake of the anti-Citizenship law protests.

6.49 pm: Amid heavy protests across the country, Home Minister Amit Shah said the Citizenship Amendment Act is not meant to take away anyone's citizenship but is aimed at granting citizenship to persecuted people from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

CAA is to give citizenship to religiously persecuted refugees, it is not to take away citizenship of any Indian.



Some parties are spreading rumours and inciting violence for their political interest.



I request students to go through the CAA once and not fall in their trap. pic.twitter.com/cEfuWiJWrn — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) December 16, 2019

6.35 pm: The Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) cancelled all 16 Bengal bound trains on Monday due to protests in various stations in the state against the newly-enacted Citizenship law, officials said. NFR operates in the entire northeastern region and in some parts of Bihar and West Bengal.

6.17 pm: Priyanka Gandhi said PM Narendra Modi should respond on what happened at the Jamia Millia Islamia University yesterday. "Whose government beat up the students? He should speak on the sinking economy. His party MLA raped a girl, why hasn't he spoken on it?" she added.

6.15 pm: Supreme Court has posted for hearing on March 18, 2020, pleas seeking to update National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Tripura. The pleas were filed by Tripura People's Front and erstwhile Tripura royal Kirit Pradyot Deb Barman.

5.59 pm: Assam Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said the curfew in Guwahati has been lifted and now there will be no curfew in the day time. However, night curfew will remain imposed until we review the situation & take a decision in this regard. Citizenship Amendment Act

5.57 pm: The National Commission for Women (NCW) has requested Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik to investigate the complaints of sexual harassment during the police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia.

NCW has written to Delhi Commissioner of Police, Amulya Patnaik over "reports of sexual harassment and thrashing of female students by male police officers". NCW has requested the police to "investigate, take action, and file a detailed action taken report".

5.49 pm: West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar has summoned Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for "instigating" the people during the violent protests in the state.

5.43 pm: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel, Ambika Soni and other Congress leaders continue to sit on a symbolic protest near India Gate over police action during students' protests in Jamia Millia Islamia & Aligarh Muslim University

5.38 pm: Lok Kalyan Marg and Janpath Metro stations have also been closed down in wake of protests in India Gate and other places in New Delhi.

5.32 pm: Just two days after France issued a travel advisory for its citizens against travel to north-east India, French Ambassador to India, Emmanuel Lenain, said Citizenship Amendment Act is an internal matter of India and we respect that.

Emmanuel Lenain, Ambassador of France to India on being asked about Pakistan and its FATF commitment: No body can say Pakistan is fulfilling its commitment. There is a need to keep pressure on Pakistan. We are very strict on that and it is not an issue which we take lightly. https://t.co/2NX7vH5dJT — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

5.12 pm: The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has issued an advisory to states and UTs, in view of incidences of violence and damage to public property being reported from some parts of the country.

“It's imperative all required measures be taken to contain violence, ensure the protection of life and safety of citizens".

“State governments and UT administrations to take requisite precautionary measures to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquillity in the country. They have also been requested to take action against the circulation of fake news and rumours on social media having the potential to incite violence” it added.

5.05 pm: The entry and exit gates of Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat and Udyog Bhawan are closed. The trains will not be halting at Patel Chowk and Udyog Bhawan, said DMRC.

5.01 pm: Sonia Gandhi issued a statement against the government on a day when the country has witnessed heavy protests against police crackdown on Jamia Millia Islamia students.

"The function of a government is to maintain peace, ensure law and order and protect the constitution. But the BJP government has declared a war on people. Modi government has itself become the source of violence and division," a statement from Sonia Gandhi said.

4.51 pm: IIM Ahmedabad students join protests over police action against Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU students.

4.41 pm: The entry and exit gates of Patel Chowk, Central Secretariat and Udyog Bhawan metro stations have been closed, announced DMRC.

4.35 pm: Other leaders present along with Priyanka Gandhi include KC Venugopal, AK Antony, PL Punia, Ahmed Patel, and other Congress leaders. They sat on a symbolic protest near India Gate over police action during students' protests in JMI (Delhi) and AMU.

4:15 pm: Priyanka Gandhi is now sitting on dharna at India Gate, along with other Congress leaders, in solidarity with students who have been protesting against the amended Citizenship Act.

3:55 pm: Randeep Singh Surjewala, Congress leader, announced that party leaders including Priyanka Gandhi would sit on a two-hour dharna at India Gate this evening. "This is a government that has attacked the rights of youths and students of the country. That is why, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other senior Congress leaders have decided to sit on a symbolic protest at the India Gate from 4 pm, for the next 2 hours," Surjewala told a press briefing.

3:50 pm: Jamia Milia Islamia Registrar AP Siddiqui has briefed the media after the university's Executive Council Meeting regarding Sunday's incident: "It has been decided that we would recommend to the Ministry of Human Resource Development to set up a high-level committee or initiate a judicial inquiry into the matter. We have organized a committee to assess the damage caused to Jamia. Those students who need medical treatment, we will assure medical assistance to them." He added: "We've always encouraged students’ voice and protest. As far as democratic rights are concerned, Jamia has never denied democratic rights to any student. They're welcome to voice their concerns, as long as it's peaceful and within rules and regulations."

3:40 pm: The Calcutta High Court has asked the West Bengal government to submit a report of measures taken by it to ensure law and order in the state after December 13. West Bengal has been witnessing violent protests against the amended citizenship law.

3:24 pm: Condemning the Jamia university violence, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said, "Government has attacked the Constitution and students, they attacked students after entering the university. We will fight for the constitution, we will fight against this government."

3:14 pm: ANI Reporter Ujjwal Roy and cameraperson Sarabjeet Singh were assaulted by unidentified persons while covering protests near Jamia Milia Islamia University Gate-1. Both are undergoing treatment at Holy Family hospital. "We condemn this incident, we will identify and take strict action against the perpetrators," Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa said on the media assault incident.

#WATCH Delhi: ANI Reporter Ujjwal Roy and Cameraperson Sarabjeet Singh were assaulted while covering protests near Jamia Milia Islamia University Gate-1. They are currently undergoing treatment at Holy Family hospital (video courtesy: Prashant Kumar,Times Now) pic.twitter.com/zGJhrMpEBl — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

3:10 pm: The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, on Monday, said that the entry and exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia metro station have been closed. Trains will not be halting at this station.

3:05 pm: It has been reported that a reporter and cameraperson belonging to news agency ANI have been assaulted outside the Holy Family Hospital in Okhla, located in the vicinity of the yesterday's violence at Jamia area.

3:00 pm: In response to a question on Jamia Vice-Chancellor's claim that the police entered university without permission, the Delhi Police PRO said: "When we started pushing rowdy elements back, they went inside the campus. Police also chased them, stones were being pelted at us. We are doing a detailed investigation into this."

2:55 pm: The police official says no casualty was reported in yesterday's clashes involving students, as against rumours floating on the social media. Further, the claim that police set buses on fire is baseless, he added. "Around 30 police personnel received injuries, 2 SHO suffered fractures, one of our personnel is in ICU. Two FIRs have been registered for rioting and arson. The Crime Branch will investigate the matter from all angles," he said further.

2:53 pm: Randhawa appeals to the people of Delhi not to believe in rumours floating on the social media and otherwise. He also assures Jamia students of their safety and further says action will be taken against only those students who were involved in arson and violence.

2:50 pm: Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa is addressing the media over Sunday's incident at the Jamia Millia Islamia university. The official said the protesters started violence when police were trying to stop them from moving forward in the NFC area. The protesters set four DTC buses, several police motorcycles and over 100 private vehicles on fire during the protests. "Yesterday around 2 pm, the protest started in which locals also participated. Our staff showed maximum restraint despite provocations. At around 4:30 pm, some protesters went towards Mata Mandir Marg and set a bus on fire," he said.

2:30 pm: Addressing her protest rally in Kolkata, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee said, "Only BJP will remain here and everyone else will be made to leave-it's their politics. It'll never happen. India is everyone's. Agar sabka sath nahi rahega toh sabka vikas kaise hoga?"

"Once I was alone. Today Delhi's CM says that he won't allow this. Bihar's CM says that he won't allow NRC, I tell him don't allow Citizenship Amendment Act too. MP's CM said that, Punjab's CM said that, Chhattisgarh's CM said that, Kerala's CM said that, everyone has to say it," she added.

2:29 pm: Nadwa college in Lucknow has been closed till January 5 after a protest erupted between the students and UP police inside the campus earlier today against the CAA.

2:25 pm: Actor Kamal Haasan's party Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) today filed a petition before the Supreme Court challenging the CAA.

2:19 pm: Internet services have been suspended in Assam for another 24 hours, till Tuesday.

2:07 pm: PM Modi, on Monday, said that violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. "Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos," he said in a series of tweets.

"The Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support. Large number of political parties and MPs supported its passage. This Act illustrates India’s centuries old culture of acceptance, harmony, compassion and brotherhood," he tweeted.

"I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India," he said in another tweet.

The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised.



We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create disturbance. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 16, 2019

2:00 pm: IIM Bangalore students wrote to PM Narendra Modi against police crackdown on Jamia, AMU students.

1:50 pm: Citizenship bill cannot be linked to religion, it is not Hindu-Muslim issue, said CPI-M general secretary Sitaram Yechury at the Opposition press briefing.

1:40 pm: The Congress party on Monday condemned yesterday's stir in Jamia Millia Islamia and blamed Delhi police for the violence.

"We condemn police entry in Jamia Millia and use of force on students. How did Delhi Police enter Jamia when university admin did not give permission. How could police enter library and toilets in Jamia as students were screaming for help," said Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad at Opposition press conference on Monday. He further said that the Opposition did not fuel any protests and demanded judicial probe into the violence. "BJP allegation that Congress is behind student unrest absolutely baseless," Azad said. "PM says Congress is behind it (protests). Had Congress been capable of inciting such violence, you wouldn't have been in power. It's a baseless allegation. I condemn it. Only the ruling party, PM, HM&their cabinet are responsible for it," he added.

1:20 pm: Opposition parties will meet President Ram Nath Kovind at 6 pm today and apprise him about the ongoing situation in the country over the Citizenship Amendment Act.

1:13 pm: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Monday hit the streets of Kolkata on Monday to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC. Thousands of TMC workers joined the Chief Minister. The TMC supremo began the protest march from Red Road, and it is set to culminate at Jorasakho Thakur Bari, the residence of Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore in north Kolkata, around 4 km away.

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee takes out a protest march against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct and #NRC pic.twitter.com/wWjHziRaLz — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

1:12 pm: Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Monday took note of the violence at Jamia Millia Islamia university during a protest against CAA and sought time from Home Minister Amit Shah for a meeting. "I am very worried over the worsening law and order situation in Delhi. To ensure peace returns to the city immediately, I have sought time from Home Minister Amit Shah for a meeting," he tweeted.

12:56 pm: Briefing the media on Monday over yesterday's Jamia violence, university's vice-chancellor, Najma Akhtar said that they will lodge an FIR against the entry of Delhi police in the varsity campus.

"There has been a lot of property damage in the University, how will all this be compensated? There has been an emotional loss as well. Yesterday's incident was unfortunate. I also appeal to everyone not to believe in any kind of rumours. We will file an FIR against the entry of Police inside our university campus without permission. You can rebuild the property but you cannot compensate for the things the students went through. We demand a high-level inquiry," she said.

12:53 pm: 25-30 per cent AMU hostels have been vacated, rest expected to be vacated by evening, said Aligarh SSP on Monday.

12:50 pm: As many as 21 people have been arrested in connection with the students-police clash at the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) during the protest against the amended citizenship law. "We have arrested 21 persons in the matter. Named FIR has been lodged against 56 persons and others unidentified. The process of hostel vacation is on and 25-30 per cent of them have been vacated, rest expected to be vacated by evening," SSP (Aligarh) Akash Kulhary told PTI over phone.

12:47 pm: Delhi Police, in its investigations, have found that rumours and fake news were spread via WhatsApp groups and other social media platforms, which intensified the tensed situation in the national capital yesterday. Eight to ten inflammatory posts and rumours were put out which vitiated the already tense atmosphere, the police observed. Delhi Police is planning to file a separate case under the IT Act and trying to identify the people who were behind the fake news.

12:35 pm: Delhi police urged students to hold a peaceful protest. "I appeal to Jamia students, that the image of University gets affected when anti-social elements join their protests. Protests should be peaceful and disciplined," said DCP South East Delhi Chinmoy Biswal., ANI reported. He also refuted reports that the police torched buses during yesterday's protest and said, "This (Police burnt buses) is an absolute lie. When mob was setting fire to properties, police tried to douse the fire by asking for water from residents. As far as the particular bus is concerned, Police saved it by using water from a bottle."

12:20 pm: Several students Delhi University, on Monday, boycotted exams and held protests to express solidarity with students of Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU protesting against the amended Citizenship Act. PTI sources said students from the English department of the varsity had written to their professors on Sunday night to postpone exams in the wake of the situation in Jamia but their request could not be considered since it was late.

12:10 pm: Meeting of Jamia Millia university's Executive Council is underway at Vice-Chancellor Najma Akhtar's office, over yesterday's incident.

12:00 pm: BSP chief Mayawati on Monday condemned violence in Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University against the amended Citizenship Act and demanded inquiry in the matter.

In a series of tweets, the former Uttar Pradesh chief minister also appealed to all communities to maintain calm. "The violence against the new Citizenship Amendment Act, first in Uttar Pradesh's Aligarh and then in Jamia University and entire Jamia region in which many innocent students and common people were targeted is very unfortunate and the party is with the victims," she said in a tweet in Hindi.

"Under such circumstances, UP and Central governments should get a high-level judicial inquiry conducted into such incidents so as to ensure that original culprits do not go scot-free. The police and administration should also act impartially" she said. "Otherwise, this fire can spread very badly across the country, especially in educational institutions. Also, it is also an appeal to all communities to maintain peace and order," Mayawati added.

11:50 am: National Commission for Minorities Chairman, Syed Ghayorul Hasan Rizvi appealed to students to carry out peaceful protests and also urged the police to show some restraint and control the situation calmly.

"I appeal to the protesters that such protests should not be done. I also appeal to the police that they should show some restraint and control the situation calmly. I also appeal to the protesters that protest isn't needed as the Citizenship Act isn't against Muslims of India. If at all they're protesting, it should be done peacefully. If Commission feels the need to issue notice, it'll be done," he said.

11:45 am: After Jamia university and AMU, a massive protest broke out at Nadwa college in Lucknow against CAA. Police have closed the gate of the college from outside. Protesters allegedly pelted stones at police and also raised slogans in support of Jamia students.

Superintendent of Police Lucknow, Kalanidhi Naithani: There was stone pelting for about 30 seconds when around 150 people had come out to protest and raise slogans. Situation is normal now. Students are going back to their classrooms. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/FiFe1b6Ee9 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 16, 2019

11:43 am: The MHA has not sought any report from Delhi Police yet on yesterday's Jamia incident but the ministry is in touch with the Delhi Police, sources within the ministry said.

11:40 am: As per ANI sources, Opposition parties sought time from President Ram Nath Kovind for a meeting to apprise him on the current situation in the country in wake of protests against CAA.

11:35 am: Amid row over yesterday's Jamia university violence, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi expressed solidarity with the students, who he said were protesting "peacefully" against the Citizenship Amendment Act and NRC. He also hit out at the BJP-led Centre by terming the CAA and NRC as "weapons of mass polarisation" which were "unleashed by fascist of India."

"The CAB & NRC are weapons of mass polarisation unleashed by fascists on India. The best defence against these dirty weapons is peaceful, non violent Satyagraha. I stand in solidarity with all those protesting peacefully against the CAB & NRC," he tweeted on Monday.

11:12 am: The CJI said that the court will take the decision in a 'cool frame of mind' on the violence against Jamia Millia Islamia's students. "Just because they happen to be students, it doesn't mean they can take law and order in their hands, this has to be decided when things cool down. This is not the frame of mind when we can decide anything. Let the rioting stop," CJI Bobde said. "Prima facie I don't think Court can do much, it's a law and order problem," he added.

11:05 am: The Delhi High Court declined urgent hearing of a petition, seeking intervention in Jamia incident through judicial inquiry and asked the petitioner to approach the court through the registry. The petition said the 52 detained and injured students should be given proper medical attention and compensation.

11:00 am: Amid violent protests across the country over CAA, Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan said that the present atmosphere has been created by BJP-RSS. "They are trying to implement their agenda. The situation in the country is volatile. Kerala is standing together against the Citizenship Amendment Act," he added.

10:50 am: CJI Bobde said that the Supreme Court "won't be bullied and can't be held to ransom while public properties are destroyed." The apex court also said, "We will determine the rights but not in the atmosphere of riots, let all of this stop and then we will take suo motu cognizance. We are not against peaceful demonstrations but we can't allow people to go on streets, indulge in rioting."

10:45 am: Senior advocate Indira Jaising asked the apex court to take suo motu cognizance of the issue saying "It's a very serious human rights violation all over the country." He also alleged that the riots were being engineered by police.

10:40 am: Chief Justice of India Sharad Arvind Bobde condemned the violence in Delhi over CAA and said, "the only thing we want is that rioting must stop." The top court agreed to hear the matter tomorrow if no violent protests further take place. The Supreme Court bench headed by CJI Bobde was hearing a petition filed over Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University incidents.

10:20 am: Two FIRs over property damage and riots have been registered by Delhi Police in connection with violence during protests in Jamia Nagar area yesterday, ANI reported.

10: 00 am: Internet services which were to remain suspended till today morning, have been extended for another 24 hours, in 10 districts of Assam including, Lakhimpur, Tinsukia, Dhemaji, Dibrugarh, Charaideo, Sivasagar, Jorhat, Golaghat, Kamrup (Metro) and Kamrup.

9:40 am: BJP's West Bengal president Dilip Ghosh on Sunday blamed the ruling Trinamool Congress government in the state for the ongoing unrest over the amended Citizenship Act. Terming the agitators as "Bangladeshi infiltrators", Ghosh said, "This is an absolute creation by the Trinamool Congress in a pre-planned manner. If they had wanted, then it would have stopped within two days like it has in Assam."

9:35 am: West Bengal continued to witness protests against the amended Citizenship Act for the fourth consecutive day on Monday, with incidents of road and rail blockades reported from various parts of the state. In East Midnapore and Murshidabad districts, the agitators have blocked thoroughfares since morning, causing inconvenience to hundreds of commuters. Protests also disrupted the train services with several trains being cancelled or delayed.

9:30 am: A group of Jamia Millia students stood shirtless in the bone-chilling cold outside the university gates on Monday to protest the police action against their colleagues on Sunday. Slogans of "inquilab zindabad" were also raised by the group of around 10 students, who took out a small march, demanding a CBI inquiry into the "police brutality". "Our colleagues have been beaten up badly. The policemen entered bathrooms, libraries and beat up girls. Our protest is against the goons called Delhi Police," said a research scholar who did not want to be identified.

Delhi: A student of Jamia Millia Islamia University removes his shirt and sits at the gate of university demanding action against Delhi police following yesterday's incident. pic.twitter.com/IlE1Ea2nk0 — ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

9:28 am: A day after the clash between Delhi police and students, Jamia Millia Islamia university has been closed till January 5.

9:16 am: Curfew, imposed in Assam's Guwahati, Dibrugarh following anti-CAA protests, eased off till 9 pm, said police.

9:00 am: The Delhi Traffic Police, in an advisory issued on Monday morning, asked people heading towards Delhi from Noida to take Mathura Road, Ashram and DND and those coming from Badarpur side to take the Ashram Chowk road. People heading towards Noida from Mathura road have been advised to take the Ashram Chowk, DND or Noida link road.

8:50 am: Entry and exit gates of several metro stations where operations were disrupted due to clashes between Jamia university students and police have been opened. Entry and exit gates of over 15 metro stations were shut by the DMRC on Sunday night as a precautionary measure amid protests over the citizenship law. Normal operations have resumed at GTB Nagar, Shivaji Stadium, Patel Chowk, Vishwavidyalaya, Vasant Vihar, Munirka and RK Puram stations, news agency ANI reported.

8:45 am: Mobile internet services will remain suspended starting from 12 pm of December 15 until further orders, in order to maintain law and order, said District Magistrate Saharanpur.

8:42 am: As many as 50 students, who were detained at the Jamia Millia Islamia university during protests against the amended Citizenship Act were released in the early hours of Monday.

8:40 am: Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU) students' union has written to controller of examination of the university, stating "due to protests by MANUU students against police's attack on Jamia and AMU students, MANUU students are boycotting exams, we request you to postpone the same".

8:30 am: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has urged people to maintain peace and harmony and not to pay heed to the rumours being spread regarding the Citizenship Amendment Act. In a statement, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister's Office has said that the government is committed to the security of every citizen and for this, it is important that all the citizens abide by the laws.

8:28 am: In the wake of Sunday’s clash between police and students of Jamia Millia Islamia university, Delhi Traffic Police has closed traffic movement from Sarita Vihar to Kalindi Kunj, road no. 13A as a precautionary measure.
