Man surrenders before Kolhapur police, days after killing abusive father

The accused told the police that his father had taken loans from several banks (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 28-year-old man surrendered before the police on Saturday and confessed to killing his father The accused Arjun Dhanaji Veer murdered his father on December 4 He allegedly killed his father as the latter used to physically assault him

Kolhapur: A man from Kolhapur surrendered before the police on Saturday, days after he murdered his father. The accused went to the Karveer police station after performing the last rites of his father. The deceased has been identified as Dhanako Gopal Veer.

The accused man has been identified as Arjun Dhanaji Veer. Arjun and his family were residents of Manjarwadi, Karveer taluka. The 28-year-old accused's father had allegedly taken a lot of loans.

The accused told the police that his father had taken loans from several banks. Dhanako Gopal Veer was allegedly spending the borrowed sum on ganja and cigarettes. According to Times of India's report, he used to subject his wife and children to physical assault as well.

On December 4, Arjun allegedly thrashed his father and strangled him to death with his hands. Following this, the 28-year-old accused misguided his family and pretended that his father had died all of a sudden.

The accused's family believed Arjun's story and performed the last rites of Dhanako Gopal Veer. The accused went to the police after the last rites were completed. A police officer familiar with the case said that Arjun has been booked under section 302 (murder) and section 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to the screen offender) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Man beheads wife after suspecting infidelity; walks with her severed head into police station

In August this year, a man went to a police station in Odisha with the severed head of his wife and surrendered before the cops. Identified as Ganesh Beura, the man confessed to killing his wife during a heated argument. The deceased was identified as Annapurna Beura.

Allegedly, Ganesh Beura suspected his wife of having an affair. The couple was having a lot of arguments due to Ganesh's suspicion. On the day of the incident, Ganesh and his wife had an argument, following which, he killed the latter and severed her head.


