At the stroke of the midnight, how universities across India united for Jamia students

Thousands gather outside Delhi Police Headquarters to protest after the violent clash between cops and Jamia Milia Islamia students. (Photo: PTI)

Students across the country hit the streets on Sunday in solidarity with Jamia Milia Islamia University after Delhi Police entered the varsity campus and detained several students for alleged involvement in violent protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

After initial reports of violence on Sunday, students from universities located in many parts of the country expressed solidarity with Jamia students and continued protest marches post-midnight.

At Jamia, there were many students who had to be taken to hospitals after they were injured in the clash. Some students were paraded outside the campus by cops with their hands raised.

Follow CAA Protests Live

Jamia Millia Islamia Chief Proctor Waseem Ahmed Khan claimed that the Delhi Police entered the campus forcibly without any permission and beat up staff members and students who were forced to leave the campus.

While the detained Jamia students were released on Monday morning, the situation continues to remain tense in the national capital.

ALSO READ: South Delhi turns battlefield as police, students clash at Jamia University

COUNTRY-WIDE STUDENT PROTESTS

As the anti-CAA protests in Jamia turned into a battleground, students from the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) were one of the first ones to come out in solidarity with Jamia University students.

News coming from AMU



The police in AMU is allegedly setting hostel rooms on fire. It insists that all hostels must be vacated tonight.



Via Prof Ayesha Kidwai pic.twitter.com/Q8fJJxTxJ9 Qaummy (@Qaummunist) December 15, 2019

They shouted slogans against the controversial Citizenship Act and slammed the police for their crackdown on Jamia students. However, AMU, too became a battleground as police clashed brutally with protesting students.

A violent clash broke out between the protesting police and AMU students, who were gathered at the Sir Syed Gate of the university.

According to reports, both students and police personnel were injured in the clash. The situation got so tense that the university administration decided to declare an early winter vacation from Monday.

MUST READ: Bengal anti-CAA protest: Mamata appeals to people to join mega rally against Citizenship Act in Kolkata

Some reports indicated that at least 60 students were injured in the clash that broke out at AMU in Aligarh. Police reportedly entered the campus, lathi-charged students, and damaged some vehicles as well. Like Jamia, police also used tear gas to disburse protesting AMU students.

That, however, led to larger protests around the country. A large number of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students mobilised against the Delhi Police to stop violence in Jamia Milia University.

Students of JNU are are going to ITO in large numbers. @CPDelhi @DelhiPolice stop the violence against students at JMI immediately. #SOSJAMIA #JamiaMillia pic.twitter.com/1sKyTrmj9x JNUSU (@JNUSUofficial) December 15, 2019

Students from the Maulana Azad University slammed Delhi Police over its actions against Jamia and AMU students.

Just Now!

Hundreds of students from @officialmanuu Hyderabad have taken to the streets to protest against the brutuall attack on #JMI students by #DelhiPolice . pic.twitter.com/OmE0yqOacA Azhar Shaheen (@AzharShaheen10) December 15, 2019

In Mumbai, students from the Tata Institute of Social Sciences took out a candlelight march and sang the famous Urdu poem 'Sarfaroshi ki Tamanna' -- a popular slogan that has been associated with revolutionaries like Bhagat Singh.

Though peaceful, this protest was also observed against the controversial CAA, which was passed last week by the government. Meanwhile, IIT Bombay also joined protests in the financial capital as its students hit the streets with torches and placards expressing solidarity with Jamia students.

Some 1,800 kilometres away, students from Patna University also clashed with police over the action against Jamia students and the Citizenship Act, reported The Print.

The echoes of protests in Delhi also spread to Kolkata as students of Jadavpur University (JU) took out a protest march at the stroke of midnight in solidarity with Jamia students. Apart from JU, Aliah University located in the New Town area of the city also held a silent protest in solidarity with Jamia students.

Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in Varanasi also witnessed a midnight student procession in support of Jamia Milia Islamia students, according to various reports. They also appealed the government to take back the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Banaras Hindu University students protesting against Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 & nationwide NRC #RejectCAB #BHU

pic.twitter.com/UPyJFfruH2 Tarique Anwer (@tanwer_m) December 14, 2019

Students of Pondicherry University also voiced their displeasure over Delhi Police's action in Jamia. A Times of India Report indicated the students from the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama (Nadwa College) in Lucknow also hit the streets to expressed solidarity with students from Jamia and AMU.

Not just universities, a large number of citizens from parts of the country also organised massive protests against the CAA on Sunday.

Massive marches are happening across Kerala even at this hour protesting against CAB and police brutalities



Truly, a revolution has begun in every nook and corner of our country..pic.twitter.com/PkVaFK1sLl Srivatsa (@srivatsayb) December 15, 2019

Most parts of India continue to remain on the edge as echoes of dissatisfaction over CAA continue to grow louder. More protests are expected around the country on Monday, but all eyes will be on the national capital where the situation continues to remain extremely tense.
