Delhi Police registers 2 FIRs against Jamia students for arson, rioting

The Delhi Police has registered two separate cases in connection with clashes at Jamia Millia Islamia University on Monday morning a day after following protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act in and around the university.

The cases have been registered under the IPC Sections pertaining to rioting, arson, sources have said.

The university had turned into a battlefield on Sunday as police entered the campus and also used force, following protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, which led to violence and arson.

Delhi: Two FIRs over property damage and riots have been registered by Police in connection with violence during protests in Jamia Nagar area yesterday. pic.twitter.com/mVV7iBsyjB ANI (@ANI) December 16, 2019

The first case has been filed at New Friends Colony police station for arson, rioting, damage to government property and obstructing government work. The second case has been filed at Jamia Nagar police station for riots, stone-pelting and obstructing government work.

The situation in Jamia Millia Islamia, which witnessed protests against the amended Citizenship Act, remained tense as many students decided to leave for their homes.

Many students feel they are not safe even inside the campus. The varsity had declared winter vacation from Saturday till January 5 and even postponed the exams.

As many as 50 detained students of Jamia Millia Islamia were released early Monday even as the situation in the University remained tense after violent protests over the amended Citizenship Act, police said.

Of the 50 students released, 35 were released from the Kalkaji Police Station and 15 from the New Friends Colony Police Station, a senior police officer said.

On Sunday night, the Delhi Minority Commission (DMC) had issued a direction to the SHO of Kalkaji Police Station to release the "injured" Jamia students held there or take them for treatment at a reputed hospital without any delay.

The Commission had also directed the officer to file a compliance report by 3 pm on Monday.

Also read | CAA protests: South Delhi turns battlefield as police, students clash at Jamia University

Also read | CAA protest rocks Delhi: Police enter Jamia Millia, teargas shells fired, Metro service disrupted

Also watch | Anti-Citizenship Act protest turns violent in Delhi's New Friends Colony
