4th phase of local elections underway in India's Jharkhand state - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-12-16 13:24:33|Editor: ZX

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, Dec. 16 (Xinhua) -- Voting for the fourth phase of local elections in India's eastern state of Jharkhand began on Monday amid tight security and adequate arrangements, officials said.

Polling in the 15 constituencies spread over four districts started at 7:00 a.m. local time and would go on until 5:00 p.m. local time except for five constituencies where voting will conclude at 3:00 p.m local time.

"The fourth phase of Jharkhand Assembly elections is underway peacefully in 15 constituencies spread over four districts of Dhanbad, Deoghar, Giridih and Bokaro," an official said. "Polling will end at 3:00 p.m. local time in five constituencies that are Naxal-affected. However, in the remaining 10 constituencies polling will continue until 5:00 p.m. local time."

Reports from the poll-bound areas said voters including women and young were in queues outside polling stations waiting for their turn to cast the votes.

Authorities have deployed adequate security personnel, including paramilitary troopers in poll-bound areas to ensure free, fair and peaceful polling.

India's state-run broadcaster All India Radio (AIR) said paramilitary forces have been deployed at all booths to ensure free and fair polling.

"Helicopters have been pressed into service for air patrols. Borders with Bihar and West Bengal have been sealed to check infiltration of anti-social elements," AIR said.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi urged voters in Jharkhand to exercise their franchise.

"Polling for the fourth round in the Jharkhand Assembly elections today. I request all voters to cast their vote and become a part of this sacred festival of democracy," Modi wrote on Twitter.

The first, second and third phases of voting in the state were conducted on Nov. 30, Dec. 7 and Dec. 12 respectively.

During the second phase, one person was killed and two others wounded after police fired upon agitating people at a polling station in village Baghani in Gumla district of the state.

As per India's election commission, the last phase of polling would be conducted on Dec. 20.

Counting of votes is scheduled for Dec. 23.

The ruling BJP, which is seeking a second term under the leadership of incumbent Chief Minister Raghubar Das, is facing a tough challenge from the opposition alliance of the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM), the Congress party and the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD).
