IAF former chief concedes ‘stupid mistakes’ during Balakot aggression

ISLAMABAD: Indian Air Force (IAF) has conceded for the first time that it suffered hugely in the wake of Balakot aggression in February this year when Pakistan responded on the following day.

The IAF then Air Chief ACM BS Dhanoa has said that "on our side.. (there were) stupid mistakes for which remedial measures have been taken and people responsible will be punished."

Dhanoa did not share any details about what the "stupid mistakes" were. Talking about the February standoff between Pakistan and India in the wake of Pulwama attack in a festival held in New Delhi Sunday, he also said, "We could not impose significant costs on Pakistan Air Force (PAF) on 27 of February (when the PAF retaliated a day after the Balakot strike)."

Dhanoa asserted that there was a paradigm shift in the way the Indian government responds to attacks involving mass casualties. Dhanoa retired from service on September 30 this year. Pointing towards the poor fiscal health of Pakistan, Dhanoa claimed that in February 2019, the neighbouring country was reeling under severe financial crisis.

"Their foreign reserves were $50 billion compared to USD 400 billion in our case. Had they gone to war with us, they would have literally eaten the grass," he said. (Interestingly the figures quoted by him about Pakistan foreign reserves were grossly wrong).

The former IAF chief said that the biggest lesson one could learn from the limited period engagement was that technology matters. Delivering a double whammy to Pakistan and avenging, Kandahar and Pulwama "What about the responsibility of people who were to get this technology and kept negotiating for nearly 10 years to get the MMRCA (Medium Multi-Role Combat Aircraft)? What would have happened in the same engagement had Wing Commander Abhinandan (Varthaman) been flying Rafale aircraft instead of MiG 21- bison?" he asked. The Indian wing commander’s plane was shot down by the PAF and he was arrested upon ejection. The Indian Air Force had struck in Pakistan's Balakot area on February 26 on pretext of the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed by a local youth. The PAF retaliated the next day by unsuccessfully targeting various military installations in Jammu and Kashmir. (Pakistan locked the targets but didn’t destroy to avoid escalation.)
