Mumbai: Man arrested for extorting money from murder accused to save her from 'police torture'

The woman identified as Reshma Oval is accused of murdering her brother and disposing of his body in the forest in Chembur. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man arrested for extorting Rs 50,000 from family of murder accused Accused identified as Santosh Sathe told the family he could save the woman from police torture Police later arrested the accused from Govandi for extortion

Mumbai: A 39-year-old man was arrested by Mumbai police for allegedly extorting Rs 50,000 from the family of a woman accused of murder, to save her from 'torture' in police custody.

The accused identified as Santosh Sathe told the woman's family member that he is connected to a political party and knows the investigating officer probing the murder case.

According to a report in Indian Express, the accused Sathe told the woman's family that he could save her from torture and custodial interrogation by police and demanded Rs 50,000 for the same.

The woman identified as Reshma Oval is accused of murdering her brother and disposing of his body in the forest in Chembur. The police said that the woman was arrested on December 8 along with her brother-in-law Sumit Pathankar.

"Sathe met the woman's family members at the police station and said the two will be tortured by police,"

Sopan Nighot, Senior Inspector, RCF police station.

Nighot also said that Sathe claimed he knows the officer probing the case and could help the family. Sathe demanded the money from the family and told them that he would have to give the money to the policemen in lieu of the favour.

The complaint against Sathe was filed by the wife of the murder accused Sumit Pathankar. Sumit's wife Chitra said she transferred Rs 50,000 into Sathe's bank account. The matter came to light after Chitra spoke to the investigating officer and told him about the incident. After this, a case of extortion was filed against Sathe.

"We have registered a case of extortion against Sathe on Saturday. He was traced to his house in Govandi after the family gave us his number. A team was sent to his residence and he was arrested in the evening," the report quoted Nighot as saying.
