Tension prevails in Uttar Pradesh over amended Citizenship Act; Internet shut in several districts

Clashes at AMU over CAA | Photo Credit: PTI

Lucknow: In the wake of the protests over the amended Citizenship Act, authorities in Uttar Pradesh are on alert and are taking precautionary measures to keep the situation under control. There are reports of tense situation prevailing in several parts of the state over the Citizenship (Amendment) Ac, which became law last week.

The authorities have shut down Internet services in six districts, including Aligarh, Meerut, Saharanpur and Varanasi. Internet was also snapped in Lucknow for a few hours yesterday. There were reports of students’ protest being held in Lucknow this morning.

Clashes were reported between police and students of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) late on Sunday night. Security personnel and around 60 students were injured in the violent clashes.

Students of the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama, an Islamic seminary, also protested on the streets past midnight in solidarity with the students of Delhi’s Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI) and AMU. JMI students had clashed with the Delhi Police on Sunday, leading to injuries.

In Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s parliamentary constituency Varanasi, Banaras Hindu University (BHU) students also organised a protest march on the campus late yesterday.

Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh said: “After Jamia incident, there were rumours and AMU students had gathered. Police then tried to explain things to them and directed them to not leave the campus after which they threw stones. The police also fired tear gas shells; at least 16-17 police officers also received injuries. A case has been registered. The situation is under control.”

As a result of the development, AMU was closed till January 5 for winter break and students asked to leave hostel rooms at the earliest.

"We will be evacuating the entire campus, particularly the hostels; the university wants them to be vacated," the DGP said.

"Hostels are now being evacuated. The university is closed from today. This is being done due to disturbances created by some anti-social elements for the last three days," AMU Registrar Abdul Hamid said today.

It was informed that remaining examinations would be held at AMU after January 5 and a revised schedule would be notified later.

According to AMU Proctor Afifullah Khan, some security personnel sustained injuries as bricks were thrown near the gate.

Meanwhile, in view of the clashes, Aligarh District Magistrate Chandra Bhushan Singh issued orders to shut Internet services. He said: "Internet services have been suspended from 10 pm on Sunday for the next 24 hours, in view of the protests by the AMU students."

It was reported that all intelligence agencies were on alert and efforts would be made to ensure no such violent protests take place.

In view of the prevailing situation, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath issued a late-night appeal and asked people to ensure peace and harmony is maintained. He further asked the people not to believe in rumours concerning the amended citizenship law.

Adityanath said in a statement issued after midnight on Sunday, "People should not pay any attention to the rumours about Citizenship (Amendment) Act being spread by some vested interests."

"For this, it is necessary that everyone follows the law. Nobody will be allowed to disturb the atmosphere of peace in the state," he said further, adding that the state government would provide security to every citizen.

The CM was this morning briefed on the situation by DGP OP Singh.
