Rioting must stop: Supreme Court’s stern message following violence at JMI, AMU over citizenship law

A vandalised public bus due to protests against Citizenship Amendment Act near Mathura Road, in New Delhi, Sunday | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Monday took serious note of the violent clashes that took place at the Jamia Millia Islamia university in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh on Sunday, during protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

A Supreme Court bench headed by Chief Justice SA Bobde categorically stated that rioting must stop.

Taking a strong note of the damage to public property and rioting during protests in Delhi and Aligarh yesterday, the apex court said: “We are not against peaceful demonstrations but we can't allow people to go on the streets, indulge in rioting. The only thing we want is that rioting must stop.”

"If protests and violence and damage of public property will be there, we will not hear the matter," the bench, also comprising justices BR Gavai and Surya Kant, warned.

The court observed that by virtue of being students, nobody is allowed to take the law into their own hands.

"We know what are rights.... what is this? Public properties are being destroyed. We will decide it in cool frame of mind," the CJI told the lawyers.

Chief Justice SA Bobde said the court would not get bullied and held to ransom while protesters go on destroying public properties. The CJI made it clear that the court was not passing any judgement on either the students or police, no calling anybody guilty or responsible.

The Supreme Court made the remarks as it agreed to hear pleas to look into the alleged atrocities by police on JMI and AMU students.

The matter was mentioned by a group of lawyers, including senior advocates Indira Jaising and Collin Gonsalves. The lawyers asked the court to take suo motu (on its own) cognisance of the incidents. The court asked the lawyers to file the pleas and agreed to hear them tomorrow.

Meanwhile, the Delhi Police today registered two FIRs in connection with the violence at Jamia Millia Islamia university and nearby areas yesterday.

Separately, the Supreme Court today also agreed to hear on Wednesday pleas of Congress and ex-Maharaja of Tripura challenging the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.
