Jamia protest: Prashant Kishor supports students as JDU chief Nitish Kumar maintains silence

JD(U) vice-president and founder of I-PAC Prashant Kishor has slammed Delhi Police for its action on Jamia Milia Islamia University students. (Photo: Reuters)

Janata Dal (United) vice-president and election strategist Prashant Kishor continued to slam the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) even as the party chief and Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar remained silent on the matter.

Kishor, whose offer to resign was turned down by Kumar on Saturday, continued to speak out against the contentious act, which triggered country-wide protests on Sunday.

Taking a dig at Delhi Police for clashing with Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI) students on Sunday over anti-CAA protests, Kishor said, "Look at the non-violence, bravery, and professionalism of Delhi Police against the "alleged" lawbreakers!"

Follow CAA protests LIVE

He also tagged a video of women students protest against Delhi Police, who entered the varsity campus on Sunday and clashed with students. In the video, a group of women students from the university could be heard saying "Go back, go back, Delhi Police go back".

Police then dragged a male protestor who was present there and beat him mercilessly. There are several other incidents from Jamia Milia University where students were lathicharged by cops.

While some cops were also injured, a number of social media videos showed how police used tear gas and batons to crack down on students protesting against the CAA.

Kishor has not only criticised Delhi Police's action against students, but has been openly speaking against the CAA and NRC, which he said is a "lethal combo" in the hands of government to "systematically discriminate and even prosecute people on religion".

"The idea of nationwide NRC is equivalent to demonetisation of citizenship...invalid until you prove it otherwise. The biggest sufferers would be the poor and the marginalised...we know from the experience," he said in a tweet posted on Sunday.

There is no clarity on what was discussed between Prashant Kishor and Nitish Kumar in a meeting held yesterday, but sources said the Kumar's offer to resign was turned down by the JD(U) chief.

The difference of opinion on CAA between Kumar and Kishor is out in the open but it is not exactly clear why Kumar refused to accept Kishor's resignation.

Though several JD(U) politicians have lashed out at Kishor over his stance, Kishor has avoided making any retaliatory comments. He also told Hindustan Times that Nitish Kumar has asked him to not pay heed to such criticism.

Kishor, however, is not the only JD(U) member who has been vocal against CAA and NRC. Party spokesperson Pavan Verma and MLC Gulam Rasool Balyawi have also voiced dissatisfaction over the party's stance on CAA.




