Fact Check: Did Aligarh Muslim University Students Raise 'Hinduon Ki Kabra Khudegi' Slogan?

New Delhi:

A day after the brutal crackdown in Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia University following the violent clashes over the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act, the nation is gripped with solidarity protests by students across various cities. Various videos have surfaced online showing the Sunday crackdown. But one video that has gone viral is not from Jamia but from Aligarh. From Delhi BJP’s Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga to BJP IT cell chief Amit Malviya, several ruling party leaders are widely sharing a clip that purportedly shows students of the Aligarh Muslim University raising controversial anti-Hindu slogans. “This is Not a protest for #CAB this is call for Ghazwa-E-Hind . Bahut se chehre Naqabo se bahar aa rhe hai dhire dhire,” Bagga said on Twitter while sharing the video clip.

This is Not a protest for #CAB this is call for Ghazwa-E-Hind . Bahut se chehre Naqabo se bahar aa rhe hai dhire dhire pic.twitter.com/MZztJbNwiT — Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga (@TajinderBagga) December 15, 2019

However, fact-checking website ‘AltNews’ ran a search on the social media and found out the original video clip, which has better sound quality that makes it clear that the viral slogan was deliberately tweaked. While the BJP leaders claim that the viral clip had the AMU student chanting slogan that goes like – Hinduon ki kabra khudegi, AMU ki chhati par (The grave of Hindus will be dug on the chest of AMU.)”

But AltNews posted a link of another video that has better audio quality that shows that the slogan was NOT ‘Hinduon ki kabra khudegi’ but ‘Hindutva ki kabra khudegi’. “It is evident from the video that the students were raising slogans against Hindutva, not Hindus. BJP office bearers were among many social media users who falsely claimed that the chants were anti-Hindu,” the fact-checking website said.

The Aligarh Muslim University administration on Sunday night announced that the institution will remain closed till January 5 after clashes broke out between police and students protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act near the campus gate. Meanwhile, has been suspended for the next 24 hours till 10 pm December 16 following the clashes. “The university is closed from today (15/12/2019) till 05/01/2020. This is being done due to disturbances created by some antisocial elements for the last three days,” AMU Registrar Abdul Hamid said. The announcement came after hundreds of AMU students protesting against the amended legislation clashed with police which used batons and teargas to disperse them.

For all the Latest Fact Check News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
