As Protests Rage on Citizenship Bill, Is India Becoming a Hindu Nation?

Days of protests at a university in India’s capital, New Delhi, have led to a violent crackdown by police. Officers beating unarmed protesters with large sticks, [explosion] and firing tear gas in the streets and inside university buildings. We reviewed dozens of videos that have led to accusations that the police used excessive force against protesters. Protests at Jamia Millia Islamia University in New Delhi are in response to a new citizenship law that will favor every major religion in South Asia except Islam. The Indian prime minister says the measure helps persecuted minority migrants. But students and teachers at the predominantly Muslim university are protesting the bill, which they say will exclusively target Muslims. Over the course of three days, the police and protesters clashed at the university. Some protesters were armed with sticks and rocks. But the protests were largely peaceful. But videos show how the police responded swiftly and indiscriminately. In one video shot in a nearby residential area, a group of women confront officers. But the officers are determined to stay. When a man tries to shield the women, he is grabbed from behind by officers and pulled to the ground. He appeared to be unarmed. But at least five officers beat him. In a video filmed inside the university by a reporter with The Indian Express, and widely circulated on Twitter, officers are seen beating protesters with large, heavy sticks. None of these protesters appear to be armed. One of the most harrowing examples of the police’s questionable tactics happened at the university’s library. A video from the library captures what appears to be a flash-bang grenade, a device often used to scare and disperse a crowd. Eyewitnesses say the police entered the campus and fired tear gas at protesters and students who were studying inside. Footage of the aftermath shows tear gas still lingering in the air. United Nations guidelines state that tear gas should never be used in confined spaces. Dozens of students were hospitalized after the protest. But the police say they used maximum restraint in their response. The protests against the controversial citizenship law have spread throughout India, galvanizing opposition groups, and setting up the prospect of more protests and more violence.
