Punjab: Both ruling, opposition party leaders are facing heat from within

JALANDHAR: Brewing discontent in a party is usually an opportunity for the opposition. But in Punjab, both head of the ruling party and head of a major opposition party are facing heat from within and the situation has the potential to take troublesome proportions for both of them. Another commonality they share is the roots of their problems converging at the same point — Bargari sacrilege issue.

The Congress cadres would earlier speak against the performance of Captain Amarinder Singh-led government in hushed tones, but they gave it a loud and clear voice in the first meeting of deed-back process. Similarly, Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) president Sukhbir Singh Badal received brickbats from senior party leader and Rajya Sabha member Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa the very day he got bouquets for getting “re-elected” as president of the party third time in a row. In fact, Dhindsa has managed to get all Badal (especially Sukhbir) bashers, who were disintegrated earlier, on one platform.

Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh has been facing heat from within his party for the last over four months, when the monsoon session of Punjab assembly took place and his minsters and MLAs did plain speaking during the Congress legislature party meetings over the perceived failure of his government on the issue of Bargari sacrilege case and other issues of governance.

Later, in the second week of September, he appointed six MLAs as his advisers to tackle the dissension among MLAs after he got the wind that the MLAs were ganging up. If the recent dissatisfaction expressed by the MLAs from his home district Patiala was not enough, the Congress workers enumerated several failures of their party’s government in Punjab when state Congress president Sunil Jakhar held the first meeting in Jalandhar with party workers and local leaders to get their feedback on December 9.

Apart from other failures of the Amarinder government, its failure in getting the probe in Bargari sacrilege case back from the CBI figured prominently at the meeting. The MLAs apprehend that they would feel the heat over the issue on the ground. Punjab jail minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa has already given words to this sentiment prevailing in the party when he addressed Sikh activists who held a dharna outside his residence on December 8.

When it could have been an opportunity for SAD (Badal) to cash in on the trouble brewing in Congress, at least in a perception battle, its president Sukhbir Singh Badal is staring at the battle within his own party. Dhindsa, who has been a close comrade of former chief minister and party supremo Parkash Singh Badal, is now not keeping his dissent subtle. The tone and tenor of his speech at Amritsar on Saturday while addressing the splinter Akali groups was unusual. A soft-spoken Dhindsa, who earlier chose his words very carefully, launched a blistering attack on Sukhbir and announced that there is no question of siting back till the control of one family on SAD, SGPC and Akal Takht. Bargari sacrilege issue also figured very prominently at the common meeting of splinter Akali groups.

What is being seen as a clever move in Akali circles is that Dhindsa is not questioning Parkash Singh Badal. This has made attacks by Sukhbir and his loyalists on him difficult. The veteran Akali leader intends to keep on attacking Sukhbir while remaining within the party fold. He also enjoys good relations with the central leadership of BJP. At a time, when the results of assembly and parliament elections have been demoralising for the Akali Dal (Badal), he has managed to get the other factions of Akali Dal on one platform. There is fluidity of sentiment and confidence within the Akali cadres and supporters and they have been expressing apprehensions about the future of the party in hushed tones.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
