Jamia violence, amended Citizenship Act and speculation over nationwide NRC

Students of Jamia Milia Islmia University of Delhi protesting amendment to Citizenship Act that allows illegal immigrants belonging to six minority communities but not Muslims from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan to acquire Indian citizenship. (Photo: PTI)

The protests against the amended Citizenship Act have led to violent clashes at many places including the Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh. Police actions in the Jamia and AMU campuses led to more protests in other universities and places in Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, and Bihar.

Jamia campus of Delhi, however, remained the centre of students’ protest against the Citizenship Act that was amended last week with Parliament passing the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

The amended citizenship law gives the right to acquire Indian citizenship to illegal immigrants belonging to six religious minorities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. But it excludes the Muslims. The citizenship law has been relaxed for these six categories of illegal migrantsHindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jain, Parsi and Christians.

Earlier, laws relating to citizenship, passport and identification of foreigners did not allow an illegal migrant to acquire Indian citizenship. Exclusion of Muslim immigrants from the purview of the amended Citizenship Act has led many Opposition parties, activists and Muslim groups to accuse the Narendra Modi government of targeting the community to further its Hindutva agenda.

The Jamia campus was the venue of protest by the university students who termed the recently passed Citizenship Amendment Bill as discriminatory and divisive. This is the same argument that many Opposition leaders put forth in Parliament.

However, the protest against the amended Citizenship Act has another dimension in Assam and other parts of the Northeast. The protesters in Assam have opposed the entire Citizenship Amendment Bill. They have called amendment to the Citizenship Act as unwarranted and the one that threatens their social, economic and cultural identity.

The amended Citizenship Act is being linked with the National Register of Citizens (NRC). Till now, only Assam has finalised an NRC a demand pending since 1951. This happened earlier this year under the supervision of the Supreme Court.

The Assam edition of NRC declared 19 lakh residents as non-citizens. Under the law before the Citizenship Act was amended the non-citizens were to be deported to countries of their origin. This is a difficult task for any government as no country read as Bangladesh and Pakistan has accepted that those left out of the NRC were their nationals.

As the question of how to address the 19 lakh non-citizens was still being discussed, the Modi government brought the Citizenship Amendment Bill which says illegal immigrants who are Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan may acquire Indian citizenship if they left their parent country to escape religious persecution.

The amended Citizenship Act has opened a window for illegal immigrants, including those declared non-citizens under the Assam NRC, belonging to these six communities to become Indian citizens. The Muslim immigrants, however, cannot claim the same right under the Amended Citizenship Act. This has left many Muslim outfits fuming.

The government, however, defended the amendment to the Citizenship Act on the ground that a Muslim immigrant from these three countries cannot genuinely claim to have fled the parent country due to religious persecution. All three countries declare Islam their state religion, the government has said.

The Muslim illegal immigrants, thus, left out of the NRC have the right to appeal before appropriate authorities. And, the final list of non-citizens from among the Muslims will still have the option of applying for citizenship through regular registration and naturalisation processes as mentioned in the Citizenship Act 1955.

There is yet another aspect to the current state of affairs surrounding protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

The government plans to bring out a nationwide NRC. Union Home Minister Amit Shah confirmed this in Parliament during the debate on the Citizenship Amendment Bill. Many BJP leaders, too, have spoken about the Assam NRC, the Citizenship Amendment Bill and a nationwide NRC as a package to detect and deport infiltrators.

This has fuelled fear with several Muslim community leaders saying that following a nationwide NRC, a large number of Muslims will be declared non-citizens. It is being claimed that the Citizenship Amendment Bill was brought to accommodate persons of other communities to give Indian citizenship but not the Muslims if they failed to prove that they were bonafide citizens of India.

The high intensity of protests and violence in such protests seem to be arising out of this fear and anger.

However, the Citizenship Amendment Bill that was passed by Parliament last week may not be applicable to those left out of a nationwide NRC, if and when it comes.

The statement of objects and reasons of the Citizenship Amendment Bill clearly spells out that the amendment is limited in scope to include only those illegal immigrants who have come from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan due to religious persecution.

If those left out of the nationwide NRC if and when it comes are not from these three countries and did not flee due to religious persecution, they will not have the protection of the latest amendment to the Citizenship Act of 1955.

Since the draft of the nationwide NRC is not yet out in the public domain, the exact nature of such a bill is in the realm of speculation and that speculation seem to have played its part, coupled with statements by some political leaders, in fomenting trouble in the events that were supposed to be peaceful protests against the amended Citizenship Act.
