Punjab: Teenager bludgeons mother to death for refusing booze money

Police say it has recovered the pan and the baton used in the crim from the residence of the accused. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 15-year-old boy batters his mother to death for refusing money Accused initially claimed his mother died in sleep Police recover pan and the baton used in the crime

Ludhiana: In a shocking incident, a 15-year-old boy allegedly killed his mother in sleep after she refused to give him money to enjoy liquor with his friends on Friday night (December 13). Police have arrested the boy on Sunday.

The incident took place at a village under Meharban police station in Ludhiana district of Punjab. The police did not reveal the identity of the accused keeping in view his juvenile status.

According to a report in Times of India, the juvenile started to ask for money after his 50-year-old mother, his father had drinks with their neighbours at the home on Friday.

But the mother of the accused refused to give him money and went to sleep. After some time, the boy hit his mother with a pan and later thrashed her with a baton leading to her death on the spot.

However, the boy's father, who was sleeping in the same room, could not intervene as he too was drunk.

"After killing his mother, the accused then went to his friends and had liquor with them. The husband of the victim raised an alarm only after he regained consciousness and saw the lifeless body of his wife," Said Devinder Chaudhary, Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP).

Police say they initially suspected that the woman was murdered by her husband. Earlier, the father-son duo claimed that she woman died when they were sleeping.

Later, the man told his factory supervisor, who is also his neighbour, that his son had killed his mother in sleep.

"The boy's father did not tell the police anything. The factory supervisor informed us about the boy's involvement in the murder after which we nabbed the accused. During interrogation, the father-son told us about the entire sequence of events," the report quoted a police official as saying.

Police say it has recovered the pan and the baton used in the crime from the residence of the accused.
