Violent protests unfortunate, CAA doesn't affect any Indian citizen: PM Narendra Modi

Violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and… https://t.co/uLsiLPKBQq — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485234000

The Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support. Large number… https://t.co/jfyedIoJRx — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1576485254000

Protests against the Citizenship Act 'unfortunate and deeply distressing': PM Modi

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday termed the violent protests against the Citizenship Act "unfortunate and deeply distressing" and added that the Act doesn't affect any citizen of the country of any religion."Violent protests on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos," the PM tweeted.The Prime Minister's tweet came a day after students of Jamia Millia Islamia University clashed with Delhi Police following a protest against the Citizenship Act. Several students were injured in the clashes.Addresing the people via his official Twitter handle, the Prime Minister assured that the Citizenship Act, which was passed in Parliament earlier this month, doesn't affect any Indian of any religion."I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India," he added in another tweet.The Prime Minister also appealed to the citizens to work towards the development of the country."The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised. We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create a disturbance," he said.
