Jamia Millia Islamia news: Don't target Jamia and malign its students: Jamia vice chancellor

Read also:

NEW DELHI: A day after police clashed with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia University, vice chancellor Najma Akhtar on Monday demanded a high-level inquiry and added that the university will be filing an FIR against the entry of the police inside the university campus.Akhtar said that the police entered the campus without permission and added that the administration will present the facts of the clashes to human resource and development ministry."Don't target Jamia and malign its students. You can rebuild the property but you cannot compensate for the things the students went through," she said.Akhtar was speaking a day after several students were injured in clashes with the police during a protest against the Citizenship Act in the national capital. The university administration accused the police of entering the university campus without permission and using "brute" force against the students. During the clashes, several students were injured.On Monday morning, she asked the students to not believe in rumours. "I also appeal to everyone to not believe in any kind of rumours. We will file an FIR against the entry of Police inside the university campus. We demand a high-level inquiry," she told reporters.The university vice chancellor also denied rumours circulating on social media that two people have died in the clashes with the police."There has been a strong rumour that two students died, we deny this totally, none of our students died. About 200 people were injured of which many were our students," she added.On Sunday evening, protests against the Citizenship Act turned violent in Delhi's Jamia Nagar area. At least four DTC buses were torched and several students were injured in the clashes. The police clashed with the protesting students inside the university campus and as a result several students recieved injuries.The controversial Act grants citizenship to non-Muslims refugees from Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Pakistan who have been victims of religious persecution there. The students have been staging protest in various parts of the country against the Act claiming that it dilutes the secular principles of the nation. Watch Condemn violence at university campus: Najma Akhtar, Jamia VC
