Jigisha murder case convict suffering from HIV, seeks parole

New Delhi, Feb 12 : Ravi Kapoor, convicted in the 2009 IT executive Jigisha Ghosh murder case and facing trial for the murder of TV journalist Soumya Viswanathan, on Tuesday told the Delhi High Court that he is suffering from HIV and other ailments and needs three months' parole for treatment.

Kapoor also said he wanted to take care of his old and ailing parents and re-establish his family ties.

The Delhi Police, however, opposed Kapoor's plea saying if he is released on short parole, he will flee.

Advocate Jamal Akhtar, appearing for the Delhi Police, told Justice Mukta Gupta that Kapoor is a hardened criminal and a threat to the society. He also said Kapoor's conduct in jail wasn't good and has been punished 41 times by the jail authorities.

Kapoor was diagnosed with HIV in tests conducted at Delhi's Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital in August 2010.

His said his life is at risk due to the ailment, he is unable to get proper medical care. Kapoor claimed he has been in the judicial custody since March 24, 2009.

The petition apprised the court that there is only a general ward and no special ward at the Tihar Jail for proper treatment. Kapoor could not hear due to bleeding from his right ear, it added.

He also challenged a November 12, 2018 Delhi government order that rejected his request for parole.

The next date of hearing is April 2.

Jigisha, 28, an operations manager with Hewitt Associates Pvt Ltd, was killed on March 18, 2009 after being abducted from outside her home in south Delhi's Vasant Vihar. Her body was recovered two days later from Surajkund in Haryana.

Police arrested Kapoor and his two associates for the crime.

Kapoor and his gang had also killed a taxi driver Nadeem and fled with his car and valuables on January 7, 2009.

He and his associates were convicted in both the cases in August 2016.

He is still facing trial in the Soumya Vishwanathan murder case. The TV journalist was shot dead in her car while returning from work in the wee hours of September 30, 2008.
