Happy my daughter is not alive to see her rapists: Nirbhaya's mother Asha Devi

Seven years after her daughter 'Nirbhaya' was raped and left to die on a Delhi road, Asha Devi is still awaiting justice. The mother of the 2012 Delhi gangrape-murder victim, yet again on Monday appealed the government and judiciary to hang the four convicts.

Speaking at a session at Agenda AajTak in New Delhi on Monday, a teary-eyed Asha Devi said her life has become a question in the fight for justice for her daughter. "I have fought with patience for the last seven years, but the situation is the same as what it was in 2012. I continue to plead for justice and in this fight, I have myself become a question," Nirbhaya's Asha Devi said as a panel discussed women security.

On the ordeal a family of a rape victim goes through, Asha Devi said she is happy her daughter is not alive. "When I see the convicts in the court, I am happy that my daughter didn't live to see them. I die every day when I see them [convicts]," Asha Devi said.

"What was our daughter's fault or of those who were raped and burnt. And what is our fault that we still await justice? Why hasn't the society and system found a solution? For how long will we ask for justice while girls continued to be burnt," she asked as she spoke about the importance of bringing change in homes to prevent such heinous crimes.

Asha Devi's sentiment was echoed by All India Mahila Congress President Sushmita Dev. "This is a social problem. Our Constitution says women and men are the same but the on-ground situation is different," she said. Sushmita Dev emphasised on the importance of including gender sensitisation in education.

We need to not only prevent rape but ensure that justice is served. Legal awareness has to reach women at all levels, Sushmita said.

BJP MP Rita Bahuguna Joshi said the judicial process needs to be strengthened to prevent crime. "The whole system needs to be strengthened. Society and nation should come together on one platform," Rita Bahuguna Joshi said.

Apna Dal National President and MP Anupriya Patel also raised the issue of time-bound justice. "We do raise our voice for the security of women and that is the reason behind tough laws. But the conviction rate poor. That is because we have loopholes in our system. Time-bound justice is important," Anupriya said.

Also read | Int'l shooter Vartika Singh wants to hang Nirbhaya rapists; writes letter to Amit Shah in blood
