Aarey tragedy still fresh in minds; 500 tress chopped in Aravali region near Delhi

The villages come under the protected zone and any tree felling activity in the same has been banned. (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The felling of trees came to light after activists reached the site. Villagers have alleged that a private company had cleared the forest land in order to sell it. Aravali green cover is protected by law and any such activity is illegal.

New Delhi: Coming at the heels of the massive outcry of tree felling at Mumbai's Aarey Colony, another mass slaughter of trees was reported, this time from the national capital region.

Activists alleged that over 500 trees were illegally cut down in the Aravalis, an area that comes under Faridabad administration. The location of the tree felling was in the villages of Mangar and Kot and was discovered when the environment activists visited the place upon receiving a tip-off.

The villages come under the protected zone and any tree felling activity in the same has been banned. However, upon contacting the officials, the usual blame game started with Faridabad forest officers saying that the site was under the jurisdiction of Gurugram forest department and the latter shifting the onus to the former.

An environmentalist who had written about the same to Haryana chief conservator of forests told TOI that the clearing of trees was also extended to the inside of a temple and the vegetation there had been levelled too.

The way in which the massive felling of trees and the levelling of land has been done raises questions about the effort to claim the land as private property. A lot of villagers echoed the same and said that a private company had carried it out with the intention of selling the land.

The irreversible loss to the Aravali ecosystem due to the loss of over 500 trees is a grave issue. No amount of official blame-shifting or procedural excuses can take away the truth that a big mistake was made. However, what can be done is to bring the perpetrators of the crime to justice so that there are no more similar acts committed in the future.


