Anti-Citizenship Act protests: Who said what

Narendra Modi, Prime Minister

Rahul Gandhi, Congress

Mamata Banerjee, West Bengal chief minister

Nirmala Sitharaman, Union finance minister

Ghulam Nabi Azad, Congress

Arvind Kejriwal, Delhi chief minister

Shashi Tharoor, Congress

#BJPBurningBharat @incIndia must lead the resistance https://t.co/WhFEBumgEF — Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) 1576485919000

Sitaram Yechury, CPM

D Raja, Communist Party of India

NEW DELHI: Protests have been taking place against the Citizenship Act in several universities across the country. On Sunday, Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University witnessed clashes between the police in which dozens of people were injured. The protest have evoked stern reactions from both the government and the opposition parties. While the government is balming the opposition for inciting the protesters, the opposition parties have condemned the police "high-handedness" and the government's inability to address the issue.Here is a look at the reactions of various political leaders on the ongoing protests -"Violent protests on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos," the PM tweeted."I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India."The CAB & NRC are weapons of mass polarisation unleashed by fascists on India. The best defence against these dirty weapons is peaceful, non-violent Satyagraha. I stand in solidarity with all those protesting peacefully against the CAB & NRC.Only BJP will remain here and everyone else will be made to leave. It's their politics. It'll never happen. India is for everyone. Agar sabka sath nahi rahega toh sabka vikas kaise hoga? What is the Citizenship Act for? We're all citizens. Didn't you cast your vote? Don't you live here? she questioned during a rally in Kolkata.I don't know what happened at Jamia last night; we must be wary of jihadists, Maoists, separatists getting into student protests.The PM says Congress is behind it (the protests). Had the Congress been capable of inciting such violence, you wouldn't have been in power. It's a baseless allegation. I condemn it. Only the ruling party, PM, HM and their cabinet are responsible for it.How did Delhi Police enter Jamia when university administration did not give permission? We condemn the police entry in Jamia Millia and use of force on students.I am very worried about the deteriorating law and order in Delhi. Peace should be restored immediately in Delhi - for this, I have asked Home Minister Amit Shah for an appointment.Citizenship bill cannot be linked to religion, it is not a Hindu-Muslim issue. What happened in Jamia with students totally unacceptable in a democracy.As far as Left parties are concerned, we have given a call for countrywide protest on December 19. We hope that the protest will be a massive one. We appeal to all secular, democratic forces to join in the protest.Violent protests have been taking place across the country since the Citizenship (Amendment) Act was passed in Parliament last week. Protests have taken place in Assam, West Bengal, districts of Uttar Pradesh, Hyderabad, Kerala and New Delhi.The Bill was passed by Parliament last week paving the way for it to become an Act. According to the Act, the members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants but given Indian citizenship.
