Vijay Diwas: 5 turning points in the 1971 India-Pakistan War that cleared the path for India’s victory

Lt Gen AK Niazi signing the Instrument of Surrender as Lt Gen JS Aurora looks on. (Photo courtesy Indian Navy)

Key Highlights The war had become inevitable after Pakistan’s military launched a campaign of genocide against the Bengalis of East Pakistan Having learnt from the setback of 1962 and the unsatisfactory victory of 1965, India was psychologically and militarily prepared when Pakistan launched unprovoked airstrikes on December 3, 1971 Right in the middle of the war, realising that Pakistan’s defeat was imminent, the U.S. Seventh Fleet was ordered to dispatch Task Force 74 to the Bay of Bengal

‘INDIA ORDERS CEASE-FIRE ON BOTH FRONTS AFTER PAKISTANIS’ SURRENDER IN THE EAST’

The New York Times headline on 17 December 1971 tried to sum up the momentous events of the previous day: Dacca (as the Bangladeshi capital was then known) had been liberated by Indian forces and India, under the political leadership of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, birthed a new nation on its east.

December 16, now known as Vijay Diwas, was Indira Gandhi’s finest hour – and her popularity soared. It was also a spectacular display of the bravery, fighting prowess and tactical brilliance of India’s armed forces and the raw courage of the thousands of foot soldiers of the Mukti Bahni, the freedom-fighters from East Pakistan trained by India who fought against the tyranny and extreme brutality of the Pakistani army.

The war had become inevitable after Pakistan’s military launched a campaign of genocide against the Bengalis of East Pakistan, and the spectre of tens of millions of refugees fleeing through the porous border into India stared New Delhi in the face.

Indira Gandhi, while giving the green signal to the chief of army staff General Sam Manekshaw to prepare for war months in advance, also launched a diplomatic offensive to present India’s side of the story to all the key foreign capitals that mattered.

Having learnt from the setback of 1962 and the unsatisfactory victory of 1965, India was psychologically and militarily prepared when Pakistan launched unprovoked airstrikes on December 3 against Indian cities and plunged the subcontinent into another war.

The war may not have come as a surprise to the Indian military leadership -- but it still had to be won.

Here are 5 significant events and moments during the 1971 India-Pakistan War that turned the tide decisively in India’s favour, leading to the liberation of Dhaka and the surrender of Pakistani troops on December 16.

1) Battle of Longewala

This famous battle on the intervening night of December 4 and 5 took place at the post of Longewala which was manned by 120 men of the 23 Punjab regiment’s ‘Alfa Company’ and commanded by the legendary Major Kuldip Singh Chandpuri. Despite being heavily outnumbered by incoming Pakistani soldiers and infantry, these incredibly brave warriors defended this critical outpost till dawn, when help came in the form of the Indian Air Force’s Marut and Hunter jets.

2) Operation Trident: Karachi port attacked

The Indian Navy targeted Karachi port on the night of December 4-5, decimating the Pakistani destroyer PNS Khyber as well as the minesweeper PNS Muhafiz. PNS Shah Jahan suffered critical damage too. India suffered no losses in this superbly conducted operation. December 4 is marked as Navy Day by India to celebrate this magnificent victory.

3) Battle of Hilli

The Battle of Hilli was one of the longest and bloodiest battles of the 1971 war, and it started on the night of November 22, even before the actual declaration of war. What made the battle so tough was that Hilli was defended extremely well by Pakistani troops, and every inch of territory had to be fought to claim it. The Indian troops were led by Lt. Col. Shamsher Singh. India claimed Hilli, but at a great price. Sixty-eight troops made the ultimate sacrifice.

4) Battle of Basantar

One of the deadliest tank fights ever fought in the subcontinent, the Battle of Basantar is best remembered for the extraordinary courage of 2nd Lt. Arun Khetarpal who led India to a famous victory, though Indian tanks were outnumbered by Pakistani ones. Khetarpal, who was posthumously awarded Param Vir Chakra Award, kept fighting despite being severely injured, and managed to singlehandedly destroy several enemy tanks.

5) The U.S. Seventh Fleet is thwarted

Right in the middle of the war, realising that Pakistan’s defeat was imminent, the U.S. Seventh Fleet was ordered to dispatch Task Force 74 to the Bay of Bengal. The centrepiece of this was the USS Enterprise. There is little evidence to indicate that the US was actually planning to engage militarily with India. At best this was a show of strength to intimidate India. But the US action merely encouraged India to capture East Pakistani towns and cities from the clutches of the Pakistani military with a greater sense of urgency.

Finally, if the US Navy had any lingering inclination for adventurism, it was put to rest by a Soviet naval task force – which included a cruiser and a destroyer – that intercepted Task Force 74. It was a classic Cold War encounter, and better sense prevailed on the US side.
