Militant who aided Jatt’s escape killed

A Hizbul Mujahideen militant who had helped Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) ‘commander’ Naveed Jatt to escape from a Srinagar jail in February last year was killed in an encounter in Pulwama on Tuesday. One soldier also died and another sustained injuries in the gunfight.

Hizb militant Hilal Ahmad Rather, a resident of Behgambagh-Kakapora in Pulwama, was encircled by a joint search team of the Army, police and CRPF in Ratnipora area. “As the midnight searches were going on, hiding militants fired upon security personnel. Rather was killed in retaliatory fire. The operation was called off in the morning after the body was retrieved,” said the police.

The police said Rather hatched the conspiracy for LeT’s Jatt alias Hanzalla to escape from a Srinagar hospital on February 6 last year. Jatt was eventually killed in an operation on November 28 last year in Budgam’s Chadoora area. “Rather a long history of terror crime. He was the main conspirator and executor in helping Jatt to flee,” said Inspector General of Police S.P. Pani.

The police said he was involved in attacks on security establishments. “Incriminating material, such as arms and ammunition, was recovered from the site of encounter. All these materials have been taken in the case records for the purpose of investigation,” said Mr. Pani.

An Army soldier, Havildar Baljeet, who sustained bullet wounds at the encounter site later died in a hospital. “Another injured soldier was admitted to a Srinagar hospital and is undergoing treatment,” said the police.

Lt. Gen. K.J.S. Dhillon, commander of the Chinar Corps, paid tributes to deceased Baljeet, 35. A resident of Karnal district in Haryana, the soldier joined the Army in 2002 and is survived by his wife, daughter and son.

Meanwhile, internet was stopped in Pulwana and train services halted in view of street protests. Authorities said many youth took to the streets during the encounter. Hundreds of locals, including women, participated in the last rites of Rather. The funeral procession witnessed anti-India slogans.

Teenage boy dies in blast

The police said a 15-year-old boy died when a blast occurred mysteriously in Anderhama area of north Kashmir's Kupwara around 3:55 p.m.

“We are ascertaining the facts regarding the incident,” said Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Shriram Ambarkar.

In a separate incident, a loud explosion took place outside Srinagar’s Central Jail. The police said it’s investigating the nature of blast.
