Result of Balakot strike would have been different if IAF had Rafales, says Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria

Bhadauria said that the result of IAF's Balakot strike would have been different if Rafales were in its fleet at the time of the attack | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights They were not able to hit even a single target. So, where is the question of parity? - he said in response to a question on parity between IAF and PAF Bhadauria also said that a lot of lip service is being done on the Make in India programme

New Delhi: Indian Air Force chief Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria, on Monday said that if the IAF had Rafales in its possession at the time of Balakot airstrike, the result of the strike would have been different. Speaking at an event in New Delhi, he further said that 'a lot of lip service' is being done when it comes to 'Make in India' programme of the IAF. He also called for a consolidated action for effective implementation of the flagship programme.

In response to a question on whether Pakistan's response could have been different if Rafale aircraft were inducted into the IAF at the time of the Balakot strikes, Bhadauria said, "Response is in their hand. But the results (of the airstrike) would have been different." He further stressed that once the French fighters are inducted into the IAF, the enemy will 'think and think a lot'.

"Everyone has to work in this direction (of indigenous development). We have given our support. DRDO has to design a timeline... PSUs should be encouraged for private sector participation," Bhadauria said.

"Right now, in this 'Make in India' and indigenisation (programme), a lot of lip service is being done. Our intentions are very good but practically, the work is going on extremely slowly. If everyone works in this direction, we will be successful," he added.

Commenting on parity between the IAF and PAF, Bhadauria said — "When we targeted (terror camps in Balakot), we hit exactly at the targets. They (Pakistan Air Force) came with 30 aircraft and we challenged them. They were not able to hit even a single target. So, where is the question of parity?"

On February 26, the IAF had carried out an attack on the Balakot terror camps in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack which resulted in the death of 40 CRPF personnel.
