Army Jawan Killed In Ceasefire Violation By Pakistan In J-K's Gurez Sector

New Delhi:

An Army personnel was killed on Monday after the Pakistan army violated ceasefire along the Line of Control in Gurez sector of Jammu and Kashmir's Bandipore district. The killed Army personnel has been identified as Havildar Chougule Jotiba Ganpati.

“Pakistani troops resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violation in Gurez sector today (Monday). Our troops retaliated to the violation in adequate measure and effectively,” PTI quoted an Army official as saying.

He further added that one soldier was killed in the firing by Pakistani troops. “The Army salutes the supreme sacrifice of the brave soldier,” the official said.

Meanwhile, the ceasefire violation was reported in Jammu and Kashmir's Nowshera sector. According to a report, the Pakistan army fired Mortars along the LoC. Indian Army is retaliating befittingly and the gunbattle is underway.

Earlier, in the day, the Indian Army foiled a major infiltration attempt of terrorists backed by the Pakistan Army along the LoC in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district in Jammu and Kashmir.

Army detected a suspicious movement along the LoC. Soon after, the Army challenged the infiltrators, the Pakistan Army retaliated and started an exchange of fire. The gunbattle took place at 2:30 PM (IST). No damage was reported on the Indian side.

Last week, the Pakistan Army had resorted to shelling of mortars and small arms from across the LOC and the International Border (IB) in Poonch, Baramulla and Kathua districts of Jammu and Kashmir. The unprovoked firing left two people injured.

Recently, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat said Pakistan has reactivated the Balakot terror camp very recently and about 500 infiltrators were waiting to sneak into India. "The response to the terror camp getting functional again may go beyond India’s previous response by way of an air strike in February," he had told reporters at the Officers Training Academy.

Also Read: Indian Army Foils Major Infiltration Bid Of Terrorists Backed By Pakistan In Rajouri District

On being asked about the response to the reactivation and if a repeat strike may be expected, he said, “Why must you expect repeat of a similar thing, earlier we did something, then we did Balakot, why must we repeat....why not keep the other side guessing as to what we will do; why tell him what we are going to do, why not keep him guessing, why say repeat, why not something beyond that.”

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
