Six arrested for snatching, loot in Patiala; committed over two dozen robberies

PATIALA: As many as six persons of a robbery gang were nabbed by Patiala police on Monday. The police claimed that there were nine members in the gang and the six arrested accused had committed more than two dozen crimes of snatching, loot and robbing off the common people in and around Patiala city.The accused have been identified as Jashandeep Singh, Paramvir Singh, Abhishek Kumar, Akashdeep Sharma, Sukhvir Singh and Arshdeep Singh of Patiala city.The police said that initially these gang members used wooden rods to attack their targets, but later they shifted to using sharp-edged weapons to attack their targets and loot them. The police said that in many cases the victims had suffered grievous injuries.The police said that all these gang members had committed over 40 such crimes of snatching, loot and robbery by assaulting people however many of these crimes were not reported.The accused used to make soft targets and they mostly attacked the people going for a morning walk or to buy vegetables in the wee hours. The accused had looted from Rs 500 to Rs 10,000 in various crimes.“Two of these accused were educated and were pursuing IT courses. The accused wanted to make easy money. The parents of the accused hailed from middle-class families were having their livelihood through self-employment or small private jobs. The accused were a gang of nine members and we have managed to arrest six of them. The modus operandi of the accused was to target the people in the wee hours from 1 am to 6 am. The accused started using sharp-edged weapons including knife, sword and other such weapons whereas before this the accused had attacked their targets with wooden rods. In around 10 such incidents, the accused had stabbed the people whom they had targeted for loot. All the arrested accused are under the age of 20. The accused have no criminal record in the past other than the cases registered against them for these snatching, robberies and assault,” said Mandeep Singh Sidhu, SSP Patiala.
