Jamia protest aftermath: Passerby shot in leg, claims police took shot without cause

Jamia protest aftermath: Passerby shot in leg, claims police took shot without cause (File PTI photo from Jamia police crackdown on Sunday)

A man who was allegedly shot in the leg during the police crackdown at protesters near Jamia university on Sunday evening has said that the police fired at him even though he was not a part of the protest and was just passing by the area.

The medical records of the victim, Mohammed Tamin, show that he has a gunshot wound on his left leg. However, it is not clear if the wound was caused by a rubber or a real bullet. Bullet recovered from his leg has been sent for forensics.

Speaking to India Today TV, Tamin said that he was not part of the protest at Jamia, he was just at the wrong place at the wrong time, "There were police officers who saw me going, they didn't ask anything, took a straight shot at my leg."

"I wasn't even protesting. I was passing by from the Okhla area. I was on a bike when suddenly police started lathicharging students," he said.

His doctors at the Holy Family Hospital said that his injuries could have been severe if the bullet had been aimed at his upper torso.

"I am shocked. I have a family. Delhi Police didn't think about anything. Had I died, will they take responsibility for my family?" Tamin asked.

Delhi Police has however denied having fired any bullet. According to a PTI report, a senior police official has said that the policemen were not carrying any kind of gun during the crackdown at Jamia protesters.

Speaking to India Today TV, Joint Commissioner of Police Devesh Srivastav has said that Delhi Police does not even own a rubber bullet gun. "We have not shot anyone and we do not have rubber bullet," he said.

In a separate report, news agency PTI has reported that two Jamia students were treated for gunshot wounds at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital.

The father of one of the students, Sohaib Khan (23), told the news agency his son was not part of the protest but was passing by when he was hit by a "pellet" on the toe.

"He underwent surgery last night and was shifted to a ward," his father, Mohammad Arshad, said.

Sohaib is a fourth-year BTech student at Jamia Hamdard, his father said.

Another student, Ajaz (22), who also suffered gunshot injury on the chest apparently at the protest site, was also undergoing treatment at the Centre-run hospital.

The senior police officer, who spoke to the agency, said that injuries were possibly caused by the sharp end of tear gas shells.

(With inputs from PTI)

Follow | Live coverage of anti-CAA protests

Read | Cops beat girls and boys alike, my brave women friends saved me: Jamia boy whose assault video is viral

Watch | Watch: There has been emotional loss, says Jamia V-C during press conference
