Indian politician found guilty of raping young woman in case where multiple witnesses died

An Indian politician has been convicted of the rape of a young woman when she was a teenager, in a case that involved the deaths of multiple witnesses.

Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a former member of the Uttar Pradesh legislative assembly for prime minister Narendra Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), was found guilty of kidnapping and raping a minor.

The court found the victim’s testimony to be “unblemished, truthful and of a sterling quality”, reported NDTV.

She was 17 when the rape took place in 2017, in the village of Unnao, Uttar Pradesh. Her case rose to prominence in April 2018 when she attempted to immolate herself in protest at police inaction.

One day later, her father – who brought the case to police on her behalf – was beaten by a group of men allegedly including Mr Sengar’s brother, and died of his injuries in hospital.

Indian General Election 2019 Show all 10 1 /10 Indian General Election 2019 Indian General Election 2019 Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) President Amit Shah (R) welcomes Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi (L) at BJP headquarters prior to a ceremony to thank the Union council of Ministers for their contribution in India's general election, in New Delhi on May 21, 2019 AFP/Getty Indian General Election 2019 An Indian Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) supporter shouts slogans and holds the party flag as he celebrates on the vote results day for India's general election in New Delhi on May 23, 2019. - Prime Minister Narendra Modi looked on course on May 23 for a major victory in India's election, with early trends from the election commission showing a clear lead for his party. AFP/Getty Images Indian General Election 2019 Indian election officials count votes using electronic voting machines at a counting center for the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament) election, in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, India, 23 May 2019. The parliamentary elections, which began on 11 April 2019, were held in seven phases throughout India and are currently being tabulated. The Lok Sabha elections were held for 542 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats, and a party or alliance needs 272 seats to form a government. EPA Indian General Election 2019 Indian supporters of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) dance as they celebrate on the vote results day for India's general election in Siliguri on May 23, 2019. - Prime Minister Narendra Modi looked on course on May 23 for a major victory in India's election, with early trends from the election commission showing a clear lead for his party. AFP/Getty Images Indian General Election 2019 Indian supporters and party workers of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) dance as they celebrate on the vote results day for India's general election in Bangalore on May 23, 2019. - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi looked on course on May 23 for a major victory in the world's biggest election, with early trends suggesting his Hindu nationalist party will win a bigger majority even than 2014. AFP/Getty Images Indian General Election 2019 Indian supporters and party workers of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) dance and hold flags as they celebrate on the vote results day for India's general election in Bangalore on May 23, 2019. - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi looked on course on May 23 for a major victory in the world's biggest election, with early trends suggesting his Hindu nationalist party will win a bigger majority even than 2014. AFP/Getty Images Indian General Election 2019 An Indian member of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) shouts slogans and shows portraits of party president M.K. Stalin as she celebrates on the vote results day for India's general election in Chennai on May 23, 2019. - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi looked on course on May 23 for a major victory in the world's biggest election, with early trends suggesting his Hindu nationalist party will win a bigger majority even than 2014. AFP/Getty Images Indian General Election 2019 Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) supporters, wearing masks dipicting Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, celebrate BJP's potential win in the the Lok Sabha election the Lok Sabha elections, in Amritsar, India, 23 May 2019. The Lok Sabha, the lower house of Parliament, elections, which began on 11 April 2019, is having the results tallied today. The Lok Sabha elections were held for 542 of the 543 lower house seats, and a party or alliance needs 272 seats to form a government. According to initial polling Narendra Modi could retain the position of Prime Minister along with the Bhartya Janta Party. EPA Indian General Election 2019 A Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) supporter wears a mask dipicting Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi as he celebrates BJP's potential win in the the Lok Sabha election the Lok Sabha elections, in Amritsar, India, 23 May 2019. The Lok Sabha, the lower house of Parliament, elections, which began on 11 April 2019, is having the results tallied today. The Lok Sabha elections were held for 542 of the 543 lower house seats, and a party or alliance needs 272 seats to form a government. According to initial polling Narendra Modi could retain the position of Prime Minister along with the Bhartya Janta Party EPA Indian General Election 2019 Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) supporters celebrate in their party's Assam state office in Gauhati, India, Thursday, May 23, 2019. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his party have a commanding lead in early vote counting from the country's six-week general election. AP

Then in July this year, the victim was travelling with her lawyer and two female relatives when their car was involved in a head-on collision with a truck, killing the relatives.

One of the relatives was a witness in the case. The victim and her lawyer were critically injured and remained in hospital for two months to recover.

A special court proceeding was held in the hospital to record the victim’s statement following the collision as she was unable to attend the trial.

The court said Sengar conspired to “silence” the victim’s father and ordered his accomplices to beat him.

It viewed the murder as “part of a larger conspiracy to deter, silence and prevent the father from pursuing” the rape of his daughter in 2017.

The case drew an outcry from both the public and opposition members of India’s parliament, who protested after the car crash took place.

Dayanidhi Maran, an MP, said at the time: “Every Indian hangs his head in shame because of the horrific Unnao case and the violence committed against the victim.

“Raped, subjected to violence, kith and kin killed. Is this the ‘New India’ we want to live in?”

Mr Sengar was expelled from the BJP party in August. He will be sentenced on Thursday, reported India Today.
