Role of Baljit Singh Tyagi and BSF in our Liberation War

It was the last week of May or first week of June 1971. Responding to the declaration of independence by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the Father of the Nation, my father Dr Akhlakul Hossain Ahamed, who was a member of provincial assembly (MPA) of the then East Pakistan, moved to Moheshkhola under the Tura district of Meghalaya. My father decided to get actively engaged in organising the war around that region. During our liberation war, thousands of Bengali civilians took refuge at Moheshkhola. It was the gateway for the youths intending to join the liberation war for moving from Netrokona, Sunamganj and some parts of Kishoreganj districts. A youth camp was set up there to recruit the youths for providing them with training so as to join the fight against the Pakistani occupation army and their local collaborators.

My father started leading the activities of the said youth camp as camp-in-charge. A few days later, on August 14, 1971, my mother travelled to Moheshkhola along with her four children. We took refuge at Moheshkhola and started staying in a thatched-roof dwelling shed. After December 16, 1971, during the last week of the month, we returned to our motherland Bangladesh. After coming back to Mohonganj (Netrokona), my birthplace, we found our house burnt down by the Pakistani army.

When I was growing up, I often wanted to visit Moheshkhola where we took refuge in 1971. On April 16, 2016, I had the chance to finally fulfil my dream. I along with my younger brother Saiful Hassan, who was only two-years-old during the war of liberation, entered the Meghalaya territory of India at about 1.00 p.m. where we were warmly received by the district administration officers from both west and south Garo hills (Tura and Baghmara) and the officers of Border Security Force (BSF). After arriving there, the government officials informed me that my entourage and I have been declared as state guests by the government of Meghalaya. BSF officer Mr Rathore took me to a monument built in memory of the martyrs of our liberation war. All the martyrs were BSF soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the cause of independence of Bangladesh. I placed a bouquet of flowers as my humble tribute at the monument.

On November 18 of this year, Justice Syed Refaat Ahmed, a Judge of Bangladesh Supreme Court, High Court Division, sent me a message where it was mentioned that BSF's lone survivor Mr BS Tyagi, who saved Killapara during 1971, had passed away. Mr Tyagi was the father of his Lordship's best friend, Mr Ajay Tyagi, who is a lawyer practicing in the Supreme Court of India. Mr BS Tyagi was a 1971 war veteran. Mr Refaat Ahmed also sent a photo of Mr Tyagi, visiting a monument at Killapara, Dalu. Seeing this photograph, I recalled my visit to the said monument, although I didn't know that the place where the monument has been erected is known as Killapara. I felt an interest to know more about Mr BS Tyagi and the role of BSF during our liberation war in 1971.

In 1971, BSF was still a relatively new organisation. The first Director General of BSF was Mr KF Rustomji. According to Mr Anil Kamboj, a former IG of BSF, Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi authorised the BSF to take on Pakistani troops in erstwhile East Pakistan several months before the war entered the decisive month of December 1971. According to contemporary newspapers and other sources, it is found that Mrs. Gandhi said to the BSF, "Do what you like, but don't get caught." Mr Anil Kamboj further said in an article, published in an online paper, that on March 29, 1971, the then Indian Army Chief Field Marshal SHFJ Manekshaw issued orders that BSF was to provide limited assistance to the Mukti Bahini who were pitted against the Pakistani troops. Thereafter, BSF entered the scene. Initially, a group of a hundred BSF Jawans, under the leadership of some handpicked officers of BSF who were well-versed in commando attack, demolitions, etc., got prepared. The aim of this group of BSF soldiers was to provide aid to the freedom fighters to carry out their mission successfully.

One of the key responsibilities of the BSF was to provide training to the Mukti Bahini. BSF started assisting the Mukti Bahini in causing subversion and sabotage inside Bangladesh (then East Pakistan). The civilian population of Bangladesh wholeheartedly worked for the cause of achieving liberation of the country. Young people from all over the country joined the Mukti Bahini. In the said situation, BSF's assistance and organisational skills played an important role in achieving the goal.

With the active facilitation of BSF, our liberation war leader Mr Tajuddin Ahmed (later Prime Minister of Mujibnagar Government) and Barrister Amirul Islam, the then MNA, could establish liaison with the government of India. When Tajuddin Ahmed and Amirul Islam crossed the border, the BSF personnel took them to Mr Golok Mojumder, the then Inspector General of BSF, Bengal frontier at Kolkata. According to Mr Anil Kamboj, BSF played a significant part in forming the Bangladesh provisional government.

Mr Anil Komboj further added that the government-in-exile of Bangladesh initially started functioning at the BSF frontier headquarters in Kolkata. Later, they shifted to a nearby building at the Theatre Road. This place was called Mujibnagar headquarters.

After the demise of Mr BS Tyagi, I came to know that during our liberation war, on May 25, the Pakistani occupation army had attacked the Killapara Post of BSF (nearer to Dalu Bazar). The area had experienced heavy shelling from across the border and large-scale atrocities carried out by Pakistani soldiers, forcing thousands of people to cross over to the Garo hills area of Meghalaya. The target of Pakistan army was to disconnect the strategic Dalu-Tura road to open up the war towards the interiors of India. Their plan, however, got halted by a small group of brave BSF soldiers led by a valiant and courageous company commander and the then Assistant Commandant of BSF, Mr Baljit Singh Tyagi (BS Tyagi). At one point of time, the Pakistani soldiers could occupy the BSF post of Killapara. But within 2-3 hours, the BSF started a counter-attack against the Pakistani soldiers by firing mortar shells. Mr Tyagi ordered the mortar shelling though it was a standing order that the mortar could not be fired without the prior permission from the battalion headquarters of BSF. But Mr Tyagi, to save his motherland and the people of Bangladesh who took refuge at the border area of Meghalaya, ordered the firing, taking the risk of facing disciplinary action. Though the Pakistani troops could occupy the Killapara outpost, their victory was very short-lived.

Finally, under the heroic command of Mr BS Tyagi, the BSF could regain the control of the said outpost. Many Pakistani soldiers died in the said battle and, on the Indian side, nine brave soldiers of BSF sacrificed their lives to save their motherland and the Bangladeshi refugees. Their supreme sacrifice shall remain etched in the history of our war of liberation.

Today in this glorious month of our victory, I believe that the role of BSF and the strong support that India extended, as our trusted friend during the war of liberation, will remain intact as a strong foundation of the affiliation between the people of the two nations.

My heartfelt and deepest gratitude and salute to the Border Security Force (BSF), particularly to Mr BS Tyagi who led the battle of Killapara. I also express my humble tribute to the martyrs, namely head constable Mon Bahadur Rai, Naik Kalyan Singh Negi, Constables Khuladhar Saikia, Mon Bahadur Chhetri Promod Chandra Kalita, Manibhadra Singh, Devendra Dutta Bahuguna, Puran Bahadur Chand and Khem Bahadur Chandan, who heroically fought and sacrificed their lives to save the territory of their motherland as well as the lives of thousands of Bangladeshi people who took shelter at Dula Bazar area and neighbouring localities. The sacrifice of the above-named heroes shall remain alive forever in the heart of the Bangladeshis.

Justice Obaidul Hassan is a Judge of Bangladesh Supreme Court, High Court Division.
