Druggist injured in Khurda clinic firing dies, doctor still critical

BHUBANESWAR: A day after an unidentified miscreant opened fire on paediatrician Manas Ranjan Das and medicine store owner Krushna Chandra Sahoo at a clinic in Khurda, the druggist died of bullet injuries at a private hospital here on Monday.The masked attacker shot at 61-year-old doctor in his clinic when he was examining a child and later opened fire on Sahoo when he attempted to overpower the accused.Das was hit by two bullets in his abdomen and Sahoo one in his chest. “We operated on Das and Sahoo and removed the bullets. Both were under observation in the ICU. But Sahoo died due to severe internal bleeding,” a doctor said.Police are still clueless about the attacker and his motive of the crime though the three bullets, which were removed from the abdomen of Das and Sahoo have been sent to the State Forensic Science Laboratory for ballistic test. Though police examined the CCTV footage of the clinic, they are yet to ascertain the identity of the accused as he had his face covered with a monkey cap.“We have not yet found clarity in investigation. The doctor is still critical. Once he recovers, we will speak to him. Though we spoke to his family members, they claimed that he had no enmity,” inspector general of police (personnel) Soumendra Priyadarshi said after inspecting the crime spot (clinic) at Khurda on Monday.Superintendent of police (Khurda) Ajay Pratap Swain said separate teams have been formed to crack the case. “Our aim is to identify the accused. We are investigating from all angles, including suspected land dispute, professional rivalry and personal enmity,” Swain said.Sources said a team of police officers visited jails in Bhubaneswar, Cuttack and Nayagarh and gathered details about some prisoners, who were released in the last few days. “We are trying to find out if any notorious criminal was involved in the firing,” another police officer said.Condemning the brazen shooting and condoling Sahoo’s death, medicine store owners in Khurda shut their shops on Monday and demanded immediate arrest of the accused. “We are pained by the death of our colleague (Krushna Chandra Sahoo). If the police do not arrest the accused at the earliest, we will stage a protest,” said Ajay Agarwal, a medicine store owner in Khurda.
