Tirupur gears up to witness ‘Ring of fire’ on December 26

Tirupur: Scientists from several organisations have made arrangements for students to witness the annular solar eclipse that would be fully visible in the city on December 26.

Tamil Nadu Science Forum (TNSF) along with six other organisations including Vigyan Prasar would distribute around 25,000 solar eclipse glasses to school students and interested people at Rs20. It has invited 500 school students from various districts to witness the event in a private school in Avinashi.

“The annular solar eclipse and total solar eclipse are the two most important eclipses. The annular eclipse would happen on December 26, and it means that the moon would cover the centre part of the sun, leaving outer parts of the sun to form ‘ring of fire’. In India, the ring of fire event would happen first at Cheruvathur in Kasargod of Kerala this time. The local government there is organising a big event,” said T Jeyamurugan, state executive committee member, TNSF.

“The eclipse would happen for three minutes and eleven seconds from 9.29am, and it could be visible fully in Pudukottai, Ooty, and Tirupur in our state. But with favourable weather forecast, Avinashi of Tirupur would be better place to witness in the state.” president of Tamil Nadu Astronomical Society D Vijayakumar said.

He said that his organisation would conduct an event to popularise the eclipse in a private school in Thiruvika Nagar in the city. “The last time, the annular eclipse happened in 2010. It will happen in June 2020, but it could be visible better in Punjab then. So, Tamil Nadu people should utilize the opportunity on December 26,” Vijayakumar added.

“It is important that the people witness the solar eclipse utilizing proper devices which protect their eyes properly. There are goggles including solar pinhole, telescope with sun filter and ball mirror method. TNSF comes up with solar goggle made of solar filter glass approved scientifically,” Jeyamurugan said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
