CAA Protest: Major protests across universities in Hyderabad too

Massive protests rocked educational institutions across Hyderabad on Monday, with thousands of students from major universities demanding an immediate roll back of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) (Photo credit: PTI)

HYDERABAD: Massive protests rocked educational institutions across Hyderabad on Monday, with thousands of students from major universities demanding an immediate roll back of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). Students of Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU), University of Hyderabad (UoH), and Osmania University (OU) raised slogans against the central government, condemned the actions of the Delhi and Uttar Pradesh police and demanded strict action against them for “attacking students”.

Students of MANUU —which has been on the boil since Sunday night — also boycotted the semester exam scheduled for Monday. “Unless the centre initiates action against police personnel who entered Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI) and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) campuses and attacked students, we will continue with our protest,” said Shaik Umar Faruq Quadri, president of the student union at MANUU. Around 1,500 students who gathered at the main entrance of the varsity also demanded that the Centre shelve its plan to introduce the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in states across the country.

‘We understand students, stand by them’

Despite faculty members extending their support to protesting students, they were stopped from entering the campus. “Many of us had to return from the main gate as students blocked the entry. We can understand their frustration and we stand by them. What happened at JMI or AMU should not have happened,” said a Manuu faculty member.

At UoH, close to 200 students took to the streets to participate in the march from the campus to Gachibowli Stadium. Expressing solidarity with students in Delhi and UP, they termed the CAA as “unconstitutional” and took a dig at the BJP-led government for the “police terror” in the two northern states.

“Our fight is against the centre's attempt to curb debate and discussion at educational institutions. As students of UoH, we have faced police brutality several times. Our varsity too tried to stop us even from holding public talks and took the help of local police to do so. But what happened in JMI and AMU is unspeakable. It reached a different level and we will stand by those students who were attacked by the police,” said Aakriti Suresh, an M Phil scholar of UoH, who took part in the protest.

The members of the Jammu and Kashmir Students’ Association at UoH also strongly condemned the ‘Islamophobic’, ‘anti-minority’, ’anti-poor’ CAA. “JKSA-UoH excoriates the state repression and police brutality that is being unleashed on peaceful protesters across this country. We condemn that internet services and telephone lines are being snapped in many parts of this country. We stand in complete solidarity with protesting citizens and especially the students who are leading the struggle against CAA across the country,” said the association in its statement.

Similarly, hundreds of OU students also protested in front of the Arts College on campus. The students said that the court should take suo moto cognizance of the “violence that is unleashed on the students and ensure that those behind the attacks are punished”.


