NA resolves against India’s anti-Muslim law

Ag APP

ISLAMABAD: The National Assembly (NA) on Monday adopted a unanimous resolution condemning the India’s Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, a discriminatory law enacted by Indian Parliament last week.

The resolution moved by the federal minister Shafqat Mahmood maintained that adoption of this law is indication of the dangerous extremist tendencies of the current government relating to treatment of minorities in neighboring countries.

The resolution stated that the controversial amendment is against international norms of equality and non-discrimination and International Human Rights Law as it seeks to setup faith-based criteria for a group of citizenship.

The National Assembly through the resolution, called upon India to revoke the discriminatory clauses in the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 and immediately halt the brutal use of force against the religious minorities, in particular Indian Muslim students.

The House also demanded release of peaceful proteststors detained under crackdown against minorities and reverse all discriminatory measures and steps in order to allow minorities to live with dignity and safety.

The resolution also called upon the international community including the United Nations, Human Rights Council, and other relevant Human Rights organizations to urge India to revoke this discriminatory Act and to protect and safeguard the rights of its minorities including Muslims.

The resolution also demanded curfew and information block out from Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and respect UN Security Council Resolutions.

It further stated that the amendment was also against bilateral agreements and understandings between Indian and Pakistan, particularly those on security and rights of minorities in the respective countries. The resolution stressed that the status of minorities in India remains deplorable and points to instances of persecution of minorities including mob lynching, particularly targeting Muslims and low caste dalits by cow-vigilantes from extremist Hindu organizations like Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP) and Bajrang Dal, schemes likes Ghar Wapsi and ‘Love Jihad’ and violence against Christians and other minorities.

The House underlined that the new Act ostensibly tries to give the impression that it aims to provide protection to minorities from neighboring countries while ignoring the fact that the rights of minorities in India continue to be violated.

The parliamentarians also reiterated that Indian occupied Jammu and Kashmir was only Muslim majority area in India were eight million innocent Kashmiris are collectively incarcerated and penalized by 900,000 Indian occupation forces and face the danger of forced demographic change.

The House also reaffirmed its solidarity and commitment to the people of Indian Occupied Kashmir in their just struggle for their rights to self determination and reiterates its continuing political and moral struggle for this just struggle in line with UN Security Council Resolution.

The House also reiterated the recent anti Muslim actions of BJP/RSS led government like revocation of Article 370 from Indian Constitution and illegal annexation of the IOJ&K, and collective incarceration and violation of the rights of more than 8 million innocent Kashmiris at the hand of Indian Occupation forces for the last four months, shifting the burden of proof of citizenship on minorities through the National Register of Citizens (NRC) in Assam and rewarding those who vandalized the Babri Mosque in 1992 are all signs of movements towards ethnic cleansing.

The parliamentarians asserted that extremist and fascist measures of BJP government in pursuit of Hindutva ideology are fast leading India into a Hindu Rashtra, where the minorities, particularly Muslims are facing the brunt of persecution.

The parliamentarians noted with concern that the Indian State’s excessive use of force and violent response against protesters, in particular religious minorities and Muslim students in various parts of India.

The House also condemned the 2019 controversial Amendment Act to India’s Citizenship Law in the strongest terms which is not only regressive and discriminatory but also interference in the affairs of neighboring countries.

The parliamentarians also rejected India’s patently false insinuation that minorities in Pakistan are not protected;

They reiterated that all minorities are equal citizens of Pakistan under its Constitution and enjoy equal protection of laws and continue to contribute actively to our collective national development and prosperity It stated that all institutions in Pakistan including the Parliament continue to mainstream our minorities and to promote their welfare.

It calls upon the international community including the United Nations, Human Rights Council, and other relevant Human Rights organizations to urge India to revoke this discriminatory Act and to protect and safeguard the rights of its minorities including Muslims.

Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi who raised the issue in the House, said the Pakistani nation was standing with oppressed Muslims of India and Kashmiri and demanded withdrawal discriminatory Citizenship Act. He demanded that the Indian government withdraw the law immediately.

The Minister observed that the Citizenship Act passed by Indian parliament has also revived memories of genocide of Muslims under supervision of Modi in state of Gujrat. “The discriminatory law has revived memories of acts of butcher of Gujrat called Modi. Now the same Modi is bent upon dividing Indian nation,” he said.

He also demanded of the international community to impose restrictions on the Indian home minister Amit Shah.

Paying salute to vision of Father of the Nation, Quaid-e-Azam, observing it has been proved now that as to how important was creation of Pakistan. “Now Mahbooba Mufti and others are also saying that they committed historic wrong by supporting India,” he said. He observed with passage of the discriminatory law, the Indian Government had closed window of citizenship on all minorities except from Muslims. “The Indian Government has proved that Muslims are not acceptable to it,” he said.

He mentioned brutal acts committed by the India’s police against Muslims particularly against students inside the Ali Garh University and Millia Islamia institution where female students were also not spared.

He pointed out that the Pakistan Government had apprised the world of future designs of India following annexation of Kashmir. “ Today the world is seeing that that Pakistan Government predicted was correct,” he said.

He demanded of the Senate chairman and Speaker to given names of parliamentarians from two houses for inclusion in delegations to be sent abroad for parliamentary diplomacy on Kashmir and India’s brutal and discriminatory acts in their country.

Former foreign minister and PPP parliamentarian Hina Rabbani Khar while saying that the House was united against Modi’s acts, questioned as to what happened with resolution passed on the floor on Kashmir issue.

She said that with passage of India’s Citizenship Act, has now given another opportunity to Pakistan to exploit the situation and apprise the world of Modi’s designs.

Former Prime Minister Raja Pervaiz Ashraf of PPP said had the Pakistan Government managed to stop India from annexation of Kashmir, the Indian Government could not have dare to pass the discriminatory law. “ Just passage of resolution is not sufficient rather we need to take practical steps,” he said.

He said the opposition was always ready to support the incumbent Government if it wanted to take effective practical steps on Kashmir issue.

The PML-N parliamentary leader in the National Assembly, Khawaja Asif questioned Government’s performance on diplomatic front observing that the present Government was maintaining all types of relations with India.

“ Today our trade with India is open, our airspace is open with India and diplomatic ties between two countries are intact,” Khawaja Asif said.

Khawaja Asif said Pakistan has very minimum role in voice being raised against India at the international level. “ Just passage of resolutions in the Parliament will serve nothing,” he said questioning as to what the Pakistan Government has done practically.

He regretted it was due to Pakistan Government’s inaction that people of the Indian Occupied have been losing their hopes with Pakistan.

Asif recalled that Pakistan fought four wars with India on Kashmir but what was being done now. “I am not saying to attack India but stressing that effective voice should come from Pakistan for Kashmiris and Muslims in India,” he said.

Khawaja Asif said that the nation should have learnt from Fall of Dhaka and tragedies like carnage at APS Peshawar saying that the APS martyrs fell victims to war of aliens.

Another PML-N parliamentarian Khurram Dastgir alleged that attitude of the PTI Government was giving an impression that it had accepted India’s annexation of Kashmir. “ I am saying that it is the PTI Government not the Pakistani nation which has accepted annexation of Kashmir with India,” he said.

Maulana Abdul Akbar Chitrali of Jamnaat-e-Islami (JI) said the PML-N leaders were making tall claims in the House but their Government kept silence when JI leaders were being hanged by the Bangladesh’s pro India Government.

He was of the view that the problems being faced by the Muslim Ummah was that it had quit Jehad. “We need to wage Jehad if we want to save Kashmir,” he said.

Khawaja Saad Rafique of PML-N while condemning India’s discriminatory act against Muslims, observed that nobody in Pakistan learned lesson following Fall of Dhaka. “I am in the Parliament for fourth but is very much disappointed,” he said observing that all the institutions should be answerable to the Parliament.

Other parliamentarians including Dr. Darshan Laal, Aminul Haq of MQM and Mohsin Dawar also condemned India’s act of passage of discriminatory law against Muslim saying that the same reflected Modi’s mindset.

APP adds: Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi expressed concern over the “brutal and indiscriminate use of force” by the state on Indian Muslim students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

“The Modi government continues to curb and undermine the rights of minorities in accordance with Hindutva Supremacist ideology,” the foreign minister wrote in a tweet. “Illegal annexation of Kashmir, Babari Masjid, Citizenship Amendment Bill which excludes Muslims are all targeted towards subjugation of minorities,” he said.

Indian police baton-charged the protesting students along with use of tear gas, leaving scores injured. The Citizenship Amendment Bill provides that Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians fleeing persecution in Muslim-majority Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan can be granted citizenship.
