Next Army Chief Manoj Mukund Naravane has worked at all operational fronts

NEW DELHILieutenant General Manoj Mukund Naravane , a soldier who has experience on all operational fronts- both land borders as well as counter insurgency operations, will be the next Chief of the Indian Army Naravane will be replacing General Bipin Rawat , who retires on December 31. Naravane, who takes over thereafter, will serve until April 2022. He is currently serving as the army’s Vice Chief. With his new appointment, the government has followed the principle of seniority. He and the other two service chiefs from the air force and navy belong to the same National Defence Academy (NDA) course - 56th.Officers who have worked with him explained that Naravane has a ‘well rounded personality’, due to his vast experience of operating on the frontiers with China and Pakistan . Before taking over as the Vice Chief in September, he was heading the Kolkata-based Eastern Army Command which looks at India’s eastern sectors of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) with China. “He speaks his mind,” an official said.For several officers, Naravane is someone who will always be alert and tell his troops to do the same, even if the situation along the LAC is absolutely quiet. For him, it is important that one must not be caught off guard to any untoward incident. He is known to see trends and thread them together instead of looking at situations individually. This mindset is to predict what an adversary could be thinking and trying to achieve and thereby countering it. And he is not known to be someone, who when dealing with an adversary accepts unfair treatment, but rather believes in being on an equal footing and having mutual respect. Towards this end, he has worked to ensure that cooperation improves at the border between the Indian and Chinese armies.Naravane has also served in other key appointments in the North East. For example, he was a Brigade commander in Assam. So in the current context with the locals protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act and the army being deployed there to control the situation, he will be able to understand and deal with it better. He has also served as the Inspector General Assam Rifles (North), giving him the ability to understand the Naga issue as well. He has been the Defence Attache to Myanmar, which gives him not only vast knowledge of that country, but again of China as well.In relation to Pakistan, he has commanded the Ambala based 2 Strike Corps. This means that he would be well aware of how best mechanised warfare can work, besides understanding the challenges and what needs to be done. This could also mean that Naravane will be the right person to easily implement the army’s new fighting formations, the Integrated Battle Groups, that are a mix of all existing elements. Having served as the Vice Chief, he will have adequate knowledge of what are the equipment that must be bought on priority.Naravane also has adequate experience of dealing with counter-terrorist operations in Jammu and Kashmir , having commanded a Rashtriya Rifles battalion there. This knowledge will be handy keeping in mind the security situation following the abrogation of Article 370.Naravane’s focus could also be on training, as he has headed the Army Training Command (ARTRAC) as well, which looks at all training requirements of the army. “He is known to be a soldier’s man, as he is concerned about their welfare,” an official said.
