China holds fentanyl card in U.S. trade talks

China holds fentanyl card in U.S. trade talks

With help from Doug Palmer

Editor’s Note: This edition of Morning Trade is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Trade subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro’s comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here.

— President Donald Trump’s ask that China clamp down on sales of fentanyl, a powerful painkiller driving the U.S. opioid crisis, gives Beijing some leverage in trade talks.

— The Commerce Department remains tight-lipped about when it will release a report that could recommend that Trump slap tariffs on autos in the name of national security. The report is due next week, but it’s unclear if the 35-day shutdown has shifted the timeline.

— Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross and a group of American executives will head to India later this week amid reports that the Trump administration is considering cutting India’s trade benefits.

IT'S TUESDAY, FEB. 12! Welcome to Morning Trade, where your host thought she had fought off the flu this winter, but alas, was wrong. Got any tips for fighting off this flu? Trade news? Let me know: [email protected] or @sabrod123.

CHINA HOLDS FENTANYL CARD IN U.S. TRADE TALKS: The Trump administration has an ambitious checklist of changes it would like China to make on trade. Besides leveling the playing field for American firms and reducing the U.S. trade deficit, the administration wants to cut off Chinese shipments of fentanyl, the powerful painkiller that claimed nearly 50,000 lives in the U.S. in 2017 alone.

That painful statistic gives China some leverage in ongoing trade negotiations, as the political stakes for Trump’s effort to tackle the opioid crisis is high: The drug has hit hardest the states that are crucial to his reelection, including Pennsylvania and Ohio.

The promise: The White House said in December after Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping met in Buenos Aires that Xi agreed “to designate fentanyl as a controlled substance," a change that would subject fentanyl sellers to the death penalty under Chinese law.

Trump “wants President Xi to make good on the promise to schedule fentanyl as a controlled substance,” White House adviser Kellyanne Conway told Fox News on Monday.

But if the world’s two largest economies fail to reach a deal and Trump raises tariffs on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods, would Xi keep that vow to rein in fentanyl sales?

“You can be sure they will use the issue in the negotiations, either by expecting to be paid for doing what we want or by using the failure to get an agreement as an excuse to walk back their commitment — or, possibly, both,” said Bill Reinsch, a former Commerce Department official now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. Doug Palmer has more.

COMMERCE MUM ON AUTO REPORT TIMING: The Commerce Department is refusing to say when it will release a highly anticipated report that could recommend that Trump impose tariffs on autos and auto imports. Ross launched the investigation on May 24, so the 270 days allowed to conduct the investigation appears to end on Monday, Feb. 18, when the government is closed for Presidents Day.

Department spokespersons James Rockas and Rebecca Glover have ignored repeated requests in recent weeks to clarify whether the 35-day government shutdown would have any impact on the release date. A third Commerce spokesperson, Kevin Manning, on Monday also had nothing to share on that point. “The investigation is still ongoing. Once there is something further to report, I’ll be sure to ping you,” Manning said.

Once Trump receives the report, he will have 90 days to decide what, if any, action to take. A hearing conducted by the Commerce Department last summer showed little industry or public support for the action, which trade forecasters have warned could cause as many as 195,000 U.S. workers to lose their jobs over 1 to 3 years.

A former Commerce official told Morning Trade that they heard the department would finish the report this week. The former official noted that a recommendation to slap tariffs on cars could serve as leverage in the China talks and could be timed to be closer to a Trump-Xi summit.

Depending on what Ross recommends, the report could lead to Trump’s biggest trade action yet. In 2017, which because of the recent partial government shutdown is the still the last year for which there are full figures, the United States imported $360 million worth of vehicles and auto parts and exported $161 billion of the same.

Mexico and Canada negotiated quotas as part of the new NAFTA to shield their production from tariffs, and Trump also pledged not to impose new duties on Japan and the European Union as long as bilateral negotiations with those two partners are making progress.

That potentially leaves China and some other suppliers exposed. But recommending new tariffs on China right now could roil Trump administration efforts to reach a trade deal with Beijing.

NAILING DOWN DETAILS FOR TRUMP-XI SUMMIT: The Trump administration and Chinese government remain at odds over the right place and time to host the meeting between Trump and Xi.

China’s proposal: China has suggested that the two leaders meet on the tropical Chinese island of Hainan around the time of the annual Boao Forum for Asia, which runs from March 26-29, a source briefed on the idea told our South China Morning Post partners. But the source said the U.S. has yet to respond to the idea.

U.S. proposal: Conway said it’s “possible” Xi will meet with Trump at Mar-a-Lago. Two administration officials told Axios on Sunday that the summit could come as soon as mid-March at the Palm Beach, Fla., club.

Looking to March 1: Asked if both sides are getting closer to a deal, Conway said: “It looks that way. Absolutely.” Deputy-level talks launched Monday in Beijing as negotiators push to reach a deal ahead of the March 1 deadline.

U.S. STEEL CREDITS TRUMP’S TARIFFS FOR ALABAMA FURNACE PLAN: U.S. Steel Corp. announced Monday that it will resume construction of a new furnace at a steelmaking facility in Alabama as domestic steel producers continue to see increased profits due to Trump’s tariffs on foreign steel.

U.S. Steel President and CEO David B. Burritt credited Trump’s “strong trade actions and improved market conditions” as part of the reason the company is now able to restart construction. The project will create 150 jobs for the plant.

RETAILERS STOCK UP AHEAD OF POSSIBLE TARIFF INCREASE: The National Retail Federation said Monday that retail imports remain higher than usual as retailers brace for the possibility of Trump raising tariffs if the U.S. and China don’t reach a deal by the March deadline.

“With trade talks with China still unresolved, retailers appear to be bringing spring merchandise into the country early in case tariffs go up in March,” said Jonathan Gold, NRF vice president for supply chain and customs policy. Retailers “need to do what they can to mitigate the higher prices that will inevitably come with tariffs,” he said.

By the numbers: Major retail ports were estimated to have handled 1.83 million containers in January, up 4 percent from January 2018, according to the Global Port Tracker report from NRF and economic consulting firm Hackett Associates. Import volume in February is forecast to be almost 6 percent higher than February 2018 figures.

ICYMI: ALUMINUM GROUP URGES U.S.-CHINA DEAL ADDRESS METAL OVERCAPACITY: The Aluminum Association is urging the Trump administration to press for China to rein in its policies that have contributed to persistent aluminum overcapacity as part of any trade deal.

In a letter to U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, Aluminum Association President and CEO Heidi Brock asks that they seek a bilateral agreement that includes a “measurable, verifiable solution” to Beijing’s “massive structural overcapacity” of aluminum.

ROSS HEADED TO INDIA THIS WEEK: Amid reports the Trump administration is close to suspending trade benefits for India, Ross will head to New Delhi for the U.S.-India CEO Forum on Thursday. The list of nearly 20 executives traveling with Ross includes Ajay Banga, president and CEO of MasterCard; John Chambers, chairman emeritus of Cisco Systems; Antonio Neri, president and CEO of Hewlett Packard; Dan Schulman, president and CEO of PayPal; and James Umpleby III, chairman and CEO of Caterpillar.

Ross, in a statement, called the forum “critical to the fruitful commercial relationship and strong economic ties between our two great nations.” He also said this week’s meeting would explore new opportunities to further deepen U.S.-India economic cooperation.

The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative had no comment on reports that it could soon give Congress 60 days’ notice that it is booting India from the Generalized System of Preferences program.

COMMERCE TO RELEASE FINAL 2018 TRADE DATA ON MARCH 6: The partial government shutdown continues to disrupt the release of economic data. The Commerce Department now plans to release the December 2018 trade balance report on March 6, one month later than originally scheduled. There is no date yet for the release of January 2019 trade data.

— Mnuchin’s team dwindles amid exodus from Treasury, POLITICO reports.

— Most Americans haven’t felt the trade war with China yet, CNN reports.

— Senate Republicans livid with Trump over ignored report on Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi’s murder, POLITICO reports.

THAT'S ALL FOR MORNING TRADE! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop the team a line: [email protected] and @abehsudi; [email protected] and @mmcassella; [email protected] and @tradereporter; [email protected] and @sabrod123; [email protected] and @jmlauinger; and [email protected] and @pjoshiny. Also follow us @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Trade.

Follow us on Twitter Pradnya Joshi @pjoshidc



John Yearwood @john_yearwood



Doug Palmer @tradereporter



Gavin Bade @GavinBade



Steven Overly @StevenOverly
