Pimpri-Chinchwad gets exclusive vaccine clinic for low-income families

Untitled Carousel 72550928

Untitled Carousel 72447178

A first-of-its kind clinic dedicated to vaccination has come up in Thergaon, Pimpri-Chinchwad with an objective to bolster the immunisation goals. The clinic started by Jivika Healthcare in collaboration with Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, on Sunday is set to provide vaccinations to people from the low-income group at nominal charges.Jignesh Patel, founder of Jivika Healthcare, said that the programme will overcome the limitations of government initiatives. “The government provides 10 free vaccines out of 19 vaccines required as per World Health Organisation (WHO) and Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP). We are on a mission to support them, by immunising all the kids. Our social workers and nurses are conducting awareness camps in various areas,” he said.Its vaccine-on-wheels (VOW) programme will also be taken to schools, colleges and corporates to conduct vaccination camps, along with doorsteps of rural parts. The awareness drive aims to educate pregnant women and mothers on vaccination. Animated videos in Hindi and Marathi will be employed to motivate the public about the eight-nine essential vaccinations necessary for children, too.“There are benefits of taking these eight-nine vaccines against diseases like pneumococcal, meningococcal, typhoid, influenza, HPV (vaccine for cervical cancer), Japanese encephalitis, Chickenpox, hepatitis A and mumps. Awareness activities are carried out throughout the week. On Sunday, we invite interested families to visit our clinic for the vaccination drive. On the first day itself we successfully administered vaccinations to the children of 27 families from low-income group,” informed Patel.Paediatrician Dr Jaynat Navrange, who is also a trustee of IAP, Pune chapter, said that this programme will bridge the gap of additional vaccines that are to be administered, apart from the ones covered under the government initiatives. “The vaccines here are given at affordable costs. There will be no separate charge or consulting fees. The vaccination is effective only if taken in masses for effective prevention,” he added.
