Protests against Citizenship Amendment Act continue across India: Top developments

Demonstrators attend a protest against citizenship Act outside Jamia Millia Islamia university in New Delhi. (Credits: Reuters)

NEW DELHI: Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act at Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University, followed by violent clash between students and police, have had a ripple effect across the country.

Here are the top developments:

Flight ops, railway services resume in Guwahati

Flight operations and railway services resumed in Guwahati on Tuesday, in a major relief to hundreds of stranded passengers, as the city limps back to normalcy after days of violent protests over the citizenship law.

Flights to and from the Dibrugarh airport is also operating as per schedule, officials said. Services of other trains are being gradually resumed.

However, all trains from Northeast to Kolkata remain cancelled in view of the law and order situation in West Bengal, the officials said.

Protest turns violent in Delhi's Seelampur area

In fresh violence, angry protesters demanding scrapping of the amended citizenship law clashed with police, pelted stones at them and damaged several buses in Northeast Delhi's Seelampur area.

Police resorted to baton charges and fired tear gas shells on the protesters who were marching from Seelampur towards Jafrabad.

Clashes erupted between police and protesters at Seelampur Chowk when the security personnel tried to stop them from moving ahead.

All entry and exit gates at Seelampur metro station, which were closed in view of violence that ensued following protests over the amended Citizenship Act, have been opened.

Citizenship Act does not take away rights of any Indian: PM Narendra Modi

Addressing an election rally in Barhait, Jharkhand, PM Modi held Congress responsible for instigating protests against Citizenship Act. "Stop this guerilla politics. Indian Constitution is our only holy book. I appeal to youth in colleges to debate our policies, protest democratically. We will listen to you. But some parties, urban Naxals, are firing off your shoulders," said the Prime Minister.

Students allege 'barbaric' beatings in Jamia by Delhi police

Students have alleged that during police crackdown in Jamia campus on December 15, the most "barbaric" attack was in the library of the varsity in which most students were injured. At least 25 students were in the library when police started crackdown, including 10-12 girls. Activists alleged that the police refused to give details of detained or injured students to their parents.

"I was beaten mercilessly and I fell unconscious. I was taken to New Friends Colony police station, they made us sit on the cold floor. I was not given any treatment although I felt like I was going to die," said an MBA student, Mohammad Mustafa who was in the library.

Delhi Police claims protests at Jamia were pre-planned

Kumar Gyanesh, Additional DCP (South East Delhi) said, "I saw it myself, some protesters were carrying wet blankets and putting them on tear gas shells to minimize their impact. It did not seem to be spontaneous but well planned."

The Delhi police have also released a video of December 15 in which Delhi Police Joint CP is heard appealing to students of Jamia Millia Islamia to stay calm. Police officials have said that some outsiders mingled with the protesters and threw stones and tube lights at the police.

Who is responsible for burning the buses, asks Supreme Court

The Supreme Court on Tuesday said high courts should be approached first on pleas alleging police atrocities on persons protesting against the amended Citizenship Act. The court also asked as to how buses were burnt during the protests.

Around 400 Indian students studying in the US extend support

Around 400 Indian students studying in various American universities have condemned the "brutal police violence" unleashed against students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University last Sunday. The students/alumni who signed the statement hail from Harvard University, Columbia University, Yale University, New York University, Stanford University, University of Michigan, University of Chicago, Brown University, Georgetown University, University of Pennsylvania, Tufts University, Johns Hopkins University, Cornell University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of California, Berkeley Purdue University, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Southern California, and University of Illinois.

Supreme Court agrees to hear plea for probe in violence during CAA protests

Supreme Court is scheduled to hear during the day a batch of petitions which have raised the issue of alleged police atrocities against students at Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia Islamia here during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Peaceful protests continue for a second day at Jamia campus

Braving freezing cold, students took out small marches outside the varsity, shouting slogans against the government. Students took precaution to not disrupt traffic movement in the area. This is the second consecutive day of peaceful protests after the demonstration on Sunday turned violent.

Delhi police arrest 10 non-Jamians for Sunday's clash

Ten people with criminal backgrounds have been arrested in connection with December 15 Jamia Millia Islamia incident where police and students clashed in the university campus. The police clarified that none of the arrested are students.

'No bullet fired by police during protests at Jamia'

Home ministry officials said that no bullet was fired during violent protests against the citizenship law at Jamia Milia University. "All 10 persons detained have criminal background. More anti-social elements are being tracked," the officials said, citing a Delhi Police report.

Curfew lifted in Guwahati, relaxed in Dibrugarh

The curfew imposed in Guwahati on December 11 in the wake of protests against the citizenship law was lifted on Tuesday, officials said. In Dibrugarh, the curfew has been relaxed for 14 hours from 6 am on Tuesday. However, the state government statement did not mention anything about resumption of mobile internet services.

Protests in 36 educational institutions across India

On Monday demonstrations big and small were organised in close to 36 colleges, universities including premier institutions such as IIT-Bombay, IIT-Madras, Jadavpur University and Banaras Hindu University, as well as in far-flung areas like Siliguri in north Bengal and Kochi in the south. Students carrying placards against CAA and the proposed nationwide National Register of Citizens (NRC) burnt effigies of BJP members and raised slogans decrying the face off between security forces and students at AMU and Jamia on Sunday night.

AMU student loses hand in gas shelling

A student in Aligarh Muslim University lost his right hand on Monday after a tear gas shell fired by police during Sunday night’s clashes burst on his hand. In all, 60 students were hurt in clashes with security men. Police filed two FIRs against 52 identified under various IPC sections, including murder attempt.

Regional parties in South divided over CAA

Kerala is witnessing maximum protests against CAA with ruling CPI (M)-led LDF and opposition Congress headed UDF joining hands to oppose the law, setting aside differences. The police took around 100 people into preventive custody, from various parts of the state.

In Telangana, ruling Telangana Rashtra Samiti opposes the CAA. Scores of students of various varsities, including the Maulana Azad National Urdu University, the University of Hyderabad (UoH) and the Osmania University, staged protests.

In Tamil Nadu, ruling AIADMK supports the CAA and has demanded Parliament for inclusion of Sri Lankan Tamils in the list of groups to benefit from the legislation. On the other hand, DMK vehemently opposes the act with MK Stalin filing a petition in the Supreme Court against CAA and holding protest rallies.

In Karnataka, Former PM and Janata Dal (Secular) chief H D Deve Gowda opposed the legislation while some other party members asked government for more clarity on non-inclusion of Sri Lankan Tamils.

In Andhra Pradesh, both the ruling YSR Congress Party and main opposition Telugu Desam Party support the legislation.

Bengal: Protests continue as some parts witness internet shutdown

The internet services in Howrah district of West Bengal will remain suspended till 5 pm on Tuesday, officials said. CM Mamata Banerjee on Monday also spearheaded a huge protest march in Kolkata against CAA and NRC. The police has stepped up vigil across the state and as many as 354 protesters were arrested for violence. Meanwhile, protests continue in the state for the fifth consecutive day.

Migrants won’t get citizenship automatically: Home ministry officials

The home ministry is yet to notify rules under the amended citizenship Act. The ministry is expected to make the detailed procedure and eligibility criterion public soon. The rules will lay down what documents will be required to substantiate applicant’s claim that they migrated to India by December 31, 2014 and that they have completed the minimum five-year residency period. Also, sources indicated, the eligible migrants may be required to submit an affidavit declaring that they had migrated due to religious persecution or fear of such persecution.

Opposition trying to ‘bifurcate’ nation: BJP

BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra accused the opposition of misleading people and trying to “bifurcate” the country in the name of Hindus and Muslims. “Why is it that on Saturday, Congress tried to re-launch Rahul and on Sunday onwards, incidents of violence started in the country?” he asked.

(With inputs from agencies)
