Mumbai: Man shoots at sister, brother-in-law; commits suicide

A case of accidental death has been registered by the police and the body was sent for post-mortem. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man attempts to kill sister, brother-in-law, commits suicide Decease was unhappy with sister's marriage to a man of her choice A case of accidental death has been registered by the police

Mumbai: Despite various efforts and campaigns to change the patriarchal mindset, it seems there are many who are still unwilling to reform themselves and digest free-thinking of the women.

In the latest case, a man from Uttar Pradesh tried to kill his sister for marrying a man of her choice in Mumbai. But the accused allegedly ended up committing suicide. The man identified as Bateshwar Tiwari shot himself dead at a flat in Kandivli after making an attempt on the life of his sister and brother-in-law.

According to a report in Times of India, the man was visiting his 20-year-old sister, who had a love marriage with a 26-year-old man named Rohit Singh. The girl married Rohit six-months ago but her family was reportedly not happy with the match.

The man also visited his sister on two occasions earlier this year, said Samta Nagar police. On Monday (December 16), Tiwari came to his sister's flat with liquor bottles and invited his brother-in-law to drink, but he refused. Later, the man drank alone.

After a couple of minutes later, he took out a pistol and fired at his sister and brother-in-law. The two escaped being hit as they ducked on time. Panicked, the couple ran out of the flat and locked it from outside.

According to police, the man, who was drunk, might have panicked and shot himself dead. The police had to break open the door as Tiwari had locked it from inside and recovered his body.

A case of accidental death has been registered by the police and the body was sent for post-mortem. Police have also recovered the gun and verifying whether it was licensed.

In a similar incident, a newly married couple was shot dead on September 16 in Punjab's Naushera Dhalla village. According to the police, the relatives of the woman intercepted the couple in the middle of the road when they were on a motorcycle and opened fire on them. Police said 23-year-old Amanpreet Kaur married 24-year-old Amandeep Singh of the same village four months ago against the wishes of the woman's family.
