EXCLUSIVE: When SALMAN KHAN got EMOTIONAL on Tara Sharma’s celebrity show and opened up on his Being Human, his childhood and many more things! : Bollywood News

After four successful seasons, Tara Sharma Saluja is back with The Tara Sharma Show. And the fifth begins from this Sunday on Star World on December 22, at 11:30 AM with a big bang – featuring none other than Salman Khan, who is caught in those rare, candid moments with his guard down. It will also appear on her The Tara Sharma Show on YouTube channel. The show doesn’t boast of gossip but as Tara (who started the show nine years ago) says it’s about chatting on topical issues with a view to bringing about positive change.

Talking about why they chose Salman, who incidentally comes for the first time on the show, Tara says, “We decided to start with a bang hence we have Salman on the opening day. Every episode is so different and moving that we thought that as the show is a mix of lightness, being meaningful and humour we should do it with a big bang. Each and every guest is incredible. With Salman there were quite a lot of laughter and light moments besides the emotional ones which were extremely moving. He spoke about some of childhood memories to how he started his acting career, how he was trying to impress a girl – so there are lots of sweet anecdotes. But there were moments he got emotional too, especially while talking about the Being Human Foundation and people who seek help. You can see that Salman has a very big heart. He was speaking about what he has seen in terms of the Being Human Foundation and that there are lots of things that are not easy to bear and makes us heart weep. He said, ‘you just have to go out of our houses and see so many people who need help.’

The family show talks about bringing in positive change. “Salman appears for the first time on TTSS. He was a wonderful guest who spoke about his own childhood and what he is doing with the Being Human Foundation. He is doing a lot when it comes to special needs and interacting with kids. Children today are much more aware about empathy and if we can create a more empathetic world we can all make a difference – like Aamir Khan said on my show last season, ‘Everyone can make a difference, however big or small or famous or not.’ I believe the bigger the celeb the more awareness can be spread.”

Tara was thrilled beyond words when Salman agreed to appear on the TTSS. “I told Salman that he has been human to me. I work really hard to make an honest show and when people Salman’s stature agreed to appear on it, I really feel grateful. You have to watch the show to know why he agreed to come on it but he was really gracious and has a wonderful team. We also shared some anecdotes in the show. When we were kids one of my closest friends was a big fan of Salman and we had gone to meet him when he was shooting in Film City in Mumbai as fans and he was as gracious then as he is today. He remembered every bit of our fan meeting.”

Behind that brawn, muscles and six-pack abs, Salman is intelligent and has a sharp memory, Tara notes. “My husband and co-producer of the show, Roopak’s father was an Indian ambassador in Budapest at a time when Salman had gone there to shoot. They knew each other then. Before Roopak had his production company, he did a role in Salman’s movie and they got to know each other better so Salman reminisced about that too. There are lots of little anecdotes but most importantly he also did it because the whole premise is bringing about positive change and spreading awareness on things like inclusion which we all know that he does through the Being Human Foundation and that he is quite humble about it. He doesn’t really talk much about it so it was great to have him on the show. He also spoke about his own childhood and told kids to stay out of trouble, and how he was a naughty kid.”

Tara says that Salman’s positivity radiated from him. “It’s a beautiful way that Salman has again connected so well and naturally as will the children watching the show. I am sure they will find him inspiring. When you hear about what and how he’s achieved his fame and success, it’s inspiring. With Salman we talked a lot about his childhood, his hits, his career… All my guests despite being huge celebrities are so humble and grounded and those are great lessons for anybody who is looking at achievers. He gave tips like – ‘everybody works hard but you should work hard in the right direction and stay out of trouble.’

The actress-producer admits that beginning with Salman Khan’s show this Sunday, the show will see a shift in perception. “It started nine years ago as my diary as a mum but now I am more aware of what issues are affecting society and topics that are important to touch upon. The first few seasons were in the context of parents and now though, the crux is still family issues, on a wider scale, my choice of guests are also relevant to the theme because this season is all about inspirational people who are using their celebrity status to bring about positive change and spread larger messages and create awareness about causes that impact families in some way.”

Also Read: Dabangg 3: Salman Khan and Saiee Manjrekar’s romance has a Shah Rukh Khan connection!

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
