Solicitor General says police had permission to enter AMU campus

Students of Jamia Milia Islamia had a violent clash with the Delhi police on December 15 | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Solicitor General of India (SGI) Tushar Mehta on Tuesday claimed in front of the Supreme Court that the police was allowed by the administration of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) to enter the campus. The statement came during the Supreme Court hearing in which the Jamia Millia Islamia and AMU students have alleged that the police barged inside the campuses without any permission from the universities administration. It should be noted that the Solicitor General did not mention the Jamia incident in this regard and only talked about AMU when it came to police entering the institutions to lathicharge the students,

The Chief Justice of India, Sharad Arvind Bobde, while reviewing the case, said that the incidents that have taken place across various educational institutions of the country have to be taken care of by following different steps for every case. Therefore, it is difficult for the court to appoint one single committee for all the cases. The CJI further said that the High Courts of the respective states are best equipped to handle the situation.

Meanwhile, talking about Delhi Police entering Jamia university premises, Waseem Ahmed Khan, the proctor of Jamia Milia Islamia said, "This is wrong. The proctor was the first person to have condemned what happened. The police had not taken any permission from either the proctor or any other authority." He added, "They do not have any written permission. The proctor was present at gate number seven and was telling the students to go inside. Meanwhile, the police were enforcing a lathi charge on the students."

He, while explaining his side of the situation, further said, "When they (police) threw tear gas shells, my eyes started burning and I ran towards the office. After coming back to the proctor office, I saw on the CCTV camera that the police entered the college from gate number four and started beating up the guard. We have proof of the same."The Vice-Chancellor of the university, Nazma Akhtar, had, in a press conference yesterday, stated that the police had no permission to enter the campus and that they had forcibly barged in.
