Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor return to India after wrapping Serbia schedule of Baaghi 3

Tiger Shroff was shooting in Serbia shooting for Baaghi 3 | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Actor Tiger Shroff was in Serbia with Shraddha Kapoor shooting for Baaghi 3 The actor announced the wrap on Instagram This will be the third installment of the Baaghi franchise

Actor Tiger Shroff, who is known for his unbelievable action sequences and dance moves, was shooting for the third installment of his Baaghi franchise. The actor has impressed us all with his photos and posts all the way from Serbia. Now, the actor and co-star Shraddha Kapoor have returned to India after a 40-day shoot.

Taking to Instagram, the Baaghi actor posted a video wherein we can see his chiseled body and music from the previous Baaghi film plays in the background. He captioned the post, "Looking back at something special...and glad came out of those 40 days in one piece #baaghi3"

The actors were also clicked at the airport where they were seen returning from Serbia.

Shraddha and Tiger were last seen together in Baaghi in 2016 and the film was an intense action-drama. The film reportedly grossed over Rs 125 crore. Helmed by Ahmed Khan, Baaghi 3 stars Tiger, Riteish Deshmukh and Shraddha in main roles.

The actor had kept his fans posted with updates from the sets of Baaghi 3. He had posted a video of an action sequence practice where we can easily sport his perfect abs and expert moves.

Check out the video here:



The actor has finished his shoot in sub-zero temperatures and was lauded by his mother on Instagram for his dedication. She wrote, "On location with my son who is shooting action bare body in zero degrees. Dedication, discipline, sheer hard work, will power and perfection in everything he does, is what makes me a die-hard Tigerian my thanks and gratitude to team tiger, Ahmed, NGE and the incredible crew that is shooting in tough conditions with tiger to make an incredible movie!!! God bless them.”

The actor had himself posted a photo of his scratched and injured back and wrote, "First set of scrapes and minor cuts from the battlefield..and hopefully last.doesn't look or feel like much until I take a shower"



Well, we can see the actors' efforts and cannot wait for his next release.
