Man shot dead inside court premises in UP's Bijnor

BIJNOR: A court in UP's Bijnor was rocked with gunshots as three assailants pumped bullets into the main accused in a BSP leader’s murder case on Tuesday . The incident took place in the afternoon at the chief judicial magistrate’s court while the hearing was still on.CJM Yogesh Kumar narrowly escaped being hit by a bullet while a constable was also injured in the attack apart from the close associate of murder accused Shahnawaz Jabbar Ahmad.According to police, the killing is seen as a retaliation of twin murder that took place in Najibabad in which senior BSP leader and incharge of Najibabad Assembly seat Ehsaan Ansari was shot dead along with his nephew on May 28 this year.In all 12 persons were arrested, including main accused Shahnawaz and Jabbar, who were nabbed by police from Delhi in October.The entire court premises has been cordoned off. In the first briefing SP Bijnor Sanjeev Tyagi said, “Three attackers have been arrested."DGP Uttar Pradesh OP Singh was quick to issue a statement saying, “Though it is a grave matter that a murder took place in the court premises, it’s a matter of joy that the three assailants have been arrested including Sahil, the son of Ehsaan Ansari who was murdered in the rivalry a few months ago. It is clear that Sahil has taken revenge of his father’s murder.”According to police sources, both Shahnawaz and Ehsaan were engaged in purchasing disputed properties at throwaway prices and sold them at high prices. If anybody opposed their move, they threatened him with dire consequences. Being in the same business both were naturally at loggerheads.Shahnawaz and his henchmen murdered Irfaan, a ration dealer, last year after a property dispute. Ehsan had political and muscle power in Najibabad. Shahnawaz wanted to become an MLA from Najibabad seat. On the other side, Ehsan was also contender for the post. And hence, for Shahnawaz, Ehsaan was the biggest roadblock in his way. Therefore, he hatched a plan to eliminate him.Police had claimed, “Shahnawaz lured local criminals by assuring them houses or money. Jabbar was also one of them.According to police, there were 21 cases including two murders, three attempt to murder, loots and ransom, etc pending against gangster Shahnawaz. There are nine cases against Jabbar.
