Victim's son opens fire at double-murder accused inside courtroom in Uttar Pradesh

Bijnor SP Sanjeev Tyagi briefing the media (Picture Courtesy: @bijnorpolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Lucknow: In what can only be seen as a sheer breakdown of law and order, a murder-accused was shot dead inside a courtroom in Uttar Pradesh's Bijnor district. The shocking incident took place on Tuesday morning when the deceased, identified as Shahnawaz Ansari, was being produced before the Cheif Judicial Magistrate at Bijnor district court.

Eyewitness accounts suggest that three men whipped out their pistols and opened fire at Ansari in the middle of the hearing. Every single person inside that courtroom, including the judge, were seen ducking for cover. In the chaos that ensued, Ansari died of a bullet wound and a court staffer suffered injuries. He is being treated at a local hospital for injuries.

Within seconds of the brazen shootout, police personnel managed to nab the three men who had allegedly opened fire inside the courtroom. The main accused has been identified as the son of Bahujan Samaj Party (BJP) leader Haji Ahsan Khan while the other two were his accomplices. The deceased, Ansari had surrendered himself to Delhi police earlier this year after admitting to the murder of Haji Ahsan Khan and his nephew in May.

Bijnor Superintendent of Police Sanjeev Tyagi confirmed that officers nabbed the three men who opened fire inside the courtroom. He also told media persons that two policemen suffered injuries as a result of the incident. It is still unclear whether Ansari's accomplice who was also produced in the court in connection with the double murder of Haji Ahsan Khan and his nephew was shot or injured, added Tyagi. More details are awaited as this is a developing story. However, the police are yet to answer for the lapse of security that enabled three armed men to enter a courtroom. Similarly, a lawyer was shot dead in his chambers in Basti district of Uttar Pradesh in March of this year.
