2 jawans killed as India, Pak trade fire in Rajouri-Poonch, Gurez

2 jawans killed as India, Pak trade fire in Rajouri-Poonch, Gurez

JAMMU/SRINAGAR, Dec 16: Two army jawans were killed as India and Pakistan armies traded heavy fire on Monday in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri, Krishna-Ghani, Mendhar sectors of Poonch and Gurez sector of Bandipore districts on the Line of Control (LoC).

In Keri Battal area of Sunderbani sector in Rajouri district, official sources said that an army jawan died during a fierce gunfight that broke out between army and suspected infiltrators aided by Pakistani forces along the Line of Control (LoC).

“Pakistan army has been aiding the suspects by opening heavy fire at the Indian posts. Alert army troops picked up suspicious movements along the LoC in Keri Battal belt in Sunderbani sector,” said defence spokesperson.

“A loud blast was then heard followed by heavy firing from Pakistan. Indian troops retaliated promptly leading to a fierce gunfight. The exchange of fire continued till last reports came in,” a defence spokesperson said.

Earlier in the day, an army jawan was killed in an unprovoked ceasefire violation by Pakistan along the Line of Control in Gurez sector of Bandipore district, officials said.

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation by Pak in Krishna Ghati sector of district Poonch, said, “Today at about 0945 hours Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by firing of small arms and shelling with mortars along LoC in Krishna Ghati sector in district Poonch. Indian army retaliated befittingly.” Pak also shelled forward posts in Mankot sector of Poonch from 9.45 AM to 11.30 AM.

In the meanwhile, local sources stated that Pak late this evening also started heavy firing in Dalhan area of Khari-Karma sector in Poonch. “Pak firing might be aimed at aiding infiltrators. Heavy firing was on till the last reports poured in,” they added.

With regard to ceasefire violation in Gurez, army spokesperson said, “Pakistani troops resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violation in Gurez sector today. Our troops retaliated to the violation in adequate measure and effectively.” He said one soldier Jyotiba Ganpati Chaugule, 36, a resident of Mahagaon village of Gadhinglaj tehsil Kolhapur, Maharashtra, was killed in the firing by Pakistani troops. “The army salutes the supreme sacrifice of the brave soldier,” he said. He was part of Maratha battalion.
