Priyanka leads `symbolic protest’ at India Gate

Priyanka leads `symbolic protest’ at India Gate

# Kejriwal to meet Shah over law-n-order situation # Delhi Police denies action against students

NEW DELHI, Dec 16(Agencies): Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Monday sat on a 'symbolic protest' at the India Gate against police action during students' protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act in Jamia Milia Islamia in the national capital and the Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh.

In the meanwhile, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal today said to have sought time for a meeting with Union Home Minister Amit Shah in view of the worsening law and order situation in the national capital.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s protest started at 4 PM.

Sitting on the protest along with a slew of other Congress leaders, Priyanka was holding a placard, which reads: "Stop attacks on young students." "This is a government that has attacked the rights of youths and students of the country. That is why Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other senior Congress leaders have decided to sit on a symbolic protest at the India Gate from 4 PM," said Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala.

Earlier in the day, the Congress general secretary blamed the ruling-BJP government for the violence that erupted in Jamia University last night, alleging that the government has attacked the Constitution and the students. "The government has attacked the Constitution and the students. They attacked students after entering the university," Vadra told reporters here.

"We will fight for the Constitution. We will fight against this government," she added. On Sunday, several students and cops sustained injuries in a protest in Jamia Nagar area. The protesters had set the DTC buses on fire near Bharat Nagar area on Sunday after demonstrations turned violent. Protestors also vandalised a fire tender that was sent to douse the fire, injuring two firemen inside the vehicle.

Delhi Police PRO MS Randhawa had said that a section of the mob had turned violent and started pelting stones on the police and at houses due to which police were forced to resort to baton charge and firing tear gas shells. Following the incident, opposition parties hit out at the Central government for passing the citizenship law without thinking about its consequences.

In the meanwhile, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal sought time for a meeting with Union Home Minister Amit Shah in view of the worsening law and order situation in the national capital.

“I am very worried about the worsening law and order situation in Delhi. To ensure peace returns to the city immediately, I have sought time from Home Minister Amit Shah for a meeting,” tweeted Kejriwal.

Earlier today, the Delhi Police had denied the allegation of police taking action against the students of Jamia Millia Islamia.

DCP, South-East Delhi, Chinmoy Biswal had said: "The campus is not compact. It is located on both sides of the road. While we were pushing the mob back, they were going to the university and then were throwing stones from inside. So, we were checking those places."

The police official also claimed that no bullets were fired by the police during the course of controlling the protest. The protesters had set DTC buses on fire near the Bharat Nagar area on Sunday after demonstrations turned violent. Protestors also vandalised a fire tender that was sent to douse the fire and injured two firemen inside the vehicle. Damage to other buses and vehicles was also caused by the protestors. Police have, meanwhile, taken control of the situation and fire tenders have been rushed to control the damage caused in different areas. Police also detained protesters from outside the Jamia Millia Islamia's gate number one.
