CAA: Kamal Haasan Lashes Out At Centre And AIADMK; Says Democracy Is In ICU

Actor and politician Kamal Haasan has lashed out at both the Central and the State governments, pertaining to the Citizenship Amendment Act. He confessed that, his party Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) is against the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC).

The actor stated that the ruling government's support to the CAA in the Parliament was 'betrayed' Tamils and the nation.

Violence began in Delhi on Sunday after police troops entered Jamia Millia Islamia University campus and lathi-charged students. The Opposition parties are demanding judicial probe into police entry and support the protest of the Jamia students against CAA.

Kamal Haasan's party, MNM has moved the Supreme Court against the Amendment to the Citizenship Act. 'Ulaganayagan' alleges that AIADMK is acting as per BJP's instructions. "They are obedient to their masters, you know who their masters are," he told reporters on Tuesday.

He said, "There is this NRC, when it is implemented, we will get into the field and go as far as we could."

Kamal has strictly criticised the attack on protesting students in Delhi, Assam and other regions as an 'attack' on democracy. He has also slammed the Centre for barring Sri Lankan Tamils who are Hindus but accepting the same religious group from Pakistan.

Kamal quoted a Bharathiyar song, which was penned 102 years ago. The song predicted the beginning of the destruction and rise of anti-national elements that attempted to divide people in terms of caste and creed.

"The young must understand and question politics...politics is omnipresent and affects all of us. There is nothing wrong with young people being politically aware and asking questions, when these questions stifled, then democracy is in dangerous ICU," said Kamal Haasan.

Kamal recently had surgery to remove an implant from his leg. The actor is now managing both his cinema and political careers. He is working with director Shankar on the much-awaited Indian 2.

Also Read:

Anti-CAA Protest: Dulquer Salmaan's Post Wins The Internet!

Anurag Kashyap Calls Government 'Fascist' Over Its Handling Of Student Protests Against CAA

Sushant Singh Dropped From Savdhaan India For Speaking Against CAA

Vicky Kaushal, Parineeti Chopra And Sidharth Malhotra Slam Delhi Police's Crackdown In Jamia Millia!
