The Clampdown On Students By Delhi Police Is A Blot On Indian Democracy. We Need Answers

The streets are on fire, as a controversial law that has been dismissed outrightly by Indian citizens. The horrific saga over the last two weeks that has led India to go back to where it all began. The birth of our democracy, the guidelines set in the Constitution. The new changes to laws that upheld the secular fabric of our nation, unleashed chaos in the northeastern flank of the country, leaving thousands landless, and the only way they could be heard is through demonstrations against the ruling regime.



These protests reached a crescendo in the national capital, and the state responded in the most unconstitutional way possible. Violence. Not from those protesting, not from those agitating, but from those who were supposed to withhold the peace.

The police

The Delhi police logo reads: 'Shanti, Seva, Nyaya'. This message was lost, when the cops clamped down on protesting students of a leading university. They barged inside the campus, without warning. From thrashing students with torturous brutality to firing tear gas shells inside the university library, the Delhi Police marked a prominent shift in its action and behaviour by treating protesting students and dissenters at par with terrorists and anti-social elements.

And that raises a question, one with a difficult answer. Without the people there can be no state, and the very purpose of the police personnel is to serve the people and secure their rights. So who will protect the state, when the police raises its weapons against the non-violent public?



Repeat offenders

This is not the first time that Delhi Police cracked down on students with brutal force. Before the Jamia clampdown came the fiasco in Jawaharlal Nehru University, and there too, the Delhi Police behaved in a manner that was simply unfitting to be pounded on students, of all people.

Sometime down the line, the Delhi Police engaged in a volatile clash with lawyers, which left many personnel wounded and gasping for their breath. On the following day, the Delhi Police carried out a protest themselves and expressed their disenchantment at the turn of events.

There was, however, a major contradiction as the very police personnel who lathi-charged and fired tear gases on students of JNU protesting against an unprecedented fee hike found themselves helpless and perhaps powerless to contain the outright show of hooliganism that was displayed by a section of lawyers in India’s national capital.

As placards held by members of Delhi Police said, their “Josh” was low and their spirits demolished. Interestingly, when Delhi Police hit the streets in protest a vast majority of people expressed their solidarity with the men in uniform and called upon the concerned authorities to serve justice to them.



Cut to the present and a study in contrast emerges.

The action of the Delhi police has come under the scanner as it used excessive force in dealing with the students and stepped inside the premises of a university, firing tear gas shells, lathi charging students, and as per their assertion beating them up with no mercy at all.

There can be no denying that the police forces face the wrath from all ends. If they are unable to control the frenzy of the mob, they are blamed for inaction and when they take action they are accused of using excessive force. But this argument runs futile when you consider the Jamia Millia Islamia stand-off.

The students and universities have their own place in every society. They too represent the country and have a role in it just like the police and law enforcing agencies.

Orders from above

The representatives of the people ought to work for the wellbeing of the society. This is a no-brainer in a democracy. But when the orders from the top, ask the protectors to persecute, how can justice be served to anyone? How will the police maintain order in the society, when they are the ones lighting a fire.

The armed forces and the police, follow orders. But apart from orders from politicians, they are also tasked to protect the rights of the people. This is where the line police toes the line.

Time and again, in India and elsewhere, the law enforcing agencies have been accused of using excessive force against the people in accordance with the instructions passed on to them by the elected representatives of the same people that they end up undermining.

It would have been quite ridiculous if the Indian army was made to clampdown upon protesting personnel of the Delhi police after the assault by lawyers. Even as protests continue to mount across India, there is an immediate need to monitor the actions that police takes hereon.

An assault against the people, no matter what arguments are made from either side, does not augur well for a thriving democracy. The role of the police is to maintain order and abide by the Constitution.

India thrived for seven decades against all odds on its foundational principles of non-violence and peaceful methods of reaching a consensus no matter how polarising the issues may be. The onus is also on the people to protest democratically and not indulge in violence.

Regardless of what happens tomorrow, it is binding upon the courts and the authorities in India to probe the role of Delhi Police in Jamia Millia Islamia.

A state that turns against its own people is nothing short of anarchy and India can not afford to tread this disastrous path.
