Protests Continue Across India Over CAA, Murder Accused Shot Dead Inside Court And Other News

Jamia Millia Islamia University students have been protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in New Friends Colony for the past two days.

Jamia had turned into a battlefield on Sunday with police entering the campus and using force, following violence and arson during the protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Despite the violence against them, several pictures of Jamia students cleaning up roads after their protests were doing the rounds on social media. Read more

Humanity Is The Best Act! Sikh Brothers Giving Chai To Protestors In Delhi Is Winning Hearts

The whole country has united against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act with people, mostly students, protesting against the new bill. Jamia Millia Islamia University students vehemently protested against the bill.

Protests even thronged India Gate in central Delhi and what caught the eye of netizens was two Sikh brothers who had arranged tea and langar for the protestors. Read more

Murder Accused Shot Dead In Front Of Judge As Court Began Hearing In UP

In a shocking case, an undertrial man was shot dead inside a court in Uttar Pradesh's Bijnor. The incident happened on Tuesday at the Chief Judicial Magistrate court in Bijnor.

According to initial reports, the firing took place while the court was hearing the murder case of BSP leader Haji Ehsan and his nephew when there was indiscriminate firing inside the courtroom. Read more

Former Military Dictator Pervez Musharraf Sentenced To Death For Treason By Pakistan Court

Former Pakistan Army Chief-tuned dictator Pervez Musharraf has been sentenced to death in the high treason case by a special court.

A three-member bench of the special court, headed by Peshawar High Court Chief Justice Waqar Ahmad Seth found him guilty of high treason for suspending the Constitution and imposing emergency rule in 2007. Read more

Get Half Kilo Plastic Waste At This Odisha Cafe And Get Free Food

In a bid to enhance the plastic waste management and create awareness among people to curb pollution from such waste products, Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) has rolled out an initiative under which it will serve a meal in exchange for a half kilogram plastic waste.

The 'Meal for Plastic' initiative has been rolled out in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) under the state government's Aahar Scheme. Read more
