No lawyer to defend accused in balloon seller rape, murder case in Telangana

Telangana

fast track court

Telangana sets up fast track court to try rape and murder case of balloon vendor The Telangana government on Wednesday set up a fast track court to try a ghastly rape and murder of a married woman in Asifabad district last month.

Reaffirming their zero tolerance to rapes and killings of women, thelawyers have decided not to argue for the three accused in the rape and murder of a petty vendor in Kumarambheem Asifabad district. The lawyers took a similar stand in the most sensational veterinary doctor Disha case.The ghastly atrocity on the balloon seller took place in Kumarambheem Asifabad district on November 24 and the state government set up afor speedy justice.The police produced the three accused -- Sheik Babu (35), Sheik Makdum (40) and Sheik Shabuddeen (35) -- in the court for the second consecutive day on Tuesday. The deadline set by the court for the three accused to appoint their legal counsel expired this evening. The Adilabad district Bar Association communicated its unanimous resolve to the court. The next option is the court may appoint a legal counsel for the accused.It may be mentioned that the victim was from scheduled caste and was eking out a livelihood by selling balloons. She is survived by her two sons aged below 10 years. Her body was found in the bushes in the village in Lingapur on November 25, two days before the sensational rape and murder of Disha.The state government came under pressure from netizens, Dalit organisations and women groups for speedy justice in the case. The Asfiabad district police named the victim ‘Samatha’ and obtained permission from the High Court to set up a fast track court. The police filed the charge sheet against the accused on Monday. They named 44 witnesses, who will be tried in the court during the trial.Though the government had set up a fast track court for Disha case trial, all the four accused were encountered much before the court came into existence. Now, the Cyberabad police will write to the court seeking closure of the case as there is no accused alive to be tried.
