Victory for citizens, activists: 11-hectare Malad plot set to be Juhu beach’s saviour as builder offers land for casting yard

Malad

Bandra-Versova Sea Link

Juhu

Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation

MSRDC

Radheshyam Mopalwar

Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority

The MSRDC was handed a 78,000-square-metre area of the beach for the casting yard.

CRZ

Versova

Construction materials for the casting yard at Juhu beach in April. Later that month, the high court halted construction on the beach

CORRIGENDUM

Ex-MLA Siraj Shaikh

A casting yard for thethat was originally set to be built onbeach could now be built in Malad instead, marking a victory for citizens and activists who fought to save one of Mumbai’s most popular beaches from being ravaged by construction. More than three months after the) invited bids to lease a plot of land, a private developer has offered it 11 hectares in Malad (West).Officials said that a detailed scrutiny of the bid, including legal status of the land and the lease rent is being carried out. “Once the scrutiny is done and everything is clear, we will take a call on setting up the casting yard at Malad,” said, vice-chairman and managing director, MSRDC.MSRDC officials said they would need the land for around five years, after which they would return it to the owner. “We had invited bids once before. But since there was only one bidder, we recalled the tenders and invited fresh bids. But even the second time we got only one bidder. So now we will scrutinise the bid and lease the land,” said an MSRDC official, who did not wish to be named. The official added that now that the plot at Malad West was being scrutinised, the MSRDC would not need Juhu beach for any construction.In April, the Bombay High Court had quashed permissions granted to MSRDC to build a casting yard for the seal link on Juhu beach, observing that it would adversely affect the coastal stretch. A division bench of Chief Justice Pradeep Nandrajog and Justice NM Jamdar had allowed a petition filed by activist Zoru Bathena seeking to stop work on the casting yard, saying it was being constructed illegally. “The petition is allowed. The permission granted by authorities concerned is illegal. Permissions granted by the(MCZMA) is quashed and set aside,” the court had said.On February 26, the MCZMA had given its approval to set up a casting yard at Juhu Koliwada after it was accordedapproval by the Ministry of Environment. Accordingly, the MSRDC was handed a 78,000-square-metre area of the beach for the casting yard. The court noted in its order that the land was on the seaward side of the sandy beach.In his petition, Bhathena claimed that the MSRDC had illegally reclaimed a portion of the beach by dumping mud, which prevented sea water from reaching mangroves along the coast. He claimed that 7.9 hectares of the beach area was affected by the construction work. Bathena’s counsel Gayatri Singh had argued that the construction of the casting yard would result in the complete destruction of the natural beach.Meanwhile, officials said that work on the Bandra-Verosva Sea Link had already begun. “The piling work for the Bandra connector of the sea link has started. The project is likely to be completed in the next five years. Once the land piling work is done by next month, work in the sea will begin,” an official said.Officials said that they wanted a land parcel less than 20 km from Juhu or, where most of the work on the sea link will be carried out. “The girders will be made at the casting yard and transported to the actual location,” the official said.MSRDC had signed a contract for the construction of the 17.7-km sea link last year. It will cost around Rs 7,000 crore to build, but the total cost of the project, including clearances and connectors, is Rs 11,332.82 crore.MSRDC officials said that the sea link will cater to around 60,000 vehicles every day. The toll for cars from Bandra to Versova is likely to be around 250. Once completed, the sea link will cut travel time between Versova and Bandra to 15 minutes.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------In the report ‘Ex-MLA Siraj Shaikh held for raping a minor’ (December 15), we mistakenly carried the photograph of former Malvani corporator Mohammad Siraj Shaikh, instead of former Govandi corporator by the same name. We apologise for the error and express our deepest regret to former Malvani corporator Mohammad Siraj Shaikh. The correct photograph is published alongside.
