MoS Railways Suresh Angadi stokes controversy, says shoot anti-CAA protesters at sight

Union Minister of State for Railways, Suresh Angadi | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Union Minister of State for Railways, Suresh Angadi on Tuesday stoked a controversy when he said that protesters who destroy public property should be shot at sight. The troubling aspect of his statement was that he asserted that "as a Minister, I direct the police to shoot such protesters at sight." His comments came in the wake of ongoing protests across Assam, Delhi, West Bengal and various other parts of the country against Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA).

While speaking to media about the ongoing protests, Suresh Angadi said, "My 13 lakh employees have been working day and night for the development of railways, its cleanliness, punctuality and for everything."

He went on to take a dig at the Congress-led opposition saying, "Some anti-social elements supported by the opposition, they are creating problems in the country. the Citizenship Amendment Act is not going to harm any citizen."

"We have only given rights to stay in the country to those who have been minorities in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Nevertheless, local minorities, some community, are unnecessarily creating problems to destabilise the country's economy. And it is should be noted that they are supported by Opposition parties like Congress; so I condemn this," he added.

The union minister dropped the bombshell when he went on to add that, "I strictly warn concerned district administrations and railway authorities, if anybody destroys public property, including railways, I direct as a Minister to shoot them at sight."

He went on to justify his orders saying the property protesters are destroying is taxpayers money. It takes several years to develop one train; the employees have sweat blood to make these trains functional, if anybody throws a stone or takes part in arson, at that time the government should take stringent action against it like Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, added Angadi.
