Another round of clashes send ripples in Delhi, Opposition knocks on President's door over CAA: Highlights

Another round of violent protests broke out in Delhi on Tuesday when a group of protesters clashed with the police in East Delhi's Seelampur and torched vehicles, vandalised police booths. Twenty-one people were left injured in the clashes between police and anti-Citizenship Act protesters in Seelampur while a Delhi court sent 10 men in judicial custody in connection with Sunday's violence at Jamia University.

On the other hand, a day after over 22 universities erupted in protests over the Jamia crackdown and Citizenship Act (CAA), Chennai Police entered the Madras University on Tuesday as protesters staged a demonstration against the amended citizenship law.

SEELAMPUR CLASHES

Two days after the Jamia crackdown in which Delhi Police personnel stormed the university and allegedly assaulted students, vandalism and angry protests caused tension in the national capital once again on Tuesday.

Twenty-one people, including 12 policemen, were injured in the violence that erupted during a protest against the amended citizenship law in Delhi's Seelampur and Jafrabad areas. Three Rapid Action Force (RAF) personnel were also injured. Two FIRs have been registered at the Seelampur and the Jafrabad police stations in connection with the violence.

Police said they used tear gas shells to disperse the mob but denied that there was any baton charge on protesters.

JAMIA PROTEST CONTINUES

Thousands of Jamia University students continued with their protest against the Citizenship Act and also the brutal crackdown on university students on Sunday evening. Delhi continued to reel under swirling agitation against the alleged "divisive" law with thousands of students hitting streets near the Jamia Millia Islamia.

Meanwhile, a Delhi court sent 10 people, arrested in connection with protests against the CAA near Jamia Millia Islamia University, to judicial custody till December 31.

POLICE AT MADRAS UNIV

Days after Delhi Police barged into the Jamia University and faced severe backlash for its clampdown on the protesting students, Chennai Police on Tuesday entered Madras University when students were protesting against the Citizenship Act for the second day.

Police presence at Madras University protests.

Defiant students said they will continue their agitation through the night. While police personnel who entered the campus said they were for the "safety of the students," the protesters alleged two of the students were picked up by police.

Police sources said two students have been called for questioning over allegedly inciting students of affiliated colleges to join the stir at the Madras University's Marina campus.

PROTESTS IN UP, 113 DETAINED

Scattered protests were held in Uttar Pradesh against the amended citizenship law and police action in Jamia Millia with no report of any violence in the state, even as police have detained 113 people for allegedly trying to vitiate atmosphere with their posts on social media.

State Director General of Police O P Singh said that the situation was "normal and peaceful" in Uttar Pradesh and blamed "anti-social" elements for brickbatting and violent protests in some institutions.

UP Police has also arrested 19 people in Mau in connection with Monday night's violence. Prohibitory orders are in place in all districts of the state and Internet services have been suspended in Aligarh, Meerut, Saharanpur and Mau where forwarded messages are being monitored by the police.

MAMATA TAKES OUT ANOTHER RALLY

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday led another massive protest rally in Kolkata on Tuesday and said a person's political views cannot be ascertained by his or her clothes, hitting back at Prime Minister Narendra Modi's comment that those indulging inviolence over the citizenship law could be identified by their attires.

Mamata Banerjee is expected to take out two more rallies against the amended Citizenship Act in Kolkata on Thursday and Friday.

STUDENTS PROTEST IN KOLKATA

The sit-in by students of Jadavpur University (JU) and SRFTI against the police action inside Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi continued for the second day on Tuesday.

Students of the Aliah University here formed a human chain to condemn the incident at Jamia.

JU arts faculty students' union leader Ushashi Paul told PTI that around 50 students of the varsity and the Satyjait Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI) are on a sit-in since Monday evening demanding punishment for the police personnel involved in the "brutal attack" on Jamia students.

Sonia Gandhi and opposition leaders at the Rashtrapati Bhavan. (PTI)

BENGALURU PROTEST

Around 5-8 students were detained by Bangalore Police on Tuesday when they staged a protest against the Citizenship Act. The group of students came from various colleges who assembled at town hall in the city.

According to the police the students had not sought prior permission to protest at the town hall. As students assembled they were asked to leave and soon some officers pushed few women students into the police van.

Around 300 people held placards against CAA and NRC and condemned police brutality against students in Jamia and Aligarh universities.

AMIT SHAH: STUDENTS HAVEN'T READ CAA

Speaking at Agenda AajTak 2019, Union Home Minister Amit Shah's said not the entire student community in India was protesting against the Citizenship Act but only a handful and that too because they have not read the law.

Speaking about the clashes at Jamia University, Amit Shah said that if the students resort to stone-pelting then police will be forced to take action.

He also dared Congress president Sonia Gandhi and leaders of other opposition parties to issue a statement saying they want all the Muslims from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh be given Indian citizenship.

SONIA GANDHI, OPPOSITION MEET PRESIDENT

Opposition leaders on Tuesday knocked on the doors of President Ram Nath Kovind, seeking his intervention in repealing the "unconstitutional and divisive" citizenship amendment law and forming a commission of enquiry to probe violent protests and the police action.

Amidst protests against the law in parts of the country, a delegation of leaders of a dozen opposition parties, led by Congress president Sonia Gandhi, submitted a memorandum to the president appealing to him to "advise" the government to withdraw the legislation and "safeguard our Constitution from being violated".

Talking to reporters later, Gandhi alleged the Modi government was "shutting down" people's voices and bringing legislations which are not acceptable to them.

(With PTI inputs)
