HC quashes FIR against man accused of murder attempt

Bombay High Court

mobile charging cable

Maharashtra Police Welfare Fund

APMC

medical records

Applicant and victim resolved the dispute after considering their careers, their lawyers said.Thequashed an FIR against a Ghatkopar-based 26-yearold who was charged with attempting to murder a 22-year-old woman. The victim had alleged that he trespassed into her house, assaulted her and then strangled her with alast year.A division bench of justices BP Dharmadhikari and NR Borkar quashed the FIR against Hardik Patel after advocates representing the victim and the man said their clients had resolved their differences. The lawyers claimed that the applicant and the victim needed to pursue their careers and that the present case would hinder their job prospects.The court also directed the parties to pay Rs 50,000 together to theAccording to the FIR filed with thepolice in Vashi, Kinjal Bhanushali, first met Patel through a common friend and met him regularly after that. Her parents had advised her to break all ties with him and had even asked his parents to convince him to stay away from their daughter. Bhanushali also stated that the accused used to call her regularly, but that she would avoid him.The FIR stated that on March 13 last year, while Bhanushali was alone at home, Patel came into her house and questioned her about her conversations with other men. He allegedly hit her face and chest before using a cellphone charging cable to strangulate her. Bhanushali managed to break loose and was saved when Patel fled the house after he heard someone approaching, the FIR stated.The FIR against Patel had also claimed that he had threatened to continue harassing her even if he was arrested for troubling her.In his statement to the police, Bhanushali’s father stated that Patel made a video call to his wife from the victim's phone to show her daughter’s bleeding face to her.The police had also recorded a statement of Bhanushali’s friend, Devendra Bamane, who had stated that he was friends with Bhanushali since January 2018 when they met at a gym. Bamane told the police that on one occassion, while he and Bhanushali were out for lunch, she avoided receiving calls on her cellphone. When he asked her why she was not receiving the calls, she told him that she did not want to talk to people who only “called her for their own work”.Represented by advocate Vaibhav Jagtap, Patel requested the court to peruse theand stated that the case did not amount attempt to murder. Jagtap said that both parties were young and that this was a case of a relationship gone sour.In an affidavit filed in May, Bhanushali stated that she had lodged a complaint with the APMC police due to a misunderstanding with Patel and that both their parents had intervened and settled the dispute amicably. She further stated that both Patel and she were pursuing their higher studies and that she had no objection if the court quashed the FIR.
