Delhi High Court sentences three snatchers to life imprisonment for killing man

Court considered victim's dying declaration while pronouncing the sentence | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delhi HC gives life term to three snatchers in 2018 stabbing case Three convicts were involved in killing a petrol pump attendant in Delhi Court considered victim's dying declaration while pronouncing the sentence

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court has sentenced three snatchers to life imprisonment for killing a man who resisted a robbery attempt in Adarsh Nagar area of the city in 2018. The court also upheld the rigorous imprisonment to three convicts by a lower court.

The convicts - Nikhil, Vishal, Punit - had challenged their convictions in the High Court for murder, robbery and Arms act.

According to a report in Times of India, a division bench comprising Justice Manmohan and Sangita took into account a dying declaration of the victim while upholding the convictions of the three convicts.

The High Court bench also considered the testimonies of two witnesses apart from relying on medical evidence submitted by the prosecution.

Upholding the verdict, the court observed, "Keeping in view the dying declaration of the deceased and other circumstances, the court is of the view that all circumstances point to the involvement of the convicts in the crime. Hence, the court believes beyond a reasonable doubt that the three convicts committed the murder with common intention."

According to police, the victim Naresh, who worked at a petrol station in North Delhi's Adarsh Nagar in April 2018, went to fetch tea from a nearby stall. After he didn't return from the tea stall, his coworkers went in search for him and found him lying in a pool of blood as three convicts stood nearby him.

As the convicts saw the victim's colleagues approaching, the three men fled on their bikes. Later, the victim died at AIIMS on that day. In his dying declaration, Naresh said the three accused tried to snatch his mobile and he was stabbed as he tried to resist the robbery attempt.

Naresh made the dying declaration to his friends Devendra Pratap Mishra and Yashpal. The court relied on the dying declaration and treated the two men as natural witnesses in the case.


