Narrow escape for Nagpur Mayor Sandeep Joshi as bikers fire at his car; gets security cover after incident

Nagpur Mayor made a narrow escape after his car was fired at

Nagpur: Nagpur Mayor, Sandeep Joshi escaped an attempt on his life last midnight after some bike-borne assailants started firing at his car while he was returning home after a dinner party. The incident has created security concerns in the city. For the time being, Nagpur police has provided police security cover to him.

Joshi while talking about the same, said that his car was fired at thrice and that he had been getting a few threats earlier. He said, “I was out with my family. While I was returning, two people came in a vehicle and fired bullets on my vehicle, thrice. I had received threats earlier. Police says this might be in connection with encroachment in the city. “

After the incident that happened at the junction of the outer Ring road and Wardha road, Joshi himself called the police to inform them about the same. Additional CP Nilesh Bharne, while speaking about the matter, said, “Joshi was returning to the city from a dhaba on Outer Ring Road. We have started a probe to get to the bottom of the incident.”

Reports suggest that Joshi, who was celebrating his 24th marriage anniversary had gone to the dhaba with a few friends and the group was coming back when the firing took place. The bikers, who have not been identified as of now, targetted the mayor’s official vehicle, a Toyota Fortuner that Joshi was himself driving.

The bikers attacked the vehicle with three bullets. According to police sources, one bullet hit the driver’s side window, another the passenger window behind him while the third hit the rear of the vehicle. An official said, "The bullets pierced through two glass windows and the rear windshield of the car, but Joshi was not hurt. He immediately stopped the car on the spot and alerted the police."

According to a media report, rural police SP Rakesh Ola had also been alerted about the incident. Joshi had earlier received two threat letters in NMC complaint boxes against removing encroachments which have made the police think if the attack was because of the encroachment in the city. For the time being, Nagpur police have provided police security cover to Joshi.

The official also said that the police have thoroughly examined the CCTV footage of the area to ascertain the registration number of the motorcycle used by the attackers. "Both the accused were wearing helmets and the pillion rider fired at the mayor's vehicle," he said.

According to the police, a case has been registered under Indian Penal Code Sections 307 (attempt to murder) and 34 (common intention) and provisions of the Arms Act.


