Once in Army, Jamia Millia Islamia guards brave cops’ lathis

NEW DELHI: Nazeer Khan, formerly of the Grenadier Infantry Regiment, was a lance naik in the Army during the Kargil war of 1999. He did not face action, but stationed in the Poonch Sector, was close enough to the theatre of war. The life of a soldier hadn’t, however, prepared him for what happened on Sunday at Jamia Millia Islamia , where he is now a security guard. “I never imagined I would be beaten up and injured by police,” the 57-year-old said on Tuesday.The guard room at Jamia’s Gate No 8 was a sorry sight, with blood stains and broken glass shards testifying to the mayhem during Sunday’s protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act. Nazeer, a native of Sikar in Rajasthan, was standing near the gate when he saw students running to the campus. He tried to stop them and refused to open the gate, but the crowd broke through.Several other security guards rushed into the guard room when, as Mukim Khan disclosed, “a large number of policemen entered the gate and started using lathis on the students”. Both Nazeer and Mukim, an ex-serviceman who served in the Rajput Regiment, faced the police fury. They pleaded they were former Armymen, but the cops, they alleged, broke the window panes of the guard room and used their canes on them.“I was wearing my army fatigues,” said the shaken Nazeer. “But one policeman rebuked me when he heard I was an ex-serviceman and hit me on the back with his baton. Another policeman hit my hand with his rifle butt.”Guard Daulat Khan told TOI of a similar life as a soldier for 17 years and recalled being posted as a havildar in Rajouri, Shimla, Chandigarh, Samba and even in Siachen. In 1984, he faced Pakistan shots during an exchange of firing in the Poonch sector. Now 55 years old, he joined Jamia as a guard in 2001.Daulat, who hails from Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan, recalled that on Sunday he was at the Jamia Masjid gate, adjacent to the library. “At around 6.30pm police emerged from the library and I could see them beating students with their canes,” Daulat said, wincing as he showed his injured left leg, the result of the cops allegedly beating him too.Daulat was taken to the university health centre by students on Monday and had his leg x-rayed. He is recuperating in the guards’ quarters near the Jamia workshop area. When his son heard of the incident, he advised Daulat to be cautious. But the security guard did not mince is words. “What happened in Jamia was absolutely wrong. The students did nothing wrong, but police beat them and us,” he said.
