Bengaluru: Woman thief suspects husband tipping off police, hire killers to murder him

According to police, Manjula grew up in Mysuru and had a habit of stealing things from relatives and neighbourhood. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman hires contract killers to eliminate her husband in Bengaluru Woman, who is a thief, suspected her husband was tipping off police about her criminal activities Police have arrested all four 'contract killers'

Bengaluru: In a shocking incident, a woman hired contract killers to murder her husband after she suspected that her spouse was giving information to police about her criminal activities.

The 44-year-old woman is allegedly a thief and has a history of involvement in robbery and theft cases. Police have now arrested the accused identified as Manjula and four of her accomplices.

According to a report in Times of India, the attack on Manjula's husband Shankar took place on November 25 when he was commuting on a motorbike. A car rammed into his two-wheeler from behind at Gottigere on Bannerghatta Road making him fall from the vehicle.

Even as the 45-year-old man suffered injuries on his head and chest, the four accused alighted from the car and attacked Shankar. He, however, survived the attack.

The police later arrested four men based on the CCTV footages taken from the surrounding buildings. What shocked the police was the revelation that the victim's wife Manjula had hired them to eliminate her husband.

"The accused Manjula, who is a resident of Mysuru and hails from Denkanikottai in Tamil Nadu, is a known criminal involved in robbery and theft cases. The woman is accused of robbing many elderly women of their ornaments by diverting their attention. She and her four other accomplices were arrested in April in Upparpet. Police had also seized 1 kg of gold from their possession," said a police officer.

Police say the woman suspected that her husband was tipping off police about her criminal activities and she decided to get him murdered.

Manjula hired 25-year-old Ganesh, a resident of Anekal, and three other men to eliminate her husband. The other three accused are identified as 27-year-old Manjunath, 45-year-old C Chaluvaraya, 25-year-old V Ramu, a resident of Chittoor in Andhra Pradesh.

According to police, Manjula grew up in Mysuru and had a habit of stealing things from relatives and neighbourhood.
