Pakistan's attorney general will defend Pervez Musharraf in death sentence appeal

Pakistan's government says it will defend former military ruler Pervez Musharraf when he appeals against his death sentence, calling it 'unfair'.

Attorney general Anwar Mansoor Khan, who was appointed by prime minister Imran Khan, told a press conference last night that the judgement against Musharraf was 'against the constitution'.

A special court convicted Musharraf of high treason yesterday for imposing a state of emergency in 2007, a move which sparked a wave of protests and plunged the country into turmoil.

The 76-year-old former army general is living in exile in Dubai, where doctors have said his health is too poor to return to Pakistan.

The former president, who seized power in a military coup in 1999, said he had been 'victimised' as he awaited the verdict earlier this month.

Sentenced to death: Pakistan's former ruler Pervez Musharraf (pictured in 2013) faces the death penalty on charges of high treason and subverting the constitution

Defence: Pakistan's attorney general Anwar Mansoor Khan (right, at a press conference in Islamabad with information minister Firdous Ashiq Awan) revealed last night that Imran Khan's government would defend Pervez Musharraf when he appeals against his death sentence

The charges against the 76-year-old, who can appeal the sentence, surround his controversial decision to declare a state of emergency in 2007. Protesters are pictured during clashes with police at the time

The rise and fall of Pervez Musharraf August 11, 1943: Born in Old Delhi, British India, his family moving to Pakistan after independence. 1964: Joins an artillery regiment after graduating from a military academy. October 1998: Appointed army chief of staff by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. October 1999: Comes to power a bloodless military coup launched after Sharif, who had fired him, tries to prevent his plane from landing when it was dangerously low on fuel. April 2002: Nearly a year after declaring himself president, he wins a much-criticised referendum allowing him to stay on for five more years. October 2007: Wins presidential elections boycotted by almost the entire opposition. November 2007: Declares a state of emergency and suspends the constitution, citing a surge in Islamist attacks and interference by the judiciary. It sparks widespread protests and is repealed nearly six weeks later. August 2008: Resigns in the face of impeachment proceedings by the new governing coalition. Goes into exile in London and Dubai. March 2013: Returns to Pakistan intending to run in presidential elections but is barred from the polls and from leaving the country. August 2013: Formally charged with three counts over the 2007 killing of his political rival, Benazir Bhutto. December 2019: Sentenced to death in absentia for treason related to his 2007 imposition of emergency rule. Advertisement

The UAE has no extradition agreement with Pakistan, meaning Emirati authorities are unlikely to arrest Musharraf.

His lawyer Akhtar Shah said Musharraf was 'still in Dubai and sick' and not well enough to return to Pakistan - meaning he is likely to avoid the sentence.

'Musharraf today sent me a message, saying he is ready to come to Pakistan but his doctors are not allowing him to travel,' the lawyer said following the ruling.

The lawyer added that Musharraf offered to give a statement to the court through a video link but the request was denied.

Musharraf's doctors say he is suffering from amyloidosis, a rare condition which affects the body's organs and tissues.

Last month, Musharraf issued a video recording from a hospital bed in Dubai in which he said he was not being given a fair hearing in the case.

'I served the nation and made decisions for the betterment of the country,' Musharraf said in the video clip.

Musharraf has a residence in Dubai and, according to reports, has also received regular treatment in London since leaving Pakistan in 2016.

The former president can also appeal to the Supreme Court and the attorney general announced at a press conference last night that Imran Khan's government would defend Musharraf.

'If the person who is accused is not getting justice this government will stand against that injustice,' Mansoor said.

The three-man court convicted Musharraf by a 2-1 verdict yesterday and ordered the death penalty by hanging, which is the only method of execution used in Pakistan.

The long-awaited verdict was initially due on November 28 but was postponed until yesterday to allow for further legal submissions.

Message: Speaking from a hospital bed, Musharraf (pictured in a video message recorded in Dubai earlier this month) said he had been 'victimised' and had 'not been heard'

The ruling by a three-judge panel was not unanimous and one of the judges had opposed the death sentence, according to Akhtar Sheikh (pictured yesterday), one of the lawyers for Gen Musharraf

Gen Musharraf, who was sentenced in absentia at a court (pictured yesterday) in Islamabad, has been out of the country since 2016, when he was allowed to leave on bail to seek medical treatment abroad

Musharraf (pictured in 2004) was yesterday found guilty of high treason and subverting the constitution by a special court in Islamabad, Pakistani officials said

Musharraf, who seized power in a 1999 coup and ruled until 2008, is currently in Dubai after leaving Pakistan for treatment three years ago. Doctors say he is suffering from amyloidosis, a rare condition which affects the body's organs and tissues. He is pictured in hospital in March this year

Will Pervez Musharraf ever face justice? Pervez Musharraf has been sentenced to death but has the backing of Pakistan's attorney general, who said last night that the judgement was 'against the constitution'. Imran Khan's government says it will 'stand against that injustice' by defending Musharraf when he appeals, the attorney general said. In any case, Musharraf is unlikely to return to Pakistan to be hanged. He is currently in Dubai and is said to be very ill with a rare condition called amyloidoisis, which affects the organs and body tissue. His lawyer says he would be willing to return to Pakistan but says Musharraf's doctors will not allow it. Pakistan has no extradition treaty with the UAE and Emirati authorities are unlikely to arrest him. In the last resort, Musharraf could also appeal for clemency from Pakistan's current president, Arif Alvi. Advertisement

The Pakistani army slammed the sentence and said there had been 'pain and anguish' in the ranks over the ruling against Musharraf, who is the first former army chief to be charged with treason in Pakistan.

'The decision given by special court about General Pervez Musharraf retired has been received with lot of pain and anguish by rank and file of Pakistan armed forces,' a statement said.

The military said 'due legal process seems to have been ignored,' highlighting that Musharraf was not allowed to present a defense.

It said the case had been concluded in haste and that Musharraf 'fought wars for the defence of the country [and] can surely never be a traitor.'

The treason case has been running since 2013, when Musharraf was charged with high treason for declaring a state of emergency and placing several senior judges under house arrest in 2007.

All civil liberties, human rights and democratic processes were suspended from November 2007 to February 2008.

Musharraf portrayed it at the time as a necessary step to fight the growing Taliban insurgency in Pakistan which had led to a wave of militant attacks and suicide bombings.

However, his opponents said he had sacked the judges to stop them challenging his re-election as President earlier that year.

Prosecutors accused Musharraf of failing to consult Pakistan's prime minister and said the state of emergency was illegal.

Connection? Musharraf (left) was accused of involvement in the assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto (right), who was gunned down in Rawalpindi in 2007

New leader: Pervez Musharraf (left) meets Sheikh Zayed of Abu Dhabi in 1999 only two weeks after he had come to power in a bloodless coup in Pakistan

Supporters: Female activists celebrated Musharraf's victory in an election in 2007, but he had left office within a year while facing possible impeachment

How Pervez Musharraf seized power in a bloodless coup Pervez Musharraf seized power in 1999 after ousting prime minister Nawaz Sharif in a bloodless coup. Musharraf had been appointed army chief in 1998 but his relationship with Sharif quickly deteriorated. Matters became particularly strained during the 1999 Kargil border conflict with India which was widely seen as a disaster for Pakistan. Sharif tried to sack Musharraf in October 1999 while the general was on his way back from Sri Lanka. But the army came to Musharraf's defence, shutting down the airport and state television network and placing politicians under house arrest. Sharif was accused of trying to kill the army chief after soldiers had to intervene to allow Musharraf's plane to land with fuel running out. Musharraf declared himself the new leader and suspended the constitution, forcing Sharif out. The ousted PM was placed under house arrest and later sent into exile in Saudi Arabia after a court convicted him of conspiracy against Musharraf. Musharraf initially took the title of chief executive before becoming President in 2001. Pakistan was virtually bankrupt at the time and the coup was relatively popular. Musharraf promised to return Pakistan to democracy, but opponents say he stifled political freedom over the following years. Advertisement

The treason charge is one of a raft of court cases which Musharraf has faced since leaving office, including a murder charge of which he was acquitted in 2016.

Musharraf was also accused of involvement in the assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto, who was gunned down in Rawalpindi in 2007.

Bhutto was a political rival of Musharraf who had been in exile until she returned shortly before her death to contest upcoming elections.

At the time, his government blamed the assassination on then-Pakistani Taliban chief Baitullah Mehsud, who denied any involvement.

In 2017 Musharraf was declared a 'fugitive' in the Bhutto murder trial, which ended with charges against five alleged Taliban militants being dismissed.

Musharraf is the first senior military figure to face trial in a country where the armed forces are often considered untouchable.

Following the court's decision yesterday, Bhutto's son Bilawal Bhutto Zardari tweeted: 'Democracy is the best revenge'.

A senior Supreme Court lawyer, Hamid Ali Khan, hailed the verdict as long overdue. 'For the first time in the history of Pakistan ... a military dictator has been punished by a court of law,' he said.

Senator Pervaiz Rashid, an aide to the ousted Sharif, called it a landmark ruling that would help constrain the military.

'We have secured our future generations,' he said.

Amnesty International welcomed the conviction of a military general but said he should be dealt with 'without recourse to the death penalty'.

The former leader's rule was characterised by 'extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances, torture, arbitrary detentions, deaths in custody, unlawful killings and other serious human rights violations,' the charity said.

Pakistan army soldiers enter the state television building in Islamabad following the attempt to dismiss Musharraf in 1999 which prompted the army general's coup

Musharraf walks by the French republican guard on a visit to the Elysee Palace in Paris in 2003 where he met his counterpart Jacques Chirac

Scuffle: A Pakistani police officer clashes with lawyers during an anti-Musharraf protest in Multan in November 2007 when the former army general declared a state of emergency

Musharraf's downfall after declaring emergency rule Pervez Musharraf declared a state of emergency in 2007 in a controversial move which accelerated his downfall - and has now led to a death sentence. Musharraf had faced few serious challenges to his rule until then and had survived a series of al-Qaeda assassination plots. But his popularity plummeted early in 2007 after he suspended supreme court judge Iftikhar Chaudhry. The move sparked outrage and a wave of protests, plunging the country into turmoil. Pakistan was also plagued by a series of militant attacks and suicide bombings which surged after Musharraf's troops surrounded a mosque in Islamabad, leading to more than 100 deaths in a bloody siege. Musharraf also struggled with the judiciary over his wish to remain head of the army while president. In October 2007 he won an election boycotted by most of the opposition, but his hold on power remained fragile and the following month he declared a state of emergency in Pakistan. All civil liberties, human rights and democratic processes were suspended from November 2007 to February 2008 and senior judges were placed under house arrest. Musharraf cited a surge in Islamist attacks and interference by the judiciary in running the country, but the move sparked further outrage. His exiled rival Benazir Bhutto called for Musharraf to resign and her assassination in December 2007 fuelled further anger in the country. In February 2008 Musharraf's allies lost a parliamentary election, leaving him isolated even further, and he resigned in August that year with likely impeachment looming over him. Since his resignation he has been accused in a series of court cases, including over Bhutto's death and the treason charge which has led to the death sentence. Advertisement

Musharraf was born in 1943 in New Delhi, where his father was a foreign service employee, but his family moved to Pakistan after partition in 1947.

He joined the Pakistani army in 1964 and fought in the 17-day war with India in 1965, later becoming a commando in the elite Special Services Group.

Musharraf quickly through the ranks, spending a year at the elite Royal College of Defence Studies in London in the 1980s.

In 1998 he was appointed army chief by prime minister Nawaz Sharif but their relationship soon soured.

The following year, he seized power in a bloodless coup a day after Sharif had attempted to sack him.

He took the presidency in 2001, becoming a key US ally in the 'war on terror' and escaping at least three al-Qaeda assassination plots.

In his memoirs he recalled a US threat to bomb Pakistan 'back to the Stone Age' if it did not co-operate against the Taliban. Then-President Bush said he was 'taken aback' by the claim but did not deny it.

Musharraf promised to return Pakistan to democracy but opponents say he stifled political freedom.

In 2007 he tried to sack Pakistan's chief justice, sparking nationwide protests and months of turmoil which led to the state of emergency.

Pakistan's national mood soured further after Bhutto's death and Musharraf resigned in 2008 in the face of looming impeachment charges.

After leaving office, he lived in London before attempting a comeback in 2013 which was halted when a court barred him from that year's Pakistani general election.

The same thing happened in 2018 when the Election Commission of Pakistan rejected his candidacy for a National Assembly seat.

In 2016 Pakistan's supreme court allowed him to leave the country for Dubai to receive medical treatment.

He left his home for Karachi airport in a heavily guarded convoy in March that year and has not returned to Pakistan since.

Sharif, who was overthrown in the 1999 coup, later returned as PM and accused Musharraf of corruption. Sharif was ousted again in 2017 and convicted of corruption himself.

'That the courts would take such a bold decision or give a bold judgement shows that there is a major transformation that is taking place in Pakistan,' he said.

Accused: Pervez Musharraf arrives at an anti-terrorism court in Islamabad in 2013, facing one of a series of legal cases against him since he resigned in 2008
