Bihar CM Nitish Kumar Blames Rise In Rapes On Porn Sites, Writes To PM Modi Seeking Ban

The rise in rape cases have exposed the dismal law and order in the country. The Telangana and Unnao rape awoke collective outrage and protests. While rapes can be blamed on societal evolution, low status of women and lack of public safety, many ministers, time and again, have given several reasons for rapes ranging from TV and mobiles to the classic “boys will be boys.”

Adding to the list, Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar has blamed porn sites for rise in rapes. Kumar has written to prime minister Narendra Modi seeking a complete ban all “porn sites and inappropriate content” available online.

“It will be my request to take appropriate action to ban all porn sites and inappropriate content available on the internet immediately after giving due consideration to the serious issue,” an official release said quoting the letter penned by Kumar.

In the letter, Kumar expressed "pain and serious concern" over the increasing number of gang rape cases which have agitated the general public.

Kumar also wrote that people, especially children and youths, are watching porn, violent and inappropriate content on internet due to its unlimited reach to them. The incidents (of gang rape and crime against women) take place in some cases because of the impact of these sites, he added.

"People make videos of heinous acts (rape) against girls and women and get them uploaded on social media such as Whatsapp, Facebook etc. Such content, which seriously affect the minds of children and youths, have been found as factors responsible for crimes (against women)," he said.

Long-term use of such content negatively affect the mind of some people, which gives rise to social problems and increases the number of cases of crime against women, the CM said.

In the first week of December, Kumar expressed anguish over bone-chilling rape and murder case of Telangana, along with a few other cases of rapes in Buxar and Samastipur districts of Bihar. He had blamed internet platforms proffering voyeuristic pleasure through video clips of rapes purportedly filmed by the perpetrators themselves.

BCCL

Kumar had made the remark on a day when four suspects of the rape and murder of a veterinary doctor in Hyderabad were killed in a police encounter on December 6.

Less than a week after the incident in the southern metropolis caused nationwide outrage, charred bodies of unidentified women were found on two consecutive days in Buxar and Samastipur after suspected sexual assault.

Talking about the laws meant to regulate inappropriate contents, Kumar said that though certain provisions have been made in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (such as amendment in 2008), these are not proving to be effective.

The Supreme Court has also given several guidelines to the government on the issue.

"In my view, the unlimited access to such inappropriate content cannot be allowed in the name of freedom of speech and expression. There is a need to take effective measures for redressal of crimes against women and children," Kumar said.

He asserted the need for carrying out comprehensive awareness campaigns.
