British tourists flee Thailand as worst storm in 30 years heads for country

Tens of thousands of tourists are reportedly fleeing Thailand as the country prepares for the worst tropical storm in 30 years.

Authorities have suspended ferry services, cancelled flights and started evacuations as Storm Pabuk approach the country with expected winds of up to 40 mph.

The Foreign Office has advised British nationals against all but essential travel to provinces on the Thai-Malaysia border, including areas such as Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Locals evacuate as high waves are seen in the background during heavy downpours (Picture: EPA)

Waves crashed into a pier in the southern Thai province of Surat Thani this morning (Picture: AFP)

Thai rescue workers carry the body of a fisherman who drowned at sea following heavy downpours and high waves (Picture: EPA)

Rain is already falling around the Gulf of Thailand and officials warned that torrential downpours, strong winds and rough seas are forecast in 16 provinces when the storm makes its expected landfall on Friday.

Three children among five in hospital after double decker bus crashes into shop

A fisherman and a dad who lost consciousness after being tossed against some rocks while saving his daughter have so far been reported drowned.

There are fears the storm will be the worst to hit Thailand since 1989, when Typhoon Gay left more than 400 dead.

Satellite image of Tropical Storm Pabuk approaching the Gulf of Thailand (Picture: EPA)

Brits make over one million trips to Thailand every year and over the winter period many head there to catch some sun.

A spokesman for the Association of British Travel Agents said: ‘Tropical Storm Pabuk has made landfall in Thailand over Pak Phanang, Nakhon Si thammarat and is moving in a northwesterly direction.’

Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha said: ‘There will be heavy rainfall and we have to prepare for flooding or an impact on transportation.

‘We are ready ourselves, but if the rainfall is high we will need some time to resolve problems.’

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Bangkok Airways have cancelled all flights to and from Koh Samui, ferry services have also been suspended, potentially leaving tourists stranded.

Three children among five in hospital after double decker bus crashes into shop

He also held a video conference with the governors of the 16 provinces to discuss preparations for the emergency, including digging canals to run off floodwaters, mobilising rescue vehicles, ordering all boats to be docked, and readying medical facilities.

Thailand’s Meteorological Department said the storm will lash southern Thailand’s east coast from Thursday to Saturday, with the provinces of Surat Thani and Nakhon Si Thammarat expected to be hardest hit.

Locals help clear the shoreline in preparation for strong winds and rough seas (Picture: AP)

Chinese tourists disembark at Surat Thani airport after tour operators were forced to suspend boats to popular holiday destinations due to Storm Pabuk (Picture: AFP)

Ferries and flights have been suspended and the country has started evacuations (Picture: Reuters)

Surat Thani is home to the popular tourist islands of Koh Samui, Koh Tao and Koh Phangan.

The department said the storm was moving west into the Gulf of Thailand with maximum winds of 40mph.

It said waves 10ft to 16ft high were possible in the Gulf of Thailand and 6ft to 10ft high in the Andaman Sea on the west coast.

Floodwaters rise over the coastal road (Picture: AP)

Local fishermen moved their boats ashore in preparation for severe weather (Picture: AP)

It warned of strong winds and storm surges on the gulf side and said all ships should stay berthed on land through until Saturday.

Three children among five in hospital after double decker bus crashes into shop

Southern Thailand’s tourist industry is a huge moneymaker and authorities have become particularly sensitive to visitors’ safety since last July, when 47 Chinese tourists drowned when the boat they were on sank in rough seas near the popular resort of Phuket.

Fishing is another major industry in the south, and small boat owners have been warned of the dangers.

Cars and fallen electricity poles are seen along a road in the southern province of Nakhon Si Thammarat (Picture: Reuters)

Many dragged their vessels ashore, attaching ropes to the boats and having friends help tug them on to beaches.

Offshore oil rigs have also been evacuated.

Got a story for Metro.co.uk? Get in touch with our news team by emailing us at webnews@metro.co.uk. For more stories like this, check our news page.
