Superbugs: Strategies to help combat antibiotic resistance

Superbugs: Strategies hospitals, patients can take to help combat antibiotic resistance | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Hospital-acquired infections are a major threat to patients admitted to the hospital and intensive care unit (ICUs) India also has one of the highest incidences of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacterial infections There is no new antibiotic in the pipeline for the next decade, which is why prevention is the best cure

New Delhi: Have you ever wondered why do some medicines - specifically antibiotics - have a ‘RED LINE’ on them? Basically, a ‘red line’ on medicine strips indicates that the drug should not be taken without the prescription of a doctor. The misuse or overuse of antibiotics in humans and animals is accelerating the process of antibiotic resistance, one of the most urgent threats to global health. According to experts, hospital-acquired Infections (HAI) are a major threat to patient safety in India.

In a series of tweets, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare urged individuals to take steps that will help in controlling antibiotic resistance, adding that everyone has a role to play in tackling the menace. “You can prevent antibiotic resistance. A RED LINE on the strip of medicines implies that the medicine should not be consumed without a doctor's prescription,” tweeted the Ministry of Health.

Hospital-acquired infections - A major threat to patient safety in India

Hospital-acquired infections are a major threat to patients admitted to the hospital and intensive care unit (ICUs) in the country. It is said that India has the highest incidence of these infections which is 4 to 5 times higher than those in the Western world. These include ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI), catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTI), and skin and soft tissue infections (SSI).

India also has one of the highest incidences of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacterial infections. These are bacteria that can cause serious infections that do not respond to most of the standard conventional antibiotics. This can lead to an increase in the length of stay in the hospital and ICU. This could also increase the need for supportive therapies such as dialysis and artificial ventilation (breathing), increase the cost of healthcare and the risk of death. In this article, Dr Yatin Mehta, Chairman, Medanta Institute of Critical Care and Anesthesiology, speaks to Timesnewnews.com on the factors driving antimicrobial resistance in the country and what healthcare facilities and patients can do to help combat this public health crisis.

What causes antimicrobial resistance?

Antimicrobial resistance or the occurrence of MDR starts with the community. The general public or patients should not ask chemists for antibiotics or medicate themselves without proper prescriptions from a medical (allopathic) doctor. The misuse and overuse of antibiotics result in bacteria becoming ‘clever’ and devising methods to overcome the effect of the antibiotics. One mechanism that bacteria use is to produce enzymes (chemicals), which degrade the antibiotic. One such enzyme has been named ‘New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM)’ because the resistant bacterial infection was probably acquired in India, which is a shame to our capital.

Besides this, there was extensive use of the colistin antibiotic in poultry farming. This antibiotic was used to fatten chicken, which would later cause antibiotic resistance in human beings. Thankfully, our Health Minister Dr Harsh Vardhan took cognizance of this and banned the use of the drug in the poultry industry.

Earlier, MDR bugs lived only in hospitals and health care facilities. But they are now found even in community water and sewage systems in Delhi. These MDR bugs are also routinely found in individuals who go for regular executive health checkups in Mumbai. This means that the danger has spread outside the warzone i.e. from the hospital to the community. This indicates the need to improve our potable water supply, sewage processing and overall hygiene - ‘Swatch Bharat’!

So, how can we control or put a check on these bugs in hospitals?

Performance of surveillance cultures for patients especially those at high risk - these include those who have been administered antibiotics in the recent past, have been hospitalised recently, have reduced immunity or have come from other hospitals. This will help in taking further precautions if necessary, such as barrier nursing, isolation, and airborne or droplet precautions, to prevent further spread of these dangerous MDR bugs to other patients and staff. It is also important to ensure that hospitals have good, well-designed ICUs with physical barriers, 1:1 nursing care, filtered air, bedside hand hygiene facility, good training and an audit of all these practices by an infection control team. The quality of water, air, and hand hygiene practices must be monitored, audited and presented in the monthly infection control committee meetings, root cause analysis, and corrective and preventive steps must be taken. Hospitals should also observe a hand hygiene week or day where the message is spread to attendants and staff. Hospitals should have an active, strong antibiotic stewardship programme in which microbiologists, infection control nurses, pharmacists and clinicians audit, monitor and check all antibiotic prescriptions. This is particularly important for the restricted antibiotics, i.e. antibiotics which are misused and expensive, and the doctor must be advised accordingly. Furthermore, hospitals must only use antibiotics manufactured by the original research company or by reputed pharmaceutical companies, so that their efficacy is not compromised. Remember, all drugs are not the same!

The bottom line is, only if we put all these efforts together, will we be able to fight this menace. There is no new antibiotic in the pipeline for the next decade, which is why prevention is the best cure. Let us all pledge to participate in this effort to contain MDR.

Watch out for the 'RED LINE' on medicine packs, and be responsible!

Disclaimer: The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
