International focus on India increases over CAA: How prepared is New Delhi to deal with the fallout?

Anti-CAA protests in Guwahati | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights New Delhi can afford to ignore the reaction from Islamabad, which is known to border on hysteria on all things India. But Bangladesh’s subtle suggestions that it is not too happy with how the CAA issue has played out is a different matter Antonio Guterres, the United Nations Secretary-General, is concerned about the violence and the “alleged use of excessive force” during the anti-CAA protests

The contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), which seeks to fast-forward the process of granting citizenship to non-Muslim minorities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, has triggered protests in some parts of India, including Assam, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.

While the protests in the Northeast are centred around the fear of illegal immigrants gaining citizenship, in most other parts of the country, protesters, including students and Muslims, see the Act as discriminatory towards Muslims.

However, both Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah have staunchly defended the CAA, and instead accused the Opposition Congress of spreading disinformation about the legislation and inciting protesters.

While the violence has receded, there is a palpable sense of further unrest in the days and weeks ahead. In any case, various peaceful rallies and marches against the CAA by civil society groups, students and Opposition parties are expected to keep the pressure on the government.

The Modi government, given its strength in Parliament and the popularity of the prime minister, believes it will be able to deal with these protests using a mixture of carrots and sticks.

However, the CAA is also starting to have an international fallout, in the neighbourhood and wider global stage. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) will have to engage with world powers and address concerns countries like the US have on this front.

In the neighbourhood

Pakistan, not unexpectedly, has reacted very strongly to India’s new legislation, in near-apocalyptic terms. “We are worried there not only could be a refugee crisis, we are worried it could lead to a conflict between two nuclear-armed countries,” Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan was quoted as saying by The Express Tribune.

New Delhi can afford to ignore the reaction from Islamabad, which is known to border on hysteria on all things India.

But Bangladesh’s subtle suggestions that it is not too happy with how the CAA issue has played out is a different matter.

Bangladesh failed to send a delegation for a meeting of the Joint River Commission scheduled on Wednesday. While no reason has been given, some observers are linking this to Dhaka’s unhappiness with the CAA, with some media reports indicating a spike in people crossing the border from India into Bangladesh in the past few weeks.

Officially, the Sheikh Hasina government has maintained that the CAA is an “internal matter” of India, but the MEA was forced to clarify that Hindus and other minorities in Bangladesh were not being persecuted under her regime.

Bangladesh is one of India’s most important partners in South Asia, and New Delhi will have to carefully and sensitively evaluate the impact the political rhetoric surrounding the CAA – especially when the word ‘Bangladeshi’ is used as a pejorative -- could have on its ties with Dhaka.

Beyond Bangladesh

The MEA has its work cut out in the larger international sphere, too. Sam Brownback, Ambassador at Large for International Religious Freedom, tweeted last week that while the US respected India’s institutions it was “concerned about the implications of the CAB Bill”.

The CAA could also come up during the ‘2+ 2’ meeting between senior Indian and US officials.

Earlier, a US federal commission, which doesn’t represent official American policy, had called for sanctions against senior Indian leaders if the CAB were passed.

PM Modi has established a warm rapport with President Donald Trump, but given that the CAA comes amid demands by several members of the US Congress to free the politicians detained in Kashmir, New Delhi should expect more questions by Republican and Democrat lawmakers in the coming weeks.

The coverage of the CAA in the international media has not been favourable to India.

There are other headaches for the Modi administration. Antonio Guterres, the United Nations Secretary-General, is concerned about the violence and the “alleged use of excessive force” during the anti-CAA protests, according to his spokesperson Stephane Dujarric .

Meanwhile, the spokesperson for Human Rights High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet said the CAA “would appear to undermine the commitment to equality before the law enshrined in India's Constitution”.

Those are tough words.
