Fact Check: This little girl was not injured in stone pelting on trains in India

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act have erupted in parts of India over the last few days. West Bengal, especially, has witnessed violent protests. In many places across Bengal, anti-CAA protesters set trains and railway stations on fire, vandalised them and uprooted railway tracks.

Amid the mayhem, a collage of a little girl has been doing the rounds on social media with the claim that she was injured after protesters pelted stones at the train she was travelling in. In one picture, the girl’s head can be seen soaked in blood and in the second, it is bandaged.

India Today Anti-Fake War News Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading. The viral picture is not from India but Bangladesh.

Facebook user Arjun Yaduvanshi posted the collage with a caption in Hindi that translates to, Thank you Indian Muslims. This little girl was also sitting in the train which you were pelting with stones. Do not say anything about this girl else it would break your brotherhood.

Many Facebook pages shared the same collage with similar claims.

AFWA probe

To verify the claim, we reverse-searched the viral photo and found articles published in United News of Bangladesh and Zee 24 Ghanta on a major train accident in Bangladesh. These articles carry a picture of the little girl as seen in the viral post.

According to the article, a train accident took place in Brahmanbaria, Bangladesh, on November 12, 2019. At least 16 people were killed and more than 50 injured in the mishap. The little girl in the viral photo was injured in the same accident and she was brought to hospital for treatment.

Therefore, it can be said that the viral picture of the little girl has nothing to do with anti-CAA protests in Bengal or even India. She was injured in a train accident in neighbouring Bangladesh.

Also read: Fact Check: No, this is not ABVP man in the garb of Delhi police

Also read: Fact Check: Old image of Egyptian child kidnapper passed off as Jamia protester

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Viral picture is of girl injured during stone pelting in India Conclusion The girl was injured in a train accident in Bangladesh JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
