Situation along LoC can escalate anytime, India needs to be prepared: Army Chief Bipin Rawat

“The situation along the Line of Control (LoC) can escalate any time,” Army chief Bipin Rawat said. (PTI File photo)

The situation along the Line of Control can escalate any time, Army Chief Bipin Rawat said Wednesday, adding the Army is ready for any “escalatory matrix”.

Rawat’s remarks came in the backdrop of increasing ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir since the abrogation of Article 370. Jammu and Kashmir was conferred with special status which was revoked on August 5.

“The situation along the Line of Control can escalate any time. The Indian Army is always ready for escalatory matrix,” the Army Chief was quoted as saying by PTI.

General Rawat played a key role in pursuing a policy of hot pursuit in dealing with cross border terrorism in the Valley after he took over as Army Chief on December 31, 2016.

He is slated to retire on December 31 and Lieutenant General Manoj Mukund Naravane will succeed him. However, it is likely that General Rawat will be appointed as India’s first Chief of Defence Staff.

According to assessment by the security forces, though the situation in the Valley has been brought under control to a large extent, a cautious approach is still required so that the atmosphere is not allowed to be vitiated.

Sources said the situation in Kashmir is being closely monitored and each and every step is being taken based on realistic assessment.

Union Minister of State (MoS) for Home Affairs G Kishan Reddy had told the Lok Sabha in November that “950 incidents of ceasefire violation had been reported along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir between August and October 2019.”

The sources said Pakistan’s Border Action Teams (BAT) are attempting to target Indian security personnel on a regular basis along the LoC.

The BAT generally comprises special forces personnel of the Pakistani Army and terrorists. There have been incidents of BAT mutilating bodies of Indian security force personnel.

Pakistan is carrying out BAT operations at an interval of 3-4 days, the sources said.

Earlier on Tuesday, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had said that the recent amendment in the Citizenship law in India may lead to conflict between the two nuclear-armed nations.

(With PTI inputs)
