Now Anyone Can Get A Gun License In Gwalior By Donating At Least 10 Blankets For Shivering Cows

What is the most benevolent act of kindness you've performed recently? Most people like to make donations to equal out their part of service to society and that, indeed, is quite benevolent in itself. In Gwalior, India, though, things are a bit different.

Here, if you make a donation, you get something in return. Not only is there apt validation for your benevolence upon making a donation, but there is also flawless cultural identification of the political structure existing in that state currently, which is quite visible too.

What am I talking about?

Well, in simpler words, if you want to attain a gun license in Gwalior, all you have to do is donate at least ten blankets to cows in any of the state-provided shelters. So, if you think the unabashed appreciation for cows by certain party's politicians couldn't get any worse, well, it already has.

Anurag Chaudhary, the man behind this legendary 'exchange' offer, is the District Collector of Gwalior, incidentally a city which is infamous for having a history of dacoits and bandits.

© Twitter

So, what made the DC realise that cows needed protection from the cold as much as people needed a gun license in the city? Well, it was brought to Chaudhary's notice that six cows had died due to excessive cold, when he attended a meeting of cow vigilantes (gaurakshaks) last week. He then thought the best way to protect the most sacred animal considered in Hinduism and restore and make compassion mandatory, was to start a fair and civil gun license exchange for some warm blankets, for the cows.

Because why else would people donate blankets, without any incentive, right?

And since Gwalior has been the hotbed of violent activities in the past, the best thing to do would be to propagate more violence, by making firearms easily available. Because that's the only way people will truly care. About cows, at least.

“People in Gwalior have a craze for arms. They need it for self-defence. Hence, once they donate blankets to get preference in getting arms licenses we will have more blankets for cows in the shelters. Earlier, our decision to ask such applicants to plant saplings yielded good results and as many as 17,000 saplings were planted for arms license seekers.” Anurag Chaudhary told a popular publication in an interview.

© Twitter/New Indian Express

Earlier, he had asked people to plant saplings and take selfies with their saplings, along with taking care of it for a month and in exchange, people would acquire a gun license. And since people are easily drawn into weaponry talks, they planted around 17,000 saplings and got a gun license as a reward for doing so.

The same thing is now being repeating and it makes us wonder if the only way Gwalior knows how to progress socially is by normalising incentives that promote gun violence. Is that how functionality dwells in that part of the country? Which TBH is quite scary.

© Twitter/New Indian Express

The fact of the matter is that violence and arms have normalised their existence in the state of Madhya Pradesh and not because the government uses it as an incentive to work on different social causes for the upliftment of the state, but because in the Gwalior-Chambal area, keeping a gun is a way to flex one's power and respect in society. It's something that was inbred with the historic dacoit battles that lasted there for decades, and like any heroic norm, keeping a weapon became a sign of strength.

But, politicians today access that piece of history to use gun license as a pawn to further the cause they care about and, of course, win a section of their incoming vote bank.

While some authorities practice this so-called compassionate exchange offer, there are others in the state, like the electricity department in the neighbouring Morena, who don't encourage such practices. The electricity department in Morena has asked for guns to not be given to those who default on their electricity bill, as they often threaten power officials and continue to not pay them. So, you see, there is always a flipside and it will always be the case if you hand any violent form of power to people.

© RSVP movies

While saving animals and planting trees is the need of the hour and we're glad the city of Gwalior is doing their bit, we are sure incentives toward executing these causes can change. They can be more naturally driven than desensitising people towards violence in general.

We really hope the government realises the tragic fallacy of this incentive and changes the way socially-relevant activities are conducted in the state, hereon.
