Panvel: Autorickshaw driver strangles 8-year-old son to death for not sleeping on time

Both accused have been remanded in police custody (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police have arrested the autorickshaw driver and his friend on charges of murder The victim's body was dumped in a gunny sack along the Uran-Palasape road Both men have been booked under section 302 of the IPC

Mumbai: Police in neighbouring Panvel have arrested a man for the murder of his eight-year-old son. Aged 32, Rakesh Ambaji Tambde alias Kaanti Paanhage was arrested in the early hours of Wednesday morning from his home in Panvel city. He has been charged under Section 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which corresponds to murder and destruction of evidence.

The matter first reported to the police by a passerby who spotted a suspicious gunny sack lying in the middle of the Uran-Palasape road near Kundevahal on Monday morning. Police officers arrived at the spot and found the body of eight-year-old Suraj Monu Upendra Sahi. Missing person complaints and CCTV footage led police to his parents who were summoned to identify the body and confirmed to the police that the deceased, was their son.

What is most shocking is that during interrogation, the boy's step-father admitted to strangulating Suraj to death. He also told police officers that he often lost control of his temper over the boy's refusal to sleep on time. The accused reportedly murdered the boy in a fit of rage for not sleeping on time. He then called a friend to help him store the body in a gunny sack and throw it along the Uran-Palasape road.

Both of the men have been arrested by police and charged accordingly as per the severity of their crimes. A local court has remanded them in police custody till December 23. An autorickshaw driver, Tambde, his wife and step-son Suraj slept out in the open in Panvel town. A senior police official familiar with the case said that the police are still trying to ascertain whether this was the real reason Tambde killed his eight-year-old stepson. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is currently underway.
