While Bollywood Bigwigs Steer Clear Of CAA, John Cusack Shows Solidarity With Protestors

It's been almost three days since the Delhi Police stormed inside the Jamia Islamia University following the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The news of clashes between the police and student protesters shook the entire country with the nation still divided on the newly introduced Act.

During this, there were so many prominent people, people with a huge amount of influence, who didn't even send out one tweet, one supportive message, actually any message acknowledging what is happening in our country at the moment.



While most of Bollywood has remained silent, an unexpected voice came in support of the students of Jamia to show solidarity. For a couple of days now, Hollywood actor John Cusack has been speaking out in support of the students, sharing messages from activists, and retweeting images and videos to show the extent of violence.

People can't believe that he's become a Bollywood ally that the country needs at this time.

Fascists in India trying to set students against each other -

To cover for the economic collapse of demonetization

but they are standing together in solidarity with their Muslim brothers & sisters -

This is fascism everywhere- them or us



Arundhati Roy pic.twitter.com/rTgF5CWF2G” — John Cusack (@johncusack) December 16, 2019

He's actively spreading awareness about the situation, calling out Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and even tagging powerful people from all over the world.

Stand with our Muslim brothers and sisters and students in solidarity being brutalized by modi pic.twitter.com/aPEFOcexsw — John Cusack (@johncusack) December 16, 2019

He's showing solidarity with the protestors while Bollywood bigwigs like Shah Rukh Khan, Aamir Khan, Salman Khan, among others, have not even bothered to put out a statement.

Reports from Delhi are it was a war zone last night -

Fascism is not a joke - we use the word with the understanding it's deadly — John Cusack (@johncusack) December 16, 2019

Can't believe.

Never knew that India's most politically aware actor is John Cusack. — shvm (@GhantaGuy) December 16, 2019

He's even retweeting powerful videos from protests.

Tum kuch bhi karlo,

Tum police bulao,

Tum dande maro,

Hum nahi chukenge,

Tum jail me daalo,

Hum nhi rukenge,

Hum leke rahenge!



Watch, again and again, the unmatchable aura of comrade @kanhaiyakumar! #CAAProtests #IndiansAgainstCAB pic.twitter.com/ZlStyhVL7z — Siddharth (@DearthOfSid) December 17, 2019

And calling out the government.

Narendra Modi is giving India the much needed International attention pic.twitter.com/eMt10KNBx0 — Rana Ayyub (@RanaAyyub) December 18, 2019

Must hear - Roy in India - and real possibility of civil war @eshaLegal: @johncusack Here is the video on YouTube! It might be easier to sharehttps://t.co/mlG9S2jxlA” — John Cusack (@johncusack) December 17, 2019

All said and done, it's important to highlight that while there have been voices from Bollywood who have made their opinions heard, it's the silence of the bigwigs that has been drawing flak from people.
