EXCLUSIVE: Sonakshi Sinha's iconic 'Thappad Se Darr' dialogue returns with Dabangg 3 thanks to Salman Khan!

Prabhudheva's directorial ' Dabangg 3 ' marks Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha ’s return to the franchise as Chulbul Pandey and Rajjo reunite after seven years. However, this cop drama will not just revisit the iconic characters but also a popular dialogue from the first part.Sonakshi, who made her big Bollywood debut with the franchise, instantly rose to fame for her portrayal of a conventional leading lady Rajjo. One of her iconic dialogues was, 'Thappad se darr nahi lagta sahab ... pyar se lagta hai’ (I am not scared of your slap sir, I am scared of love). This whistle-worthy line appeared in the first part, ‘ Dabangg ’ (2010) and made men go weak in the knees, including Chulbul Pandey.And with the third part, Sonakshi will once deliver this iconic statement. A source close to the film exclusively revealed to ETimes, “A few days ago Sonakshi Sinha had asked the makers of ‘Dabangg 3’ to give her a hard-hitting dialogue and Salman Khan suggested that they re-create the 'Thappad se darr nahi…’ statement for ‘Dabangg 3’. This dialogue had catapulted the film’s popularity to great heights and the team felt that revisiting it will definitely add nostalgic value to ‘Dabangg 3’.”Interestingly, ‘Dabangg 3’ has a flashback sequence with a college-going Salman Khan romancing Mahesh Manjrekar 's daughter Saiee Manjrekar. And once the film gets into present-day, Sonakshi will return as Rajjo. The third installment is planned as a prequel of the previous two films.Salman and Sonakshi recently returned from Jaipur, where the team was shooting amidst heavy showers. The duo has been entertaining fans on social media by sharing several BTS pictures and videos. Recently, Sonakshi shared a picture of herself decked as Rajjo. The actress is back to her desi avatar, sporting backless blouses and designer sarees. Recently Salman Khan announced that ‘Dabangg 3’ will release on December 20, in Hindi, Kannada, Tamil and Telugu.
