4 convicted for Jaipur blasts that killed 80

(With inputs from Parul Kulshrestha)

Jaipur: 4 convicted in Jaipur 2008 serial blasts case, 1 acquitted

JAIPUR: Eleven years after 80 people were killed and more than 170 injured in eight successive blasts that rocked Jaipur on a warm May evening, a special court on Wednesday convicted four of the five accused in the case and held the banned Indian Mujahideen (IM) responsible for the attack.The fifth accused, who was the first one to be arrested in the case, got the benefit of the doubt and was acquitted.The court of special judge Ajay Kumar Sharma pronounced Mohammad Saif, Mohammad Sarwar, Mohammad Salman and Saifur Rahman guilty of murder, criminal conspiracy and other charges under the Indian Penal Code , the Explosive Substances Act and the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. Their sentencing is scheduled for Thursday.Special public prosecutor Srichand said the state government would appeal the acquittal of Shahbaz Ahmed, who had allegedly emailed media houses on behalf of IM to claim responsibility for the blasts on May 13, 2008.The special court upheld the prosecution’s contention that Saif planted bombs at Manak Chowk, Sarwar at the Chandpole Hanuman temple , Salman at the Sanganeri Gate Hanuman temple and Rahman at Phool Walon Ka Khande in Choti Chaupar. Describing the eight explosions targeting places of worship as heinous crimes perpetrated in the name of “jihad”, the court said these were part of a larger terror conspiracy that included later attacks such as the blasts in Ahmedabad on August 27 that year and Delhi on September 13.The kingpin of the blasts, Aatif Amin, was killed in the infamous Batla House encounter in Delhi on September 19, 2008.The prosecution built its case around the statements of Saif, who was arrested during the encounter in which Amin was shot dead. Co-accused Salman’s claim of being a minor and his appeal to be tried in a juvenile court was set aside.The statements of 1,296 witnesses were recorded, 1,272 in favour of the prosecution and 24 for the accused. As many as 800 pages of documents were submitted and 50 Supreme Court rulings cited during the hearing.Gayatri Devi, whose husband Chaman Lal Sharma was among the 80 victims of the blasts, said nothing would ease the pain of the loss she suffered 11 years ago. “I can’t express in words what these terrorists took away from me. They killed my husband and my son’s father. I want to ask these terrorists the pain they would feel if their parents died in such a gruesome manner,” she said.E-rickshaw driver Hanuman Prasad, one of the lucky survivors of the blast near the Chandpole Hanuman temple, was in the crowd of expectant faces outside the courtroom when the special judge read out his verdict. He had come looking for catharsis, only to be flooded with memories he has struggled to erase for more than a decade. “They (the convicts) are responsible for wreaking havoc in our lives. I wish the court hands them the ultimate punishment,” he said.Mahendra Kumwat was a civil services aspirant in the summer of 2008 and would visit the Walled City frequently to buy books. Since the blasts, he hasn’t set foot there. “I can’t bring myself to visit that place ever again. I escaped being killed or maimed because I had left the area moments before the bombs went off. I could hear the explosions as I headed home. I am here today to see the guilty punished,” he said.A member of the Gupta family that lost two small children in the blasts — Mehak (6) and Diya (3) — said he couldn’t believe that four or five people alone masterminded and executed the blasts. “Nothing less than the death penalty to the convicted terrorists can give us a sense of closure,” said Govind Gupta, an uncle of the slain girls.The siblings were visiting the Chandpole Hanuman temple with their grandmother when a bomb went off. The elderly lady survived, but the little girls didn’t. The Gupta family has since set up the Mehak and Diya Foundation in their memory for charity and blood donation.
