Left-Secular Denial Denied

By R Jagannathan

Nothing is what it seems in the arguments for or against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) 2019, a law designed to fast-track citizenship for persecuted Hindus, Jains, Buddhists, Sikhs, Parsis and Christians who have migrated here from one neighbouring Muslim-majority and two Islamic States.

The Narendra Modi government says CAA is about inclusion, not exclusion. The rest can apply for citizenship in the normal course, after 11 years of stay in India as illegal migrants. The Opposition says it is about exclusion of Muslims — and Muslims alone. But beyond the openly stated arguments, the law is as much about BJP signalling to its Hindu voter base as about the Opposition trying to consolidate its Muslim vote banks.

The Opposition contradicts itself by claiming that many Muslims are also persecuted in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. In short, they indirectly accept BJP’s argument that these three neighbouring States persecute their citizens, even if the degree of persecution of various religious groups varies.

BJP, for its part, provides no explanation as to why Ahmaddiyas or Bahais should be excluded from CAA. The Opposition sees no hypocrisy in claiming that the Constitution does not permit discrimination on the basis of religion, when some laws — like the Right to Education Act — specifically discriminate against Hindu-run schools by forcing them to take on the burden of the 25% quota for the economically weaker sections. This week, the Supreme Court rejected the idea of Hindus being given minority status even in states like Punjab and Nagaland, and the former state of Jammu & Kashmir, where they truly are minorities.

In the south, the State blatantly denies Hindus the right to run their own temples, while refraining from doing the same with churches and mosques. So, anybody who says the Indian State is about non-discrimination on the basis of religion is living on another planet.

Let’s also conduct a mind experiment here to expose more hypocrisies. What if CAA had been only about providing persecuted Pakistanis and Afghans the right to fasttrack citizenship? Would our ‘secular’ tribes have been busy igniting popular passions in the name of religious discrimination? Probably not. For Pakistan is a designated enemy, and Afghanistan a distant reality.

It would have made no political sense for the Opposition to demand that all Muslims, too, be brought under CAA. This is why the PM, at an election rally in Jharkhand, dared the Opposition to give citizenship to Pakistani Muslim nationals.

There is also the misinformed, or deliberate, attempt in the media to conflate opposition to CAA in the northeast with the chorus of protests in other parts of India. One is about excluding every illegal immigrant, and the other is about complete inclusion of all of them, and not just persecuted minorities. The northeast wants both Hindus and Muslims kept out, while the rest of the protesters are talking about extending CAA to Bangladeshi Muslims too.

Then there is the red herring of the National Register of Citizens (NRC), which home minister Amit Shah says will be carried out all over India. After the botched Assam NRC, this may sound like a bad idea. But, surely, no one can object to a State deciding to find out who its legitimate citizens are and who are undocumented migrants.

The real issue is not whether an NRC is right or wrong, but whether we can do it right, with the minimum of public disruption. The case for or against NRC revolves only around this issue — about the State’s capacity to conduct it painlessly.

If we really want to understand the bushfires ignited by CAA, we should look not for the logical or constitutional reasons adduced by proponents and opponents. We have to look at the politics and the emotions that support both narratives.

For BJP, it is about telling its Hindu base that it has not forgotten their priorities, from Ram Mandir to CAA. After deciding to eviscerate Article 370, BJP now wants to turn the spotlight on the persecutions that Hindus face in the neighbourhood.

Unstated is the belief that India must not allow more Muslims to enter India, given the demographic shifts already happening in the northeast, especially in Assam.

BJP is more and more inclined to see India as the civilisational inheritor of a 5,000-year Indic heritage, and not just as a State created in 1947 and limited by its constitutional mandate.

For those who oppose CAA, there are two reasons for their passionate stands. Some Muslims genuinely fear that CAA is the first step towards declaring them second-class citizens in India. BJP must step up its efforts to assure them that it has no such intentions.

The visceral ‘Left-secular’ opposition to CAA has to be understood differently. They are livid at BJP’s temerity in painting a picture of Hindu victimhood in the neighbourhood, something that Left historiography and secular narratives have tried to bury.

They are upset that they can no longer maintain the façade that oppression is only about majority Hindus denying rights to Indian minorities. They stand exposed, for five of the six minorities covered by CAA are minorities in India too.

(The writer is editorial director, Swarajya)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
