Fire in Delhi hotel with ‘illegal floors’ kills 17

NEW DELHI

fire

hotel

Distraught family members mourn the deaths. Delhi govt has announced compensation of Rs 5 lakh for kin of each victim

Central Delhi was jolted out of sleep in the early hours of Tuesday as a massiveswept through a budgetwith two illegal floors in Karol Bagh, killing at least 17 guests, including two people who jumped in a desperate bid to save themselves.A child, three Myanmarese Buddhist pilgrims, including two women, and an IRS officer were among those killed in the blaze at the four-storeyed Arpit Palace Hotel around 3.30 am. There were around 70 people, including staff, in the 40-room hotel at the time of the incident. At least 35 people were injured.While the Delhi Police registered an FIR, the AAP government ordered a magisterial probe as glaring lapses came to light. The hotel’s general manager, Rajender, and manager Vikas have been arrested, said DCP (central) Mandeep Singh Randhawa.Union Tourism Minister KJ Alphons, who visited the site, said that the emergency exit was “too narrow” and locked at night. There were also a lot of wooden structures which may have helped the flames spread.The hotel had a basement, a ground floor and four floors.Delhi Home Minister Satyendar Jain called it a clear case of negligence. He said that the hotel had added two floors — fifth and sixth — even though building law permits construction up to only four floors in the area. The terrace had a canopy with chairs and tables laid out, indicating that there was an open restaurant.Jain added that he has directed the fire department to inspect buildings, which are five floors or more and submit a report on their fire safety compliance within a week.The hotel was first granted a licence in October 2005 and was renewed every year. The last renewal was done on May 25, 2018 and was valid till March 31.Sandip Khandelwal, president of the Delhi Hotel and Restaurants Owners Association, claimed that fire tenders reached 15-20 minutes late because the area was barricaded for security purposes at night. Twenty-four fire tenders were rushed to the spot.GC Mishra of Delhi Fire Service said that prima facie, the blaze appeared to have been caused by short circuit. “Most victims died of suffocation, and the toll could up as some of the injured were in critical condition.”The Myanmar nationals killed in the fire were Daw Hla May, 66; Daw Mya Mya Htwe, 44; and Htumhla Sein, 32. They were part of a seven-member tourist group who had come to India on a Buddhist trail. A woman guide accompanying them escaped death by jumping off its second floor.Among the two people who jumped to escape the fire but succumbed was Suresh Kumar, an assistant commissioner in the revenue department’s GST wing.Prime Minister Narendra Modi condoled the deaths.Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who inspected the site, said the magisterial probe will look into alleged lapses by the hotel authorities, including the absence of a fire exit. Giving the issue a political spin, AAP spokesperson Saurabh Bhardwaj blamed the BJP-ruled Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) for the tragedy. “The hotel had a fibre structure on the top floor. How did MCD give approval to such a building plan? If no approval was given, how could such a hotel operate?” He also targeted Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal, saying that he shields the bureaucracy.
