Students spearhead protest against Citizenship Amendment Act in Coimbatore

COIMBATORE: The city on Wednesday saw various sections of the society, including the student community lawyers and political outfits , marking their strong opposition to the Citizenship Amendment Act.At least 17 students of Bharathiar University , 11 of them girls, were detained and taken to Thondamuthur police station after they tried to block the way of governor Banwarilal Purohit to the university’s convocation venue in protest against the Act and police violence on students in Delhi for voicing against the Act.R Selvam, one of the protesters detained by police, told TOI that their plan was to block the road to the convention centre inside the campus. “We were planning to block the governor’s vehicle, but police removed us before the convoy arrived on the campus.”Selvam said police were not allowing students and parents, who had come to attend the convocation, near the university’s administrative block right from the morning.A Velmurugan, deputy superintendent of police (DSP), Perur sub division, said the students were detained as a preventive measure and that they were taken to the police station.Students of other city colleges too staged protests on their campuses. At PSG College of Arts and Science in the city, around 300 students staged a sit-in on the campus. According to the protesters, police had asked them to disperse saying the governor had seen them protesting while he was on his way to the Bharathiar University.“We held the demonstration to create awareness on the Citizenship Amendment Act and express our solidarity with the Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University students, who were attacked by police for protesting against the Act. We concluded by speaking about the Act and asking all the students to read more about the Act,” said a protester, who didn’t want to be named.The situation in Government Arts College wasn’t any different where students staged sit-in on the campus. Protesters asked the other students to leave the college premises and boycott classes. M Dhinesh Raja, a student protester and representative of Students Federation of India, said the Citizenship Amendment Act would divide the nation on religious lines. “It would also deny citizenship to hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankan Tamil refugees staying in the country. We condemn the police violence on students who protested against the Act in Delhi. We want the Act to be repealed.”Following the protest, the Government Arts College has cancelled classes on Thursday and Friday and declared holidays from December 23 to January 1.Protesters attributed this as a move to curb further protests. College officials, however, said the classes were cancelled on Thursday and Friday as faculty members had gone for the Bharathiar University’s language valuation programme. “As the college is the answer script valuation centre for the Bharathiar University, we have declared holidays from December 23-28. The college will, however, remain closed till January 1 as many people are going on leave for the New Year,” said a college official.Meanwhile, writers, artists and professors belonging to Tamil Nadu Kalai Ilakkiya Perumandram issued a statement against the Act that was signed and sent to the Centre.
