Bizmen up in arms against PSPCL over power tariff revision plea

Ludhiana: The Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (PSPCL), which has been constantly under fire from city businessmen for various reasons, has once again come under attack from the same community after seeking revision in the power tariffs from the Punjab State Electricity Regulatory Commission (PSERC).

The PSPCL has recently filed a petition before the PSERC for sanction to hike tariffs on the plea of suffering losses. However, according to businessmen, if the rates of power are hiked even by 1 paisa per unit, it will prove to be a huge setback for the industry.

Speaking to TOI, Sunil Mehra, state general secretary of Punjab Pardesh Beopar Mandal, said “The PSPCL is proving to be the biggest enemy of businessmen as every other day the department comes out with new plans to harass us. A few days ago they slapped backdated power factor penalties on us and prior to that they made unauthorised use of electricity cases against businessmen. Now, they want to increase power tariff and loot us. Our association has decided to raise the issue with the chairperson of the PSERC and urge the commission to not allow the PSPCL to go ahead with its devious plan to hike the rates.”

According to Svinder Singh Hunjan, general secretary of Janta Nagar Small Scale Manufacturers Association, “The PSPCL has recently filed a petition before the PSERC, demanding an increase in the power charges for both industrial and domestic consumers. If the PSERC allows this to happen, it will prove to be disaster for us as our cost of production will be hiked significantly, which is already rising day by day due to several factors. Moreover, the rate of industrial power in Punjab is already very high as compared to other states, so we will not let this happen at any cost.”

According to Inderjit Navyug, former president of United Cycle and Parts Manufacturers Association , “It is very shocking how the PSPCL has filed a petition for tariff hike without even thinking about the consequences of this decision. On one side even after promising us the state government has failed to provide us power for Rs 5 per unit and three years have passed like this only, while on the other side the PSPCL is not leaving any chance to pass on the burden of its losses due to mismanagement on us. But this time businessmen will not sit silent and any kind of hike will be opposed by us even if we have to come on to the street or sit on hunger strike.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
