Campaigning ends for Jharkhand polls, parties ready to battle it out in Santhal

Ranchi: Campaigning for the fifth and final phase of state polls ended on Wednesday with 16 seats in the tribal-dominated Santhal Pargana going to the hustings on Friday. The mahagathbandhan of Congress, JMM and RJD signed off with high octane rallies by AICC general secretary Priyanka Gandhi in Pakur and RJD working president Tejashwi Yadav in Godda. A total of 237 candidates are in fray across 16 seats, including six reserved for tribals. Both BJP and JMM are evenly placed with six MLAs each while Congress and JVM-P have three and one respectively.BJP, for whom PM Narendra Modi campaigned twice in three days in Dumka and Barhait, brought in celebrity MPs Babul Supriyo (Asansol) and Ravi Kishen (Gorakhpur) on Thursday while CM Raghubar Das and other central and state BJP leaders fanned out in different pockets holding road shows, padyatras and choupal sabhas.Fate of two BJP ministers — Lois Marandi (Dumka) and Randhir Kumar Singh (Sarath) — and JMM working president Hemant Soren is at stake in this phase. Soren, who is also mahagatbandhan’s chief ministerial face is in fray from two seats — Dumka and Barhait. In 2014, Soren lost Dumka but won the latter.For BJP, which has set a target of clinching 65-plus seats, increasing its tally in Santhal Pargana will be key as the party has never won from at least six of these seats since the creation of Jharkhand in 2000. For JMM and Congress, which are contesting on 12 and four seats respectively, retaining its hold on Santhal Pargana is important for their jal, jungle jameen politics. With BJP’s estranged ally, Ajsu Party also in fray on 12 seats and Babulal Marandi led JVM-P contesting on all seats, the contest on all constituencies is multi-cornered.In Dumka, minister Lois Marandi, who clinched the prestigious seat on her debut election in 2014, is eyeing for a second term. She is again pitted against JMM’s working president Hemant Soren. He is also fighting from Bharhait, considered as JMM’s citadel, which he currently represents.Another debutant minister, Randhir Kumar Singh, who won from Sarath on a JVM-P ticket before defecting to BJP, is eyeing a second term. Against him is JMM’s Parimal Kumar Singh, JVM-P's Uday Kumar Singh, Ajsu Party’s Firoz Miyan. In Poriyahat, JVM-P's Pradeep Yadav, who has been won the seat for three terms, has BJP’s Gajadhar Singh and JMM’s Ashok Kumar as key opponents.BJP’s real test lies in the Muslim-dominated seats of Rajmahal and Pakur following the passage of Citizenship Amendment Act. In Rajmahal, BJP’s sitting MLA Anant Ojha is pitted against the mahagatbandhan, JVM-P, Ajsu Party, Shiv Sena and LJP.With two days left for the final electoral showdown, all parties sounded confident about their prospects. BJP state president Laxman Gilua said, “Santhal Pargana will be JMM-free this time. In five years, BJP has made inroads into every house through its development works.”JMM spokesperson Vinod Pandey on the other hand said that the 2019 assembly polls will mark the opposition’s resurgence in Jharkhand. “The trend is clear with every phase of voting indicating that JMM-Congress-RJD will form the government. BJP has only exposed its nervousness after every phase of voting. In Santhal, they will receiving befitting reply,” he said. Congress’s Lal Kishore Nath Shahdeo said, “BJP has morally conceded defeat in this phase, going by the way it brought in its central leaders for campaigning. If they had worked in five years, what was the need of such panic? AICC general secretary Priyanka Gandhi’s rally on the final day has also turned the tide against BJP.”
