As trial of cops begins after 26 yrs, families have no hope of justice

Dar Ulum Imdadia madarsa

Mohammed Ali Road

Ram Dev Tyagi

BN Srikrishna Commission

Missing RTI activist Vinayak Shirsat found dead, cops arrest two suspects Vinayak Shirsat's body was found in a gorge under suspicious circumstances.

Eight Muslims were killed in the 1993 raid led by Ram Dev Tyagi; while he has long been discharged, only 7 of the 18 accused cops face trial from today.Twenty-six years after eight unarmed Muslims with no criminal record were shot dead inside the premises of the Suleman Usman Bakery and the adjacenton, the trial of the policemen accused of shooting them is to begin in the Sessions Court today.But no families will be in court to see the men charged with killing their bread-winners in the dock. All but one of the victims were aged between 20 and 30; their families lived in UP. A few family members who are in Mumbai say they don’t want anything to do with the case. “Nothing will come of it,” said one; “we’ll take all the trouble of going to court only to be disappointed again, like we were when Tyagi was discharged.”The raid on Suleman Usman Bakery on January 9, 1993, was led by, then Joint Police Commissioner. Tyagi and two of his assistants were indicted by theof Inquiry for causing the deaths of innocents. After then Supreme Court Chief Justice AS Anand asked the Maharashtra government what action had been taken against Tyagi, a Special Task Force charged Tyagi and 17 policemen who accompanied him during the raid, with murder.Today, only seven face trial for murder. Nine, including Tyagi, were discharged in 2003; two died later. None of the accused spent even a day in custody.None of the policemen could be named by the survivors because they were in mufti. The reason Additional Sessions Judge Pradeep V Bavkar thought these policemen should face trial is because the record showed that out of the 18 accused, only these seven had used their firearms during the raid. “The police have no right to open fire on helpless persons who did not resist,” wrote the judge, calling their firing “illegal and unwarranted”.The Supreme Court upheld his decision in 2011.After the raid, 78 Muslims were arrested and charged with attempt to murder and rioting. The police alleged that they were being fired upon from the rooftop of the bakery by sten-gun-wielding terrorists, from the morning of January 9. They also alleged that the inmates of the bakery had attacked them with choppers and iron bars during the raid.But the FIR against the policemen tears apart these allegations, pointing out that the police could produce no evidence to back up either of them. No firearm or lethal weapon was found; nor did any policeman suffer any injury “worth the name”, either before or during the raid, it says.It describes the original FIR filed by the police in 1993 against the 78 Muslims as a “got-up document… attempting to justify the deaths caused by the police”.In 2011, those 78 Muslims were discharged by the Bombay High Court with the remark: “Nothing can be more frightening than … when the protector becomes the predator.”The post-mortem reports of the eight shot dead in the 20 minutes that the raid lasted show multiple gunshot injuries – as many as four – in some of the bodies. They also show that four of them were shot in the back. Five of the victims were bakery workers, one a madarsa teacher, and two had taken shelter inside the masjid during the riots.Under public pressure, the government appointed well-known senior counsel Pheroze Vakil as the special Public Prosecutor to fight Tyagi’s anticipatory bail application in 2001. After that, no government thought it fit to appoint a special PP for a case described by Vakil as one where “the accused abused their authority and misused their power to cause intentional death, without there being any duty to perform or any authority to exercise”. Justice Srikrishna had used even stronger words: the conduct of Tyagi and his men was “not becoming of the police force of any civilised, democratic state”, he had said.The lack of a special PP is one reason for the delay in the trial. There is no watching advocate either, since none of the survivors chose to intervene.Asked if he would be attending the trial, Sattar Bhai, owner of Suleman Usman Bakery, remarked: “When those in charge of upholding the law are the accused; when the powers that be do nothing to ensure that justice is done, how can one hope for anything?”First the incident and then the case had brought nothing but infamy for his bakery, he said. “At that time we were called terrorists. After that whenever we went for any work to the police, we would be accused of having filed the case against them.”
