Additional chargesheet filed in Pansare case

Sanatan Sanstha

CPI leader Govind Pansare

2017 Gauri Lankesh murder case

Narendra Dabholkar murder case

Sources detail the alleged role of six chargesheeted accused in the 2015 murder of CPI leader Govind Pansare;calls it ‘filmy stories’.Maharashtra police’s Special Investigation Team (SIT), probing the February 2015 murder of, has filed its supplementary chargesheet in a Kolhapur court against four additional accused for their alleged role in the crime.Sources familiar with the probe said that one of the four chargesheeted accused, Amit Digwekar had allegedly conducted reconnaissance at Pansare’s Kolhapur residence to find out if the act/attackers could stay undetected. Digwekar allegedly could not spot a CCTV unit that was located close to the spot where two bike-borne assailants had eventually fired at Pansare on February 16, 2015, when he was returning from morning walk with his wife Uma. “Amit Digwekar conducted a recce to ensure that no CCTV camera was in the vicinity. But there was one located around the crime scene,” said a source, adding, “The CCTV footage was retrieved from a unit located at a school.”Pansare was targeted allegedly because he was “seen to have spoken against the tenets of Hinduism”, the source said. Apart from Digwekar, the SIT has chargesheeted Amol Kale, Vasudeo Suryavashi and Bharat Kurne under sections related to murder, attempt to murder, criminal conspiracy and arms act violations. Digwekar, Kale and Kurne were also chargesheeted by Karnataka police in theThe SIT has so far chargesheeted six accused since 2015 but has not been able to track the crime’s weapons, the getaway bike and the absconding alleged shooters, Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar. “When Akolkar and Pawar are nabbed, they can reveal if there were others involved as well,” the source said.As per sources, the four chargesheeted persons had allegedly attended “conspiracy meetings” held by the key accused Virendrasinh Tawde, who was chargesheeted in 2016 and in the, also in 2016.Lawyer Sameer Patwardhan, who represents the accused, told Mumbai Mirror, “I cannot comment as we will get a copy of the SIT chargesheet only on February 21.” Sanatan Sanstha’s spokesperson Chetan Rajhans said, “These are ‘filmy’ stories of SIT. It’s the court that will find out the truth. The four chargesheeted by SIT on Monday had no link with Sanatan Sanstha. Tawde and Gaikwad were Sanatan Sadhaks.” Special public prosecutor Shivajirao Rane declined to comment about the chargesheet.Govind Pansare and his wife fired uponPansare succumbed to his injuriesSIT arrested the first accused, Sameer GaikwadChargesheet against GaikwadChargesheet against main accused Virendrasinh TawdeSIT chargesheets four more accused
