Akhilesh barred from taking flight to Prayagraj

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, February 12

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister and Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav was on Tuesday prevented from boarding a flight to attend an event organised by the Students Union at Allahabad University, triggering a political storm.

Yadav had to board a flight here but was stopped by ADM East Vaishav Mishra. When the Samajwadi Party leader asked for a written order, Mishra “tried to physically prevent” him and Yadav’s security had to intervene. A fuming Akhilesh, who returned the party headquarters after being “detained” at the airport for some time, alleged that the Centre was “involved” in preventing him from flying, adding that it was beyond the powers of the state government to stop a plane.

He said he had no criminal record, but Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had stopped him from going to Allahabad alleging that his (Yadav’s) visit would spark a law and order problem. The SP leader showed Yogi’s EC affidavit to show the number of criminal cases pending against Yogi, including that of instigating riots. “Here is a CM who had used his own government to deny permission to proceed in the criminal cases against him,” Yadav alleged.

He said the BJP was scared of youth power and the support that the Samajwadi Party enjoys among the students. The former CM said during his visit, he was also scheduled to meet Akhara Parishad president Maharaj Narendra Gir who had invited him for lunch. He said a written schedule of his programme was sent to the Prayagraj administration as early as on December 27 and another one on February 2.

The issue rocked the Rajya Sabha as SP and other Opposition parties protested over the incident, disrupting the proceedings of the House. The matter also caused uproar in both Houses of the Uttar Pradesh legislature.

As the news spread, scores of Samajwadi Party workers and leaders rushed to the airport and raised anti-government slogans. Samajwadi Party MP Dharmendra Yadav, along with hundreds of supporters, sat on a dharna near the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Prayagraj. The SP student wing’s workers who protested in Prayagraj were baton-charged by the police. Dharmendra Yadav was among the 100 injured in clashes with the police.

Protests also broke out in Lucknow, Etawah, Rae Bareli, Gorakhpur and Kanpur, and other places, where SP supporters smashed windscreens of vehicles and clashed with the police.

Party MLAs gheraoed Raj Bhawan in Lucknow, seeking a meeting with the Governor to apprise him of Emergency-like situation”. They have been given an appointment for tomorrow as the Governor was not in the town.

Earlier, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said, “The Allahabad University authorities had informed the district administration that if Akhilesh Yadav visited the campus, the factional fighting of students could cause a law and order problem. They feared that there could be major arson and damage to university property. That is why they had requested the administration to prevent him from coming and spreading lawlessness which is party is known for.”

Coming out in support of Akhilesh Yadav, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tweeted, “Spoke to Akhilesh ji. We strongly condemn BJP's conduct. That is yet another example of BJP's dictatorial attitude.”

(with agency inputs)

Is the BJP govt at the Centre and in UP so afraid of the BSP-SP alliance that it is resorting to anti-democratic methods to curb our political activities. This is unfortunate and undemocratic step and will be fought at all levels. — Mayawati, BSP Supremo

We condemn the arrogant attitude of the so-called #BJP leaders who didn’t allow Akhilesh to address the students. Where is the democracy in our country? And they are giving lessons to everybody! — Mamata Banerjee, TMC Chief
