Bijnor courtroom murder: Allahabad high court summons DGP, Additional chief secretary

Slain neta’s son among 3 arrested

ALLAHABAD: The Allahabad High Court on Wednesday took suo motu cognizance of the murder inside a courtroom in Bijnor on December 17, and summoned additional chief secretary (Home) and director general of police (DGP) on December 20 with a plan to strengthen security of court premises across the state.“This is really a serious and shocking incident. We can take judicial cognizance of the fact that in last few years, similar incidents had taken place in various district judgeships including Muzaffarnagar, Agra and now Bijnor. We may also place on record that for the last more than one and half decades, in district judgeships, disturbing criminal incidents are happening including terrorist attacks which resulted in casualties in district court premises at different places,” observed a division bench comprising Justice Sudhir Agarwal and Justice Suneet Kumar.“In 2008, the then Chief Justice had constituted a committee presided by senior judge to suggest and get implemented various ways for security of district judgeships as well as this court”, the court said.The court added, “Since 2008, several meetings have been held with state government officials but the fact remains, nothing concrete has been done till date. Now, even judicial officers are not safe, since incidents are taking place in court rooms. It is high time that now immediate steps must be taken. We cannot afford to delay and defer the matter. Time has come when this aspect has to be dealt with strong conviction and determination.”Chief Justice Govind Mathur had set up this special bench while taking suo moto cognizance of the Bijnor court attack of December 17.A gangster accused of killing a BSP functionary was shot inside CJM court in Bijnor when hearing in the case was on. Two policemen were also injured in the attack.Shahnawaz, who was killed in the courtroom attack, was an accused in the murder of property dealer and BSP functionary Ehsaan Ansari and his nephew Shadab on May 28 in Najibabad of Bijnor district The police had arrested Shahnawaz, Danish and shooter Jabbar Ahmad in connection with the murders. Subsequently, on December 17 afternoon, Shahnawaz and Jabbar were brought from Tihar jail to the CJM court in Bijnor for a hearing when this incident took place. The police have arrested three assailants, including the son of Ehsaan, in connection with the courtroom shooting.
