Uttar Pradesh: Desperate for help, need money for her treatment, says husband of dancer who was shot in face

The family has reportedly taken loans from relatives which were used in the initial surgery but they are now financially exhausted | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The incident took place during a wedding function in Tikra village Family members stated that they somehow they managed Rs 7 lakh for her initial treatment but are unable to get the additional amount of Rs 13 lakh The victim was identified as Heena, who reportedly cries for help every time she gulps down liquid as her food Heena's 22-year-old husband, Puran Lal is a BSc graduate and the most educated in the family

Lucknow: After almost 20 days of a shocking incident where a 20-year-old dancer was shot in the face during a marriage function in Uttar Pradesh's Chitrakoot district, the victim has been brought back to her home in a Farrukhabad as the family is unable to bear the treatment cost. They claim that they somehow they managed Rs 7 lakh for her initial treatment but are unable to get the additional amount of Rs 13 lakh.

The victim was identified as Heena, who reportedly cries for help every time she gulps down liquid as her food. She was shot in the face just for catching a breath during her dance performance in a wedding celebration. According to a report in The Times of India, her husband stated that they are desperate for help but they don't know who to turn to. Reportedly, they brought Heena back home with stitched tongue and jaw and she now needed a jaw replacement surgery which would cost around Rs 13 lakh.

The family has reportedly taken loans from relatives which were used in the initial surgery but they are now financially exhausted to further support the treatment. Heena's 22-year-old husband, Puran Lal is a BSc graduate and the most-educated one in the family but he is unemployed.

He further stated that Heena is completely bed-ridden and can communicate only through her hands and eyes. Puran, along with his brother-in-law, has to help the bed-ridden young lady with every basic need such as urination and defecation. The incident took place on November 30 when Heena was performing at a wedding function and one of the guests shot her in the face after she stopped to catch a breath. She got a bullet injury in her jaw and two others sustained pellet injuries during firing at the function.

An eye-witness told a media person that they had to drive the victim to the nearest government hospital which was 80 km away. As soon as they reached, the hospital staff stated that there was no surgeon available. Hence they had to rush her in a private hospital. The Police have arrested two people- Sudhir Singh and Phool Singh- in connection with the incident. The function was held to celebrate the wedding of the daughter of village head Suhir Singh Patel.
