MONSTER PARENTS KILL THEIR TWO CHILDREN BEFORE JUMPING TO THEIR DEATHS FROM 8TH FLOOR FLAT

An Indirapuram couple allegedly killed their two kids early Tuesday morning before they jumped to death from the eighth floor of their building.

Another woman, whose identity is yet to be established, also reportedly jumped with the couple from the building in an apartment complex in Indirapuram of Ghaziabad. She was rushed to a hospital, but her condition is stated to be serious.

As per initial reports, the woman was linked to the man as his ‘second wife’. His family, however, refuted the claim and said the woman worked for the couple.

Police have said the husband-wife duo murdered their daughter and son in sleep before they jumped off the building in Indirapuram. Earlier, it was reported that the couple had two daughters.

While the investigation is still on, police say the couple allegedly committed suicide and murdered their children due to a financial crisis.

“After an investigation, it has been discovered that the two women were the wives of the deceased man. When we opened the flat, their two kids were found dead. A suicide note was also found in their flat. The possible reason behind the suicide is a financial crisis,” Ghaziabad Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Sudhir Kumar was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

According to locals, the family had recently moved into the society here.

“The incident occurred at around 5 am-5:15 am. I heard some noise and went out to check and saw that three people were lying on the ground. I immediately called my supervisor and called the police,” Ajaz Karim Khan, a guard at the apartment complex told ANI.

Security guards said they heard a loud noise at 5 am and when they rushed to the spot, they saw bodies on the ground following which they informed the police.

A suicide note scribbled on one of the walls in children’s room was also found.

The case is a stark reminder of Delhi’s Burari horror in which 11 members of a family were found dead — most of them blindfolded, gagged, hands tied behind the back while they hung from the ceiling.

Later, in a shocking revelation, a number of handwritten notes were found which pointed towards the family’s spiritual/mystical tendencies. Coincidentally, the notes bore a resemblance to the way the hands, mouths of the family members were tied.

(Visited 28 times, 1 visits today)
