Hyderabad man sentenced to 7-year imprisonment for abusing step-daughter

The court lead by Justice Suneetha Kunchala who declared him guilty and pronounced a seven-year jail for Hanumanth. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights He was found guilty under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offence Act for sexually abusing his five-year-old step-daughter The convict is a labourer from Maharashtra and he married a widow The prosecution was led by K Pratap Reddy who represented the five-year-old girl’s testimony

Hyderabad: A Hyderabad court has sentenced a man for seven years of imprisonment under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offence Act for sexually abusing his five-year-old step-daughter.

The verdict was given by the First Additional Metropolitan Sessions judge for POCSO. The convict has been identified as 24-year-old Hanumanth. The court found him guilty of forcible touching, kissing, hugging his daughter and for sexual assault. The judgement came within nine months of the case being registered in March 2019.

The convict is a labourer from Maharashtra and he married a widow who has a son and a daughter from a previous marriage. The convict was said to be an alcoholic and inebriated state he used to touch his step-daughter inappropriately. He also tried to sexually abuse his step-son. The prosecution was led by K Pratap Reddy who represented the five-year-old girl’s testimony and the mother’s oral evidence as a primary witness. The court lead by Justice Suneetha Kunchala who declared him guilty and pronounced a seven-year jail for Hanumanth.

Similarly, A local court in Odisha's Keonjhar district awarded death penalty to a man for the rape and murder of a three-year-old girl in 2017. The Additional District Judge's (ADJ) court sentenced Sunil Nayak to death under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act for the rape and murder of the minor girl. Nayak was found guilty of raping and murdering the minor girl on January 13, 2017.
