Man's highly decomposed body found dumped behind bushes in Mumbai's Borivali

Police found the body in Borivali after a call was made to the control room (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Initial inputs suggest that the body had been lying there for 4-5 days before it was found The deceased was wearing a pink shirt and innerwear while a pair of trousers was found near the body A post-mortem of the body is being conducted at Shatabdi hospital

Mumbai: On Wednesday, locals found the decomposed body of a male in Borivali (west) area. City police were alerted and officers arrived at the spot to recover the body which has been sent to Shatabdi hospital for post-mortem. Preliminary inputs suggest that the body was lying at the spot for four-five days before it was discovered.

After noticing a foul smell coming from bushes in an open plot owned by a city-based builder in the IC Colony area, residents placed a call to the police at around 10.30 am on Wednesday. Police officials reached the spot, only to find the highly decomposed body of a male in the empty compound opposite Meghkamal apartments on Holy Cross road.

Police officials summoned an ambulance and the body of the 40-45-year-old man was transported to the Shatabdi hospital. The time and cause of death are to be ascertained on the basis of the post-mortem report which is still awaited. An inspector told Mirror Online that the deceased was wearing a pink shirt and innerwear at the time his body was found. A pair of trousers was also found not far from where the body had been dumped, added the officer.

The deceased also spotted steel rings in his right hand and steel studs in his ears. While the police are trying to identify the deceased, a post-mortem report will further clarify what happened to him and when. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

Earlier this week, police in Panvel arrested an autorickshaw driver who had murdered his step-son. With help from an accomplice, the accused had dumped the body on the Uran-Palasape road where it was spotted in a gunny sack by locals who alerted the police. Shockingly, the man admitted to strangling his son in a fit of rage after the boy refused to sleep on time.
