Couple admits to committing double-murder with hammer, screwdriver in UP's Rampur

Police with the accused, Prem Kumar (Photo Courtesy: @rampurpolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights A team was formed to solve the double-murder and detained the couple on suspicion The accused claimed that the victim was tarnishing the family's reputation Both the murder weapons were recovered from the couple's home, said police

Lucknow: Police in Rampur district of Uttar Pradesh has solved the double-murder of a man and his specially-abled son. A couple related to the victims were taken into custody and admitted to the crime during the course of interrogation. They have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The matter first came to light on November 10 when a man by the name of Ramcharan Tiwari approached the Civil Lines police station. In his statement to the police, Tiwari said that he found the bodies of his brother and his brother's younger son at their home. Both had been murdered on the intervening night of November 8 and November 9.

He further told police that armed men likely barged into the house late at night and killed his brother while fatally injuring the younger son who succumbed to injuries at a local hospital. A complaint was filed against unknown accused under Sections 302, 307 and 452 of the IPC and a team was formed to investigate the deaths.

The team detained a couple, identified as Prem Kumar and his wife Madhuri, on the basis of circumstantial evidence and eyewitness accounts. During interrogation, the couple admitted to the double-murder and told police that they did so out of concern for the victim's elder son. In his statement to the police, Kumar claimed that he is related to the victim. The victim's younger son was mentally unfit and that was the reason he could not get his elder son married, said Kumar. The accused also said that the victim was characterless and had several affairs that tarnished the family's image in the locality.

He further added that he and his wife went to the victim's residence at around 3 am that night and bludgeoned him to death with a hammer and screwdriver. The younger son woke up from the commotion and the couple fatally wounded him in an attempt to silence him. He too, succumbed to injuries the next day. The hammer and screwdriver were recovered from under the staircase of the couple's home.
