India bans protests against citizenship law

Indian police has denied the permission for scheduled protests in parts of the capital Delhi, and throughout the states of Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.

People have been protesting for weeks against a controversial new citizenship law, according to which non-Muslim illegal immigrants from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan would be allowed citizenship.

The ban, imposed by the nationalist government of India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, prohibits the gathering on more than four people in a place. The protests turned violent in several places, and the crackdown escalated on the Jamia Milia Islamia University campus.

“It shall be the duty of every police officer to prevent the commission of offences and public nuisances; and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally authorised to apprehend and for whose apprehension sufficient grounds exist”, the law reads.

Around 200 people were arrested and nearly 1.500 detained in the Assam state, where the protests turned deadly. The government also cut mobile data services in some parts of the capital. Clashes between demonstrators and police have been reported in other cities as well.

Modi accused the opposition of “dirty politics”. “The Congress is spreading lies, creating an atmosphere of fear for Muslims over the new law. Citizenship Act neither takes away the rights of Indian citizens nor harms them in any manner,” he said in defence of the law during an election rally in Jharkhand.

On 19 December, the Indian government imposed a curfew in the city of Mangaluru in Karnataka state, where two protesters were killed in the violent clashes with the police who opened fire. The curfew has been expanded to other cities as well, specifically the city of Ghaziabad near Delhi, Pilibhit, Sambhal, Bareilly and Meerut.

“Curfew has been clamped in the jurisdiction of Mangaluru Police Commissionerate covering the city, till Dec. 22 midnight. Mobile internet data services have been suspended in Dakshina Kannada till Saturday night”, local media said.

Government officials said the curfew intends to stop the fueling of the protests, with the goal to repair the law and order situation, as the death toll rises.
