Try 8 Mumbai policemen for ‘murder in custody’: HC

MUMBAI: The Bombay high court has held the 2014 death of Agnelo Valdaris (25), found on tracks near the city’s Wadala station, where he was in a GRP lock-up, to be prima facie “a case of custodial death” and directed the trial court to try eight police personnel , including a woman, for murder.Valdaris and three others, including a minor, had been picked up for alleged chain-snatching . Till now, cops were charged mainly with causing hurt, wrongful confinement and sodomy, besides three of them being booked additionally under the Pocso Act . Now, if they are convicted for murder, they can face the death sentence.This is the first time in 16 years that the HC has slapped the murder charge on cops. “God has heard my cries and prayers,” Agnelo’s father told TOI after the HC order.The HC also directed that the eight be tried for the offence of deliberately offending religious beliefs under section 295A of the IPC.The Bombay HC also directed that the eight be tried for the offence of deliberately offending religious beliefs under section 295A of the IPC. This pertains to allegations by the three others who were picked up that they and Valdaris were sexually abused in custody with references to their caste and religious beliefs. The three were released from custody soon after.In their order, the HC bench of Justices B P Dharmadhikari and S S Jadhav said, “Facts would indicate that (Valdaris) was taken into custody in the midnight of April 15-16, 2014 and was not produced before any court within 24 hours. He was taken to hospital with brutal injuries, where police prima facie appear to have manipulated hospital records. It was only after a complaint by the father of the deceased was lodged that the victim was produced before court.”Soon after Agnelo’s death, his father, Leonard, had filed a petition demanding justice. His advocates, Payoshi Roy and Ajay Basutkar, sought that the IPC Section 302 (murder) be invoked against the eight cops. They cited a series of investigation lapses and other material to back the demand. Hearing the petition in June 2014, the HC transferred the case to the CBI.The CBI case, argued by its counsel Hiten Venegaonkar, was that Agnelo fled custody while in transit and hence wasn’t in custody at the time of his death on tracks on April 18, 2014. The lawyer said there were eyewitnesses to back this claim.Leonard Valdaris’s lawyer, Roy, took the HC through several “suspicious” witness statements recorded by the CBI and cited a lack of CCTV footage from the lock-up during the custodial period, April 15-18.The HC, in its order, observed, “In the facts of the case, the action of the police right from the inception is riddled with mystery.” The bench said, “Custodial violence may be either physical, emotional or mental. It leaves its permanent impact on the victim.” Regarding the Valdaris case, it said, “The victims were tortured by none other than the protectors of law… Custodial deaths have been on the rise in the country.”On the plea for victim compensation, the HC said the issue of framing the murder charge was urgent but the compensation matter requires detailed hearing. It has kept the matter pending.
