CAB Bill Protest News: Schoolchildren and officegoers in Mangaluru scramble to reach home

MANGALURU: With the situation growing tense in Bunder area of Mangaluru, schoolchildren and officegoers had a tough time returning home. Police had cordoned off the area from the Clock Tower. Students from a tutorial centre were trapped in the classroom after violence broke out and as the situation came slightly under control, they were asked to leave the premises under police protection.It was the same with fisherwomen at the central market. Most left behind fish preserved in ice and rushed home. The area around Hamilton Circle wore a deserted look with most businesses remaining closed.Mangaluru police commissioner PS Harsha called upon Muslim leaders to calm down the protesters. Several leaders, including former mayor K Ashraf and corporators Shamshuddin and Muneeb Bengre, Attaullah from SDPI and Musthafa Kempi arrived at the spot to pacify the mob. Ashraf, who walked towards the mob, was seriously injured and was rushed to hospital. Police requested people to vacate the Masjid Ibrahim Al- Khaleel mosque and announcements were made from Kutchi Memon Masjid in Bunder requesting the crowd to move away.Senior citizens caught in the mob were escorted by police to safer areas. Later in the evening, the commissioner said though it had been made amply clear that Section 144 CrPC was in force, a mob started moving from Nellikai Road towards the depputy commissioner's office around 2pm.“They had stones, bottles and were picking up other materials from the ground to attack police. Our appeals fell on deaf ears and we had to use force to disperse the unruly mob. Within a few minutes, the mob, numbering 6,000 to 7,000, gathered at Rao & Rao Circle with stones, bottles and missiles to throw at police and we used tear gas shells to disperse the crowd. Another mob gathered at Kudroli and attacked Mangaluru North police station. They tried to set fire to the station and with no option left, we had to open fire in the air. But that didn’t deter them and they advanced and attacked eight to nine police personnel. We had to use force against them.”Several schools had organised their school day on Thursday. The celebrations had to be called off midway.Qazi of Mangaluru Twaqa Ahmed Musliyar in a voice message on social media appealed to the youth of the community to maintain peace and cooperate with police.
