Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif’s Bharat to release in multiple languages?

Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif are all set to surprise the audience on the Eid of 2019 with their upcoming film, Bharat. Since the time Bharat went on the floors, it has been making headlines. Be it banning cellphones on set or just the hype around Salman Khan’s look in the film, Bharat has been getting a lot of attention from the media and the fans as they want to know more about this EID release. Helmed by Ali Abbas Zafar, the teaser of the film surely intrigued the audience but didn’t give much away in the process.

Now, reports are coming in that this Salman Khan starrer will not just entertain the audience in Hindi, but will also release in multiple languages. Yes, as per a report published in the Mumbai Mirror, Bharat will not just release on Hindi but will also entertain the audiences in Telugu, Tamil and Malayalam. A source informed Mumbai Mirror, “They are scouting for dubbing artistes in different language in different languages to lend their voices to various characters.”

Also, as per the source, the makers plan on making Bharat Salman’s biggest release till date in domestic as well International markets. The cast has been busy shooting in Filmcity for the final schedule of the film and a set has been created which depicts Delhi. However, the source reported the entire set which costs around Rs 10 Crore will be destroyed as a part of the climax which is yet to shot.

(Also Read: Bharat teaser: Here is a sneak peek of the Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif starrer)

Meanwhile, Salman is gearing up for the climax sequence which will involve Jackie Shroff and Tabu. On Valentine’s Day, Salman and Katrina will be shooting all day with Jackie and Tabu in film city. Previously, they have shot for a wedding song followed by other festive songs which will be a part of the film. Bharat has been shot in parts of Abu Dhabi, Punjab and Delhi. Bharat is based on the South-Korean film, An Ode to My Father and is slated to release on Eid 2019.
