Strange unrest seems to have taken over our capital

(Barik, 23, a post-graduate student and a resident of Sarita Vihar in Delhi, spoke to Anuvab Deb Sinha & Sampurna Majumder)

A strange unrest has taken over the capital since the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) came into force, one that I had never seen in the last one and half years of my stay here. It seems everyone is under scrutiny now. There are cops everywhere, including the neighbourhood where I live and ‘nakabandis’ are being put up along with police barricades, blocking roads at different places. People are being looked upon with suspicion. There is an unnerving sense of insecurity.With no internet, keeping in touch with people has become difficult. This morning, I tried sending messages to my friends only to find that internet connectivity has been withdrawn. Was it shut only in my neighbourhood? There is no way to find out since voice calls, too, were blocked for a considerable period. Thankfully, voice call services resumed after some time. But the internet shutdown has left everyone worried.My parents back home in Kolkata are worried and so are my friends. There is a sense of isolation. Commuting, too, has been difficult with Metro services suspended at some places, including Rajiv Chowk, Munirka Jamia Millia Islamia . Metro stations on Thursday remained shut at these places. While returning from Gurgaon this afternoon, I had to hire a cab. I was stuck in traffic at Connaught Place when suddenly I saw the cops beating up a group of protesters and dragging them inside a police van. The protestors seemed to be students and it scared me. I am student, too. Are they going to do the same to me if I raised my voice against CAA?I had never witnessed the effects of Section 144 in Kolkata. But I am getting to see it here in Delhi — deserted roads, closed shops, fewer vehicles and people moving individually rather than in groups. I walked down a distance of almost 2km on my way back home.Everyone is scared and worried, eager to return home. This is not the Delhi I was acquainted to.
