Dalit Policeman's Wedding Procession Attacked in Rajasthan

New Delhi: A Dalit policeman’s wedding procession or baraat was attacked, allegedly by upper caste Rajput men, on Saturday in Dugar village of Rajasthan. The police registered a case on Sunday.

Some people have been detained by the police, who are on the lookout for more men connected to the incident.

The groom Sawai Ram said his wedding procession was attacked as it was about to enter Dugar village.

He claimed that people from the Rajput caste attacked the procession and verbally humiliated him. When people tried to stop the Rajput men, they attacked the procession back with sharp weapons and left many injured, he said.

Police inspector Ajit Singh said Ram’s statement was recorded on Sunday. “A case has been registered under relevant sections against more than 12 people. The matter is being investigated. Action will be taken against the culprits,” he said.

There have been several reports of Dalit wedding processions being attacked or denied permission. In April last year, a Dalit groom was attacked for riding a horse in Rajasthan’s Bhilwara district. Eight years ago, the groom’s brother was also not allowed to conduct a marriage procession. Similar incidents were reported in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.

Last July in UP’s Kasganj, Sanjay Jatav became the first Dalit groom in at least 80 years to lead a marriage procession through his village.

Rajasthan records a high number of atrocity cases against Dalits and tribals. According to the latest available statistics, the state had the second worst crime rate of atrocities against Dalits. Only Madhya Pradesh fared worse.

During the recently concluded assembly elections in the state, analysts said the rising caste crimes against Dalits and scheduled tribes was one reason for the BJP’s loss. While the Congress has promised to tackle hate crimes and discrimination against Dalits, the lynching of a Muslim man in late December and the Dugar village incident have brought it under a cloud.
