India's new citizenship law is not just against Muslims

The uproar over the new citizenship law in India has two distinct dimensions. They are quite different, but the dividing line, while crucial, is often misunderstood.

In the rest of India, including the national capital, the central belief is that the amended Citizenship Act (initially enacted in 1955) is discriminatory against Muslims, a charge naturally denied by Prime Minister Narendra Modi's ruling Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP).

The bill amended citizenship bill allows illegal migrants from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan to become Indians, provided they are not Muslims. Protestors across India say the law discriminates people on the basis of religion.

The fear, however, is different in the far-flung north-eastern states, a region that contains prominent Christian tribal communities such as the Nagas, Mizos, and Assamese (among an overwhelmingly Hindu population). They believe extending citizenship to migrants from Bangladesh will result in natives and tribal people being swamped by "outsiders."

The term "outsiders" in India's northeast does not necessarily refer to foreigners as another term used is "plain manu" (people from the plains or the rest of India)." The fear of being 'swamped' remains very strong, however, whatever the definition.

It is in this context that we must examine what a Naga Christian lawmaker, K. G. Kenye of the Naga People's Front party, said during the parliamentary debate on Dec. 11.

He supported the amendment and said the issue had been taken completely out of context. "What is raised at the regional level on the ground and what is happening at the national level has taken a completely different turn. Our people in the Northeast have no religious bias."

He said if the federal government "does not take a closer look and consider our genuine fears early, if it continues to sit over those policies which were in place during the colonial era, and young India never takes a second look, then, it will be catastrophic where one day an irreversible situation may develop."

Like in Nagaland or the Northeast, especially in Assam, the fear is about issues of employment and opportunities and that the "indigenous Assamese" and other natives (Nagas or Mizos) would lose their rights on their own land.

The inflow of "outsiders" is a major issue in the socio-political life of the region, especially Assam, which in the 1970s and 1980s witnessed unrest that lasted six years.

Three decades back, "the Assam disturbance" was an oft-used phrase relating primarily to agitation by students. The unrest, spearheaded by the powerful All Assam Students Union (AASU), was also linked to a linguistic battle between Bengalis and the Assamese. The religious context did not matter as much as the linguistic divide!

"The combination of the influx of foreigners or outsiders from the rest of India, the monopoly by Bengalis of white-collar jobs, and New Delhi's economic exploitation emerged as an ideal recipe to plunge Assam into long-lasting anarchy," says Ratnadeep Gupta, a veteran Northeast observer.

This ended in 1985 when the Assam Accord was signed but was revived in this year's agitation, says Gupta.

Just like the federal government of the 1970s and 1980s, the Modi government has also been "virtually dictatorial" in its push for the controversial Citizenship Amendment legislation.

However, Home Minister Amit Shah, a trusted lieutenant of Prime Minister Modi, says he held talks with student organizations and political leaders before drafting the Bill, which has been passed by parliament and received presidential assent.

The new law, it is expected, will virtually guarantee an influx of Bengali Hindus from Bangladesh and add to the BJP's share of the vote in Assam. The same could also happen in other northeastern states, especially in the neighboring state of West Bengal.

Modi, a strong leader ... for Hindus

The politics of polarization has always suited Modi and his party, partly due to the nature of electoral politics.

Moreover, Modi has presented himself as a "strong" Hindu leader (and thus at times a strong leader who can teach Muslims and also Pakistan a lesson).

Cementing power in West Bengal will be a major achievement for the entire Sangh Parivar (Hindu nationalist organizations), its national volunteer corps figurehead Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and, of course, the BJP.

In terms of parliamentary polls, West Bengal sends 42 MPs to Lok Sabha, a much higher number than, say, the 14 from Assam and 25 from across the region.

The BJP performed surprisingly well in the general elections earlier this year when it won as many as 18 seats from West Bengal for the Lower House of the Indian parliament.

The state has long been a "pariah" for the BJP – it hardly had any organizational presence there for many years but the belated politics of polarization (Hindus in favor of BJP and Muslims rooting for a regionalist Mamata Banerjee) has contributed to the rise of Sangh Parivar and the BJP and also resulted in decimation of the Communists, who ruled the province for 33 years.

In 2011, the Marxists lost power to the Mamata Banerjee-led regional party Trinamool (Grassroots) Congress, but immense lapses in governance issues and her alleged tilt towards Muslims have helped the BJP reap rich dividends.

Back in Assam and in states like Meghalaya, parliamentarians belonging to smaller parties such as the Mizo National Front, NPP (in Meghalaya) and Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party (NDPP) and Naga People's Front (NPF) in Nagaland have backed the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

Even Assam-based regional party Asom Gana Parishad lawmakers in Rajya Sabha (Upper House of parliament) voted in favor of the government measure. Still, tension over the newly amended law is certain to leave the Northeast devastated.

"The BJP has a political motive for pushing the new law. Neighboring Tripura is a state where the local tribal population, mostly Christians, has been overtaken by migrants, and the natives are in the minority, down to around 30 percent of the population today," says Gaurav Gogoi, a Congress leader from Assam.

The core argument is this: the new law is a threat to the Assamese community as well as other tribal groups in other states in the region.

The Modi government has, however, exempted some majority tribal pockets under Inner Line Regulation Permit rules and Sixth Schedule (protection to inhabited tribal areas). But the locals continue to feel apprehensive.

"We are all aware that a community thrives only when its language, literature, and culture remain intact," ran an editorial in Guwahati-based newspaper The Sentinel. "But when more and more of these illegal immigrants come to Assam, they bring with them their own language, literature, and culture and might start imposing their characteristic features upon the Assamese community by being the majority."

The general apprehension is that "illegal immigrants" – mostly Hindu Bengalis, may turn Assam and other northeastern states into their "own land," heralding an era of disaster for the indigenous people.

Nirendra Dev is a New Delhi-based senior journalist and writer.
