India Will Unite Again For Second Consecutive Day And Protest Against Citizenship Act

National capital Delhi and other major cities across the country are likely to witness more protests against the Citizenship Act on Friday, a day after the nationwide demonstrations and protests rejecting the controversial law.

In Delhi, there are three protests marches scheduled for Friday, at Juma Masjid, Jantar Mantar and the India Gate. The Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi which was the epicenter of the anti-CAA protests is also likely to see more demonstrations today by students who have been holding protests outside the campus.

On Thursday, the website of Jamia was hacked and a message supporting the students in their protest was posted on it. The message on the site read, "Hacked by Dark Knight to support Jamia students... Jai Hind!".

On Friday morning, the Delhi Metro had announced that entry and exit gates of Jamia Millia Islamia and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh will be closed. However, it was later changed and the DMRC said all stations will remain open.

Meanwhile, in Uttar Pradesh, there is a tight security clampdown on Friday, a day after the state which was under Section 144 saw some of the most violent protests on Thursday. Ahead of Friday prayers, authorities have snapped Internet services in Hamirpur and Firozabad.

On Thursday, one protester was shot dead in Lucknow during the demonstration. The protester, identified as Mohammad Wakeel, died of a firearm injury in the King George's Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow.

Two others were also killed on Thursday in Mangaluru when the Karnataka police opened fire at the demonstrators. The protestors had defied a Section 144 and the police opened fire at them after the demonstrations turned violent. Following the two deaths, internet services were suspended in the area.

Meanwhile, in Assam, which saw some of the biggest protests against the CAA, the mobile internet services have resumed after nine days of shutdown. Assuring that the rights of indigenous Assamese will be protected, chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal addressing the media on Friday said, "I want to assure people that no one can steal rights of the sons of the soil of Assam, there is no threat to our language or our identity." "Nobody can rob our culture, language, and identity of Assam. Our land won't be stolen," said Sonowal.

Thursday saw one of the biggest mass protests in India in recent history, tens of thousands of people pouring to different protest venues across the country, to denounce the CAA. In Delhi, which saw the biggest protests of the day despite prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPC and mobile services suspension, thousands joined the marches.

Over 1,200 protesters including many opposition leaders, like D Raja, Sitaram Yechury, Nilotpal Basu, Brinda Karat, Ajay Maken and Sandeep Dikshit, and activists Yogendra Yadav, Prashant Bhushan, Harsh Mander, and Umar Khalid were also detained by the police on Thursday.
