CAA Protest: Internet suspended in 18 UP districts, Karnataka's Mangaluru | Here's all you need to know

Lucknow | Jagran News Desk: Amid the violent protests over the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act, internet services have been snapped in many parts of the country -- including Lucknow, Ghaziabad and Mangaluru.

According to officials, the step has been taken in order to prevent the possible misuse of internet to disturb the peace and tranquillity of the city and create further law and order situation.

Here are the latest updates on internet suspension across various states:

Uttar Pradesh:

In Uttar Pradesh, the internet services have been suspended in as many as 18 districts of the state. The districts that are facing a complete internet shutdown are Hapur, Moradabad, Saharanpur, Muzzafarnagar, Shamli, Lucknow, Prayagraj, Unnao, Agra, Sultanpur, Mau, Bagpat, Meerut, Bulandshahr, Azamgarh, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Pilibhit.

According to Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avanish Awasthi, the step has been taken after Thursday's protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) turned violent in Lucknow and Sambhal and led to large scale destruction of public and private property. He added that the shutdown would continue till December 21 midnight.

However, internet services have not been snapped in Noida and Greater Noida and District Magistrate (DM) BN Singh has warned of strict action against those who attempted to disturb law.

“Internet services will not be suspended in Noida and Greater Noida. We are keeping a watch on the trouble makers. If somebody tries to disturb the law and order here, stern action will be taken against them,” news agency ANI quoted him as saying.

Protests erupted in different parts of the country including Uttar Pradesh over the CAA which seeks to grant citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Buddhists and Christians fleeing religious persecution from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh and came to India on or before December 31, 2014. On Thursday, one person was killed in the protests in UP’s Lucknow.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Thursday said that said that the destruction caused by the violence will be ‘avenged’ by his government adding that those damaging property have been captured in video and CCTV footage.

“There is no place for violence in a democracy. In the name of opposing the Citizenship Amendment Act, the Congress, SP and Left parties have pushed the entire country into fire,” he had said.

Karnataka:

A day after two people were killed in Mangaluru over the protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, the Karnataka government has suspended mobile internet services in Dakshina Kannada district on Thursday night for the next 48 hours. Curfew has also been imposed in various parts of the city, reported news agency PTI.

According to a notification, the step has been taken to prevent the misuse of social media platforms to disturb peace and tranquillity, and for maintaining law-and-order situation.

“I promulgate this notification to prohibit the internet data service of all mobile operators for the next 48 hours beginning from Thursday 10 p.m. in Manguluru and Dakshina Kannada district,” news agency IANS quoted Additional Chief Secretary, Home, Rajneesh Goel as saying.

Two people were killed in protests on Thursday. The two people received bullet injuries. They were admitted to a hospital where they scummed to their injuries.

Assam:

Meanwhile, internet services, which were suspended across Assam since December 11, were restored on Friday. The internet services were snapped across Assam after violent protests erupted against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

The Assam Police said that the situation has improved in the state and curfew has been lifted across the state.

“The situation in the State has improved immensely. We thank the people of Assam for following the spirit of the law. Day curfew has been withdrawn in Guwahati from 0600hrs of December 16. Night curfew would remain from 2100 hrs till 0600 hrs next day,” the Assam Police tweeted.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
