Irrfan Khan back in Mumbai for Hindi Medium 2 shooting?

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Irrfan Khan back in Mumbai for Hindi Medium 2 shooting?

Bollywood actor Irrfan Khan, who revealed the news of his cancer diagnosis last year, is being treated in London. While the actor had an amazing line up of films in 2018 including Blackmail Karwaan and Puzzle. fans can't wait to see Irrfan Khan dazzle on the big screens once again. The wish might come true soon as fresh reports say that Irrfan Khan is back in Mumbai and will start shooting for Hindi Medium 2 on February 22.

“Hindi Medium is going on floors on February 22. Costume Designers have already started looking for Irrfan’s outfits. The leading lady is yet to be decided, ”a source was quoted as saying to PinkVilla.

The film marks a sequel to the 2017-released film Hindi Medium. The comedy-drama starred Irrfan Khan and Saba Qamar in lead roles and Deepak Dobriyal and Dishita Sehgal in pivotal roles. The film was directed by Saket Chaudhary and written by Zeenat Lakhani.

Recently, there was buzz that Kareena Kapoor Khan has been approached for Hindi Medium 2 co-starring Irrfan Khan. The report quoted a source, who has revealed to them that the makers of the film have approached Kareena but the actress is yet to give her nod.

Irrfan Khan sent a major wave of shock amongst all his friends and fans when he disclosed about his neuroendocrine tumour diagnosis.The actor often shares posts regarding how the disease takes a toll on him every now and then.

Speaking about the repercussions of suffering from the disease, the actor said, “It has put me in a rapture state. Initially I was shaken. I didn't know. I was very, very vulnerable. But slowly, there is another way to look at things that is much more powerful and much more productive and much more healthy and I just want people to believe that nature is much more trustworthy and one must trust that.”

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
