Pak-based terror group likely to attack PM Modi's Ramlila Maidan rally on Dec 22: Sources

As Prime Minister Narendra Modi gears up for a rally at Ramlila Maidan in Delhi on December 22, intelligence reports reveal that Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a Pakistan based terror group is conspiring to target Modi at the venue.

On the basis of inputs by intelligence agencies, Special Protection Group (SPG) and the Delhi Police were informed about the terror threat, so that they could make adequate security arrangements before the rally.

The Prime Minister along with BJP Chief Ministers and other cabinet ministers will be present at the rally in Ramlila Maidan. The rally is organised by the Bharatiya Janata party where he is scheduled to address the gathering about Centre's move to regularise unauthorised colonies.

The intelligence report also stated that the recent slew of government enactments and court judgments which include Citizenship Amendment Act (December 12), the Ram Janmabhoomi verdict (November 9) and abrogation of Article 370 (August 5), have added "fresh dimensions" to the "threat scenario."

Intelligencies agencies also ordered security forces to follow instructions laid down in the Blue Book to ensure Prime Minister Modi's protection during visits across the country.

The agencies also stated that Pakistan's Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) continue to provide "infrastructural and other financial/logistical assistance" to terror outfits.

In October, a letter was received by the National Investigation Agency which threatened to target President Ram Nath Kovind, PM Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, and other important dignitaries to avenge the killing of its terrorists by the Indian Army.

In August, Terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) was planning a major attack in the country and trying to establish its base in Uttar Pradesh Varanasi city.

According to a central intelligence report accessed by Zee News in August, the terror organisation, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), is looking for new targets in the country, possibly Varanasi which is the parliamentary constituency of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The report revealed that in its attempt to set up a terror base in Varanasi, terrorists have been surveying in the region in the past couple of months.

In May 2019, a terrorist named Umar Madni and a Nepal-based terrorist had visited Varanasi and explored ways to create their network in the ancient city.

Back in June, the Union Home Ministry informed that terror groups including LeT were trying to set up bases in other cities including Gorakhpur, Faizabad to plan a major attack in the country.

India has recently abrogated Article 370 which has fumed Pakistan and is in a desperate attempt to infiltrate terrorists from across the border by violating the ceasefire. Islamabad has also been snubbed globally in its attempt to internationalise the Kashmir issue.
