J&K: Two militants killed in Budgam encounter with security forces

Mortal remains of Wing Commander Siddharth, who lost his life in Budgam crash brought to residence

Air Chief Marshal RKS Bhadauria says shooting down IAF chopper in Kashmir was a 'big mistake on our

J&K: Two militants killed in Budgam encounter with security forces

India

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Jammu, Feb 13: Two militants affiliated with Hizbul Mujahideen were killed in a gunfight that broke out between security forces and militants in Chadoora area of central Kashmir's Budgam district on Wednesday.

Speaking to media, a police spokesman identified the slain as Hilal Ahmad Wani son of Mohd Akram Wani of Yaripora Kulgam and Shoaib Mohd Lone Mursi son of Late Arshad Hussain of Bumrath Kulgam.

[J&K: Encounter between terrorists, security forces in Pulwama district]

Ahmed Wani Wani, he said, had a long history of crime records and was involved in several cases. "He was the main person responsible for the recruitment into the militant fold and was longest surviving militant who was operating across the southern and central belts of the valley ever since he had joined the militant ranks in 2015.

Arms and ammunition have been recovered from the site of encounter. A case has been registered.

Security sources said that a joint team of security forces launched cordon and search operation following specific input about presence of terrorists in the area.

They said as the forces zeroed in on the suspected spot, the hiding terrorists fired upon forces triggering an encounter. Talking to AIR, DG Police Dilbagh Singh said two terrorists were killed during the encounter.

[J&K: Encounter underway between terrorists, security forces in Pulwama district]

On Tuesday morning, Hizbul Mujahideen militant who helped slain Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) commander Naveed Jatt escape from a Srinagar hospital last year, was killed in an encounter between militants and security forces in South Kashmir's Pulwama district. A soldier was also killed in the operation, while as another soldier was injured in the gunbattle.
