Imposing ban on PFI will help improve communal harmony in Assam, says BJP

Representative image

GUWAHATI: After the arrest of two top PFI leaders of Assam in connection with the arson in the city during the protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, there is now a demand for banning the organization in the state.

In January this year, the Jharkhand government had banned PFI in its state under Section 16 of The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 for its alleged links with the Islamic State (IS).

Assam BJP Minority Morcha president Muktar Hussain Khan told media on Thursday, “If the Keralabased PFI is banned in Assam, it will be better for the communal harmony of the state. PFI is almost similar to the banned SIMI. The PFI has vitiated the atmosphere in Assam and is trying to create a communal divide.”

PFI’s footprints in Assam can be traced back to 2012 soon after the ethnic clash between Bodos and Bengali-speaking Muslims in the Bodo heartland. Since then, the organization’s activities have been under the scanner of intelligence agencies.

Besides Assam, PFI has also entered Manipur. “PFI was formed at Kozhikode (in Kerala) in 2006. Soon it spread to other areas, including Manipur where it roped in Lilong Social Forum,” an intelligence source said.

PFI’s activities in Assam were initially concentrated in Dhubri district before spilling over into the Barak valley. In 2014, PFI formally announced the launch of its activities in the Assam and constituted an ad hoc committee with Aminul Haq as the president. Haq, who continues to be PFI president in the state, and state publicity in-charge Mohammad Muzamel Haq were arrested on Wednesday by Assam Police.

“In Assam, Popular Front will give utmost priority to educational empowerment, relief and rehabilitation of calamity victims and issues related to citizenship and ‘D’ voters. It will try its best to act as a bridge between the government and the poor, making development schemes enjoyable to those who really deserve it,” PFI had declared during its launch.

PFI’s name also came to the fore recently during the National Register of Citizens (NRC) update exercise in Assam. The organization conducted legal workshops in five districts of the state and it said that this initiative was taken “in the context of large-scale NRC exclusions and mounting incidents of police atrocities in the state”. It added that 19.06 lakh people were excluded from the final NRC list and “during the NRC process, the weaker sections and Muslims were harassed by the police indiscriminately”.

On Tuesday, finance minister Himanta Biswa Sarma had alleged that PFI, Campus Front of India (CFI) and a section of Youth Congress leaders were involved in a conspiracy to attack the Dispur secretariat. PFI, however, has denied Sarma’s allegation and said the arrests were “totally biased as no PFI leader or member had indulged in any violence”.


