Airtel’s Sunil Mittal Is Worried, Feels Cheap Plans Are Killing India's Telecom Industry

India has been one of the few nations with the cheapest call and data tariffs across the globe -- a whole lot cheaper when you compare cellular access costs in the US.

Reliance Jio’s Dhan Dhana Dhan offer surely brought internet on the hands of every Indian, but it came at a cost -- a heavy price the competition had to pay by incurring loses while trying to stay relevant when everyone in the country made the switch to Jio.



With both Vodafone and Airtel drowned amidst heavy debts while coping with the competition, they decided to raise the tariffs to do some damage control while offer great products and services as the consumers expect them to.

Reuters

In a recent press conference, Airtel leader Sunil Bharti Mittal addressed the media stating that rock bottom prices and high consumption is killing the telecom industry. He said in a statement, “My view is Rs 200 ARPU (average revenue per user) is eventually going to Rs 300 ARPU... At the lower end, Rs 100 for a customer over a month of consuming rich data, voice and other services and on the upper-end Rs 450-500... therefore, blended eventual landing point of Rs 300 a month, which will still be USD 4 a month... by far, the lowest anywhere in the world and yet consuming two or three times more data than anywhere else in the world.”



Mittal stated that the industry needs to get to that balance, while adding that TRAI needs to intervene to stabilise this chaos.

He further stated, “We are unnecessarily killing this industry in a manner and way that is not conducive for our industry, and that's why we need TRAI intervention.”

These statements come right after TRAI suggested to prescribe floor price (base price) for call and data. Moreover, recently TRAI also extended Vodafone Idea and Airtel’s charge paid by mobile phone users for calls made to rival networks by one year.

Reuters

The prescription of floor prices could result in a further rise of tariffs, disappointing Indian consumers, as the industry expects per user to be spending at least Rs 300 per month (currently it sits at just Rs 125 per month).



The rise in tarrifs could be the breather these brands truly need. Bharti Airtel and Vodafone reported loss of around Rs 74,000 crores (Vodafone Idea: 50,921 crores/ Airtel: Rs 23,045 crores) in the previous quarter after statutory dues arose out of the September quarter.

The Supreme court upheld a demand from the telecoms department for $13 billion in overdue levies and interest last month, hitting the shares of both Vodafone Idea and rival Bharti Airtel. Vodafone has clashed with Indian authorities over tax and regulatory issues ever since it entered the country.
