Rajasthan govt to table bills giving 5% quota for Gujjars, 10% for upper caste poor

Amid Gujjar protests, the Rajasthan government conducted meetings throughout Tuesday at the state secretariat to discuss the quota issue with ministers and other Congress leaders. (File photo: PTI)

The Rajasthan government today will table bills on the Gujjar community's demand for an additional four per cent reservation as well as on 10 per cent reservation for economically weaker sections.

The Gujjar agitation for reservation has entered its sixth day, with protestors continuing to block railway tracks and roads. Amid the protests, the Rajasthan government conducted meetings throughout Tuesday at the state secretariat to discuss the quota issue with ministers and other Congress leaders.

Though the deliberation of the meeting was not briefed officially, some Congress legislators indicated that the government will announce a proposal in the state assembly Wednesday, seeking to break the impasse.

"The chief minister is serious and the issue was discussed to find a solution and end the deadlock. There is unrest in the state and the country," Khetri MLA Jitendra Singh said.

Gujjar agitation leader Kirori Bainsla and his supporters began their indefinite sit-in on railway tracks in Malarna Dungar of Sawai Madhopur on Friday evening.

At present, the Gujjar community in Rajasthan have one per cent reservation under the Most Backward Classes (MBC) within the 50 per cent legal limit. The demand for separate five per cent reservation for the Gujjars was struck down by the Rajasthan High Court in 2017. The state government has moved the Supreme Court against the Rajasthan HC order.

Gujjars have argued that the 10 per cent reservation announced by the Centre also exceeds the 50 per cent reservation limit.

Since the reservations will require changes in the Constitution, the state government will put the ball in the Centre's court with the tabling of the bills today.

Protests disrupt daily life

The agitators continue to block rail tracks and highways, causing inconvenience to common people. On Tuesday, they blockaded Chaksu town, about 40 km from here on National Highway 52, police said.

The blockades on the Agra-Jaipur-Bikaner National Highway-11 in Dausa district, state highway in Nainwa of Bundi district, Malarna road in Sawai Madhopur and the Karauli-Hindaun road at Budla village in Karauli district continued.

A Congress legislator from Gujarat, Himmat Patel, also met Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla at the protest site on Malarna Dungar rail track to express his party's commitment in resolving the issues.

But the Gujjar leaders have refused to back off from the tracks and roads.

"We have not received any communication from the state government so far. Dharna will continue and we will not go back until the government hands over 5 per cent quota order," Vijay Bainsla, son of Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla, said.

Bainsla has stuck to the demand for five per cent reservation to the Gujjar, Raika-Rebari, Gadia Lohar, Banjara and the Gadaria communities, and has to refused to move from the tracks until the same is met through an official announcement.

(with inputs from PTI)
