Unrest against CAA spreads through India

Unrest against CAA spreads through India

The popular unrest that began from northeast has spread through the country with students and others staging demonstrations in and outside the campuses in all major cities of the country because the controversial amended citizen law has failed to address the core issue behind the movement of across the international border.

In fact, the CAA addresses only a part of the problem caused by the movement of people across international borders. There is still the outstanding issue of what to do with those whose presence in India is described as illegal. It is finding a humane solution to that problem that should occupy the national attention now, not denying justice to those who sought the protection of India.

The violence broke out in the national capital following protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act; hundreds of students took to streets demanding a probe into the usage of teargas and police entering the campuses without permission from the varsity authorities. Several Delhi University students boycotted exams to express their solidarity. They gathered at India Gate to participate in the protest march.

"We were inside the university when the police barged in. Around 20 policemen came from gate no 7 and 50 others came from the back gate. We told them we were not involved in the violence. They didn't listen. They didn't even spare women," Khanzala, an injured student, said

In Lucknow, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Kolkata and other parts of the country students gathered in hundreds shouting slogans as police tried to control the situation "Some students of the Nadwatul Ulama here tried to protest and hurled stones from inside. They were prevented and no one is allowed to come outside the campus," said Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police O P Singh. There were angry demonstrations all over with students demanding that the government take action against police "hooliganism"

An uneasy calm prevailed in Assam, epicentre of the violence, as curfew was relaxed in for several hours following improvement in the situation but peaceful protests were held amid calls by the Asom Gana Parishad for resignation of its ministers. Violent protests erupted near Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi and at the Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh, while West Bengal plunged deeper into chaos during the stir over the new citizenship law with incidents of arson and loot reported from the state and the northeast, acts which Prime Minister Narendra Modi alleged were being instigated by the "Congress and its friends".

Those who are protesting in the streets in North-eastern states claim to be against all 'foreigners' who have settled in the region and, seek the deportation of all those non-citizens who entered India after 1971. They certainly don't want all Hindus, Buddhists, Christians, Sikhs, Jains and Parsis who settled in India prior to 2015 to be automatically given Indian citizenship and become permanent residents in their states.

The second school of thought against them is averse to the act, comprises of those who view the CAA as discriminatory and inherently anti-Muslim. They argue that this is aimed at giving religious dimension to citizenship that goes against both the Constitution and their 'idea of India.' They accused the present dispensation at the centre with creating a Hindu variant of Pakistan.

The first set of people Assam, and Tripura in particular, has witnessed a massive demographic transformation since Independence caused by the influx of Bengali-speaking people from what became East Pakistan. Some of the immigrants were undeniably those who fled religious persecution but a large part also comprised Muslim settlers who were drawn by other considerations.

The cumulative effect of this immigration has resulted in Assamese-speakers being reduced to a minority in Assam and the social character of Tripura being altered significantly. There is some wariness to Bengali Hindus and Buddhist Chakmas being granted citizenship. These communities do not threaten the overall integrity of the region but it has to be viewed in the larger context of region's politics that has seen the interests of local people being subordinated.

The reality of religious minorities being systematically harassed and driven out of East Pakistan from 1947 to 1971 has been documented. However, the exodus from East Pakistan didn't happen all at once - unlike in West Pakistan. There was a belief at the initial stage that East Pakistan would be a secular state. The Constituent Assembly, for example, set July 19, 1948 as the deadline for citizens to choose between India and Pakistan.

After the formation of Bangladesh in December 1971, it was again assumed that the Hindu and Buddhist minorities would finally live with dignity in the new state. There was also a denial of the fact that a big chunk of the Hindu refugees who crossed over into India following the Pakistani army crackdown in March 1971 never returned after the liberation. The steady influx of migrants from Bangladesh to India subsequently was silently acknowledged but, owing to political compulsions, was never acted on.

It seems that CAA hasn't addressed the problem in its totality, but it has at least given recognition to the predicament of the Hindus and Buddhists who fled persecution. In the normal course, these peoples should have been classified as refugees and not viewed as illegal aliens. However, in line with the denial that began in 1947-48, they were deprived of their social identity and viewed as an invisible community.

Even though the situation in the restive northeast region has calm down but mistaking this as normalcy that the ruling NDA government has been doing will be dangerous as north-eastern part of the country is full of diversity and share border with other countries and assertive ethnic politics has been a defining character of the area. The grievances of local people in the region are by and large seem genuine but it would not be a wise move to resolve such issues by putting one group over another. The diversity that is found in the northeast makes its difference from other parts of the country and BJP's inability to accept this fact has also been instrument in fuelling the unrest in the area because the amended citizen act directly hits them.

In other words the new legislation has wrecked the Assam accord that slain Prime Minister had entered into the then agitating All Assam Student Association over the contentious issue of illegal infiltrators or migrant from Bangladesh.

The BJP seems playing a dangerous game in entire north east region that has the potential of the strife-torn region returning to militancy and communal violence in adjoin ing West Bengal that has a sizeable chunk of muslim population and by excluding them The BJP is trying to reinforce it in West Bengal that goes to polls in 2021.

—[IFS]
