It's a wrap for Slovakia schedule of Emraan Hashmi and Amitabh Bachchan-starrer Chehre

Emraan Hashmi wraps up Slovakia schedule of Chehre

Key Highlights Slovakia's shooting schedule of Chehre has now wrapped up Emraan Hashmi shared photos on social media to mark the day Chehre releases on April 24, 2020

Bollywood actor Emraan Hashmi has been filming for his upcoming thriller drama Chehre in Slovakia since the first week of this month. Megastar Amitabh Bachchan was also filming with Emraan for the film. After completing Delhi and Mumbai film schedule, the film's cast has wrapped Slovakia's shooting schedule as well.

While wrapping the Slovakia schedule, the actor thanked the entire team for filming under difficult situations and bearing the -12 degree temperature of the snow-capped mountains of Slovakia. He also revealed that he used to wear 9 layers of clothing to stay warm in the deadly weather.

Hashmi took to Twitter to share photos from the sets. In the caption, he wrote, "And its a wrap for the #chehrein Slovakia schedule. Kudos to the entire team that pushed themselves and shot in -12 degrees. I, on the other hand, was snugly packed with 9 layers of clothing."

And its a wrap for the #chehrein Slovakia schedule. Kudos to the entire team that pushed themselves and shot in -12 degrees. I, on the other hand, was snugly packed with 9 layers of clothing pic.twitter.com/NHjJiQbfUi — Emraan Hashmi (@emraanhashmi) December 20, 2019

This is the first time that the two actors are coming together for a film. Produced by Anand Pandit, the film is being helmed by Rumi Jaffrey. Bachchan will be seen playing the role of a lawyer, while Hashmi will play the role of a business tycoon in the movie.

For those unaware, the film went on floors in May, this year. The film also stars Rhea Chakraborty, Siddhanth Kapoor, Raghubir Yadav and Annu Kapoor. Fans' wait will come to an end on April 24, 2020, when the film will get released pan India.

On the work front, the actor was last seen in Soumik Sen directorial Why Cheat India. His film The Body is playing across theatres currently. The film released pan India last week.

Other than Chehre, the actor will be seen in Jay Krishnan directorial Ezra and Sanjay Gupta directorial Mumbai Saga, both the films will hit the theatres next year.

Stay tuned for more news and updates.
