ITI student, his parents arrested

Vadodara: Sleuths of local crime branch (LCB) rural on Friday cracked the sensational murder of a TY BCom student in Chansad village of Padra taluka and arrested an 18-year-old boy and his parents in the case.

Cops said that the boy, identified as Hitesh Vyas, who is a distant relative of slain MSU girl, Khushboo Jani, killed the girl when she resisted his attempts to molest her.

According to the police, Hitesh, who admired her, called her to his home on December 11 afternoon on the pretext of helping him bind his books. When she went to his home, Hitesh, whose family was away, tried to hug her.

“Khushboo panicked and raised an alarm following which Hitesh got scared. He picked up a hammer which was lying nearby and hit it on her head,” said Ravindra Patel, inspector, Vadodara rural (in-charge).

Khushboo then fled to the first floor of the house and locked herself in the bathroom. Hitesh followed her and opened the bathroom door forcefully and hit her again with the hammer and also slit her throat with an axe later.

“The accused tied her hands and legs with a thick rope and wrapped the body in a quilt. He then kept the body on his two-wheeler and disposed it in the lake nearby,” Patel told TOI.

Next day, Hitesh, who studies in Industrial Training Institute (ITI), went to the spot again and saw that the body had floated to surface. He then tied a heavy log to it and disposed it again in the same lake.

“He returned home and behaved normally. His parents, Mahendra and Raksha, were not aware of the crime their son had committed,” Patel said, adding that only two days ago that they learnt about the crime.

“We had circulated a video of the quilt in which Khushboo was disposed. The video reached Hitesh’s parents two days ago following which they realized that the quilt belonged to them and that their son had murdered the girl,” Patel said.

The parents then helped Hitesh clean up the blood spots in their home and even changed the bathroom lock that was broken on December 11. “We have arrested the parents for trying to destroy evidence,” Patel added.

Khushboo had gone missing on December 11 following which her parents had filed a missing persons complaint. Her body was found three days later from the lake after the locals suspected something foul due to the stench emanating from the waterbody.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
