Accused in high profile crime cases get their just desserts in 2019

Ludhiana: From discharging chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh and other accused in the City Centre case, to acquitting terror accused Jagtar Singh Hawara in Ghanta Ghar blast, and recovery of weapons on his alleged disclosure, Ludhiana courts have sentenced many accused in the high profile murder and rape cases in 2019.

On November 27, in a major relief for chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh, the court of district and sessions judge Gurbir Singh had accepted the closure report by Vigilance Bureau (VB) in the City Centre case, wherein he and 35 others were named as the accused. As the court has accepted the closure report, this suggested that Captain Amrinder Singh, among other accused, were discharged of charges in the case filed by VB. Captain Amarinder Singh had attended the hearing when the final order was pronounced by the court, which did not find evidence against him and other accused.

On December 9, the court of additional sessions judge Atul Kassana had acquitted Jagtar Singh Hawara, who was sentenced to life imprisonment for the assassination of former chief minister Beant Singh in the Ghanta Ghar blast case of 1995. In the same case, on November 22, the court of the then additional sessions judge Arunvir Vashista had acquitted Jagtar Singh Hawara, who had got life imprisonment for the assassination of former chief minister Beant Singh, in an explosives and arms and ammunition recovery case of 1995 in Ludhiana. The case dates back to 6 December 1995, when Kotwali police station had registered a case under sections 307 (attempt to murder) and 427 of the IPC, and sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Explosives Act after a bomb blast occurred near Ghanta Ghar Chowk of Ludhiana. Hawara was arrested in the case on 23 December 1995, and later the police had claimed to have recovered 5kg RDX, an AK-56 rifle with magazine, 60 cartridges of AK-56, a remote control, and a wireless set from Kundanpuri near Buddha Nullah on his ‘disclosure’.

Dhandari rape and murder case

On November 21, more than five years after Dhandari alleged the rape and murder case, a local court had acquitted all the accused in the case. On 29 October 2014, the Sahnewal police had booked three residents of Dhandari Khurd and a Dholewal resident under sections 365 (kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine person), 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 376 (rape), 506 (criminal intimidation), and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC for allegedly kidnapping and sexually abusing 16-year-old girl.

Meanwhile, in a murder case related to the same girl, there are seven accused whosed trial is going on in a Ludhiana court. The minor girl, a Class XII student at Government School, who was allegedly kidnapped and raped by four accused on October 25, was allegedly burnt by around six miscreants after they poured kerosene oil on her in Dandhari Kalan at around 11.30am on 4 December 2014. On 9 December 2014, she had breathed her last at the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) in Sector 32, Chandigarh.

In November, a local court had sentenced a woman, Jagga Rani, to life imprisonment for the murder of her husband. On 16 June 2016, Sadar Raikot police had booked Jagga Rani (64) of Burj Hari Singh Wala in Ludhiana and her son from the first husband, for the murder of her husband Pala. As per prosecution, Jagga Rani — in connivance with the co-accused — committed Pala’s murder, and in order to remove evidence of the crime, they buried the body in the courtyard.

In October, a local court had sentenced a person to life imprisonment for the rape and murder of a seven-year-old girl. The court of additional sessions judge Tarntaran Singh Bindra also imposed a fine of Rs50,000 on the convict. On April 10, 2017, Focal Point police had booked a thirty-five-year-old accused for the rape and murder of a seven- year-old girl. Police officials had said that the then seven-year-old girl was allegedly raped and then murdered by a 35-year-old man.

Life term for stepfather

In August, a local court had sentenced a stepfather to life imprisonment for the rape of his minor daughter. The court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma had also imposed a fine of Rs1.60 lakh on the convict of which Rs1.50 lakh is to be paid by convict to the victim as compensation. On June 4, 2017, Meherban police had booked the accused, who originally belonged to Uttar Pradesh, under Section 376 of the IPC (rape) and sections 3 and 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act for violating his stepdaughter.

In July, a local court had sentenced two persons to life imprisonment in the murder case of a sarpanch. The court of additional sessions judge had also imposed a fine of Rs1.2 lakh and Rs1 lakh on two convicts respectively. On 14 July 2017, Haibowal police had booked two persons — Narinder Singh of Jhamat village, and Amrinder Singh of Jawaddi village — for the murder of sarpanch Bhupinder Singh, after they had fired at him outside a gym in the posh South City.

In May, the court of additional sessions judge had sentenced a person to life imprisonment for the rape and murder of a minor girl. On 25 February 2016, Focal Point had booked the 19-year-old accused for the rape and murder of a 12-year-old victim who lived in the same area as accused. Before dying, the victim had told the police that the accused was violating her for 10 days, and on the day he sprinkled kerosene oil on her and ran away.

In January, a local court had sentenced a person to life imprisonment after finding him guilty of shooting dead an agriculturist over a land dispute at a shop in the Pakhowal market. The court of additional sessions judge also had imposed a fine of Rs12,000 on the convict. On January 15, 2015, Sudhar police had booked Dilbagh Singh of Mehal Kalan in Pakhowal for the murder of Satwinder Singh at a cloth shop near the bus stand in Pakhowal.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
