Forest guards get lessons in fighting wildfire

COIMBATORE: The state is equipping forest guards to fight wild fire as there has been an increase in such incidents in recent years. Not many would have forgotten about the Kurangani forest fire that killed 23 trekkers in Theni district in March last year. And that has been an eye-opener for the state government, which decided to provide advanced training to forest field staff on forest fire management.In the past five days, at least 377 forest guards from across the state have been undergoing training in forest fire management at the Tamil Nadu Forest Academy (TNFA).Special task force personnel, who are experts in dealing with forest fire, from Sathyamangalam had conducted a demonstration for the trainees on Thursday. According to TNFA officials, forest guards and anti-poaching watchers were taught on different types of forest fires and their causes. “They were advised not to climb the hills while fire is raging in the forests as there are high changes of flames spreading to top of the hills. So, they won’t be able to escape. They should, instead, climb down the hills to escape from fire,” said an official, who didn’t want to be named.According to him, forest fire usually occurs from January-end to July-end. He said the forest guards were also sensitized on manmade forest fire. “Sometimes, people who go to forest for grazing cattle or collecting firewood, set fire inside the jungles.”Pointing out that a forest guard had the mammoth task of covering 2,000 hectares of forest in a range, the official said the forest guards were hence advised to take precautionary measures to prevent forest fires. “They should take fire lines inside the reserve forest and it would help fire from spreading one place to another.”The fire and rescue services department, meanwhile, trained the forest guards in first aid steps. D Venkatesh, district forest officer, Coimbatore forest division, also addressed the trainees on Friday.The official said another 262 forest watchers were trained in forest fire management at the Tamil Nadu Forestry College on Vaigai Dam forest campus.
