Chennai: Man sedates auto driver's daughter, steals gold and cash

The teenage girl's brother took her to a doctor where necessary treatment was provided to her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The residence of an autorickshaw driver was allegedly robbed on Thursday The driver's daughter was alone at home when the incident took place The accused stole 10 sovereigns of gold along with Rs 45,000 cash from the driver's house

Chennai: A 15-year-old girl was allegedly sedated and robbed by a man on Thursday. The unidentified man allegedly stole 10 sovereigns of gold jewellery and cash worth Rs 45,000 from the girl's residence in Ambattur, Chennai.

The minor girl was alone at home when the incident took place. Allegedly, the accused laced a handkerchief with a sedative and forced the girl to inhale it.

The incident came to light when the girl's brother came back home and saw her. The girl was unconscious and the doors of the house were open. The teenage girl's brother took her to a doctor where necessary treatment was provided to her, the Times of India reported.

The doctors told the girl's brother that she had inhaled sedatives. When the girl regained consciousness, she told her brother that a man had entered their house. According to the girl, the man forced her to inhale from the handkerchief.

After the girl's recovery, her father approached the Ambattur police and lodged a complaint in relation to the incident. The police have launched a search operation and collected the CCTV footage of the nearby areas to ascertain the identity of the accused.

Mumbai man shot dead, another injured during robbery at mobile shop

In December this year, two men robbed a mobile shop in Virar area of Mumbai. The two men allegedly stole Rs 2.5 lakh from the shop. A man was also shot dead in the incident. The two accused men had hidden their faces with a mask.

Vijay and Vishal used to run a mobile and stationery shop in Kumbharpada, Virar. On the day of the incident, the two accused entered the shop and asked the two men to give them all the cash kept in the counter. Vishal and Vijay tried to resist, following which, the former was shot in the chest and abdomen. He died on the spot.

Meanwhile, Vijay also had bullet injuries. He was taken to a hospital in Mira Road. One of the accused was caught when he was trying to escape from the spot.
