A true ‘buddy’ in the line of fire

Know your heroes: Sepoy Joginder Singh

Col Dilbag Singh Dabas (Retd)

Raj Kumar Sheoran of Pauli village in Jind district of Haryana has three sons. The eldest took to farming, the middle joined the 6 Grenadiers and the youngest, Joginder, after matriculation from the village high school, followed into his elder brother's footsteps and joined the Army.

Joginder was enrolled in the 7th Battalion of the Jat Infantry Regiment on September 20, 2000.

After the alleged rigging in the Assembly elections in 1988 in Jammu and Kashmir, the masses, a peace loving lot, felt deceived by the power politics at the Centre and the state and turned against the state. Taking advantage of the disturbed situation in the state, Pakistan infiltrated its trained cadre into Kashmir Valley to add fuel to the fire and within a year, the entire valley was in the grip of militancy. It can be rightly surmised that the nefarious design of Pakistan this time was the replay of 'Operation Gulmarg' of 1947; overtly it was then, covertly it is now.

In Jammu region, the Line of Control (LOC) between Bhimber and Poonch is most susceptible to intrusions by the Pak-trained militants. In this stretch, Mendhar village on the Indian side of the LOC is infamous for harboring sympathy for militants. The militants cross over the LOC, spend the night at Mendhar, next day resume their trek after sun down and before day break, reach a small town named Surankote another safe hideout for them to hide during the day. At dusk, the militants take off towards Pir Panjal Range through dense forest astride old Mughal Road and before morning hours, they are in the hinterland of Kashmir Valley, where they have hideouts in almost every house, every hamlet and every village.

The Army deployed there is not oblivious to the modus operandi of militants and adopt all counter measures, but thickly wooded areas and the demography, unfortunately, favors the militants.

Deployment of the elite Rashtriya Rifles Battalion in the region sealed the fate of militants and curtailed the infiltrations to a large extent, but the intrusions, though considerably reduced in number, still happen since densely wooded areas and sympathetic demography helps militants in getting past unhindered.

By the time the 7 Jat was inducted into the Mendhar sub-sector of Rajauri in Jammu region, the sector had become the hot bed of militancy. It was here that Sepoy Joginder Singh of 'A' company displayed his grit fighting militants along with his officer buddy and earned the richly deserved Shaurya Chakra.

As per the dictionary, the word 'buddy' means a mate. But ask the paratroopers of the Indian Army, the Garuds of Indian Air Force or the Marcos of Indian Navy, and you will know what a 'buddy' is in the line of fire. Sepoy Joginder Singh, SC, by his demonstrated outstanding camaraderie, is a living example of the word 'buddy'.

On medical grounds, Joginder took pre-mature retirement in 2006 and took to farming. He is now the buddy to his elder brother, another ex-serviceman. Raj Kumar, father of Sepoy Joginder Singh, SC, reminiscences: "Bachpan me Joginder bohot khota tha. Kisi ki nahi sunta tha. Maine socha ise fauj me bhej dun, siddha ho jaega". The septuagenarian then fondly pats Joginder's back and proudly adds: "Khud to yo fauj me bhi bhot ghana siddha na huya par ugravadi isne sare siddhe kar diye".

The bravery recorded in the War Diary of 7 Jat reads...

“On February 15, 2002, Sepoy Joginder Singh was part of the ambush laid to eliminate terrorists trying to cross over the LOC near Dharna in Mendhar sub-sector of Rajauri in Jammu and Kashmir. He was also buddy to Major DS Murty, who led the ambush. At 0045 hours on February 15, 2002, the buddy pair of Major Murty and Sepoy Joginder noticed the terrorists approaching the ambush site. When the terrorists came close to 10 metres, Sepoy Joginder Singh along with his officer buddy charged on to the terrorists and killed one. Having been caught unaware, the remaining terrorists ran down and hid behind a boulder and kept firing at the party. Despite heavy fire by the terrorists and being closest to them, Joginder remained with his buddy, stuck to his position and continued engaging them killing two more. At that moment, Sepoy Joginder noticed that one terrorist from behind the boulder was aiming his rifle at Major Murty. Before the terrorist pressed the trigger, Joginder immediately leaped in front and took the bullet on his chest. But before he fell, he fired another shot and killed the third terrorist also. By then, half the terrorists had been eliminated, mostly by Sepoy Joginder and the remaining half fled. Sepoy Joginder Singh was quickly evacuated to the base hospital Rajauri, where three bullets were extracted from his chest and life of the brave-heart was saved. Throughout the operation, Sepoy Joginder Singh displayed courage, determination and camaraderie of a high order in the face of the hard-core terrorists, for which he was awarded the Shaurya Chakra".

About the award

Shaurya Chakra is awarded for gallantry of a high order not in the face of the enemy

in the face of the enemy It was established as Ashok Chakra Class 3 on January 4, 1952, with the award effective from August 15, 1947. The statutes were revised on January 27, 1967, and the decoration renamed 'Shaurya Chakra'

It is awarded to military personnel as well as to the civilians, including the police and para-military personnel. It may be awarded posthumously as well

The award of Shaurya Chakra carries with it the right to use SC as the post-nominal abbreviation

Among 1,997 Shaurya Chakra awardees in the country to date, 127 are Haryanvi brave-hearts

Among four awarded the Shaurya Chakra twice to date, Naik Jardish Ahmad from 22 Grenadiers belongs to Mewat district of Haryana

(The writer is a veteran Gunner, 6 Field Regiment)
