Yediyurappa visits trouble-hit Mangaluru, curfew to be relaxed for 3 hours

Yediyurappa visits trouble-hit Mangaluru, curfew to be relaxed for 3 hours

India

oi-Deepika S

Mangaluru, Dec 21: Upset over the alleged incident of police firing, Chief Minister Yediyurappa visited trouble-hit Mangaluru today.

Two persons were killed in police firing on Thursday as protests against the CAA turned violent in Mangaluru.

Earlier, he had appealed to people to stay away from 'vested interests' indulging in rumour mongering and assured his government's commitment to protecting the rights of all citizens.

"In view of the protests in certain parts of the state against the enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). I make this humble appeal to every citizen of Karnataka to stay away from vested interests indulging in rumour-mongering and stoking the passions to disturb peace and harmony in the state," Yediyurappa said.

CAA protests across UP turn violent, over 8 people dead | Oneindia News

Mangaluru: Cong delegation denied permission to meet injured, bereaved families, detained at airport

Clarifying that CAA will not affect the rights and privileges of any Indian citizen of any religion in anyway, he said, therefore let us not heed to ill-motivated rumours and tarnish the peace-loving image of the state of Karnataka. "Let us all join together in upholding this image by maintaining peace and harmony," he added.

The Chief Minister also assured that the government was committed to protecting the rights of every citizen without prejudice to caste, creed, community, religion or race.

Mangaluru city which is under a curfew remained calm under heavy police security on Saturday while prohibitory orders were lifted for two hours from 6 am to enable people to purchase essential items.

City Police Commissioner P S Harsha said the curfew will continue till Sunday night in the commissionerate limits as a precautionary measure after the violent clashes between protesters agitating against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the police on Thursday.

Two farmers protesting demanding fertilizers in Haveri were killed in police firing during Yediyurappa's stint as CM IN 2008. Citing this, the Opposition in Karnataka has been taking a dig at his legacy as CM.
