Dainik Jagran calls CAA protests ‘dangerous politics’, Dainik Bhaskar doubts govt’s intent

Monday, 16 December: Violence in the garb of upholding the constitution is how Dainik Jagran describes the protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. It writes that the protests clearly show that some anti-social elements are fuelling the fire and political parties are also propping them up.

In Bengal, it is clear that the Mamata Banerjee government is encouraging such elements and as a result widespread violence was seen in Malda, Howrah and Murshidabad. Now that the violence has reached Delhi, the central government needs to be alert and also firm. Protests cannot mean naked violence and should be curbed firmly. All political parties stoking this fire should be exposed.

Amar Ujala writes that the Namami Gange project has not fulfilled its expectations. It writes that the project will be successful in rejuvenating the river only when civilians collaborate with the government and other agencies.

None of the targets fixed by the government have been met, including sewage treatment where Rs 7,700 crore was spent. There was a plan to grow trees like Neem, Banyan and Gooler around the Ganges banks and approximately Rs 114 crore was spent on this project but decorative trees like Gulmohar and Kachnar were grown instead. The issue is not just limited to cleanliness of the Ganges but also the flow of the river. So, people should join hands with government and its agencies to fulfil this onerous task

Tuesday, 17th December: Amar Ujala writes that the violence one is witnessing in different parts of the country against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act is being spread for political gains and the government will need to do everything in its power to curb them.

It writes that Mamata Banerjee, through her own strident position, empowered anti-social elements of such protests. However, in Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia and in Aligarh Muslim University, along with other universities in the country, students have raised their voices and this should be a cause of concern for the government. The way the police entered Jamia campus without the permission of the university and used force is unacceptable but the way public property, buses were destroyed by protesting students is also condemnable, writes Amar Ujala.

Dainik Jagran sees signs of dangerous politics (khatarnak rajniti) in the nationwide protests. It says that even the Supreme Court said it would not hear any protest-related issue until the violence stops. The opposition seems to be playing with fire, encouraging anti-social elements to spread violence and then complaining about police brutality but are not uttering a single word against the violent protesters. The government has made it clear time and again that the new amendment will not impact any Indian citizen and despite this, political parties are busy creating an atmosphere implying that this Act is against Indian Muslims.

If India is showing concern for the minorities, who are facing prosecution in these countries, why is there so much outrage about it? India is no hostel that everyone can come and live in.

Wednesday, 18th December: Dainik Bhaskar writes that, in India, it is believed that rape cases should not be overtly highlighted and fingers are often pointed at US and other western countries since they have a higher number of rape cases. However, what happened in Hyderabad was not just a gang rape but the victim was also murdered and the outrage is because of the delay in justice.

In India, rape is associated with social stigma unlike in the West. One saw jubilation at the ‘encounter’ of the alleged Hyderabad rapists by the police and it was almost like a cathartic release for people. Now, the Supreme Court has ordered a judicial inquiry into the ‘encounter’ in an effort to restore people’s faith in the judiciary. It is important to remember that the police didn’t even file an FIR for 6 months in the Unnao rape case and the court couldn’t do anything. It cannot force investigations as the transfers and promotions of investigators are in the hands of the ruling dispensation.

Dainik Bhaskar calls the opposition asking the President to annul the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, a case of pure politicking. The opposition is only stoking the fire and is not saying a word against the anarchy being spread on the streets, from Delhi to Bengal. It is indulging in spreading misinformation, which is instigating people.

Amar Ujala says that former President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf has been found guilty of treason and been awarded the death penalty but the million dollar question is if he will ever return to Pakistan from Dubai. This judgment shows how Pakistan is struggling with its inherent contradictions. It is ironic that Nawaz Sharif who started the investigation against Musharraf is accused of corruption himself and is in the UK for treatment. Musharraf is accused of imposing an emergency and putting lawyers and judges under house arrest.

Thursday, 19th December: Dainik Jagran writes that if the Citizenship (Amendment) Act was against the Constitution, then Supreme Court would have shown some urgency in dealing with it. While the court has sought answers from the government, it did not display any urgency in hearing the matter. Would it not be right to stop the protests now that the court has settled the matter? Out of the 60 petitions against CAA, most were by political organisations and this makes it clear that politicians are making hay.

Dainik Bhaskar says the government’s intentions are doubtful as its priorities aren’t right. It says “niyat par shak” is because from Triple Talaq to Article 370 to now the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, all of these targeted the Muslim community. According to statistics, Hindus are making a mockery of marriage laws, men are marrying twice over etc. but the state is turning a blind eye to them. Child marriage and child labour are still prevalent in our society and the government doesn’t seem to be bothered by it. The economy is in a mess and the government is not bothered and thus, with such priorities it is easy to doubt their intent.

Amar Ujala says that after 11 years, justice and relief has come to the families of those who were affected by the serial blasts in Jaipur. The special court found four guilty but our record of terrorism cases reaching their logical conclusion is not very commendable. Steps should be taken for time-bound hearing and justice delivery in these cases.

Friday, 20th December: Amar Ujala asks when justice will be served (kab hoga nyay) in the December 16 gang rape-murder case. It writes that the accused have used all the legal machinations they could to delay the final sentencing. They were given the death penalty two-and-a-half years back and ever since this case has been caught in a legal quagmire, which is quite painful. The celebrations which were marked after the ‘encounter’ of the rape accused in Hyderabad was primarily due to the long-drawn out legal process and delay in justice in the December 16 case. Justice delayed is indeed justice denied.

Dainik Bhaskar says that India has slipped four places to reach the 112th spot in the World Economic Forum 2020 Gender Parity Report. This shows the attitude of Indian men towards women. They still do not receive good education, health benefits and economic opportunities despite some reservation for women in Panchayat and municipal bodies. The bill for reservation of women in Parliament has been hanging fire for 11 years and therefore women’s equality is more lip service at the moment, than reality.

Dainik Jagran calls the protests against the CAA the mischievous face of politics. According to the newspaper, the protests were a result of lack of knowledge and were also on the instigation of political parties. Those spreading chaos include political parties who had in the past demanded citizenship for minorities from these neighbouring countries.
