Stop Brutal Rapes and Murders in “Most Dangerous Place for Women”

Target: Ravi Shankar Prasad, Minister of Law and Justice for India

Goal: Implement criminal justice reforms targeted at widespread violence against women.

A young woman allegedly gang-raped, murdered, set ablaze, and tossed away like garbage: unfortunately, this horrifying incident is not an isolated atrocity in India. For almost two decades, the populous country has been hit with increasingly frequent acts of sexual violence, each seemingly more brutal than the last. Predators have targeted victims as young as six years old. The latest brutality again sparked country-wide protests and a demand that leaders do much more.

Four men currently stand accused of sabotaging a woman’s vehicle for the purpose of luring her to a secluded area and then sexually assaulting her. After the attack, the defendants allegedly strangled the woman and lit her on fire. Such heinous crimes have given India the title of “most dangerous country in the world for women.” In one year alone, an average of 92 rapes occurred every day. Even more troubling, victims who come forward face further turmoil. Death threats against accusers are rampant, and cases move notoriously slowly through the legal system. In addition, the lack of female law enforcement officials is believed to have a major detrimental effect on victims telling their stories.

Sign this petition to urge criminal justice leaders to make India a safer place for all girls and women.

PETITION LETTER:

Dear Minister Prasad,

“The most dangerous country in the world for women”: this distinction is not one any country should take with pride. Please use this title—and the thousands of cases that back it up—as the greatest motivator for real reform. Listen to the protesters who may want vengeance now, but in the end possess a more fundamental want: safety and security.

In a given year, over 125,000 rape cases remain pending in India’s system. Victims spend these long waits in agony, often under the threat of more horrific violence. Many victims remain discouraged from seeking help from authorities because of fear and because they do not see female faces in law enforcement that could afford them comfort and assurance. Please work for a more efficient, quicker legal process and a more inclusive law enforcement structure.

Ensure justice for the victims of rape and sexual assault, and that no more lives are lost.

Sincerely,

[Your Name Here]

Photo Credit: Nilanjana Roy
