Kanpur Erupts Again Over Citizenship Law, Protests In Jamia Too: 10 facts

In Kanpur, where one person died and several were injured on Friday, protesters took on the police after they tried to stop a protest march. The cops used batons on the protesters who threw stones and set fire to a police post. The situation is still tense in the area. Mobile internet and broadband has been snapped across Rampur after clashes broke out in the Idgah area.

Thirteen people died in protests held across 13 districts of Uttar Pradesh Friday. The list includes Saharanpur, Deoband, Shamli, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Ghaziabad, Hapur, Sambhal, Aligarh, Bahraich, Ferozabad, Kanpur, Bhadohi and Gorakhpur; Parts of the state are under prohibitory orders and internet has been unplugged. 705 people have been arrested and the police have filed 124 cases.

So far, 15 people have died across the state -- four of them in Meerut, two each in Firozabad and Bijnor, one each in Sambhal, Kampur, Varanasi and Lucknow.

Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh denied that anyone died in police firing. "We did not shoot even a single bullet," he said. Another officer have alleged that the protesters were using firearms. The Uttar Pradesh police have also said that 57 policemen have been injured by firearms. Overall, 263 policemen have sustained injuries in the violence in the state since Thursday.

More protests have been scheduled for Sunday in several cities including the national capital. The Congress will hold a protest at Rajghat -- which party leader Rahul Gandhi is expected to attend. Other protests will be held at Jantar Mantar, the capital's designated protest site.

A four-member delegation of Bengal's ruling Trinamool Congress will visit Lucknow today to meet the families of the man killed in police firing in Lucknow on Thursday. The delegation will be led by Dinesh Trivedi.

The national capital witnessed protests Friday morning as Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad led a massive protest at the Jama Masjid and called for a march to Jantar Mantar. In the evening, hundreds of protestors took to the streets, defying prohibitory orders.Sources said at least 36 people, including eight policemen, were taken to the Lok Nayak Hospital with injuries.

Chandrashekhar Azad, who was formally arrested On Saturday after Friday's detention, has been sent to jail for 14 days. Fifteen others been arrested for the violence.The Delhi Police, which came under fire for using excessive force, said they used neither batons not tear gas.

Curfew has been imposed in some areas of Madhya Pradesh's Jabalpur district after a protest march against the citizenship law turned violent on Friday. The Congress-led state government had placed restrictions on large gatherings in 50 of 52 districts amid violent protests against the law across the country.
