Citizenship Act: Clashes Erupt In Uttar Pradesh's Rampur; Several Protesters, Policemen Injured

New Delhi:

Clashes broke out between anti-CAA protesters and police in which several people, including policemen, were injured in Uttar Pradesh's Rampur on Saturday, officials said. Around 400 to 500 people gathered here to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act amid a bandh call, they said. Five protesters were hospitalised and the condition of one of them was stated to be critical, District Magistrate Aunjaneya Singh said.

"Over a dozen policemen also suffered minor injuries during stone pelting by protesters that included children between the ages of 12 and 18 years," Singh told PTI.

Another dozen protesters also suffered minor injuries in tear gas shelling by the police, he said. A call for a bandh was given in Rampur on Saturday by anti-CAA protesters even as CrPc Section 144, which bars assembly of people, was in force in the region.

Till date, at least 11 people, including an 8-year-old boy, have lost their lives in Uttar Pradesh in the protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in the state, officials said on Saturday. Four deaths were reported from Meerut district, while the boy was killed in a stampede in Varanasi when a violent mob was being chased by police personnel on Friday, they said. After Friday prayers, six people were killed as protesters clashed with the police at several places in the state.

They hurled stones and torched vehicles, the officials said. There have been reports of firing on police personnel deployed to maintain law and order, they said. Director General of Police O P Singh on Friday said that 50 policemen were seriously injured in the violence. Violence during the anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests has so far claimed lives in Bijnor, Sambhal, Firozabad, Kanpur, Varanasi and Meerut in the state.

Clashes with police were also reported from Bhadohi, Bahraich, Amroha, Farurukhabad, Ghaziabad, Varanasi, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur, Hapur, Hathras, Bulandshahr, Hamirpur and Mahoba districts. At many places, police used lathis, lobbed teargas shells and, according to some officials, rubber bullets when they failed to contain angry mobs. Internet services have been suspended across major cities in Uttar Pradesh, following the state government orders.
