Sonchiriya: This Is How The Makers Of This Sushant-Bhumi Film Trained The Cast For Playing Dacoits!

The makers of Sushant Singh Rajput- Bhumi Pednekar starrer Sonchiriya have left no stone unturned in doing justice to the characters and keep in sync with the dacoit era.

The actors who are donning a rustic look also have gone out of their way to get into the skin of their characters. Each of them had to carry 5 kgs of backpack and walk on the sets to develop the body language and walking style of dacoits.

Shot in the valleys of Madhya Pradesh, Sonchiriya presents an ensemble cast starring Sushant Singh Rajput, Bhumi Pednekar, Manoj Bajpayee, Ranvir Shorey, and Ashutosh Rana in lead roles, also with an intriguing storyline.

Speaking about her working experience with Sushant, Bhumi Pednekar had opened up in a DNA interview and said, "Sushant is a passionate actor and so am I. We bonded on those grounds. He is a fit guy and did a lot of prep to get into the layers of the character. Sushant, Manoj sir (Bajpayee), Ranvir Shorey, Ashutosh sir (Rana) and I had a blast shooting for it. We used to improvise and help each other, there was never any kind of insecurity or ego battle. The entire cast needed to be synchronised for the film to be what it is."

Meanwhile, Sushant had said that he considers Sonchiriya to be his best performance till date.

Recently the makers of Sonchiriya organised the special event wherein they have gone ahead to launch the extension of the trailer titled as 'The Rebels of Sonchiriya'.

Sonchiriya is all set to release in next month, cast and crew is on a promotional spree and seen promoting the film on social media as well.

The film is set in the 1970s showcasing a small town ruled and dominated by dacoits. Multiple gangs fight over the struggle to attain power. The cast dons fierce avatars in sync with the theme of the film.

Sonchiriya promises to be a power packed action film giving a glimpse of the glorious years of dacoits in central India. Shot in the valleys of Madhya Pradesh, Sonchiriya presents an ensemble cast with an intriguing storyline.

Directed by Abhishek Chaubey who has earlier presented 'Udta Punjab' and 'Ishiqiya', 'Sonchiriya' presents a rooted tale set in Chambal. Produced by Ronnie Screwvala's RSVP, the movie is slated to release on 1st March 2019.

Ranveer Singh's Terrible Performance In Ladies Vs Ricky Bahl Made Him Fearless
