Violence and stampede in Kashi after Friday namaz

Cops resort to lathicharge to disperse protesters in Varanasi on Friday

VARANASI: Protests took a violent turn in Varanasi after Friday namaz where an eight-year-old boy was killed and 10 others were injured, including eight policemen. Internet services also remained suspended in the district.

District magistrate (DM) Kaushal Raj Sharma said, “Police had to use force to control the mob in Bajardiha. Ten persons, including eight policemen suffered injuries who were rushed to the hospital. ” DM, Varanasi, Kaushal Raj Sharma said he will write to the government for ex-gratia relief to the family of the boy.

SSP Prabhakar Chawdhary said, “Possibility of planned conspiracy in Bajardiha violence can’t be denied as protesters carried placards and bricks,”the DM said.

He added, “Most protesters will be identified as police have sufficient photos and video footage and appropriate legal action would be initiated against them.”

Most shops in Muslimdominated localities and markets especially in Dalmandi, Madanpura and Nadesar areas remained closed.

Heavy police and paramilitary force was deployed near Langda Hafiz mosque in Nai Sadak. Divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal and IG Varanasi range VS Mina were camping in major localities to check any untoward incident in the region.

The shopkeepers, who had pulled down their shutters on Thursday when protests had started in Dalmandi, didn’t open their shops on Friday morning.

Similar scene was witnessed in the vicinity of Nadesar mosque as most of the shops of auto spare parts were not opened. In Madan Pura, shops mostly of Banarasi sari and textiles, remained closed. A crowd assembled on Madanpura road following afternoon namaz, paralysing the traffic for sometime.

ADG Varanasi zone Brij Bhushan, who camped in Nai Sadak area, appealed to the shop-owners to open their shops.

On getting information about crowding on Madan Pura road, the DM and SSP, who were camping at Nai Sadak reached there with heavy police force to control the situation. Except these areas, markets in other Muslim-dominated localities, including Badibajar, Jaitpura, Adampura, Pilikothi and several areas of trans-Varuna remained opened like normal days.


