BJP to contact more than 3 crore families and hold rallies in multiple districts to clear air on CAA

Protests against CAA have been going on for quite a while now | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Amidst the ongoing anger that the nation has been showing against the Citizenship Amendment Act in forms of protests all across the country, BJP, on Saturday, said that the officials from the party plan to contact over three crore families in the next ten days in order to clear the air over the amended Act. In addition to that, the party has said that it will hold rallies in various districts to reach out to the public over the issue that has been creating widespread outrage among the people.

According to party general secretary Bhupender Yadav, "The BJP will reach out to over three crore families. We will organise press conferences at over 250 places in the next 10 days. In addition, over 1,000 rallies will be held to clear the air over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and to bust the myth created by the opposition." He also said that the party will counter the "lies" of opposition parties including that of the Congress over the provisions of the new law through effective communication, while also announcing, "The BJP will take along the refugees, who come to India due to atrocities in their countries in its rallies."

Yadav further said that the party believes that all communities -- Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Parsi, Sikha, and others and they are all Indian citizens and have the right to live with dignity. He further alleged opposition parties of supporting violence. He asked, rather rhetorically, "Do Congress and RJD support violence so far as anti-CAA protests are concerned?"

The saffron party’s move on the issue has come after days of agitation in the country. Protests over the amended Act have been going on in various parts of the nation for over a week now. While some places have seen peaceful protests, other areas have seen severe violent clashes between the protesters and the police.



Violent clashes in various states have also caused the government to impose a curfew. Moreover, section 144 has also been imposed in various areas of the nation. In addition to that, several areas have also been experiencing internet shutdowns which the government has imposed in order to avoid any untoward incident. The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill that was passed by the two houses of the parliament and went on to become an Act after it got a go-ahead from the President of India, aims at protecting the interests of and giving citizenship to the non-Muslim refugees of three neighbouring countries- Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.



The major focus of the Act is to change the definition of an illegal immigrant fo all the Non-Muslims who have lived in India without any proper documentation. Such immigrants will now be granted a fast track Indian Citizenship under the Act. The process is expected to take place within six years against the 12 years of process in regular cases.
