Mohali police arrest contract killer who murdered teacher outside her school in Kharar

CCTV footage showing the contract killer fleeing the scene of the crime | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Sarabjit's live-in partner had hired Jaswinder to commit the murder CCTV footage shows her being shot dead in front of her five-year-old daughter Police say that the victim's live-in partner, Sandhu, fled the country on December 5 itself

Chandigarh: Over a fortnight after a school teacher was murdered in cold-blood in Kharar town of Mohali district, police have arrested the man who committed the act. He has been identified as Dyalpura resident Jaswinder Singh, a contract killer who was hired by the victim's live-in partner Harvinder Singh Sandhu.

While Sandhu left the country on December 5, the day of the incident, his 60-year-old mother Shinder Kaur was taken into custody on December 7 after investigators named her as a co-conspirator in the crime. Police have also managed to seize the vehicle the contract killer used to flee the scene of the crime after he opened fire at the 31-year-old Sarabjeet Kaur right outside the Knowledge Bus Global School in Kharar's Sunny Enclave area.

Footage retrieved from CCTV cameras at the spot captured Jaswinder firing three shots at Kaur in front of her five-year-old daughter as she was parking her scooter minutes before school was about to start. He can also be seen running towards a four-wheeler that was waiting for him nearby. The accomplice who accompanied the contract killer is yet to be arrested.

Sarabjit had been teaching French and Punjabi at the school since her return from France in 2018. She had met Sandhu in 2009 and the two entered into a relationship. They later moved to France where she gave birth to a daughter. However, she found out that Sandhu was already married upon her return to India earlier this year.

In a letter to the police in October, Kaur had cited a threat to her life. She had even told a senior officer that Sandhu had threatened her when she pressed him for marriage. Police have now revealed that Sandhu arrived in India to plan the murder and fled the country along with his wife on the day of the incident.
