Anti-CAA stir: 15 dead, 263 police personnel injured since Dec 10, says UP top cop

Fifteen casualties have happened and 263 police personnel were injured of which 57 personnel received fire arm injuries: UP IG Praveen Kumar | Photo from ANI

Uttar Pradesh Inspector General (Law and Order) said that anti-Citizenshi Amendment Act (CAA) clashes in Uttar Pradesh, since December 10, have claimed lives of 15 people so far.

IG Praveen Kumar said that 4,500 people have been released after preventive arrest.

"In protest against Citizenship Amendment Act since December 10 in state [Uttar Pradesh], 705 people were arrested and around 4,500 people were released after preventive arrest. Fifteen casualties have happened and 263 police personnel were injured of which 57 personnel received fire arm injuries," UP IG Praveen Kumar said.

Praveen Kumar, IG(Law&Order): In protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct since Dec 10 in state, 705 people arrested&around 4500 people released after preventive arrest.15 casualties have happened,&263 police personnel were injured of which 57 personnel received fire arm injuries pic.twitter.com/L4d7GKDdHG ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 21, 2019

ANTI-CAA STIR: DEATH TOLL MOUNTS TO 15 IN UP VIOLENCE

Fresh cases of stone pelting took place in Uttar Pradesh's Kanpur and Rampur on Saturday against the Citizenship Amendment Act, while 15 people, including an eight-year-old boy, were killed since Thursday in violent agitations in different parts of the state.

"Women and children were used as shields by the protestors," Director General of Police OP Singh said on Saturday maintaining that police did not open fire.

"All the deaths that took place have been in cross firing and this will become clear in postmortem examination," the DGP told reporters.

"We are clear and transparent in this. If anyone died due to our fire we will conduct a judicial enquiry and take action. But nothing happened from our side," the DGP stressed.

Police had no option but to resort to lathi charge to chase them away, he said, adding that tear gas shells for dispersing the mob.

On Friday, four deaths were reported from Meerut district and two each in Kanpur and Bijnor. An eight-year-old boy was killed in a stampede in Varanasi when a violent mob was being chased by policemen. Besides, violence claimed a life each in Sambhal and Firozabad.

While, three persons died in Firozabad, SP Sachindra Patel said.

On Thursday, one person was killed in Lucknow during clashes, officials said, adding so far 218 people have been arrested in the state capital.

(With inputs from ANI and PTI)
