Delhi: Man abducts woman's 2-year-old son to force her into relationship

Accused told cops he has two sons and came to Delhi a year ago | Photo courtesy: Tanseem Haider

On Wednesday in the evening, a PCR call was received regarding kidnapping of a two-year-old baby. A woman over the call told the police that one Shiv Poojan Pandit has abducted her two-year-old son.

She told the police that Shiv was living in her locality -- Najafgarh, New Delhi -- for the past 10 months and hails from Rajasthan.

The police wasted no time and started tracing the mobile number of the accused. The police found Shiv was in Uttar Pradesh's Ghaziabad after which his phone was switched off and further he could not be traced.

The woman told the police that on Thursday, a day after her kid was abducted, she received a call. Shiv had asked her to come to a location. Shiv also asked the woman to not tell it to the police or anybody else.

Police were still on to Shiv's number and again traced his location. This time it was Wair in Bharatpur, Rajasthan.

A police team along with the complainant woman left for the location in Rajasthan. Shiv kept on changing his location within Rajasthan. Police followed him to his latest location -- Shyam Nagar, Sanganer in Jaipur -- and enquired in the area.

The cops showed the photo of Shiv and the abducted kid to the locals and this came out in their favour as they got a lead from this effort.

The police team raided a house in Shyam Vihar, Sanganer. When the police opened the door they saw Shiv holding the woman's abducted son. Shiv tried to throw the baby from the house on the first floor but before he could the police got him under control.

The baby was rescued without any harm.

When Shiv was interrogated, he told the police he came to Delhi a year ago and worked at a dairy. He told the police that he is a Class 6 pass-out and is married having two kids.

He told the police that he learnt that the woman was living alone with her two-year-old son and then he wanted to be friends with the woman. When the woman turned him down, he tried on many occasions to lure her but she did not budge.

Failed in this love endeavour he then decided to abduct the woman's little son so as to pressurise her to give in to a relationship with him.
