Jamia students continue anti-CAA protest in Delhi, share tea with cops

Protesters were also raising slogans of 'Inquilab Zindabad' and 'Azadi' and singing 'Sare Jahan Se Accha' | Photo from PTI

Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University students continued their protest outside the campus against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

A week ago, violent clashes had broken out between Delhi Police and the protesting students.

Over 5,000 protesters which included students along with former students participated in the demonstration.

A group of lawyers were also present during the protest, mostly former students who now practice at Delhi courts.

"I want the Supreme Court to take cognisance of it and dismiss this act. The act is unconstitutional and I am here to support the students of Jamia as I passed out from here," a lawyer, who was protesting outside campus, said.

The protesters were also raising slogans of 'Inquilab Zindabad' and 'Azadi' and singing 'Sare Jahan Se Accha'. Some of the protesters were singing songs, few were playing music, few others had their faces painted with 'No NRC, No CAA'.

What started out as a protest organised by the students saw hundreds from all walks of life joining them which included married women, children and senior citizens throughout the day against the new law.

Participating in the protest, a 16-year-old girl said, "We are not afraid of government or police, if they beat us, we will stand again but allow this act in our country. The Act is to communalise the country and it is against Muslims."

Students also took out a march against the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019.

The protest continued till 6 pm with one side of the road blocked whereas the other side of the road was operational.

Hundreds of policemen were also deployed near Sukhdev Vihar Metro Station who were served tea by the student.

"What happened a few days ago should not happen again. We understand that police is here for us and we will help them to perform their duty," a Jamia student who gave tea to policemen said.
