West Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh says those who damage public property in CAA protests should be shot dead

Protests against CAA have been going on in the country for a while now | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Dilip Kumar said that the protesters who damage public property in agitation should be shot dead He also accused Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee of speaking the language of Pakistan He further said that the students who will march to the state BJP headquarters would not go back on their feet

Bankura: While stirring a controversy, state BJP chief Dilip Ghosh, on Saturday, said that protesters who damage public property during the agitation against Citizenship Amendment Act should be cane-charged or shot dead. He, while addressing a gathering in support of CAA said, "Those who damage public property will be either cane-charged or shot dead.” He further said that the students who "gherao" party office against the Citizenship Amendment Act would not be able to walk back on their feet.

His statement came in response to a plan that was being made by a students’ organization. The plan involved a protest march to the state BJP headquarters to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC). He also said, "If anyone went to our party office even by mistake, they should carry stretchers with them because they won't be able to come back by walking. They will directly go to hospitals.”

The protesters, however, made a change in the plan and marched to Mahajati Sadan instead of the BJP headquarters. Ghosh also took a dig at Mamata Banerjee and said that the West Bengal Chief Minister was speaking the language of Pakistan, considering her anti-CAA stand. He said, "Mamata Banerjee speaks the language of Pakistan. Like Pakistan, which demands UN intervention in everything, Mamata Banerjee has also demanded UN mediation on the matter of CAA.’

This is, however, not the first time that Ghosh has made some controversial remarks. He had, in November this year, said that cows in India produce milk that has gold in it. He had also added that foreign breeds are not "our gaumata" but "aunties"

Protests against CAA have been going on all across the country with the youth of the nation taking to the streets and questioning the motives of the government behind CAA and NRC. For the uninitiated, the Citizenship Amendment Act aims at granting fast track Indian Citizenship to the non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.




