450 Okinawa i-Praise electric scooters booked in 2018

A total of 450 units of the Okinawa i-Praise electric scooters have been booked since order books opened last month. These bookings have been made across tier I, tier II and tier III cities which include Pune, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Nasik, Dehradun, Chandigarh, Ambala, Vishakhapatnam, Mysore, Bulandshahar, Gorakhpur, Warangal, Trichy, and Thrissur among others. The vehicles will be delivered to their respective owners after the launch is concluded in the coming weeks.

Also read: Okinawa Praise has a nearly identical Chinese twin - Report

A top feature on the i-Praise is a detachable battery pack that can be carried away and charged at home or office. About 2 to 3 hours of charge time gives the electric scooter a range of 160 to 180 km.

Other features include Geo-fencing, Virtual Speed limit, Curfew hours, Battery Health Tracker, SOS notifications, Continuous monitoring, Trips, Directions, Maintenance / Insurance Reminder and Vehicle status. The scooter also comes with LED DRLs and a mobile charging port.

Speaking about the i-Praise booking, Jeetender Sharma, MD, Okinawa Scooters said:

We had set an initial target of closing bookings for 500 Okinawa i-Praise units by 15th January 2019 and we are thrilled to announce that we have achieved 90% of this target well ahead of time. A major reason behind these really positive numbers is the fact that the e-scooter is equipped with detachable lithium-ion batteries that compellingly address the issues related to battery charging and the time consumed for the same.

Sharma added:

We have got a good response from Tier – II & Tier – III cities as well, which shows consumers in those cities are looking forward to accepting the advanced technology and attracted towards the detachable battery. Further, the other USPs that make i-Praise “The Intelligent Scooter” such as its long charging range and reduced weight have made it a very appealing buy for consumers at a pan-India level.

Also read: Okinawa Praise vs Hero Photon - spec comparison

Previously, Okinawa had launched the Ridge+ electric scooter in India at INR 64,988 (ex-showroom Delhi) in October 2018. Similar to the i-Praise, the Okinawa Ridge+ too gets a detachable lithium-ion battery. The Ridge+ is claimed to offer a riding range of 120 km on a single charge, while the top speed is rated at 55 km/h.
