Supertanker kidnapped crew released

Crude oil tanker NAVE CONSTELLATION was attacked by pirates at 1830 UTC Dec 3 in vicinity 03 05N 007 06E, Gulf of Guinea, while en route from Bonny Offshore Terminal to India, i.e. in full load, with minimal freeboard. 19 crew, including 18 Indian and 1 Turkish nationalities, were kidnapped.

They’ve been released on Dec 21, all are safe.

Statement from Owners, Navios Maritime Acquisition Corporation and Managers, Anglo-Eastern Tanker Management (Hong Kong).

NAVE CONSTELLATION (HONG KONG) – PIRACY Update/ Crew released.

London, Dec 21, 2019.

Crude oil tanker Nave Constellation (157039 gt, built 2010): Statement from Owners, Navios Maritime Acquisition Corporation and Managers, Anglo-Eastern Tanker Management (Hong Kong).

Following the attack on the Nave Constellation on December 3, some 77 nautical miles off Bonny, Nigeria, by an armed criminal gang, 19 crew members were abducted and held hostage. 18 Indian Nationals and one Turkish National crew member have been held by the gang since that time.

Since the attack, the prime concern has been the safety, well-being and early return of the seafarers taken by the pirate gang. Owners and Managers are now delighted to report that on December 21 all of those taken were released and are now safe and undergoing medical tests and debriefing, following which they will return to their loved ones at home. All those taken and now released are in good spirits and well, given the circumstances of their time in captivity.

Owners and Managers wish to thank all the crew members and their families for their courage and fortitude during this difficult and worrying period; also to thank the Government Agencies, Authorities, Maritime institutions and specialists who have all done so much in securing the release of our much valued seafarers.

It would be much appreciated if the privacy of all those held by the criminal gang for nearly three weeks could be respected as they are, once again, reunited with their families.

No operational details of the kidnap or release will be provided in order not to jeopardise the safety of seafarers still being held elsewhere or to encourage future criminal events and seizures.



December 4, 2019

Supertanker attacked, 19 crew kidnapped UPDATE

Crude oil tanker NAVE CONSTELLATION was attacked by pirates at 1830 UTC Dec 3 in vicinity 03 05N 007 06E, Gulf of Guinea, while en route from Bonny Offshore Terminal to India, i.e. in full load, with minimal freeboard. Reportedly 19 crew, including 18 Indian and 1 Turkish nationalities, were kidnapped. Tanker was under way full speed some 2-3 hours after attack, not clear how, with just few sailors left. As of 1230 UTC Dec 4, tanker was sailing in W direction, full speed.

UPDATE: According to official statement from Navios and Anglo-Eastern Tanker Management (Hong Kong), 7 seamen remained on board and were instructed to take the tanker to a safe position to await the arrival of a security vessel and other support craft.
