Violence over CAA spreads across UP, death toll rises to 15

A vehicle which was torched during a protest against CAA in Kanpur. (Photo: PTI)

Fresh cases of stone-pelting took place in Uttar Pradesh's Kanpur and Rampur on Saturday against the Citizenship Amendment Act, while 15 people, including an eight-year-old boy, have been killed since Thursday in violent agitations in the state.

One person died in Lucknow and one in Sambhal on Thursday, taking the total number of deaths in the state to 15. The police said four persons died in Meerut, two each in Firozabad and Bijnor, one each in Sambhal, Kampur, Varanasi and Lucknow. During the violence over 265 cops have also been injured since Thursday.

The violent protest had taken place across 13 districts which include Saharanpur, Deoband, Shamli, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Ghaziabad, Hapur, Sambhal, Aligarh, Bahraich, Ferozabad, Kanpur, and Bhadohi.

Maintaining that the police did not open fire, Director General of Police OP Singh said, "We are clear and transparent in this. If anyone died due to our fire we will conduct a judicial inquiry and take action. But nothing happened from our side," the DGP stressed.

As many as 705 persons were arrested for committing substantive offences and 4,500 were detained across the state, IG (Law and Order) Praveen Kumar said on Saturday.

Across the state, 405 empty cases of bullets were recovered from the protest sites, which prima facie hints that how unruly elements were firing at the police, Kumar said.

Claiming that outsiders were involved in the violence, the DGP said the presence of members of political parties and of NGOs also could not be ruled out. Internet services were suspended across major cities in Uttar Pradesh, following state government orders.

KANPUR

In Kanpur, anti-CAA protestors on Saturday set Yatimkhana police post on fire and indulged in heavy brickbatting, leading to injury to some people. Police had to lob tear gas shells and use canes to chase them away.

MEERUT

Four dead, 13 FIRs, these figures can easily describe the grave situation in Meerut where protests against CAA turned violent on Friday. Police suspect that the violence was pre-planned as the protestors fired more than 50 rounds at cops.

Illicit weapons including 12 bore, 315 bore were recovered from many of the arrested accused.

A week before the incident, pamphlets of PFI, SDPI were recovered by police. During the violence, public property was damaged. Around 50 policemen were injured.

RAMPUR

Clashes broke out in Rampur between anti-CAA protesters and police, resulting in injuries to several people, including policemen, officials said.

Around 400 to 500 people gathered to protest against the Act amid a bandh call and five of them were taken into preventive custody, they said.

Five protesters were hospitalised and the condition of one of them is critical, District Magistrate Aunjaneya Singh said.
