Days After Yogi Adityanath's Stern Warning, UP Govt Seals Properties Of Alleged Violent Protesters

New Delhi:

Days after Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath issued a stern warning to anti-Citizenship Act protesters indulging in violence, the administration in several districts of the state started proceedings by sealing properties of the accused. On Thursday, Adityanath had said, “In a democracy, you can’t indulge in violence in the name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property.”

The statement from Adityanath came after violent protests erupted in Lucknow and other parts of Uttar Pradesh over the controversial Citizenship Amendment Act.

According to a Times of India report, on Saturday, the administration in Muzaffarnagar sealed 50 shops belonging to alleged rioters. “We have to confirm why these shops were kept closed and mobs had also gathered around the shops. An investigation is on into the matter,” TOI quoted SSP Abhishek Yadav as saying. The shops are located in the Minakshi Chowk and Kachchi Sadak areas of the town.

In Uttar Pradesh, the death count in the violence in the last two days rose to 16. The police in Lucknow cracked down on protesters using tear gas and batons after the agitation against Citizenship Act turned violent in Hazratganj area of old city. According to reports, protesters pelted stones and set many vehicles on fire during the protests.

Angry protesters allegedly set a fire 20 motorcycles, 10 cars, 3 buses and 4 media OB vans around Parivartan Chowk area during protests against "divisive act". UP police chief OP Singh said cops had to fire tear-gas shells to control the situation in Madeyganj area. The protesters had defied the prohibitory orders, put in place across the state, and gathered on the streets of the city.

They were all demanding the Narendra Modi government revoke the Citizenship Amendment Act, that grants Indian citizenship to illegal immigrants from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan on basis of their religion. Immigrants from Muslim community have been excluded from the Act.
