CAA protests: Death toll in UP reaches 18, 705 arrested, over 5,000 under custody

The UP government is also expected to invoke the National Security Act (NSA) against 250 agitators. (Photo: PTI)

As city after city in Uttar Pradesh burns over the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, the death toll in CAA-related protests has now reached 18 in the state. Police said at least 18 people, including an eight-year-old boy, lost their lives in the state since Thursday in the state.

A total of 5,400 people have been taken under custody till now and around 705 have been sent to jail.

The government is also expected to invoke the National Security Act (NSA) against 250 agitators.

On Saturday, clashes broke out between anti-CAA protesters and the police in Rampur, even as protestors set ablaze Yatimkhana police post in Kanpur and indulged in heavy stone-pelting, leading to injuries to many people including policemen, a senior official said on Saturday.

Follow LIVE updates on CAA protests here

Around 269 policemen were reportedly injured in Uttar Pradesh and 57 received bullet injuries. The Uttar Pradesh Police also seized 405 country-made revolvers and pistols.

As protests rage, the UP Police is cracking down on those protesting. Social activists Deepak Kabir alias Deepak Mishra and SR Darpuri are among few prominent names who have been arrested. 60 FIRs have also been registered over various charges including rioting.

Social media under scrutiny

The Uttar Pradesh Police is also keeping strict surveillance over social media with more than 13,000 such social media accounts claimed to be spreading incendiary content having been identified by the administration so far. More than 100 people have been arrested for inciting violence through social media platforms.

On Saturday, many parts of Uttar Pradesh remained under lockdown. Internet was snapped in 14 districts while all schools and colleges were shut for security purposes. Internet services will remain blocked till Monday in 21 districts of the state.

UP Govt sets up teams to confiscate properties

Amid violence, the Yogi Adityanath-led government has also decided to form teams of four members who will be responsible for confiscating the property of identified rioters in Uttar Pradesh. The committee will assess the damage of public and private property done during protests in the state. The move comes after CM Yogi Adityanath announced that those damaging property will not be spared.

According to sources, the UP government has started the process of identifying and sealing properties belonging rioters involved in CAA protests. Sources said, the cost of the damage to public property during riots will be recovered with fines collected from those responsible.

AMU gets back to protesting

After a lull of four days, the Aligarh Muslim University campus again witnessed protests with hundreds of non-teaching staff joining hands with teachers' association to oppose the CAA and police action against students.

The AMU has set up a one-man judicial panel to conduct an internal inquiry into violent incidents that took place on the campus on December 15 and 16.

Police claims protestors died from country-made bullets

They said, 405 empty cartridges, fired by protestors, have been recovered till now. The autopsies of the 18 dead reveal that most of the deceased were hit by these country made bullets.

Director-General of Police OP Singh claimed women and children were used as "shields by the protestors". He maintained that police did not open fire and suggested the deaths were due to cross firing between protestors.

"We are clear and transparent in this. If anyone died due to our fire we will conduct a judicial inquiry and take action. But nothing happened from our side," he said.

Clashes with police were reported after Friday prayers from Bhadohi, Bahraich, Amroha, Farurukhabad, Ghaziabad, Varanasi, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur, Hapur, Hathras, Bulandshahr, Hamirpur and Mahoba districts and cases have been registered.

(-With inputs from agencies)



The committee will assess the damage of public and private property done during protests in the state.
