They killed my father infront of me, says daughter of Mangaluru man killed in CAA protest

Two people -- Nausheen and Jaleel -- died during protests against the amended Citizenship Act in Mangaluru. (Photo: PTI)

Mangaluru resident Jaleel was just outside his home when a bullet hit his left eye and took his life then and there. He had just dropped his children back home after they were left midway by their school van amid intense protests in Mangaluru -- the family of Jaleel, who died in Mangaluru protests recalls the day that changed their life forever.

Jaleel, 42, who worked as a daily wage worker, lived in Bunder area of Mangaluru in Karnataka. He is survived by two children -- Shifani, 14, and Sabil, 10 -- and his wife.

Jaleel's children were on their way home from school when the van they were travelling in left them midway. It was then that Jaleel went to pick them up. When he reached home, police shot him in his left eye. When rushed to a hospital, the doctors declared him "brought dead".

In an interview with India Today TV, Jaleel's daughter blamed the police for killing her father and said, "They killed my father in front of me." The grief-struck teenager could not speak further.

Jaleel's two children -- Shifani, 14, and Sabil, 10 -- and his relative. (Photo: India Today)

Jaleel's family said that he was not even part of the ongoing protests over the Citizenship Amendment Act that turned violent in Mangaluru on December 19.

A family member of Jaleel said that there was no mob of 7,000 to 9,000 people as initially claimed by the police, but only 50 to 100 people. He condemned the police for not being able to manage even a small lot of people.

Jaleel's wife was not in the position to speak and was crying incessantly.

The incident happened on Friday during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act when two died and at least 50 people, including women, who reached the city from Kerala without any identity cards, were detained.

Eight journalists and camera crew of Kerala-based TV channels, who had interviewed relatives of those killed in the firing, were also detained allegedly for not having authorised accreditation card and released later on Friday.
