Mumbai: Teenage mother strangles infant after 14-year-old father raises doubt over paternity

Police said that the girl strangulated the baby after her 14-year-old father repeatedly raised doubt over the paternity of the child. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Teen mother kills infant girl after fight with minor husband Mumbai police say girl has confessed to crime Girl's husband had frequent fight with her over paternity of the child

Mumbai: Police have arrested a 17-year-old girl for allegedly killing her one-month-old baby girl in the city. The body of the infant was found in an auto-rickshaw in Qureshi Nagar area of Bandra (West) in October.

Police said that the girl strangulated the baby after her 14-year-old father repeatedly raised doubts over the paternity of the child.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the minor couple had frequent fights over the issue and on one such occasion, the girl killed the baby in anger.

After the recovery of the baby's body, the police started a probe to identify the child's parents and searched hutments, temples and mosques across Mumbai.

According to Vijayalaxmi Hiremath, senior inspector of Bandra police station, "A beggar told the police that a girl used to come to Tardeo mosque with a child, but he had not seen the girl coming to the place since October."

Police later identified the teen mother and questioned her. Police said that during interrogation, the girl confessed to her crime and was arrested.

In a similar incident reported in April this year from Kancheepuram district of Tamil Nadu, a man murdered his wife after suspecting her of infidelity. The accused was identified as Maharajan, a resident of Soppanacheri near Padappai in Kancheepuram district. Reports suggest that the accused killed his wife in front of his three-year-old son.

The accused engaged in frequent arguments with his wife, suspecting her of infidelity. An officer with Manimangalam police said the couple got into one such fight in the night following which the accused stabbed his wife to death with a kitchen knife and fled the scene of the crime, leaving her in a pool of blood.
