Modi in bid to soothe Muslims

Police beat two men who rode too close to a barricade amid heightened security. afp

Prime Minister Narendra Modi sought to calm India's Muslims as a wave of deadly protests against a new citizenship law put his Hindu nationalist government under pressure like never before.

At least 25 people have died in 10 days of demonstrations and violence after the passing of a law seen as anti-Muslim.

But addressing party supporters in New Delhi, the 69-year-old Modi claimed: "Muslims who are sons of the soil and whose ancestors are the children of mother India need not to worry."

Accusing the opposition Congress party of condoning violence by not condemning it, Modi said opponents were "spreading rumors that all Muslims will be sent to detention camps," but "these stories...are lies, lies and lies."

Most demonstrations have been largely peaceful, but some protesters have hurled rocks and torched vehicles, while heavy-handed police tactics including the storming of a Delhi university last week fueled anger.

Tens of thousands of protesters gathered late on Saturday in the southern city of Hyderabad, other protests were held elsewhere, and more went ahead yesterday.

The law gives religious minorities - Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Christians and Buddhists - from three neighboring Islamic countries an easier path to citizenship.

Modi's government, re-elected in May, says it wants to help "persecuted" minorities in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. But there is no offer to Muslims.

Islamic groups, the opposition and others fear this forms part of a Modi plan to marginalize India's 200 million Muslims and remould the country as a Hindu nation.

Authorities have imposed emergency laws and blocked internet access in a bid to contain the unrest. At least 7,500 people have been detained or arrested for rioting, according to state officials, with 5,000 in Uttar Pradesh state alone where 17 people have been killed.

Two people were shot dead in Karnataka state and six died in Assam in the northeast last week.

In Assam, opponents fear the law will enable large numbers of Bengali-speaking immigrants to settle there. Elsewhere, opponents say the law makes religion a test for citizenship ahead of a nationwide register Modi wants by 2024 to remove "infiltrators."
