En route Delhi to marry her boyfriend, 15-year-old girl held captive and gang-raped in Amritsar

A protest by students in Bengaluru on 19/06/2014 after the rape and murder of two minor girls in Uttar Pradesh (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Amritsar: Punjab police have launched an investigation into the alleged gang-rape of a 15-year-old girl from Ludhiana. The mind-numbing allegations have come to light less than 72 hours after a college student was gang-raped and held captive along with a male friend by over 15 people near Isewal village.

Going by reports, the 15-year-old girl who left home for Delhi to marry her boyfriend who lives there, accidentally reached Amritsar. In her complaint to the police, the minor girl said that she was apprehended by an autorickshaw driver and his friend who forcefully took her to a hotel where they took turns raping her. They then made her board a bus back to Ludhiana and threatened her against reporting the matter to the police.

Come forward, and share your problems with the Punjab Police as the cops in uniform are your friends, not enemies. We are there to protect you, and your rights.#PunjabPolice pic.twitter.com/weSJiY4InR — Punjab Police India (@PunjabPoliceInd) February 2, 2019

However, the survivor lodged an FIR at the Division 4 police station as soon as she reached Ludhiana. Acting on her complaint, police identified the accused as one Sahib Singh and one Baba, both residents of Amritsar.

An official familiar with the matter said that the girl stole Rs 1,500 from her home and boarded a train from Ludhiana on February 3. Unfortunately, the train she boarded took her to Ferozepur instead of Delhi where she had to meet her boyfriend. She then took another train from Ferozepur to Amritsar. She had planned to board a train from Amritsar to Delhi but was intercepted by the accused, said an official familiar with the investigation.

Assistant sub-inspector (ASI), Shamsher Singh told Hindustan Times that a case under sections 376 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with Section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act has been registered against the two accused. He added that the accused are yet to be arrested.

Must Read: Ludhiana gang-rape: Police suspect involvement of 15-16 people, launch manhunt leading to two arrests so far
