Letdown: Not a word by Modi on families

15 people have been killed by police brutality in Delhi and BJP-ruled Uttar Pradesh

“He did not utter a word for the bereaved families. Instead, he urged the BJP supporters in the crowd to chant slogans in support of the policemen who had sacrificed their lives in the line of duty,” Karim, 60, said.

Furqan Karim was hoping against hope that Prime Minister Narendra Modi would condemn the police brutality on the anti-citizenship amendment protesters in Delhi and BJP-ruled Uttar Pradesh, where at least 15 people have been killed.

Several videos circulating on social media show the police mercilessly thrashing protesters in the Delhi locality of Daryaganj on Friday and several parts of Uttar Pradesh.

Karim, speaking on the sidelines of a demonstration against the amended citizenship law in Nizamuddin Bustee on Sunday, said the Prime Minister’s speech earlier in the day had lacked the reassurances that the Muslim community was desperately seeking from him.

In his speech at Ramlila Maidan, Modi merely said: “There have been no talks on the NRC (National Register of Citizens), nor have any rules relating to it been framed.”

Karim said: “We have seen Union home minister Amit Shah claiming in a dozen videos that the government will implement the NRC across the country, and how Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists, Christians and Parsis can get citizenship while the rest are infiltrators who will be thrown out. Whom do we believe? Why didn’t Modi say categorically that there will not be any NRC (update) in the country?”

Munir Abbas, a retired teacher participating in the rally, accused Modi of “doublespeak”.

“Today he said that unity in diversity was India’s speciality, but last week he told an election rally in Jharkhand that those resorting to violence over the citizenship law can be identified from their clothes.”

He cited how thousands of Hindus were participating in the protests. “There are so many Hindus even at this demonstration. Can you identify them by their clothes?” he said.

“How can a Prime Minister stoop so low and speak such divisive language?”

Abbas highlighted the growing climate of hatred against the community. “Why do Muslims with a beard and a skullcap look like enemies to so many? Is this not our country? We are Indians first and then Muslims.”

Manish Pandey, another participant, stressed the spontaneous, popular nature of the demonstrations.

“People from all religions fought for the country’s independence. Even today people from different faiths are protesting against the new law,” he said.

“It’s bizarre that the same people who voted for this government have to show proof of their citizenship now. If that is the case, this government should be declared illegal. Nothing can be more autocratic than this.”

Several speakers — activists and students — at the demonstration explained the implications of the amended citizenship law and the proposed all-India NRC.

“The new law is a diversionary tactic to distract people from the bread-and-butter issues and economic problems. Both the citizenship law and the NRC are anti-Indian,” a student said amid applause.

Senior advocate Sanjay Hedge told the crowd: “All of us fighting this battle are warriors of the Constitution. We oppose this (citizenship) legislation not as Hindus or Muslims but as Indians.”

Lawyer Khalid Saifi said protesting peacefully had now become the most dangerous thing to do in this country.

Central Park in Connaught Place witnessed a demonstration by nearly 200 people, mostly students, doctors and artistes. They sang patriotic songs, recited poems and read out the Preamble to the Constitution.

Ajay Verma, a psychiatrist at AIIMS, sang songs against the contentious law amid loud cheers.

“People hurt in the protests were not given timely treatment. We have arranged for ambulances to provide immediate medical aid to people,” Verma said.
