Drowned in a flood of aliens!

Editor,

We urgently need a strong and satisfactory Land Possession and Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act to replace whatever Land Act we have now. Many times in the past (decades), I, as a responsible citizen, had suggested amendments to the Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1971, through the press, but, no notice or weightage seemed to have been given by all authorities concerned.

Had we given ourselves a strong Land Act since 1971, the invocation of ILP/ILR would not even be thought of. The Inner Line Regulation does not mention that it would solve the issue of influx – let anyone, government or its legal experts challenge this statement.

Yours etc.,

Morning Star Sumer,

Shillong – 2

Access to Internet: A human right

Editor,

The internet is a basic tool in today’s world for conducting any kind of work online. It also facilitates the exercise of freedom of speech and expression, provides access to information, education, public services online and so on. Internet plays a vital role in ensuring that people stay in contact regardless of the physical barriers. Hence access to Internet enables those rights as a part of everyday living. Therefore a complete ban on it would be disproportionate.

The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Frank La Rue submitted a report to the United Nations Human Rights Council acknowledging the pivotal role that the internet plays for exercise of human rights. The Special Rapporteur says the uniqueness and transformative nature of the Internet not only enables individuals to exercise their right to freedom of opinion and expression, but also a range of other human rights and to promote the progress of society as whole.

Vinton G Cerf, the father of the Internet, however pointed out that access to Internet is not a human right. He also stated that technology is an enabler of rights, not a right in itself.In Ahmet Yaldirim vs Turkey, the European court of Human Rights held that Turkey violated Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) when it blocked access to all Google sites. The court also wrote that the right to freedom of expression is two-fold, encompassing not only the right to transmit but also to receive information.

In India, On September 2019, the Kerala High Court held that the right to have access to the internet is part of the fundamental Right to Education as well as the Right to Privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution.

Hence in order exercise and enjoy the right to freedom of speech and expression and other fundamental human rights, the State should ensure that internet access be made available to all and that the state may not unreasonably restrict an individual’s access to internet.

Yours etc.,

Badonkupar Mairom

Law Department

NEHU Shillong

Suppressing voices of protest

Editor,

The Citizenship Amendment Act is a matter of huge concern and a topic for heated debate for the North East Indians. The local news channels’ main focus is this topic only, but if we turn to the national media, especially television, the concern doesn’t seem as big as it should. The protest by the people of the region against the CAA is rarely discussed and the news is nothing more than a few minutes information. The voices of the people of North East India has been ignored again. The national media continues to ignore North East India. The closure of internet in various states has become a menace for people. It has affected especially the students. While the protest is intense in North East India, to the rest of the Indian states, the problem seems much smaller.

Now coming to the Internet. This is a medium of communication and hence a right of the people. Shutting it beyond a certain point will be a violation of our fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression as well as our right to access information under the Right to Information Act. The Government claims that these platforms can be used to spread false information and false news and can ignite violence but banning the internet is not the solution. The solution is to nab the perpetrators who are the reason behind the false news. Common people and students in this examination season have suffered a lot. The continuous bandh and protests along with no Internet has left the students studying outside Meghalaya, stranded in their universities and colleges as they are unaware whether or not exams will take place.

The MDA Government needs to analyse the present situation seriously. If the people have strongly raised their voice against the CAA they have done it for a reason. Our voices and protests need to reach out to the whole country. The nation needs to know what is going on in these states in North East India. As citizens of India, we have some fundamental rights which we use everyday but it seems the current government is trying to take away all these rights slowly. Our Constitution is above everything in this country. It is the soul and armour of our people. Violation of the Constitution is wrong and unacceptable

Yours etc.,

Reakor Shisha Kharkrang,

Nonglyer – 9

Govt’s belated clarification on CAA

Editor,

As the nation burns on account of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and more deaths are reported due to violence over the enactment of the Bill, the BJP has now decided to create an atmosphere in its favour. BJP general secretary Bhupendra Yadav said that the Opposition in the country is working to spread confusion on this Act. He said that RJD, an ally of Congress in Bihar, committed violence during the agitation.

BJP has decided to take on the Opposition parties which have been creating panic among the people on the issue of the Bill. Further, the BJP party has made it clear that some of the political parties are fuelling and fomenting countrywide protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. So, the BJP has decided to hold rallies in every district to clear confusion on CAA. It has also planned to hold more than 250 press conferences in a bid to clear the air on the CAA.

Hence it has become clear that the Government will not retract from its stand on the CAA, but on the other hand it will further campaign in favour of the Act and the party will hold conferences at the grass roots level to educate people about this controversial Bill. So in the coming days, all are going to witness the BJP enlightening the masses on the one side and on the other the Opposition parties continuing their protests across the country.

The Citizen Amendment Act has already claimed more than a dozen lives by now. More clarifications from the Central government on the CAA have started coming- a top government official said on Friday ‘Anyone born in India before July 1, 1987 or whose parents were born before that date are bona fide Indian citizens.’ According to the 2004 amendments of the Citizenship Act, people of the country, except those in Assam, whose one parent is an Indian and neither is an illegal immigrant are also considered Indian citizens. The clarification came amid on-going protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act and several versions of the recently enacted law being circulated on social media. In the case of Assam, the cut-off date for identification of an Indian citizen is 1971.

Thus, the government has taken up measures to combat the Opposition parties’ protest against the CAA. But how much the government would succeed in its effort to enlighten the people is debatable. The appeal to the protesting parties is that the Opposition parties have every right to protest but they cannot destroy public property by being destructive. Political parties must be held responsible for any damage caused to public property.

Yours etc.,

TK Nandanan,

Via email

Corrigendum: The Letter to the Editor, captioned “ILP a regressive legislation (ST Saturday Dec 21, 2019) was written by Larsing Ming Sawyan of Centre Point Group Enterprise
