CAA protests: Nation at ransom

Bengaluru: Protestors display placards and raise slogans demanding withdrawal of Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) during a demonstration, in Bengaluru, on December 22, 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

On December 11, 2019, the Rajya Sabha voted in favour of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 (CAB) and after receiving the President's assent the next day, the draft became an Act. Even while the debates were going on in parliament, there were large-scale disturbances in many parts of the country, especially in the northeast. Curfew was imposed in Shillong on December 12, 2019.

The social media was already on fire "#NotoCab" began trending on Twitter even at this initial stage.

Students of Jamia Millia Islamia were continuing their agitation. But all this changed for the worse and the movement took an ugly turn on December 15 and widespread violence ensued. This was compounded by the fact that there was a deluge of fake news and deep fake news, reinforced by malicious rumours that were trending on social media. It was in the backdrop of this large-scale vandalism and arson that the Delhi Police had to, per force intervene and contain the situation with exemplary restraint and minimum use of force. But a section of the faculty and students accused the police of entering the campus without the permission of the Vice-Chancellor, little realising that the question of permission does not arise in the face of this extreme violence and lawlessness.

The University authorities themselves acknowledged, that a large number of outsiders managed to enter the University and indulged in criminal activities. It is also alleged that almost 750 fake identity cards were in possession of undesirable elements, who misused them for gaining entry into the campus. Unfortunately, there was and is a very strong lobby that condemned the role of the police and its entry into the campus. It is to be noted that sections 41, 46, 47 and 48 of The Criminal Procedure Code empowers the police to enter any place where there is a legitimate requirement and here no prior permission from any quarter is required. Therefore the demand of the Vice-Chancellor to lodge an FIR against the police for this “transgression”, is ill-founded, to say the least.

The disturbances spread to West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka and elsewhere. There were signature campaigns not only in India but abroad, notably in the USA and UK.

The simultaneous agitations at multiple locations in the country and elsewhere give the impression that the grievances have been inflamed by special interest groups, with ulterior selfish motives, in total disregard to the national interest, who seem to be hell-bent on fishing in troubled waters. There is one Chief Minister who demanded a UN referendum! This is the same leader who propped up welcome arches to welcome illegal Rohingyas, even when they are known to be a serious threat to national security. Another senior politician questions the power of the government to impose Section 144 CrPC. “Where ignorance is bliss, this is folly to be wise”. There seems to be a mad rush to quote the law incorrectly as also to spin a narrative of falsehood, accusing the police and the administration of crimes that they have not committed. Rumour mongering and falsehood have become the order of the day.

Uttar Pradesh, till date, has reported 16 casualties and gunshot injuries to 56 police personnel. Here also the police are accused of using disproportionate force, especially in Kanpur. Incidentally, this is the same district where a sub-Divisional Magistrate was killed by automatic gunfire in a riot a few years ago. Therefore, handling these disturbances with a firm hand is imperative. By a conservative estimate, the government has lost Rs 3.6 lakh in GST alone, not to mention thousands of crores lost in arson and man-hours wasted by a derailed society.

There is a negative diplomatic fallout to these disturbances too. The UN is reportedly “concerned” over the action taken against the protesters and has also said CAA is fundamentally discriminatory. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe cancelled his visit to India. The United States and the UK have issued a travel advisory to their citizens on travel to India. Pakistan PM Imran Khan, not surprisingly, is indulging in his characteristic sabre rattling, and an ill-informed Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Bin Mohamad has chosen to criticise India, on what is purely an internal matter.

In the wake of these widespread agitations, there is an urgent need to audit the strengths and weaknesses of the police department and the administration. A large number of vacancies of almost 30% in the police, need to be filled up on a war footing, especially those pertaining to women police officers. We must upgrade the technology, weapons and anti-riot equipment of the police department. Some notable relevant areas are the drone technology, face recognition technology-they can indeed be game-changers in such situations. Israel has very effective non-lethal riot control system, that is known as skunk gun systems, which throws putrid fluids on the agitators without harming them but the offensive smell and the dyes help the police and the law enforcement agencies to arrest the culprits later.

There is a wide choice of stun guns that can be put to optimum use when dealing with such hostile mobs. There is no substitute for advanced intelligence, which appears to be sadly lacking in several places. The Government had painstakingly formulated the Internal Security Scheme for every district which was to be rehearsed every month. Unfortunately, this seems to have lapsed into indifference, consequently, the speed, efficiency and response time of the police were found missing in many locations. The traditional community outreach programmes like the mohalla and the district peace committee were either non-existent or dysfunctional. They need to be reconstituted, activated to serve as a bridge between the community and the administration. This also doubles up as an excellent source of quality intelligence.

The law must be unsparing to the instigators, ringleaders and hardcore rioters who have done irreparable damage to society and have also been instrumental in causing huge economic loss to the nation. There are specific laws to penalise such elements. Special mention must be made of Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act 1984 and the Supreme Court judgement of October 1, 2018, on the subject. Sections 15 and 15-A, of The Police Act of 1861 authorise the Government to recover the cost of Police deployment from the aggressors. The provisions of the UP Gangsters Act and MACOCA can also be invoked as per evidence and requirement.

The existing situation is undoubtedly serious and those in high position need to enforce the rule of law without fear or favour with promptness, impartiality and honesty. Display of any bias would be most counter-productive.

We, as a nation, have seen many challenging situations and there is no doubt that the nation will overcome this crisis as well. India respects the dignity and sanctity of all religions and communities and any difference that may be existing today is certainly not big or relevant enough to divide the nation.

Peace and lasting peace would be the ultimate solution. After all, inclusiveness is our backbone.

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
