Delhi government promises Rs 10 lakh as compensation to the next of kin of those killed in Kirari fire

Fire broke out in Delhi's Kirari on Monday | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Delhi government has promised a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the kin of people who died in the Karari fire o n Monday Nine people including three children have lost their lives during the incident The building comprised of a godown for clothes and three residential floors

New Delhi: The Delhi government has announced a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the next of kin of those who were killed in the fire that broke out in a three-storey residential-cum-commercial building in outer Delhi’s Kirari area a little after midnight on Monday. According to the Delhi fire service, at least nine people, including three children, were killed in the incident.

The service also said that eight fire tenders were rushed to the spot after a call was received at about 12:30 AM. The ground floor of the building had been converted into a godown for clothes while the rest of the floors were residential. However, it was also said that no safety equipment was found in the building.

According to the officials, the fire that could be brought under control around 3:50 AM, erupted because after a cylinder blast on the second floor that led to the partial collapse of the building. However, it was said that the actual cause of the fire is being investigated.

He further confirmed multiple deaths in connection with the incident. The deceased have been identified as Ram Chandra Jha (65), Sudariya Devi (58), Sanju Jha (36), and Uday Chaudhary (33) and his wife Muskan (26), their children Anjali (10), Adarsh (seven) and Tulsi (six months). The officials were also able to successfully rescue three people who have been identified as Pooja (24) and her daughters Aaradhya (three) and Saumya (10).

The incident came days after 43 people were killed in a massive fire in a four-storey building converted to a factory, housing illegal manufacturing units in north Delhi's congested Anaj Mandi area on December 8. In a development that has now come up in the case, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate court had sent the factory owner Rehan, manager Furkan and co-owner Mohd Sohail to judicial custody till 4th January 2020.
