India’s main opposition party to stage protest against new citizenship law - National

Send this page to someone via email

India‘s main opposition party will stage a silent protest in the capital on Monday against a contentious new citizenship law, a day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi defended the legislation at a rally in New Delhi and accused the opposition of pushing the country into a “fear psychosis.”

The protest, led by Congress party chief Sonia Gandhi, comes at a time when tens and thousands of demonstrators have taken to India’s streets to call for the revocation of the law, which critics say is the latest effort by Modi’s government to marginalize the country’s 200 million Muslims.

The party’s former president Rahul Gandhi urged young people in New Delhi to join the protest at Raj Ghat, a memorial dedicated to Mahatma Gandhi.

2:25 Protesters continue to rally across India over citizenship bill Protesters continue to rally across India over citizenship bill – Dec 22, 2019

Story continues below advertisement

“It’s not good enough just to feel Indian. At times like these it’s critical to show that you’re Indian & won’t allow to be destroyed by hatred,” Gandhi tweeted.

Twenty-three people have been killed nationwide since the citizenship law was passed in Parliament earlier this month in protests that represent the first major roadblock for Modi’s Hindu nationalist agenda since his party’s landslide reelection last spring.

Most of the deaths have occurred in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, where 20 per cent of the state’s 200 million people are Muslim.

1:06 Protests escalate in India over citizenship law that’s left several dead and 1,500 arrested Protests escalate in India over citizenship law that’s left several dead and 1,500 arrested – Dec 21, 2019

Police also resorted to a crackdown of sorts in the state by seizing some shops in the town of Muzaffarnagar. The crackdown, which began Sunday, came after the state’s chief minister, Yogi Adityanath, vowed Friday to “take revenge” against people who had damaged public property during the protests by seizing their assets.

Story continues below advertisement

The Uttar Pradesh government’s spokesman, Shalabh Mani Tripathi, said authorities were “working as per directives of the Supreme Court, which has asked that the damages of public property should be compensated by rioters.”

He did not say how the owners of the shops were identified as offenders.

READ MORE: Death toll rises to 23 as India citizenship bill protests continue

Authorities across India have taken a hard-line approach to quell the protests. They’ve evoked a British colonial-era law banning public gatherings, and internet access has been blocked at times in some states. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has asked broadcasters across the country to refrain from using content that could inflame further violence.

The communication shutdown has mostly affected New Delhi, the eastern state of West Bengal, the northern city of Aligarh and the entire northeastern state of Assam.

Undeterred, protesters have continued to rally throughout the country.

2:32 Police, protesters clash as demonstrations continue against India citizenship law Police, protesters clash as demonstrations continue against India citizenship law – Dec 20, 2019

The new law allows Hindus, Christians and other religious minorities who are in India illegally to become citizens if they can show they were persecuted because of their religion in Muslim-majority Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It does not apply to Muslims.

Story continues below advertisement

Protests against the law come amid an ongoing crackdown in Muslim-majority Kashmir, the restive Himalayan region stripped of its semi-autonomous status and demoted from a state into a federal territory in August.

The demonstrations also follow a contentious process in Assam meant to weed out foreigners living in the country illegally. Nearly 2 million people, about half Hindu and half Muslim, were excluded from an official list of citizens — called the National Register of Citizens, or NRC — and have been asked to prove their citizenship or else be considered foreign.

India is building a detention centre for some of the tens of thousands of people who the courts are expected to ultimately determine have entered illegally. Modi’s interior minister, Amit Shah, has pledged to roll out the process nationwide.

On Sunday, Modi denied the existence of a detention centre, accusing the Congress party of spreading fear that Indian Muslims would be jailed there. He also contradicted Shah, saying that there had been no discussion yet of whether to execute a nationwide citizens registry.

The protests against the law began in Assam, the centre of a decades-old movement against migrants, before spreading to predominantly Muslim universities and then nationwide.

Advertisement
