'If religion creates divide...' Sena's Sanjay Raut quotes Martin Luther King in slamming govt on CAA

Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Sanjay Raut slammed the government over anti-CAA stir quoting Martin Luther King Jr. Shiv Sena voted in favour of CAB in Lok Sabha and staged a walkout in Rajya Sabha when it was introduced there Anti-CAA-NRC protests continue in many parts of the country after the contentious Bill was cleared by Parliament

New Delhi: Shiv Sena’s Sanjay Raut on Monday launched a veiled attack at the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) at Centre using the words of American civil rights movement leader Martin Luther King Jr.

"If politics creates a religious divide, then one should know that the country is being run by the wrong people," Raut tweeted, attributing the comment to the late American leader.

Raut’s words in the background of violent anti-CAA-NRC protests in the country assume significance as the party earlier supported the government while the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was put to vote in Parliament.

The ruling BJP is facing flak in various states as debates continue over the validity of the newly-enacted citizenship law and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) process in the country.

Shiv Sena supported the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, when it was introduced in Lok Sabha and staged a walkout in the upper house of the Parliament when the contentious legislation was put to a mandatory vote before the Presidential assent.

But Shiv Sena changed the tact after protests began across the nation in the aftermath of police entering Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and attacking the students staging demonstrations.

Referring to students' protest over CAA, Raut had earlier said that the government should listen and understand the concerns of the students as the “whole country was burning”.

Raut urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to call an all-party meet to discuss the matter. Raut also remarked on Home Minister Amit Shah’s comments on CAA that some changes might be made to it.

This means that there are some mistakes in this law", Shiv Sena leader asserted.

"If this would have been done before then there would have been no violence," he said earlier.

Sanjay Raut played a key role in forging an alliance of the Congress and the Shiv Sena in Maharashtra after the Sena walked out of its 30-year-old alliance with the BJP.


