Ramaswamy, Wadkar keep Vidarbha afloat

IRANI TROPHY 2019

Ramaswamy, Wadkar keep Vidarbha afloat

by Cricbuzz Staff • Published on

Representational Image © Getty

Sanjay Ramaswamy and Akshay Wadkar led Vidarbha's reply by striking fifties on the second day of Irani Trophy clash against Rest of India in Nagpur on Wednesday (February 13). Faiz Fazal and Ramaswamy started the day on a cautious note and raised the fifty-run opening partnership. Four balls after the first drinks break, Vidarbha's captain succumbed to an umpiring howler as Umpire Nandan ruled him out caught-behind for 27.

Atharwa Taide walked in at No. 3 and steadied the ship for a while before Rahul Chahar trapped him in front for 15. Ganesh Satish and Ramaswamy eased the nerves in the Vidarbha camp by ensuring there were no more damages and capped off the 40-over first session.

Both batsmen consolidated making hay on a pitch that had softened post lunch and stitched together a 62-run stand. But the well-set Ramaswamy ended up gifting his wicket away to Dharmendrasinh Jadeja as he chipped a tossed up delivery straight to cover.

Krishnappa Gowtham got into the act and removed Mohit Kale for just 1 which left Vidarbha in a tricky position at that stage. In the same over, while trying to stop a ball, Gowtham injured his bowling shoulder and sustained a serious blow which saw him walking off the field. Rest of India continued to chip away at the wickets with Jadeja befuddling Satish with an arm-ball and caught him plumb in front as Vidarbha sank to 168 for five at Tea.

Wadkar and Aditya Sarwate added 68 runs for the sixth wicket and just when it seemed like they were getting into the groove, Ankit Rajpoot scalped the latter for 18 which brought things in balance. Vidarbha's wicket-keeper batsman brought up his fifty and in the company of Akshay Karnewar lifted the spirits in the home team's camp by stretching their total to 245 for six at stumps with the Ranji champions still 85 runs adrift of Rest of India's total.

Brief scores: Vidarbha 245/6 (Sanjay Ramaswamy 65, Akshay Wadkar 50*; Krishnappa Gowtham 2-33, Dharmendrasinh Jadeja 2-66) trail ROI 330 by 85 runs.

© Cricbuzz

TAGS

RELATED STORIES
