In Uttar Pradesh, 19-Year-Old Hit By Bullet Waits To Get Voice Back, Many Battling For Life

After protests were met with violence in Yogi Adityanath-ruled Uttar Pradesh, leaving a horrendous sight behind, many hit by bullets are struggling for life in hospitals.

Among those who were killed in violence during anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in the state, was an eight-year-old who had gone out to play with friends when a lathicharge set off by police led to a stampede and the boy was trampled in the crowd.

Most of those injured in the anti-CAA protests are admitted to different wards of Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial (LLRM) Medical College in Meerut.

Victims hail from Meerut, Muzaffarnagar, Bijnor, Amroha and even Rampur.

AFP

With blood on the clothes and memories of the gory protests can’t be erased now. Their family and friends are wishing for speedy recovery.

Sameer Ahmed, 19, from Muzaffarnagar, is waiting to get his voice back. A bullet passed through his neck, close to his larynx, leading to formation of an edema.

“We were having lunch at our home when Sameer went outside to see what the chaos was all about, and next what we heard was that he had got shot in the neck. He was first admitted to a government hospital in Muzaffarnagar and later referred to Meerut. We haven’t heard a word from him since Friday afternoon, because he is unable to speak. Only he can tell what went wrong and we are waiting for him to say something,” an inconsolable Tanveer Ahmed, Sameer’s elder brother, told The Times Of India.

AFP

Among those injured is policeman VD Shukla from Amethi is an RAF sub-inspector posted in Meerut. He claimed to have received a bullet in his right leg during the protests but has chosen not to tell his family about it. “They would then try to travel to Meerut in these troubled times, which I do not want,” Shukla said.

Samad, 18, was admitted to the hospital with a bullet lodged in his chest. He said he was only returning from work when police open fired at a crowd behind which he was walking. He is now admitted to a higher centre in Delhi.

Reuters

A few patients are still treated in the emergency ward while many have been referred to higher centres in Delhi. Some are battling for their lives in the ICU.

Sana, 21, is waiting outside the ICU for her husband Salman, 23, to respond to the medicines and treatment. “He had gone to offer prayers at a nearby mosque and had to return after purchasing milk for our eight-month-old daughter. I called him up after the namaz got over and he said that he was on his way to purchase some milk. After that, all my calls went unanswered. Later, we got a call from him in a dull voice where he said he was shot in the stomach,” Sana said.

Protests took a violent turn in Uttar Pradesh with videos emerging of police firing on the crowd. The state has not yet returned to normalcy.
