Modi trying to suppress voice of Bharat Mata by shooting students: Rahul Gandhi at Satyagraha protest

Congress staged a "satyagraha" protest against the Citizenship Act and NRC at Rajghat on Monday in which Rahul Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi and others read the Preamble to the Constitution. At the event, Rahul Gandhi launched an attack on Prime Minister Modi saying he has been spreading hate and suppressing the voices of students and "Bharat Mata".

"Narendra Modi ji, when you get students shot by bullets and when you get them lathicharged, or when you threaten the journalists, then you try to suppress the voice of the country," said Rahul Gandhi.

"This country has a voice, the Preamble that we read is the voice of our people and that voice fought against the Britishers with love and peace and without stepping back. That voice gave us jobs, airports, dams and without that voice the country will not exist. Enemies of the country are trying their best to suppress that voice, they tried to wreck the economy but people fought against them," said Rahul Gandhi at the protest on Monday.

Attacking PM Modi over the protests and police action on students, Rahul Gandhi said, "What our enemies couldn't do, Narendra Modi is trying to do it now. When u suppress the judiciary, shoot students and lathicharge them and try to silence journalists, small traders, industrialists, you are silencing the country's voice."

"It is not Congress you are fighting against but against the country. Modiji you must give an answer to why is our growth rate only 4 per cent. You must tell the youth why there are no jobs in this country and why are you trying to sow the seeds of enmity," said Rahul Gandhi.

Gandhi also said Modi's organisation had taught him how to break the country and spread hatred, and he was "number one in doing so" and the entire country knew that.

The Congress leader was addressing the gathering at the "Satyagraha for Unity", a protest rally organised against the amended Citizenship Act and the proposed countrywide National Register of Citizens (NRC) as well as for expressing solidarity with the youth and students protesting against it.

"The country will not let you attack the Constitution, suppress the voice of 'Bharat Mata'," Rahul Gandhi said, while taking a dig at Modi.

Stating that the country was like a voice, Gandhi said the Preamble to the Constitution was read at the "Satyagraha for Unity" rally and it was the voice of the people.

"That voice fought against the British and made them flee the country and the same voice made the country's economy stand and without that voice, India cannot be," he added.

Hitting out at Modi for saying that those protesting on the streets against the CAA could be identified by their clothes, Gandhi said, "When it comes to clothes, the entire nation knows you because of your clothes. It was you who had worn the suit worth Rs two crore and not the people of the country."

"The voice of Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians is in the Constitution and you cannot attack it. India will stop you," he said.

Gandhi said the voice at the "Satyagraha" was not that of the Congress party, but of the entire country, as he thanked people for participating in the protest.
