AIIMS doctors conduct second autopsies on four Cyberabad rape-and-murder accused

The entire postmortem examination (PME) was videographed following the instructions of the court. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights AIIMS doctors conduct re-postmortems on four Cyberabad rape and murder accused The each of the autopsies was entirely videographed on Telangana HC's order The four accused were killed in an alleged gunbattle with the Cyberabad police on December 6 after the accused allegedly attempted to attack the police and escape

Hyderabad: Following the directions of the Telangana High Court, a team of doctors from the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) conducted the second postmortem on each of the four accused in the rape and murder case of Cyberabad veterinary doctor. The first autopsy of each of the four accused was earlier performed at the Gandhi Hospital in Hyderabad Monday.

The four accused were killed in an alleged encounter by Cyberabad police. The team of AIIMS doctors was led by Dr Sudhir Gupta, head of Forensics at AIIMS. Other doctors in the AIIMS team included Dr Abhishek Yadav and Dr Adarsh Kumar.

According to a report in Indian Express, the entire postmortem examination (PME) of each of the bodies was video-graphed following the instructions of the court. The report of the PME will be submitted to the high court in a sealed cover.

Earlier, the high court had ordered that the bodies be preserved at the Gandhi hospital mortuary following the encounter. After the autopsy, the bodies of the four men were handed over to their families.

"We had followed all the protocols laid down by the honourable high court for the second post-portmen examination. The entire autopsy was video-graphed and the documentation was completed on the spot," the report quoted Superintendent of Gandhi Hospital, Dr P Shravan Kumar as saying.

The team of doctors from AIIMS also met the families of the four accused. Heavy police deployment was ensured outside the hospital's mortuary since the morning. Twelve other autopsies were kept on hold due to the sensitive nature of the postmortems of the accused.

On November 27, Disha (name changed) - the 27-year-old veterinary doctor was raped and burnt allegedly by four men in Chatanpally area of Cyberabad in Ranga Reddy district of Telangana.

After the woman's brutal murder, the four accused were killed at the same spot when the police took them for a crime reconstruction scene. The police claimed that they were killed in a shootout after the accused attacked the police team.

Earlier, the Supreme Court announced a 2-judge panel to probe the alleged encounter of the accused. The panel will be headed by former apex court judge VS Sirpurkar.


