9 days after gangster’s escape, two accused arrested

Ludhiana: Nine days after gangster Bhagwan Singh Gaggi was freed by five assailants outside the Moonak court complex by opening fire at a police team, the Ludhiana police have arrested two accused late on Sunday. The police have also seized a .32-bore pistol with seven cartridges and one country-made revolver with five cartridges from their possession. According to cops, the accused were planning to snatch a car at gunpoint in Ludhiana to further use it in another crime, however, the police manage to nab them before that.

The arrested accused have been identified as Harsimran Singh (24), who is a driver, and Inderjit Singh (30),who runs a grocery store. Both are residents of Moga. Their absconding accomplices are Manjeet Singh and Jabrang Singh, also of Moga, and one unidentified accomplice. The accused were arrested from the back side of a bus stop at Agar Nagar, Block-B, near Ferozepur road.

According to police, a PCR team noticed the accused and found their activities suspicious. Thereafter, the Sarabha Nagar police reached there and nabbed them.

The deputy commissioner of police, investigation, Simratpal Singh Dhindsa said that, “The accused are hardcore criminals and have many criminal cases against them. On December 12, the accused had stolen a Maruti Suzuki Brezza from Moga and the next day they used that car to free gangster Gaggi from outside the court complex. The accused opened fire at police team when they were heading towards the car after Gaggi’s court hearing. In that incident one constable Charanjit Singh had also sustained bullet injury.

Dhindsa added that the accused on Sunday night were planning to snatch another car in the city. Further, they were supposed to use that car to attack their rival in Moga. After Moonak incident the Brezza was recovered by police form near a canal in Haryana’s Tohana. On being asked that Gaggi was their gang leader, the DCP added that the accused were from different gangs and their gang leaders were lodged in jails. It is suspected that the accused freed Gaggi on the order of their gang leader.

Meanwhile, the Sarabha Nagar police have registered a case under Section 399 (making preparation to commit dacoity) and 402 (assembling for purpose of committing dacoity) of the IPC against the five accused.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
