Trophy hunter beams for photo next to rare goat he paid $110,000 to kill

An American trophy hunter reportedly paid $110,000 to kill a rare mountain goat on a trip to Pakistan.

Bryan Harlan posed in a picture with the Astore markhor that he shot on Tuesday in the northern Himalayan region of Bilgit-Baltistan.

The Astore markhor is the official national animal of Pakistan – and their population has been diminishing due to deforestation, military activities, and unregulated trophy hunting.

The Astore markhor is the national animal of Pakistan and has been listed as ‘endangered’ in the past (Picture: Twitter )

An American hunter Bryan Kinsel Harlan successfully hunted 41 inches flared-horned markhor in Sassi-Harmosh Community Conservation Area of Gilgit Baltistan ?? by paying US$110,000 as permit fee. pic.twitter.com/pkr52L2uPl — aazizwahidi (@aazizwahidi) February 5, 2019

‘It was an easy and close shot. I am pleased to take this trophy,’ Harlan told Pakistani media.

Video of Harlan’s hunting trip shows him climbing a cliff and shooting the goat, then celebrating with a round of high-fives.

Another video shows him thanking the people of Pakistan who he said ‘welcomed (him) with open arms.’

#American trophy hunter #Bryan_Kinsel_Harlan says Pakistan is a safe place for international tourists. He says media is negatively portraying Pakistan. “#Mexico is more dangerous than Pakistan,” Harlan comments.l #GilgitBaltistan #Pakistan pic.twitter.com/xSStRtldOL — Gilgit-Baltistan ?? (@loving_gb) February 8, 2019

‘This is a perfect example of hunters and villagers coming together for a common goal of game conservation,’ he said, although the photo of him posing with the animal has sparked some backlash.

‘A couple of years ago an American hunter paid lots of dollars to hunt a markhor – this month again 2 hunters (one American & another Swiss) have arrived in Chitral to hunt this beautiful animal – what a complete shame that we facilitate this slaughter,’ one Pakistani journalist tweeted.

Body-cam footage captures moment woman arrested for killing boxer boyfriend

‘Bryan Harlan paid $110,000 to stalk and kill a markhor goat, the national animal of Pakistan. There are only 5700 of them on the planet! F this guy,’ tweeted another user.

Pakistani authorities told the Washington Post that only big-spending hunters, like Harlan, are permitted to kill markhors in the norther part of the country for fears of extinction.

Currently, there are five sanctuaries in India to protect the markhors, who are able to roam freely and procreate.

This is so far the highest permit fee offered in the country. The foreign hunter managed to hunt a 41-inch Markhor trophy, which is considered a good-sized trophy. (Picture: Facebook/ Abdullah Khalid)

The last official census of markors was conducted in 2011 and it found that there were only about 2,500 left in the region.

Local poachers are banned from killing any animals, but foreign hunters are permitted to hunt 12 male goats in ‘community conservation areas.’

Approximately 80 percent of the income made off foreign hunters reportedly goes to ‘isolated residents’ who live in the goat’s habitat. The other 20 percent goes to the Pakistani government.
