Khurda doctor regains sense, cops plan to record statement

BHUBANESWAR: Paediatrician Manas Ranjan Das, who was shot at by an unidentified miscreant in his clinic at Khurda on December 15, is out of danger and likely to give his statement to the police on Tuesday. Druggist Krushna Chandra Sahoo, 42, who also suffered bullet injury near his abdomen, succumbed during treatment on December 16.Das, 61, who was hit by two bullets near chest, had been extremely critical in the ICU of a private hospital for last one week.Das’ recovery has brought relief for the probe agency that has been struggling to make any headway in the investigation. Police have so far failed to identify the attacker, who had his face covered with a monkey cap, and establish the motive behind the crime. Police strongly suspect involvement of a contract killer in the offence.“We are pinning hope on the doctor ’s statement. Since doctors today (Monday) informed us that Das is out of danger, we are planning to record his statement in the hospital on Tuesday. Doctors told us that he has regained consciousness and can speak,” Khurda superintendent of police Ajay Pratap Swain said.Swain is hopeful that the police may get vital clue from doctor Das whether he had previous enmity or professional rivalry with anyone. “We are yet to get any clue on the motive behind the crime. The doctor’s wife and family members said he did not have any hostility with anyone,” Swain said.Police said Das is a retired government doctor and was last posted in a government hospital at Boudh . Das, who stays with his family at Madhusudan Nagar in Bhubaneswar, had started his own clinic at Khurda town last year. Police sources said everyday Das travels to his clinic by road from Bhubaneswar and returns. The doctor had allowed Sahoo, a pharmacist, to open a medicine store at the clinic.On December 15 evening, the unidentified masked man entered Das’ chamber and fired two rounds on him from close range. While returning, the miscreant opened fire on Sahoo, who was trying to overpower him. Police have sent the bullets that were fired at Das and Sahoo for ballistic test to the State Forensic Science Laboratory.
