Forest department relies on trap cameras to track down leopard in Mumbai's SEEPZ

The leopard has been spotted in SEEPZ four times in the last week (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights SEEPZ is an industrial area located in Mumbai's Andheri (East) The leopard has been spotted in SEEPZ four times in the last week It attacked two dogs on December 9, who managed to get away despite severe injuries

Mumbai: Officials with the forest department have set up camera traps and closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras in Santacruz Electronic Export Processing Zone (SEEPZ), an industrial area in Andheri (East). This is being done to capture a leopard that has been spotted in the area four times in the past seven days.

On December 9, the leopard was seen attacking a dog in a compound near the Telecom Power gate opposite Seepz. Captured on CCTV camera, a video of the incident shows the predator slowly moving towards the dog who is sleeping on the gate of the compound. The leonine can be seen pouncing on the dog and grabbing the latter by its scruff. Fortunately, the dog manages to escape.

The same leopard attacked another dog in the area on the same night. Both the dogs were treated for injuries. According to a security guard who spotted the leopard attacking the dog, he made a noise by thumping his stick from inside the compound which scared the big cat away.

In one such incident where it was seen in the days following the incident, a security guard spotted the leopard sitting on a boundary wall in the Mahakali Caves area. Forest rangers were alerted and rushed for the spot but could not reach the spot in time.

Leopard sightings are not uncommon in parts of Maharashtra. In fact, the forest department in Dahanu even put up boards along the Mumbai-Ahmedabad National Highway 8 just this month. The purpose of these boards is to warn motorists to slow down. An official with the forest department said that as many as 20 leopards have been run over by speeding vehicles along the Palghar-Vasai stretch since 2004. These boards have been put up at identified spots where leopards to cross the road. Similar accidents have been reported on the Kalyan-Ahmednagar highway.
