Man thrashed and tonsured for social media post about Uddhav

medical firm

Hiramani Tiwari

Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray

Jallianwala Bagh massacre

33-year-old claims Sena supporters assaulted him; party says it’s ascertaining facts.A 33-year-oldemployee,, from Wadala was thrashed, and his head tonsured, allegedly by a group of local Shiv Sena supporters on Sunday. The assaulters were angry at him for putting up a derogatory reference toon one of his social media accounts.According to Tiwari’s statement given to the Wadala Truck Terminal police on Monday, his reference to Thackeray was made when he put up a post to criticise the chief minister’s comment on Delhi Police’s action against certain students protesting the Citizenship Amendment Act at the Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) University.On December 17, Thackeray had said, “The way police opened fire on students by forcefully entering (JMI) compound, it appeared like the.”According to Tiwari’s statement to the police, he had put up the post on his social media account after someone sent that to him but he does not know who the author was. According to Tiwari, he started getting threats for the post after which he deleted it on Friday.Two days later, on Sunday, a few persons reached his Wadala (East) residence, asking him to come out for a talk. When Tiwari came out of his home, around 20 people were gathered at a spot near a temple in Shantinagar. Tiwari was allegedly beaten up by the alleged Sena supporters even as one of them tonsured the front half of his head. Someone else made a video-recording of the entire proceeding, according to Tiwari’s statement to the police.“I want the police take action against those who attacked me as I was just airing my view. Because of the thrashing, my ear got injured and I was experiencing pain,” Tiwari told media. Tiwari said his attackers could have taken legal action against him for the post instead of taking law into their hands. Tiwari claimed he was earlier with a right-wing outfit.According to Wadala Truck Terminal police station’s senior police inspector Jitendra Bhobe, the police received complaints from Tiwari as well as those who allegedly mistreated him.A senior Shiv Sena functionary said that the party was investigating the matter. “We are still verifying if they were Shiv Sainiks. They were not office-bearers of the party. The police are investigating the case. The police will take action as per the law. The party will take action as per its disciplinary procedure,” the Sena functionary said.
