Bijnor: Father of infant killed in police firing during CAA protest, grieving family deprived of funeral rites

Anas, who used to serve coffee and other beverages in various events and social functions, had no criminal record. (Photo: Munish Pandey/India Today)

The Citizenship Amendment Act has left many parts of the country burning. While some protesters have indulged in violence, others question the violence caused by the government machinery.

Until Friday, Nehtaur, a small town in UP's Bijnor, was peaceful but around 1:15 pm the situation dramatically changed after the Friday prayers in the locality's mosque. A local Hamid Salmani told India Today TV, "People had just left from the mosque and the police asked them to head home. They were leaving but suddenly an argument erupted between a local and a policeman and the situation got out of control."

In a confrontation between police and protesters, 21-year-old Anas and 20-year-old Suleiman were hit by bullets fired by UP Police. The two were taken to a local hospital where Anas was declared dead on arrival and Suleiman succumbed to his injuries while undergoing treatment.

Anas, whose son is only 7-months-old, had just stepped out of his home to get milk for his son but was shot dead by the police.

His grieving father Arshad Hussain said, "He had just come home when his wife asked him to get milk for their son. He immediately left for his uncle's place which is barely 50 meters away and suddenly people started saying that a youngster in black coat has been shot by the police. I rushed and saw my Anas lying on the street amid police firing. I dragged him and took to him to the hospital but it was too late."

Bijnor resident Arshad Hussain's son Anas was killed in police firing over CAA protests. (Photo: Munish Pandey/India Today)

Anas, who used to serve coffee and other beverages in various events and social functions, had no criminal record. The police did not even allow the grieving family to perform his last rites in their native town. The family said that the police took the body for autopsy and forced them to bury their son at a different cemetery.

A family grieves. (Photo: Munish Pandey/India Today)

"The entire night and afternoon, I was begging the police to return his body but they refused, saying that we can't bury him at our native place. Finally, I told them that if they want, I can bury him at his Nani's place which is 15 kilometres away. Later, when the police finally returned the body, they forced us to bury Anas immediately. I requested them that it's not how burial is done and that we should at least be allowed to follow our customs. They somehow agreed, took the body again and returned only to complete the customs immediately and bury it," added Arshad.

Priyanka Gandhi, who discreetly reached Nehtaur on Sunday, met with the family to offer her support. However, the family members believe this show of support is not enough.
