Pune man murders third-wife with chopper in fit of rage following heated argument

The accused has been arrested by police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place around 4 am on Monday at the family home in Pimple Gurav A complaint was made to Sangvi police by the victim's stepson The alleged murder weapon has been recovered from the spot

Pune: Police in Maharashtra have arrested a 59-year-old man in connection with his wife's death. Identified as Hanumant Lokhande, the accused was taken into custody from his home in Pimple Gurav area of Pune city on Monday. Lokhande allegedly killed his 45-year-old wife Shaila with a chopped in a fit of rage following a heated argument.

The matter was brought to the attention of Shaila's 28-year-old stepson. All three lived in the same house where the couple lived on the ground floor and the son on the first floor of the building. Upon hearing his mother screaming on Monday night, the complainant rushed downstairs and saw her lying in a pool of blood. A chopper was lying close to her body. There were severe wounds on her neck, hands and stomach.

A call was made to the Sangvi police and a team of personnel arrived at the spot. Since the victim died on the spot, her body was taken for post-mortem to a state-run hospital in the city. Meanwhile, Lokhande was arrested on the basis of a complaint by his own stepson who has accused him of murder. An FIR was registered against him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Lokhande works in a rubber manufacturing factory in Pimpri-Chinchwad while his deceased wife worked as a domestic help in housing societies not far from their home in Pimple Gurav. This was the accused's third marriage. His first wife had died an untimely death and his second wife had left him over some quarrel. He has been married to and living with Shaila for the past 15 years. Police officers have also recovered the chopped allegedly used to murder the victim from the scene of the crime. That will also likely be sent for forensic examination. More details are awaited.
