Rs 38 lakh, liquor seized from house of candidate

After mass bribing of village councils to get unanimously elected as panchayat president, incidents of voter bribing have surfaced in the rural local bodies where elections will be held on December 27 and 30. However, district election officials claim they are yet to receive any complaints in most of the districts.On Monday, Rs 38,63,700 in cash and 1,192 liquor bottles worth several lakhs of rupees were seized from houses belonging to a woman contesting the Mandala Manickam panchayat president’s post in Ramanathapuram district . The houses, located near the Kamudi government hospital, were raided by the police and an election flying squad based on a complaint received in the complaint number of the superintendent of police of the district. SP Varun Kumar said they received complaints of voter bribing and rushed to the house where the teams found the money and liquor bottles meant for distribution to voters. Preliminary inquiry revealed that the houses belonged to R Dharmalingam, 70, a highways contractor and former president of Mandala Manickam panchayat. His wife Raniammal is in the fray for the same position this time.The teams led by deputy tahsildar Jamal M Mohammed and deputy superintendent of police Mahendran raided the nine houses belonging to them and seized the materials. Police claimed that the couple’s son, Balu, a former panchayat union councillor, is now contesting for the same position representing AIADMK but he is not connected with the seizure. District collector Veera Raghava Rao said that the seized cash will be handed over to the income tax department as any cash seizure above Rs 10 lakh is handed over to the department to probe its source. “A case will be registered and based on the outcome of the IT department’s inquiry we will go ahead with further prosecution,” he added.Complaints have started reaching officials in Tirupur district. It was alleged that money was distributed to voters at Vadugapalayam in Palladam panchayat union, but the authorities said they could not get any evidence for the distribution.
