Gujarat: ‘Mardaani’ thrashes husband and girlfriend in cinema hall, calls cops

Representative image

AHMEDABAD: A fight sequence of Rani Mukerji starrer Mardaani-2 was enacted live when a 45-year-old woman became Dabangg and thrashed her husband and his girlfriend at a multiplex on Ashram Road dragging them from corner seats.

After thrashing them, the woman called up police control room and narrated her grievance. Getting a call of ruckus being created by an angry woman, a team of Navrangpura police rushed to the multiplex and brought the three persons to police station. But as infidelity is no longer considered a criminal offence, the police were also helpless and sent the three back to their respective homes after counselling them.

An official of Navrangpura police said that the woman, an Isanpur resident who is an accountant and also runs an event management firm in Navrangpura, got a call on Monday afternoon from a friend who told her that her husband was watching Mardaani-2 in the multiplex. When the woman asked what was the big deal in it, her friend told her that he was not alone and accompanied by a woman, aged around 35.

On hearing this, the woman rushed to the multiplex, barged into the theatre overpowering security persons and caught her husband romancing another woman. She first slapped her husband repeatedly and as the other woman pleaded to leave him, the woman pulled her hair and thrashed her too. She, then, called up police and reached Navrangpura police station. A police official said that the man had first tried to get a ticket of Salman Khan starrer Dabangg-3 but as the cinema hall was overcrowded, he dropped the idea and went for Mardaani-2 as it was not that crowded. But he was caught by his wife. Inspector P B Desai said that the woman was sent back without registering any case as she later decided not to file any case. Another official said that the cops were helpless as IPC 497 (charge of adultery) has been struck down by the Supreme Court in September last year.


