After 2 crashes in 2 turbulent years, Holt family grateful to be home for holidays

DELHI TWP. - On a Tuesday night in November, a little more than a week before Thanksgiving, Kim Iverson sits at her dining room table amid the everyday chaos that comes with raising four daughters.

It's just after 5 p.m. and her oldest daughter, Nina Iverson, 20, is in the kitchen dyeing fabric in a pot on the stove using sriracha sauce. It's part of a project the Michigan State University senior, a fashion and textile design major, had been tasked with doing.

Her sisters — Charlotte , 8; Allison , 12; and Daelyn O'Donnell, 16 — are gathered downstairs. The girls joke back and forth, eventually coming upstairs to the living room, where they sprawl on the couch together, scrolling through their cell phones and chatting.

Their voices nearly drown out Iverson at times, but she doesn't mind, stopping periodically to hush them.

This is normalcy, a busy school night at home.

But it very nearly wasn't.

"We thought going into the holiday season it was going to be very fractured," Iverson, 38, said. "We had no idea what it was going to look like and here we are. I’m yelling at my kids, and telling them to behave themselves.”

Just days earlier, Charlotte and Kim Iverson had been at Mary Free Bed Rehabilitation Hospital in Grand Rapids closing out a month-long stay, during which Charlotte underwent five to six hours of therapy a day aimed at getting her out of the wheelchair she'd been in since summer.

In June, three of Iverson's daughters were in a devastating vehicle crash. It left Charlotte's body broken, with internal lacerations to her bladder, liver and spleen and an open pelvic fracture.

The crash came just over a year after Allison was struck by a vehicle while crossing the road after class let out for the day at Hope Middle School, suffering a severe concussion and a pelvic fracture of her own.

Friends, family and a supportive community — including Holt Public Schools' teachers and staff — helped them through both recoveries.

Despite two turbulent years, Iverson said finding her family’s silver lining isn't hard.

“I always tell my children, ‘The greatest gift I can give you is time and education. I can’t give you anything beyond that that’s going to be meaningful for you.’ To get that gift of time back, I’m just so grateful for that.”

A crash and deja vu

When the back passenger tire of the car Daelyn was driving down a rural road in Fife Lake caught on a gravel shoulder during a wide, sharp turn she remembers feeling the vehicle starting to swerve.

"I tried to correct and I over corrected, and I think that’s what threw us into the tumble," she said. "We started rolling.”

It was just after 10 a.m. on June 1 and Daelyn and her sisters, Allison and Charlotte, were on their way to visit their dad in Traverse City.

She'd called him about a half hour earlier to let him know they were nearly there. Then the car was rolling. Daelyn hit her head on the window and steering wheel and lost consciousness.

She woke up to Allison’s screams.

“We both looked in the back seat and Charlotte wasn’t there,” she said.

They found her lying on the ground outside the vehicle, her back “sliced open."

"I remember running out into the road," Daelyn said. "My mindset was pretty much, ‘Get someone to help,’ because at that point everything else didn’t matter."

An hour later, near Lansing, Iverson got a call from the Kalkaska County Sheriff's Office — and it felt like deja vu.

The call was eerily similar to one she'd gotten from police in April 2018 after Allison had been struck by a vehicle while walking home from Hope Middle School in Holt. She spent 16 weeks in a wheelchair following the collision.

Allison suffered a pelvic fracture and, by the time Iverson arrived at Helen DeVos Children's Hospital in Grand Rapids, where Charlotte had been taken for treatment, she'd been told her youngest daughter had one, too. Iverson was familiar with that type of injury.

Allison’s injuries would prepare Iverson for what Charlotte was facing, she thought, until she arrived at the emergency room to find medical staff surrounding her youngest daughter and knew it was grave.

“There were 20 people in the room. She had a specialist from every area.”

Though Charlotte's back injuries looked frightening, she'd also suffered an open pelvic fracture, a serious injury that came with complications. Charlotte's pelvis had opened in the front and detached completely from her sacrum bone in the rear. She was given seven blood transfusions and underwent eight surgeries.

After an initial operation, Charlotte lay in a hospital bed, external equipment supporting her pelvic injury.

“And she stayed like that," Iverson said. "She was in intensive care for three weeks.”

Charlotte spent 61 days in Grand Rapids, at DeVos Children's Hospital and then at Mary Free Bed. Iverson stayed with her the entire time.

Without support from family and friends, Iverson said she doesn’t know what she would have done.

“I barely could do it with that support,” she said. “I was still trying to figure out how to be everywhere."

Andrea Llage, a longtime friend, took care of Allison and Daelyn whenever Iverson asked.

Iverson showed everyone how strong she is, Llage said.

"I don’t know how she did it," she said. "That shows you who they are as people, as a family."

When everyone came home in August, it was a huge adjustment. The entire family lived in their home's lower level, which was transformed into a bedroom for Charlotte. She was wheelchair-bound and needed around-the-clock assistance. The family used a backboard to transfer her to her bed or a chair.

“She had a very comprehensive medical plan that had to be followed,” Iverson said. “That’s why she was really a candidate for home-bound schooling.”

But Charlotte, who loves school, wanted to be back to Wilcox Elementary with her classmates for the start of the school year on Aug. 21.

"I know we can do this," she told her mom, who reached out to school staff hoping it was possible.

Going back to school

When Allison was injured in 2018, staff at Hope Middle School worked with Iverson to accommodate her needs. Charlotte's return to Wilcox came with more challenges.

Wilcox Elementary Principal Traci Heuhs said staff was committed to making it work. They took time to meet with Iverson, learning together how to help Charlotte navigate the school and her classroom.

"We didn't want Charlotte to feel a setback," Heuhs said. "Right from the day that we learned about Charlotte's accident staff were saying, 'What can we do to help?'"

Charlotte's third-grade teacher, Sarah Kuenner, met with Iverson before school started, assessing the classroom and making arrangements for a smooth first week of class.

Heuhs and Kuenner said Wilcox staff want every student to succeed. Charlotte was no different, they said.

"She’s one of the kids, and it really just wasn’t only me," Kuenner said. "The students in the classroom accommodated her as well. I think part of it that helped is that she wanted to be there as badly as she did. If you let her she'd be there all day, every day."

Charlotte is social, down to earth, and loves learning, Kuenner said.

She started back to school, attending for half days at first, and then, at her request, attending all day. Charlotte needed an adult with her during the school day, so Iverson went and often spent time in the staff lounge.

The conversations she had with Wilcox's staff were never anything but encouraging.

“The question on the other end was always ‘How can we support this? What can we do?'" Iverson said.

Heuhs said that's a testament to the people who work at Wilcox Elementary.

"I really feel like we have a very special staff here at Wilcox," she said. "Our teachers are dedicated to helping students succeed."

Charlotte attended school until October, leaving for another stay at Mary Free Bed, where therapy to get her up and walking began.

"When she left again for Mary Free Bed, we had a little party for her," Kuenner said. "She was bound and determined to be back before Thanksgiving."

Iverson cautioned Charlotte that she could be in Grand Rapids for three months.

“No,” Charlotte told her. “I’m not missing all of this fun stuff at school."

Meeting goals, being grateful

“Charlotte, what would you do if I said you could not go back to school anymore?” Iverson asked her last month at their house in Holt.

“She would cry,” Daelyn said.

“No, I wouldn’t,” Charlotte said. “I’d just relax all day.”

But asked what her goal was after she was admitted back to Mary Fee Bed in October, she’s responded quickly.

“Before Thanksgiving or Christmas, and we did it before even Thanksgiving,” Charlotte said.

There was a hint of pride in her voice.

It was hard work, she said, but she never worried she wouldn’t be able to do it.

READ MORE:

Smoke N' Pig BBQ goes from tent to food truck to new Delta Twp. restaurant

Company proposing 850-acre solar array in Eaton Co sues Benton Twp.

This stone house in Eaton Rapids was once a church

Iverson said when Charlotte went back to Grand Rapids it was clear she'd come to work. The time she spent at school, in class with her friends and her teachers, gave her the motivation she needed to get back on her feet, Iverson said.

"It was something to work for, to come back to," she said.

Thanks to Kuenner, Charlotte still spent time in class, even though she couldn't be there physically. She used FaceTime on her phone with Kuenner during a class field trip to Meridian Historical Village in Okemos, and called in to class during lessons whenever she had a break from therapy.

Kuenner included Charlotte whenever she could, in math lessons and while reading books to her class.

"As much as I could I wanted her to know we were thinking about her, that we missed her, that she was still part of the class," she said. "I knew her feeling she was part of the class would really help."

Charlotte took her first steps in early October, but it took her weeks to get the hang of it, using a crutch and walker.

By Nov. 18, she was home with her family, and back to school minus the wheelchair.

Charlotte is now in intensive outpatient therapy three to four days a week. In February she’ll have another surgery at DeVos to remove hardware doctors put inside her body to stabilize her pelvis.

“She needs to be able to walk without any assistive device,” Iverson said.

She can’t run or ride a bike yet, or jump and climb playground equipment, but by next summer Iverson is hoping for great gains, in part because Charlotte is determined to get her childhood back completely.

“Right now she’s an 8-year-old with the body of a 90-year-old," Iverson said. "She wants to be right back to being an 8-year-old.”

For now, spending the holidays at home, and having normal back, is enough, Iverson said.

“There were times, even through all of it, that I caught myself smiling, being thankful," she said. "I mean, all of my children. This involved all of my children. As a mom you don’t want it to be hard. I’m really thankful they’re all smiling. That’s a powerful thing to be able to pass on to them, just that gratitude."

Contact Rachel Greco at rgreco@lsj.com. Follow her on Twitter @GrecoatLSJ.
