Bangladesh FM A K Abdul Momen blames Indo-Pak enmity for SAARC's low prosperity

Image Credits: AP

Dhaka: Bangladesh Foreign Minister A K Abdul Momen while talking about the age-old Indo-Pak conflict during the closing ceremony of 'Visit Nepal-Bangladesh Programme-2019' hosted by the Bangladesh Foreign Ministry, said that the enmity between the two nations is the major reason why SAARC is not prospering. However, he expressed his optimism about other regional initiatives such as the BIMSTEC and the BBIN.

His comment came after India and Pakistan resorted to a blame game, attacking each other for the lack of cooperation and coordination among the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) member states earlier this month.

Momen, while speaking to the media said, "You know why SAARC is not prospering, one main reason is the enmity between India and Pakistan, but BBIN (Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal) and BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation) should do better. We have to work harder and in that process, things should work better.”

However, a few weeks ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had spoken about India's efforts for greater collaboration among the SAARC countries. He had sid that such collaborations had been repeatedly been challenged with threats and acts of terrorism.

The Prime Minister, in a letter to the SAARC secretariat, had said that all countries in the region should take effective steps to defeat the scourge of terrorism and the forces which support it, an oblique reference to Pakistan. He also said that such efforts will generate trust and would help in building a stronger foundation for SAARC. It has been noted that India has been distancing itself from SAARC in the last three years, citing Pakistan based terror networks as the reason.

Speaking about the same, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had also, from his side, expressed the hope for the removal of the hiatus created in SAARC's continuous progression. Following that, Pakistan Foreign Office Spokesperson Mohammad Faisal had also, while making a reference to India, had said that all South Asian countries except one want to hold the SAARC summit, which was called off in 2016. The last SAARC Summit in 2014 was held in Kathmandu, which was attended by Modi.

After the 2014 summit, another one was to be held in 2016 in Islamabad. However, it was called off after the Uri attack that was carried out on an Indian Army camp in Jammu and Kashmir. India had expressed its inability to participate in the summit due to "prevailing circumstances", following which, the summit was called off after Bangladesh, Bhutan and Afghanistan also declined to participate in the Islamabad meet.

SAARC summits are usually held biennially and hosted by member states in alphabetical order. During the summit, the member state hosting the summit assumes the Chair of the Association.
