Jaslok Hospital unveils second state-of-the-art Cardiac Cath Lab

Cardiac Catheterization Lab is the most advanced image guided therapy platform across all hospitals. The lab is equipped with the latest upgraded version of Philips Azurion.

Jaslok Hospital & Research Center, a leading super multi-specialty hospital in Mumbai and amongst the most reputed hospitals in India, has launched a state-of-the-art Cardiac Catheterization Lab equipped with the latest upgraded version of the Philips Azurion, an image-guided therapy platform. This makes this Cath Lab facility the most advanced one, across all hospitals in the city.

This is the second Cath Lab to be added in the hospital and will help to cater to the increasing number of patients with heart-related issues in the city. This facility will provide assistance in various heart-related procedures like Angioplasty, Angiography, Rota ablation, intravascular ultrasound, TAVI & other structural heart diseases, Pacemaker, amongst many other procedures. The facility will also help Doctors work with greater confidence and avoid complications, as they will have a image-guided visualization of the patient’s heart, automatically segmented according to the type of procedure recommended.

Speaking at the launch, Mr. Jitendra Haryan, CEO, Jaslok Hospital said, “We have seen a steady increase in the number of cardiovascular cases that the hospital receives and thus adding another advanced Cath Lab will benefit us in treating more number of patients. There is a growing demand for image-guided therapy and increasingly complex procedures, so hospitals are looking for ways to treat more patients in less time without compromising quality of care. Our state-of-the-art Cath Lab will not only increase the number of procedures done at Jaslok, but doctors would also be able to perform more elective or planned procedures on patients.”

Adding to this, Dr. A B Mehta, Head of Cardiology, Jaslok Hospital said, “Cath Lab facility will directly benefit patient outcomes and experience, because it enables clinicians to provide superior care in the interventional lab and provides high productivity at a lower cost of procedure. Specialized facility significantly reduces the patient preparation time (by 12%), expedites procedure time (by 17%) and post procedure lab time (by 28%) while also reduce the scope of delay in providing the planned treatment as per schedule. The facility is specifically designed to provide both high performance for real-time multitasking and an outstanding user experience where interventional team members can work parallelly at flexible work spots without interrupting each other.”

The uniqueness of the lab is that it has Live Image Guidance (LIG) to perform the minimal invasive surgery with precision. Apart from LIG the machine also has features such as Intuitive user interface, Physiology Co-registration, Seamless integration into the PCI workflow, Analysis and Device Detection to name a few. It will also provide deeper anatomical understanding to plan and perform TAVR/TAVI, mitral valve replacement and LAAC procedures. Immersive user experience and fully automated tasks simplify planning, measurement, device selection and choice of optimal X-ray viewing angle.

As per industry reports, globally there is a steady rise in the number of coronary disease patients and the same trend is visible in India too. Close to 1.7 Million patients die every year due to heart diseases and by 2030, the figure is expected to increase to 23 Million. Adding further from industry statistics, the Cath Lab market globally is estimated to be about 2.5 billion dollars and in India, the market is estimated to be about 1,000 crores. But the demand for Cath labs is eminent with the rising number of cardio vascular patients across the country.

Another key highlight of the event was the felicitation of 5 BEST drivers who went beyond their call of duty to save lives of patrons in the city. BEST association conducts CPR trainings for the drivers and support staff as part of their community outreach initiative. These 5 drivers who had received CPR training could identify the commuter under stress as a case of heart attack, and immediately performed CPR on them. This stabilized the patient till they could reach the hospital and thus saved their lives.

Dr. A B Metha, Head of Cardiology, Jaslok Hospital was also felicitated for his outstanding contribution in the field of cardiology and nearly half a century service at Jaslok Hospital.
