Did Nick Jonas And Priyanka Chopra Move To India?

Nick Jonas and Priyanka Chopra never moved to India, but exactly one year ago today, a tabloid claimed they’d be doing so. Gossip Cop debunked the story when it was first published. Time has officially disproven it.

On December 24, 2018, Gossip Cop busted the National Enquirer for wrongly reporting that Jonas and Chopra were moving to India following their wedding. The spouses held two marriage ceremonies in India last year – a traditional Hindu ceremony in Jodhpur, and a second reception in Mumbai. The outlet insisted the spouses would also be relocating to the actress’s native country.

An anonymous source told the outlet that Jonas was “already getting offers to star in Bollywood movies,” as he hunted for homes in India with his wife. The article was based on claims from an unknown insider, but Gossip Cop reached out to Chopra’s spokesperson, who told us on the record that it was untrue. The actress’s rep, who’s qualified to speak on her behalf, said this time last year that she wasn’t moving to India with Jonas. 365 days later, that’s become even more clear.

Following the couple’s wedding ceremonies last year, they moved into Jonas’ $6.5 million house in Beverly Hills. This past August, Jonas sold the house for $6.9 million as he and Chopra decided to upgrade to a bigger home together. Just last month, Jonas and Chopra purchased a $20 million home in Encino, where his brother Joe and his wife Sophie Turner also bought a home.

The Enquirer clearly has zero insight into the couple’s personal life or living situation. Unfortunately, that didn’t stop the publication from printing fiction about the couple in the months that followed. In February, Gossip Cop called out the magazine for falsely claiming Jonas and Chopra were planning more wedding receptions. The story was invented because the spouses held a small reception in North Carolina following their two wedding ceremonies in India. According to the outlet, they’d be having at least two more weddings, “one in New York City and another on Long Island.” Those ceremonies never took place, nor were they ever planned.

One month later, Gossip Cop busted the Enquirer‘s sister outlet, OK!, for falsely claiming Jonas and Chopra were headed for a divorce. They’re still very much together, happily living in Los Angeles. We look back at stories from a year ago to show which outlets shouldn’t be trusted when it comes to getting celebrity scoops. All evidence points to the Enquirer being one of those outlets.
