Kerala link in Mangaluru violence: Karnataka

BENGALURU/MANGALURU: Hours after the Mangaluru police released videos that purportedly show protesters bringing stones in an autotrolley and hurling them at police personnel during a protest against the controversial citizenship law last week, Karnataka home minister Basavaraj Bommai said on Tuesday that the attack was premeditated and the arson orchestrated by anti-social elements.

He alleged the role of people from Kerala in fomenting trouble in Karnataka. “We’ve definite information about people who have come from Kerala and enrolled in Mangaluru colleges and were back in the coastal city last week to create trouble, exploiting the unrest against the CAA,” he said.

The video footage was released after the Mangaluru city police requested the public to share pictures and videos to help their investigation into the December 19 violence. Two protesters died when police opened fire to disperse a group that had allegedly been trying to storm a police station in Mangaluru and snatch arms.

In some videos, protesters, with faces covered, attempt to destroy CCTV cameras before going on the rampage. Mangaluru city police commissioner P S Harsha thanked Mangalureans for sharing about 1,000 video clips from the day of the trouble and said it was possible only because of the crowdsourcing initiative.

Bommai said, “The video clippings and pictures clearly show vandals used goods vehicles to transport stones and bricks to the protest site and hurl them at the police.” To find out the truth, the minister said the Karnataka government has commissioned two probes — one magisterial and the other by the CID.

The magisterial inquiry, to be conducted by Udupi deputy commissioner G Jagadeesh, will study the circumstances under which police had to open fire. The CID will probe the incident based on an FIR filed in Mangaluru.

The senior police officer leading the investigation said that the footage shared by the public had helped police identify at least 100 miscreants. Police have registered 24 cases in connection with the violence.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
