Delhi Police arrest notorious car thief 'Doraemon', recover 11 stolen vehicles

Delhi Police are in the process of raiding the gang's known hideouts (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The main accused would often buy cars which were a 'total loss' to the insurance companies Arif was arrested from near the Govindpuri metro station in Delhi Police also arrested his accomplice Kishan Gopal from Rajasthan

New Delhi: A gang of carjackers who claim to have 'lifted' over a hundred four-wheelers from the national capital, has been busted by Delhi Police. In a statement on Tuesday, the police said that the prime accused in this regard was arrested near the Govindpuri metro station on December 10 which led police to the modus-operandi of this gang of car thieves.

Interestingly, the 42-year-old prime accused identified vehicles declared as 'total loss' by insurance companies. He would then buy those cars at a highly discounted price. Once he had the car's documents, Arif would steal a car of the same make and colour. He also sold spare parts of the stolen vehicles at the infamous Kabadi market in Uttar Pradesh's Meerut district.

Arif was arrested in a stolen Toyota Innova by a group of personnel from various police stations who were deployed in the area to track down carjackers and other criminals out on bail in the area. Following his arrest, Arif led police to his 49-year-old accomplice Kishan Gopal who was arrested from Rajasthan by Delhi Police. According to a report by The Indian Express, gang members referred to Arif as 'Doraemon' owing to his physical appearance.

A total of 11 stolen cars were recovered from the gang's hideouts, said Deputy Commissioner of Police (South East) Chinmoy Biswal. The prime accused would often replace the number plate and chassis number of the stolen car with that of the 'total loss' cars he would buy for the documents. It has come to light that Arif and his gang had been stealing vehicles from Delhi-NCR for the past 10-12 years. During this time, they are said to have stolen over a hundred cars from the national capital. More details are awaited as the police are still in the process of raiding all of the gang's hideouts and nab associates and accomplices.
