Shocking! UP Police caught vandalising property in Muzaffarnagar during anti-CAA protests [WATCH]

Visuals of police vandalising public property in Uttar Pradesh. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Around 20 people have lost their lives in Uttar Pradesh alone in the protests, with several other cases of police atrocities have surfaced from the state, some also against minors This comes just a couple of days after a purported video showed a police officer in Kanpur firing at protesters in a market place Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh had claimed that his force had not fired even a “single bullet” during the protests

Muzaffarnagar: Visuals of police vandalism in Uttar Pradesh during the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act last week have emerged where police personnel wielding batons and wearing helmets can be seen barging into public properties and smashing glass panes and other structures.

The CCTV footages that have emerged from Muzaffarnagar in Uttar Pradesh rebuff claims by top police officers in the state who have continued to claim that agitators, and not them, were the ones who vandalised properties during the violent protests that rocked the state, including several other parts of the country.

Around 20 people have lost their lives in Uttar Pradesh alone in the protests, with several other cases of police atrocities have surfaced from the state, some also against minors.

This comes just a couple of days after a purported video showed a police officer in Kanpur firing at protesters in a market place, contrary to Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) OP Singh’s claims that his force had not fired even a “single bullet” during the protests.

The Congress party has pounced on the Uttar Pradesh government over the lawless state of affairs in the region during the protests. Congress MP Shashi Tharoor has called the atrocities against minors “despicable and monstrous”.

“Words fail me. This is beyond unbearable, monstrous, execrable, despicable. There’s nothing you can adequately say about people in the uniforms of power torturing defenceless children. They should be jailed as the criminals they are,” he said in a post on social media platform Twitter.

Words fail me. This is beyond unbearable, monstrous, execrable, despicable. There’s nothing you can adequately say about people in the uniforms of power torturing defenceless children. They should be jailed as the criminals they are. https://t.co/UMBJEFEhrg — Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) December 25, 2019

In Kanpur, a police officer in a bulletproof jacket and helmet, walked up to the protesters at a clash site and opened fire at them.
