Three arrested in Ghaziabad for opening fire at man to avenge brother's death

The three men arrested by Loni police on Tuesday (Photo Credits: @ghaziabadpolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The three men were arrested during a routine checking exercise on Tuesday Two pistols and four live cartridges were recovered from their possession Police revealed that the attempted murder was to avenge the death of Pathan's brother

Ghaziabad: Officers with the Loni police station in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, have solved a case of attempted murder with the arrest of three men who perpetrated the crime on December 13 of this month. The three accused were nabbed at around 11 pm on Tuesday night from a spot near Ram park in Loni.

Identified as Sonu Pathan, Anil and Pappu, the three men were wanted in a case of attempted murder. They were charged under sections 706 and 372 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on the basis of a complaint by the victim's mother. Following their arrest, the three men admitted to the crime and told police that their intentions were to avenge the death of Sonu Pathan's brother.

They told investigators that the victim, Monu alias Prince, shot Pathan's brother dead in Baghpat about five or six years ago. In a bid to avenge his brother's death, Pathan roped in his friends Anil and Pappu. The three of them managed to surround the victim at Bansal Chowk at around 7.15 pm on December 13 and opened fire. They fled the spot almost immediately and were nowhere to be seen until their arrest on Tuesday.

A pistol with two live cartridges and a country-made 315 bore pistol with two live cartridges were recovered from their possession along with a dagger and a motorcycle used to perpetrate the crime. Meanwhile, the victim is being treated for gunshot wounds at the Guru Tegh Bahadur (GTB) Hospital in Delhi's Shahdara area.

Police officers familiar with the case also revealed that other police stations in the state are being contacted to check whether any of the three men have other cases registered against them. All of those involved in this case hail from Baghpat district where the alleged murder of Pathan's brother took place.
