Rajnath Singh: Army Capable Of Securing Borders, Rest Assured

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Thursday said that the nation should rest assured about the security of borders as the Indian Army is capable of securing them. "The nation should rest assured regarding border (security). Our Army is capable and is doing whatever it takes (to secure the borders)," Singh told reporters in New Delhi.

Rajnath Singh was speaking to reporters after distributing Excellence Awards at National Institute of Defence Estates Management in the national capital. Army chief General Bipin Rawat was also present at the event.

READ | Uri: Indian Army Jawan Martyred As Pakistan Violates Ceasefire Along LoC

Raksha Mantri Shri @rajnathsingh lighting the lamp at the inauguration of 'Raksha Mantri's Award for Excellence 2019' in New Delhi, today. Also seen are Chief of the Army Staff General Bipin Rawat and Director General Defence Estates @ddg_it Smt Deepa Bajwa pic.twitter.com/WCoc46X4wC — ADG (M&C) DPR (@SpokespersonMoD) December 26, 2019

Chief of the Army Staff General Bipin Rawat lighting the lamp at the inauguration of 'Raksha Mantri's Award for Excellence 2019'. Also seen are Raksha Mantri Shri @rajnathsingh and Director General Defence Estates @ddg_it Smt Deepa Bajwa. pic.twitter.com/2uOIhrtMbK — ADG (M&C) DPR (@SpokespersonMoD) December 26, 2019

READ | Indian Army Training Dogs For Surveillance During Counter-terror Operations

Rajnath's remark hours after ceasefire violation in Uri

The defence minister's remark came hours after Pakistan Army violated ceasefire along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir's Uri sector on Wednesday night. Indian troops hit back with artillery and mortar fire, damaging Pakistan Army positions. The exchange left one Indian soldier martyred while killing one civilian.

READ | J&K: Indian Army Jawans Sing 'Badluram Ka Badan' To Mark Christmas Near LoC

Earlier on December 22, Pakistan violated the ceasefire along the LoC in Nowshera sector of Jammu and Kashmir. Even on the intervening night of December 21 and the following day, Pakistan Army reportedly violated the ceasefire at multiple locations in Mendhar, Krishna Ghati and Poonch which was retaliated by the Indian Army befittingly.

Earlier this month, Centre had informed Rajya Sabha that there have been 950 incidents of ceasefire violations along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir region from August to October.

READ | CDS To Be Announced On December 26, General Bipin Rawat Tops Race: Sources

(With ANI Inputs)
