Anti-CAA protests: two from Firozabad with gunshot injuries die in Delhi hospitals

Uttar Pradesh’s Firozabad residents Mohammed Haroon (30) and Mohammed Shafeeq (40), who were shot during protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on December 20, died of their injuries in the AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi on Thursday.

Haroon’s relatives walked between the ward at the AIIMS Trauma Centre, where his body had been kept, and the hospital police post completing documents.

While walking in haste, his brother-in-law, Zaki Sheikh, said his four sisters were waiting for him to come back home in good health but now they’ll take his body. “It was just his bad luck that he went to that area on December 20. There was no plan,” he said.

The family said that they’re all, including Haroon, were in the business of buying and selling buffaloes. They used to go to the weekly market at Rasulpur for business. “On December 20, it was a Friday and the weekly market had been set up. None of us had any plan to go but he went. We don’t know why he decided that! Wish he hadn’t,” Mr. Sheikh said.

According to the family, Haroon had sold a buffalo for Rs 33,000. Mr Sheikh said they have the receipt for the same that would prove he was in the area for business. However, the family couldn’t find the money and the mobile phone in his possession, they said.

“We don’t know who shot at him. Whether it was police or someone in public. We got the information when he was taken to the hospital in Agra. He was shot in the face. They referred him to AIIMS and we brought him here on Wednesday,” Mr. Sheikh said, adding that doctors here tried their best to save him but “it was his destiny”. He breathed his last at 12:55 a.m.

Silently weeping on Mr. Sheikh’s side was Haroon’s younger brother. He did not wish to share his name but said, “Teen mahine main behen ki shadi thi. Bhai jaan taiyariyan bhi kar rahe they [It was our sister’s wedding in three months. Brother was also preparing for it),” he cried. The sister is to get married in March but Mr. Sheikh said that they might have to postpone the date.

At Safdarjung Hospital, Shafeeq’s family stood outside the mortuary. They had just submitted the documents for post-mortem to be conducted.

Wife not told of death

They haven’t told Shafeeq’s wife Rani about his death. “She’ll lose her mind if we tell her upfront. When we brought the body to the mortuary, we told her that he is being taken for operation. She’ll eventually get to know when we go to Firozabad,” Shafeeq’s brother Shaheed said.

Early Thursday morning, when The Hindu spoke to Ms Rani, she said her husband was still undergoing treatment. He had passed away at 2 a.m.

The brother said doctors at Safdarjung told the family that he can’t be operated upon and that he was brain dead because of the gunshot in his head. He was brought here on Monday morning.

On December 20, during protests against the CAA, several people sustained injuries, including gunshots, and were taken to a Agra Hospital. Three of them, including Haroon, Shafeeq and one Mukeem (20) were referred to the Delhi hospitals. Mukeem passed away in the early hours of Tuesday.

While the Uttar Pradesh police, in a statement, said the death toll in protests against the CAA stood at 19, it has not been ascertained whether the number includes the three persons who died in Delhi.
