Paan-Crazy Man Bites Vendor's Ear & Lip After Not Getting One For Free

Have you ever gone for vegetable shopping with your mom? You must have seen your mother asking for free dhaniya at the end and just like that we also ask for a free golgappa after we are done eating pani puri. But this man took ‘demanding free stuff’ to the next level!



28-year-old videographer, Shalu, went to a paan shop at 10 in the night in Lucknow’s Alambagh and demanded a free paan, according to the Times Of India. But Satyendra, the shop owner, refused to give a free paan and that’s when Shalu got furious and lashed out at him.

Representative Image - Wikipedia

He immediately picked up a stone and threw it at him, according to IANS. Shalu then went on to bite Satyendra’s left ear and lower lip and, according to the police, the victim fell to the ground bleeding heavily and writhing in pain. He then left the spot.

A passerby who saw Satyendra took him to the nearby hospital and the police was then informed about the incident. After investigation, A. K. Sahi, Station House Officer (SHO), Alambagh said that Shalu is an alcoholic and a case has been registered against him.

Well, I hope that Shalu learns that nobody is entitled to give us free stuff!

Representative Image

In another strange incident, a drunk man bit a snake into three pieces after the reptile attacked him at his house in a village in Etah district of Uttar Pradesh, on the night of July 28.

The man - Raj Kumar - was taken to a hospital and as he arrived the doctors said he was in a serious condition. The man’s father confirmed that his son was in an inebriated condition when he bit the reptile.

"My son was drunk. A snake entered our home and bit him. He later bit the snake into pieces. His condition is serious. We are unable to afford the expenses of his treatment," Babu Ram, father of Raj Kumar told ANI.

ANI

"A patient came to me and said that he bit a snake. I misunderstood as the snake bit him. His condition is serious. He has been referred to another hospital," the doctor treating the man told ANI. After the incident, Raj Kumar’s family cremated the snake.

Well, there is no dearth of strange stories on the internet!
