Understand The Chronology: Here's What Has Happened Since Nationwide Protests Began Over CAA

The Citizenship Amendment Bill (which is now the Citizenship Amendment Act) is undoubtedly turning out to be the most polarising legislation that has been passed by the Indian Parliament so far.

The bill to provide Indian citizenship to members of Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities - who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan, till December 31, 2014 - facing religious persecution there was passed by the Lok Sabha on December 10 and by the Rajya Sabha two days later.

Twitter

The northeast began the protests

Following this, the country witnessed unprecedented scenes from one end to the other. Even before the bill was passed the northeast, especially Tripura, Assam, and Meghalaya were up in arms against it as the legislation over fears that allowing illegal immigrants from Bangladesh to settle there would make them a minority in their homeland.

Assam saw some of the stiffest resistance against CAA even before it became a law. It turned violent in several places, forcing the authorities to declare a curfew and suspend the internet. Three people including Sam Stafford, a 17-year-old boy were killed in police firing on demonstrators in the state.

Photo: EPA

In the meantime, large scale violence erupted in West Bengal against CAA and the protesters set fire to several trains, forcing the authorities to snap the mobile internet in parts of the state on December 15.

Students' resistance and police crackdown

The opposition against the law took an unexpected and violent turn when the Delhi Police cracked down on the demonstrators on December 15, a day after the national capital witnessed a massive protest at Jantar Mantar against the CAA.

Reuters

On December 15, the protests turned violent in Delhi's New Friends Colony where three buses were bunted, allegedly by the demonstrators. However, the Delhi Police entered the Jamia Millia Islamia University campus, allegedly looking for the vandals, despite it not being a student protest and unleashes absolute chaos there. Several students, including females and those who were inside the library, were beaten up by the police who also detained nearly 50 of them. Others, including girls, were made to leave the hostels in the middle of the night.

The students of Jamia disassociated themselves from the protest that turned violent and the University officials alleged that the cops entered the campus without their permission.

Protests and crackdown spread From JMI to AMU and other universities

Following the detention of Jamia students, there was a massive mid-night protest outside the Delhi Police headquarters. The next day as the news about the police action at Jamia spread, students of Aligarh Muslim University, Banaras Hindu University, and Delhi University came out in support of the Jamia students. Universities, Colleges and even IITs across the country joined in the protests in the following days.

BCCL

However, the country saw the biggest of its kind protest against CAA and NRC on December 19. With several demonstrations and marches planned for the day, Section 144 was imposed across parts of Delhi and mobiles services were also suspended. Around 20 metro stations across the national capital were also closed because of the protests. However, thousands of demonstrators, including politicians, rights activists, and students defied the prohibitory orders and marched to Red Fort and Jantar Mantar.

No, not only Muslims

The next day, on December 20, Bhim Army Chief Chandrashekhar Azad was scheduled to lead a march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar, but the permission was denied by Delhi Police. Despite this, Azad showed up in Jama Masjid after the Friday prayers but managed to escape police. The day took a violent turn in the evening after a car was torched in Daryaganj after which the police attacked the protesters with water cannons.

The same day also witnessed large scale violence in Uttar Pradesh where at least six people were killed in police firing. Mobile services were also suspended across several parts of the state for days.

On December 23, Jakob Lindenthal, a German national, who had come to India under a student exchange programme, at the Indian Institute of Technology-Madras (IIT Madras) was asked to leave the country after he was seen at one of the protests by students on the campus against the CAA.

Apart from Indian cities, the controversial Act has resulted in protests in many cities across the world. Several European cities reported protests, same was the case with the Indian student community in the US. They too organised protests on various campuses.

The government might have said that it won't change the law, but the ever-increasing protests may result in some change. One thing is pretty clear, a considerable number of Indians are not happy with the new citizenship law, and they all have their own reasons for that.
