Thursday News Roundup

Three minors died and two others were hospitalized after a crash off of Foothill Road near Pleasanton on Christmas night, a California Highway Patrol spokesman said.

Officers responded at 9:57 p.m. to a report of the crash on Foothill Road just north of Castlewood Drive at 9:57 p.m. Wednesday and found a downed power line near the roadway and a vehicle that had overturned and hit a large tree just east of the road, according to CHP Officer Tyler Hahn.

Three people were trapped inside the car and two others had been ejected. The driver and two passengers were pronounced dead at the scene, while two other passengers were taken to a hospital with major injuries, Hahn said.

Investigators determined the vehicle was heading south on Foothill when, for an unknown reason, the car crossed the northbound lane, hit the power pole and then the tree.

Hahn said officers who responded to the scene indicated that alcohol did not seem to be a factor in the crash, but a final determination won't be made until there's further investigation and the coroner's report is completed.

A judge on Thursday postponed a hearing until Monday in the ongoing battle over a vacant West Oakland home that's been occupied by two homeless mothers, saying there's been confusion about notifying all of the parties in the case.

At a hearing packed by dozens of people who support mothers Dominique Walker, 34, and Sameerah Karim, 41, in their effort to remain living at the house at 2928 Magnolia St., Alameda County Superior Court Judge Patrick McKinney said, "I understand the confusion" and said there seems to have been a lack of notice.

The women, who are part of a group called Moms 4 Housing, moved into the house without permission on Nov. 18 to call attention to Oakland's homelessness crisis and to vacant, investor-owned homes in the city.

Real estate investment firm Wedgewood Properties, which bought the house on July 31 for $501,078, recently served an eviction notice on the women but attorneys for the women filed legal claims asserting their right to live there.

McKinney issued a tentative ruling on Tuesday saying the claims do not appear to provide a basis for a valid claim of right to possession. But the judge said he invites the women to provide evidence that they have a right to occupy the house when he holds a hearing on the matter.

A 28-year-old Minnesota man killed by a falling tree Tuesday in the Muir Woods National Monument has been identified as Subhradeep Dutta, according to the Marin County coroner's office.

Dutta, a resident of Edina, Minnesota, was hit by the tree at about 4:40 p.m. while walking on a path in the park, coroner's officials said Thursday.

He was found "unconscious and lifeless beneath a large redwood tree" in the Hillside Trail area and emergency responders pronounced him dead at the scene at about 5 p.m., according to the coroner's office.

Another person was hurt by the falling tree and was taken to Marin General Hospital with injuries that aren't considered life-threatening.

According to his LinkedIn and Facebook profiles, Dutta was an engineer with Seagate Technology, a data storage company based in Cupertino, and was originally from Jamshedpur, India.

A 22-year-old woman has been arrested on suspicion of striking and killing a man with a vehicle in San Jose early Wednesday morning after he allegedly shot her relative, police said.

Sabrina Marie Gutierrez is in custody in a case that started when officers responded at 2:16 a.m. to a silent burglar alarm in the 1200 block of East Santa Clara Street and found a man unconscious in the street with a loaded gun near him, police said.

He was taken to a hospital and died a short time later, according to police. His name has not been released.

At 2:21 a.m., officers learned a shooting victim had been dropped off at a hospital, and they determined the victim had been shot at the East Santa Clara Street location. His injuries are not considered life-threatening, according to police.

Investigators eventually determined two men got into an argument and one shot the other. Gutierrez, a relative of the victim, then allegedly drove a car onto the sidewalk and struck the shooter with it as he ran away. Detectives arrested Gutierrez later Wednesday and booked her into Santa Clara County Jail on suspicion of murder.

A man who died after his car crashed into a tree in Antioch on Christmas Eve has been identified by the Contra Costa County coroner's office as 36-year-old Ahkeen Carter.

Carter, an Antioch resident, died in the crash reported shortly after 5:25 p.m. Tuesday on Hillcrest Avenue near Via Dora Drive, police said.

He was the only person in the car, which was traveling an estimated 80 mph on an area of the road that had a speed limit of 45 mph, according to police.

A 61-year-old man died after he was shot in East Oakland early Wednesday morning, police said.

Officers who responded to a report of a shooting in the 5900 block of East 16th Street at 12:07 a.m. Wednesday found the man suffering from multiple gunshot wounds, according to police.

The man was transported to a hospital to be treated for his injuries, but he was pronounced dead at 9:41 a.m. Wednesday, police said.

No information has been released about a motive or suspects in the shooting.

A 45-year-old woman found with blunt-force injuries in San Jose last week died at a hospital on Tuesday, police said.

The victim, identified by police as Thanh Xuan Luong, was found by officers who responded to a suspicious circumstance call at 10:14 p.m. on Dec. 19 in the 200 block of Stagehand Drive.

Luong was taken to the hospital, where she eventually succumbed to her injuries, police said.

No suspect has been identified or arrested in connection with Luong's death, and investigators have not determined the circumstances surrounding her attack.

A 48-year-old man was injured in a shooting Tuesday morning in San Francisco's Bayview District, police said.

The shooting was reported at 9:03 a.m. in the 1000 block of Palou Avenue.

A male suspect approached the victim, fired rounds at him and then fled. The victim was taken to a hospital to be treated for his injuries, which are not considered life-threatening, according to police.

No arrest has been made in the shooting and San Francisco police have not released any description of the suspect.

A man who apparently purposely went into Los Gatos Creek in Campbell on Christmas Day was pulled from the water by a group of bystanders, according to the Santa Clara County Fire Department.

At about 2:30 p.m. Wednesday, fire crews were dispatched to the creek near Camden Avenue.

Firefighters found the man, whose name wasn't released, on the creek's steep concrete slope near a spillway in the area of Camden Avenue and the San Tomas Expressway overpass.

Witnesses said the man seemed to have gone into the water on purpose.

A man who had his backpack stolen from his car was able to retrieve it after chasing the thief and shocking him with a Taser stun gun in San Francisco's Hayes Valley neighborhood on Christmas morning, police said.

The theft occurred shortly before 11:30 a.m. Wednesday in the area of Franklin and Hickory streets.

The 40-year-old victim was able to give chase though and used the Taser on the suspect, who then dropped the backpack and fled on foot, according to police.

The suspect, a man believed to be in his 20s, remained at large as of Thursday, police said.

Santa Cruz County officials are warning residents about avoiding ticks during this winter season when they are prevalent in the county's coastal hills.

Santa Cruz County Mosquito and Vector Control has received 12 reported case of Lyme disease in 2019, matching the county's annual average.

The western black-legged tick (Ixodes pacificus) is the primary spreader of Lyme disease on the West Coast and is particular active in the winter months, according to the county.

The county's 2018-19 tick-borne disease surveillance program found that about 2 percent of those ticks were infected with the bacteria that can cause Lyme disease.

County officials encourage people to reduce the risks of being bitten by ticks by wearing long pants and long-sleeved shifts, walking in the center of trails to avoid logs, tall grass and brush, and to shower and check their body for ticks after time outdoors.

Copyright © 2019 by Bay City News, Inc. Republication, Rebroadcast or any other Reuse without the express written consent of Bay City News, Inc. is prohibited.
