Hyderabad: Hardly 500 Maoists left, says DGP

Hyderabad: Director-General of Police M. Mahendar Reddy said that the Maoists were left with hardly 500 members and were gradually losing mass support. “Only the eastern regional bureau (Bihar and Jharkhand) has some activity and there is no fresh recruitment,” Mr Reddy said while speaking after the formal surrender of Maoist central committee member Oggu Satvaji, 53, alias Sudhakar, and his wife Vydugula Aruna alias Neelima. Sudhakar, also known as Buriyar alias Kiran, carried a reward of Rs 25 lakh and Neelima, Rs 10 lakh.

Director General of Police M. Mahendar Reddy said that Sudhakar, while working in the military wing, led many raids and ambushes. He headed the Bihar and Jharkhand committees as a central military commission member from 2014 till he decided to leave the outfit. There is no clear data of how many people Sudhakar killed.

He said Sudhakar would face trial in cases including those registered by the National Investigation Agency, after his brother was caught with Rs 25 lakh at Jharkhand. The DGP said that Sudhakar was vexed with the happenings in the party where most cadre including central committee members were looking to make money.

“Dacoities and robberies are mostly done to gain money. Over the last year, he was planning to leave the party and join mainstream society and our efforts became fruitful,” the DGP said. Sudhakar, a native of Sangapur village in Nirmal, joined the Maoists in 1983.

He worked as a courier for Venu and was attached to the central technical team courier network under Irri Mohan Reddy. He said that he was in Bengaluru and Kalburagi (Gulbarga) till 1986 when he was arrested and jailed till December 1989. He said that he met poet Varavara Rao, and this led to his joining the Raythu Coolie Sangham.

He played a crucial role in the construction of the martyrs' memorial at Indravelli in Adilabad. In 1998, he married Neelima, then a special zonal committee member.

After the Maoist peace talks in 1990 failed, he went underground and worked in military formations of the Maoists. He was with the Dandakaranya special zone committee state military commission before joining the central committee in 2013.
