Mutton prices in city touch Rs 600 per kg

Deonar abattoir

Red meat

Bombay Mutton Dealers Association

Christmas

Deonar

Maharashtra

Every Tuesday and Saturday, about 20,000 to 30,000 goats from Gujarat and Rajasthan are supplied to the Deonar abattoir

BMC

Mumbai

Bombay High Court

Dealers from other states flockas unseasonal rains have caused goat deaths and destruction of grazing land.After onions, another commodity is witnessing a price surge.has become dearer by Rs 100 per kg, causing panic among the. Attributing the sudden spurt in prices to the death of goats and destruction of grazing land during floods and unseasonal rains this past monsoon, dealers said goat meat could soon become a luxury item.According to consumers, the prices were hovering at around Rs 500 per kg just a few days ago. Right before, the rate became Rs 600 per kg. While some dealers said it will settle back after the festive season, others said buyers from the neighbouring states have been flocking toas the abattoir here is far less expensive.Every Tuesday and Saturday, about 20,000 to 30,000 goats from Gujarat and Rajasthan are supplied to the Deonar abattoir, which is also one of the biggest in western India. For the past one month, though, about 70 per cent of these goats are being sold to dealers from Karnataka, Kerala, and sections of rural Maharashtra. “The rates in Karnataka, Telangana, Goa and Madhya Pradesh are much higher than, so dealers have been coming here, causing unprecedented shortage and price surge,” a dealer said.Shahnaz Thanawala, president of the Bombay Mutton Dealers Association, said the association has asked the state government and theto not allow dealers from outside Maharashtra to buy from. “Our supply should be restricted for local consumption but the government is not paying attention to our problem. We fear the surge could hamper our business,” he said. Muhammad Qureshi, a retail trader, said he fears losing customers. “If prices keep increasing, consumers could switch to other meats,” he said.Last month, Kolhapur witnessed a similar surge in prices, resulting in protests by local consumers. Taking note of the unrest, the district collector there had constituted a committee to look into the reasons behind the hike and provide a solution. There have been no protests in Mumbai yet, but the consumers are said to be turning towards cheaper options like chicken and fish.Last week, thehad upheld the BMC’s 28-year-old decision to cancel licenses of over 350 retailers who were slaughtering animals outside Deonar. Consumers feel the HC’s recent order could lead to further price rise as retailers would also charge for transport costs. “People prefer fresh meat, but this decision could also deprive consumers of knowledge whether the meat is tender or of old animals,” said Rupesh Sawant, a consumer.
