EXCLUSIVE | Kushal Punjabi commits suicide; TV actor-good friend Chetan Hansraj in disbelief

Kushal Punjabi death reason | Photo Credit: Instagram

The news of popular TV actor Kushal Punjabi's death has spread shock waves across the Television industry. Actor Karanvir Bohra was the first one to break the news on social media. He posted a picture of Kushal last night and captioned it saying, "Ur demise has shocked the hell out of me.I'm still in denial @itsme_kushalpunjabi I know you are in a happier place, but this is unfathomable. The way you lead your life really inspired me in more ways than one....but what was I to know."

Several other actors who have known Kushal personally or have worked with him in the past were quick to comment on Karanvir's post in disbelief. While many questioned how did the 37-year old actor pass away at such a young age, some even suspected it to be case of suicide due to depression.

In an exclusive interaction with Telly Talk, TV actor and good friend Chetan Hansraj confirmed Kushal was found dead in his apartment last night. "I went to his apartment last night, had called the keymaker to open the door, his mother and father too were with me. When we opened the door, we saw....(pauses)...takes a deep breath...It all happened too fast", he said. He also mentioned that he hadn't spoken to Kushal, since the last two days.

Further when asked if he ever suspected Kushal to be in some problem that could lead to depression and force him to take such a drastic step in his life, Chetan added, "No, never. He was always positive, a fighter, very strong as a person. What he did and why he did is beyond understanding. Samajh mein nahi aa raha hai kya ho gaya yeh duniya ko. (Can't understand what has happened to this world)."

Reportedly, Mumbai Police has also found a suicide note from Kushal's residence. As per sources, he has written that nobody should be blamed for his death in his suicide note. He has apparently also mentioned in his one-and-a-half page note that 50 percent of his property/assets should be equally distributed among his parents and sister and the remaining 50 percent should be given to his 3-year old son.

Keep watching this space for more updates.
