Kushal Punjabi, 42, found dead at Mumbai home

Actor Kushal Punjabi who was last seen in Ishq Mein Marjawan was found dead in his Mumbai home. The actor was 42. The news came as a shock when actor Karanvir Bohra shared the news of his demise on social media.

Kushal Punjabi's body was found hanging at his residence in Pali Hill, Mumbai, last night. The Police has found a suicide note at his residence. Accidental Death Report (ADR) filed, further investigation underway. In his one-and-a-half page suicide note, Kushal Punjabi has mentioned that 50 per cent of his property/assets should be equally distributed among his parents and sister, and remaining 50 per cent should be given to his three-year-old son Kian.

His last rites will be held in Mumbai today at 4 pm.

Kushal’s friend, actor Karanvir Bohra expressed his shock on Instagram and wrote, "Ur demise has shocked the hell out of me.I'm still in denial @itsme_kushalpunjabi. I know you are in a happier place, but this is unfathomable. The way you lead your life really inspired me in more ways than one....but what was I to know. Your zest for dancing, fitness, off-road biking, fatherhood and above all that, that smiling face of yours, your happy-go-lucky nature your warmth all that was such ingenuity. I'm gonna miss you so much #kushlani You will always be rememberd sad a guy who lived a full life. #dancingdaddy #fit #lifeenthusiast #biker #smilingface #onelifeliveitright #restinpeace #omnamoshivaya."

We worked together on ishqmeinmarjawan and @PunjabiKushal was one positive guy always wearing a smile .I am shocked to hear that he has left us. May your soul rest in peace . pic.twitter.com/wdGwepcqzV Arjun Bijlani (@Thearjunbijlani) December 27, 2019

Kushal tied the knot with his European girlfriend Audrey Dolhen in 2015. The couple has a three-year-old son Kian. Kushal shared a picture of his son Kian as Instagram story 22 hours back. Even his last Instagram post is a picture of himself with Kian.

ALSO READ| Kushal Punjabi eliminated from Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa

ALSO READ| Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa should've more transparency in eviction, says Kushal Punjabi
