Locusts Wreak Terror in Gujarat, Rajasthan Agricultural Communities

File photo of a locust in Gandhinagar, Gujarat (Photo: Kevin Antao/TOI, BCCL Ahmedabad)

With over 9000 hectares in Gujarat and Rajasthan under locust attack, the government is battling to wrest back crop land from the fierce swarms of the winged insects.

Gujarat is the epicentre of the current crisis, with over 6000 hectares being affected over the last two weeks. The swarms are thought to have entered the state from Rajasthan and Pakistan, and are currently spread across Banaskantha, Patan, Mehsana, Kutch and Sabarkantha districts. Worryingly, the voracious swarms have wreaked havoc on crops like mustard, castor, cumin, fennel, wheat and others, putting the fate of innumerable farmers at risk.

News reports say that around 45 teams of the Central and State government are working to get rid of the pests by spraying insecticide in north Gujarat. The administration also reportedly plans to press drone-mounted sprays into action in Banaskantha to counter the menace.

Meanwhile, in Rajasthan, around 3200 hectares have been affected by the swarms, an official told The Times of India. The official said that the greenery and moisture due to good rainfall in Rajasthan was what was drawing desert locusts. The affected areas in Rajasthan mainly include Jaisalmer, Barmer, Jalore and Jodhpur.

Advertisement In Gujarat, local leaders from the BJP-led state government were seen in the fields using old-fashioned methods of driving away locusts with loud noises.

According to the Locust Warning Organization (LWO) under the Ministry of Agriculture, there are 4 locust species found in India, of which the desert locust (Schistocerca gregaria) is the most important pest species. On average a small locust desert swarm “eats as much food in one day as about 10 elephants, 25 camels or 2500 people, the LWO says.

On December 18, 2019, the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations had said that adult groups and swarms of desert locusts were expected to arrive in southwest Pakistan and southeast Iran during the next few weeks. Up to that point, India had treated nearly 1 800 ha and Pakistan more than 20 000 ha of land area, it had said then.

Locust attacks are a seasonal phenomenon in Gujarat and Rajasthan. The current spell is not the first time it’s occurred in 2019. Since May this year, around 10 swarms have entered India from across the international border. However, the scale of the current episode is earning it the distinction of being the biggest locust attack in these two states since 1993-94. That year, the LWO says the total damage amounted to Rs 7.18 lakh. But that is far below the all-time record damage caused by locusts in India, between 1926-31, which is estimated at Rs 10 crore.
