Citizenship Law Protests Highlights: Hundreds Protest Outside Delhi's Jama Masjid

Protesters outside Jama Masjid raised slogans against the Act and the central government

Mobile internet has been cut off in 21 districts in Uttar Pradesh over concerns of further protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act erupting after the Friday prayers. Apart from internet suspension which is aimed at checking rumours, the police have also made strategic deployment in sensitive areas, state top cop OP Singh said.

Internet connectivity has been suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Bijnor, Bulandshahar, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Agra, Firozabad, Sambhal, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Rampur, Sitapur and Kanpur. Mobile Internet services and sms messages of all mobile service providers except BSNL were also suspended in state capital Lucknow, which witnessed clashes between the police and protesters last week.

More than 1,100 people have been arrested and 5,558 kept in preventive detention following violence in the state.

Restrictions have also been imposed in several sensitive areas of Delhi, including Seelampur where protests turned violent on December 17. Restrictions on assembly of four or more people are in place near Lal Quila, a large part of North East Delhi district and around UP Bhawan in anticipation of the protests.

Students of the Jamia Millia University have declared that they will picket the Uttar Pradesh Bhawan at 3 pm on Friday to protest "police atrocities" in the state.

The Citizenship Amendment Act for the first time makes religion the test of citizenship in India. The government says it will help minorities from three Muslim-dominated countries to get citizenship if they fled to India because of religious persecution. Critics say it is designed to discriminate against Muslims and violates the secular principles of the constitution.

Here are the Updates on protests over Citizenship Amendment Act:

Dec 27, 2019 23:05 (IST) Left, Congress bring out joint rally against Citizenship Amendment Act in Kolkata

Bringing out an impressive joint rally in Kolkata against the new citizenship law and proposed nationwide NRC, leaders of the Congress and Left parties today asserted only they could provide the right alternative to the ruling Trinamool Congress and BJP in the state. With the flags of the Left parties and Congress, the combine claimed only they could fight the Citizenship Amendment Act and the National Register for Citizens exercise.

The marchers also canvassed for the nationwide general strike called on January 8.

Dec 27, 2019 22:20 (IST) Muslims offer roses to UP Police after Friday prayers

Muslims, after offering Friday prayers, offered roses to the police personnel deployed to take care of the law and order situation in this Uttar Pradesh district and pledged to maintain peace.

"People from Muslim community offered roses to the officials and police personnel deployed for maintaining the law and order situation after offering Friday prayers and pledged to maintain peace. In return, the police also assured them of providing complete security," Deputy Superintendent of Police Alok Mishra said.



Dec 27, 2019 21:14 (IST) TRS government would take a decision on the NRC and NPR after due deliberations in the state cabinet: KT Rama Rao

"We are extremely clear on the stand on the issue of Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA). There is no big confusion in it. Whatever we have said on the floor of the House, we stand by that. There is no change in that," TRS working president KT Rama Rao said.

"With respect to National Register of Citizens, that is a decision of the government.... CAA, NPR (National Population Register), NRC, you are linking them and using them interchangeably as you wish, all these acronyms. What we are saying is, these are important issues that need to be discussed in the government, he said.

Dec 27, 2019 20:48 (IST) West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee: No one will have to leave Bengal or the country. This movement will continue & it will be a success. Don't be scared and worried. pic.twitter.com/te6rnf0DyU - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 20:17 (IST) CAA does not strip any Indian of citizenship: Devendra Fadnavis

"The Congress and communists are spreading misinformation about CAA and NRC (National Register of Citizens)," the former Maharashtra chief minister said.

"I am surprised that our old friends are quiet. They used to say once that illegal Bangladeshis should be thrown out, but now they are quiet," he said, in a dig at the Shiv Sena which now heads the ruling coalition which includes the Congress and the NCP

Dec 27, 2019 19:03 (IST) RSS, BJP trying to destroy democratic structure: Brinda Karat

CPM leader Brinda Karat accused the BJP and the RSS of trying to destroy the "democratic structure" of the country in the name of religion.

Ms Karat was speaking at the 12th national conference of the All India Democratic Women's Association. "BJP-RSS people are destroying the democratic structure of India. They are attacking (democracy) in the name of NRC (National Register of Citizens) and Citizenship Amendment Act," she said.

"This government wants to change the basic structure of democracy in the name of religion," Ms Karat said.

Dec 27, 2019 18:20 (IST) Mumbai: People continue to hold demonstration at August Kranti Maidan in support of #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/11AEGVWL07 - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 17:30 (IST) Citizenship (Amendment) Act will not be implemented in Bengal as long as I am alive: Mamata Banerjee

"As long as I am alive CAA will not be implemented in Bengal. No one has to leave the country or the state. There won't be any detention center in Bengal," West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee today said.

"Why can't students protest against a draconian law? The Centre is taking action against protesting students and is rusticating them from universities," she added.

Dec 27, 2019 17:07 (IST) Devendra Fadnavis arrives at August Kranti Maidan

Mumbai: Former Maharashtra CM & BJP leader, Devendra Fadnavis arrives at August Kranti Maidan where demonstration is being held in support of #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. pic.twitter.com/MGomiIP7iW - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 17:03 (IST) Friday prayers pass off peacefully in Uttar Pradesh: DGP

Friday prayers passed off peacefully in Uttar Pradesh amid tight security arrangements put in place after last week''s violence by anti-citizenship law protestors. "The entire state was peaceful," Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh told news agency PTI. There was no report of any untoward incident from anywhere in the state.

Dec 27, 2019 16:37 (IST) Protests at Mumbai's August Kranti Maidan

Mumbai: People hold demonstration at August Kranti Maidan in support of #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/vjgSspgv2Q - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 16:29 (IST) People stage protest in Ajmer

Rajasthan: People stage protest in Ajmer against #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/wXTDjQ9aM8 - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 16:10 (IST) Protest in Jor Bagh

Delhi: People staged a protest in Jor Bagh today, demanding release of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad. #CitizenshipAmendmentBillpic.twitter.com/H5tx5PRI2d - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 16:03 (IST) Police use drones to monitor protests against Citizenship Act in Northeast Delhi



Dec 27, 2019 15:50 (IST) CAA Protests: Entry & exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are closed, tweets Delhi Metro Rail Corporation



Entry & exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station, tweets Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. Security Update



Entry & exit gates of Lok Kalyan Marg are closed. Trains will not be halting at this station. - Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 15:34 (IST) CAA Protests: "I have decided to give him roses and ask him to maintain peace in the area," says school girl who gave roses to a Delhi policeman



"I have decided to give him roses and ask him to maintain peace in the area. I believe such disturbances due to protests shouldn't have happened,", a school girl, who gave roses to DCP (North-East) Ved Prakash Surya, was quoted as saying by news agency ANI. Delhi: A school girl gives roses to DCP (North-East) Ved Prakash Surya. She says,"I have decided to give him roses and ask him to maintain peace in the area. I believe such disturbances due to protests shouldn't have happened". #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/S9wyRGE6da - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 15:30 (IST) CAA Protests: Protesters marching towards PM Modi's residence stopped by police



Hundreds of people with their hands tied marching towards Prime Minister Narendra Modi's residence to demand the release of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad and to protest the amended Citizenship Act were stopped in the way by police on Friday, reports news agency PTI.



Amid heavy security arrangement and drone surveillance, the protesters including Bhim Army members started from Dargah Shah-e-Mardan in Jor Bagh in the national capital and were stopped by police at a barricade en route PM Modi's residence at Lok Kalyan Marg, reported PTI.



They participated in the march with their hands tied, saying they did it so that they could not be blamed for violence and arson during the protest.



They raised slogans of ''Tanashahi nahi chalegi'' and carried posters of Babasheb Ambedkar and Chandrashekhar Azad.



"We have tied our hands and are protesting so tomorrow they do not attack us and lie that we were not protesting peacefully," said Majid Jamal, one of the participants in the protest.



Dec 27, 2019 15:22 (IST) Delhi: Police detains protesters from outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan, reports news agency ANI



Delhi: Police detains protesters from outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan, reports news agency ANI Delhi: Police detains protesters from outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan. #CitizenshipAmendmentActpic.twitter.com/FNOy45ojvy - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 15:11 (IST) CAA Protests: Mumbai traffic police issues traffic advisory ahead of "Inquilab Morcha" protests in Azad Maidan, Mumbai



In view of the massive protest, the traffic police has put in place several diversions and parking restrictions in south Mumbai, a traffic official said, according to news agency PTI.



Mahapalika Marg has been closed for vehicular movement from Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus to Metro junction, he said.



Vehicles moving towards Metro Junction will have to head towards DN Road, JJ School of Arts, Police Commissioner''s office and turn then left via Lokmanya Tilak Marg to proceed further, the official said.



Vehicles will not be allowed to park on Mahapalika Marg, Badruddin Tayyabji Marg, DN Road, LT Marg, MG Road, Hazarimal Somani Marg, he added.



Meanwhile, a large number of women under the banner of All India Democratic Women''s Association held a public meeting at Azad Maidan against the amended citizenship law.



Dec 27, 2019 15:09 (IST) CAA Protests: Students from TISS, IIT Bombay to join "Inquilab Morcha" at Azad Maidan, Mumbai



Students from Tata institute of Social Sciences (TISS) and Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT-B) will also join the agitation, during which they will demand withdrawal of CAA, NCR and the National Population Register (NPR), reported news agency PTI.



Former Bombay High Court judge BG Kolse Patil and Bollywood actor Swara Bhasker will speak during the protest, organiser Rafiq Shahab added.



Dec 27, 2019 15:08 (IST) Citizenship Amendment Act Protests: Student activists from Delhi and Uttar Pradesh will be part of the ''Inquilab Morcha'' to be held at the Azad Maidan in south Mumbai



Student activists from Delhi and Uttar Pradesh will be part of the ''Inquilab Morcha'' to be held at the Azad Maidan in south Mumbai on Friday against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), reported news agency PTI.



Student leaders, including Umar Khalid and Afreen Fatima from Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), Hammada Rehman from Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and Maskur Usmani from Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) will be part of the protest, its organiser Rafiq Shahab said, according to PTI.



Dec 27, 2019 14:58 (IST) READ HERE: Citizenship Amendment Act Protests: VK Singh Defends Army Chief Bipin Rawat, Says Ask Him What He Means

Amid controversy over Army Chief General Bipin Rawat's criticism of those leading protests against the citizenship law, Union Minister VK Singh, a past army chief, came to his defence on Friday. "I don't see any politics in it," said General Singh, urging the media to explore the "context" in which he made the comments. Amid controversy over Army Chief General Bipin Rawat's criticism of those leading protests against the citizenship law, Union Minister VK Singh, a past army chief, came to his defence on Friday. "I don't see any politics in it," said General Singh, urging the media to explore the "context" in which he made the comments.

Dec 27, 2019 14:45 (IST) CAA Protests: "Protest and anarchy should not be mixed": Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi attacks Asaduddin Owaisi for his remarks on Army Chief General Bipin Rawat's comments on Citizenship Act protests



Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi slammed All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi for targeting Army Chief General Bipin Rawat over his remarks on the Citizenship Act protests and said, "Protest and anarchy should not be mixed. He has his own understanding of the issue", reported news agency ANI.



Dec 27, 2019 14:43 (IST) Citizenship Amendment Act Protests: Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi slams opposition for "manipulating" issue of amended Citizenship law



Union Minister of Minority Affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi on Friday slammed Opposition for taking part in the anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests and "manipulating" the issue, reported news agency ANI.



Speaking to ANI, Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi said, "Congress has become a synonym of political hypocrisy. They find issues on a daily basis. They work with a negative mentality, which not at all in favour of the country. Their main job is to manipulate people."



Dec 27, 2019 14:35 (IST) Citizenship Act Protests: Amit Shah accuses Congress of misleading people, reports news agency PTI



Amit Shah accuses Congress of misleading people, says Citizenship law has no provision to take anyone's citizenship away, reports news agency PTI



Dec 27, 2019 14:02 (IST) CAA Protests: "Unemployment is the real issue in the county, but you (PM) are trying to put people in a queue for NRC," says Alka Lamba, protesting at Jama Masjid: PTI



Alka Lamba hit out at the BJP government, is quoted as saying by news agency PTI, that "unemployment is the real issue in the county, but you (PM) are trying to put people in a queue for NRC, as it was done during demonetisation".



Dec 27, 2019 14:01 (IST) CAA Protests: Congress leader Alka Lamba and former Delhi MLA Shoaib Iqbal among those protesting outside Jama Masjid, reports news agency PTI



Congress leader Alka Lamba and former Delhi MLA Shoaib Iqbal were among those who joined the demonstrations, reported news agency PTI.



Dec 27, 2019 13:58 (IST) CAA Protests: People gathered outside the iconic Jama Masjid in Old Delhi today to protest against amended citizenship law



Braving cold weather, several people gathered outside the iconic Jama Masjid in Old Delhi on Friday to protest against the amended citizenship law, reported news agency PTI.



Dec 27, 2019 13:47 (IST) CAA Protests: Protestors gather outside Jama Masjid after Friday prayers



Protestors gather outside Jama Masjid after Friday prayers





Dec 27, 2019 13:40 (IST) CAA Protests: Protest outside Jama Masjid against Citizenship Amendment Act, reports news agency ANI



Protests have started outside Jama Masjid against Citizenship Amendment Act, reports news agency ANI Delhi: Protest outside Jama Masjid against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct. pic.twitter.com/EZ6Np7y6Nj - ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

Dec 27, 2019 13:08 (IST) READ HERE: CAA Protests: Hardeep Singh Puri Says Opposition Spreading "Misinformation" About Citizenship Act

Union Minster Hardeep Singh Puri on Friday said the Citizenship (Amendment) Act does not alter the country's secular credentials and accused opposition parties of spreading "misinformation" on the new law.

Union Minster Hardeep Singh Puri on Friday said the Citizenship (Amendment) Act does not alter the country's secular credentials and accused opposition parties of spreading "misinformation" on the new law.

Dec 27, 2019 13:04 (IST) READ HERE: Kargil: Mobile Internet Back In Kargil 145 Days After Curbs Imposed In Ladakh

145 days after restrictions were imposed and internet communications were blocked in Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh, mobile internet has been restored in Kargil, part of the Union Territory of Ladakh.

145 days after restrictions were imposed and internet communications were blocked in Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh, mobile internet has been restored in Kargil, part of the Union Territory of Ladakh.

Dec 27, 2019 12:24 (IST) Security beefed up, prohibitory orders imposed in parts of Delhi





Delhi Police have made elaborate arrangements to check and deal with any untoward situation in the national capital and prohibitory orders have been imposed in several sensitive areas of the city.

Restrictions under section 144 of the CrPC have been imposed in the area near Lal Quila, a large part of North East Delhi district and around UP Bhawan in anticipation of the protests.

In Seelampur where protests turned violent on December 17 but remained peaceful last Friday, section 144 has been imposed and about 15 companies of police force have been deployed. The police also carried out a flag march in the morning and urged local Muslim clerics to appeal for peace and tranquillity.

Dec 27, 2019 12:18 (IST) People have right to protest; Yogi Adityanath creating a divide: Nawab Malik



Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) spokesperson Nawab Malik said that people have the right to protest while alleging that Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath deliberately allowed the situation to deteriorate and go out of hand in his state.

"People have the right to protest in the country. The protests in the other parts of the country were peaceful but Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister deliberately allowed the situation to go out of hand and is creating a divide between the people on the basis of religion," Mr Malik was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

His comments came after protests against the amended citizenship law turned violent in various districts of the state, in which a number of people died and scores sustained injuries.

"The manner in which the UP government, police and administration handled the situation is not right due to which many people lost their lives," the NCP spokesperson said.

Dec 27, 2019 11:59 (IST) Norwegian Tourist "told to leave country" after protest pics on Facebook





Janne-Mette Johansson, a tourist from Norway, revealed in a Facebook post that she has been ordered to leave the country or face action. An officer from the Bureau of Immigration "showed up" at her hotel and would not leave until she bought a flight ticket home, Janne-Mette Johansson wrote on Facebook.

The Foreigners' Regional Registration Office (FRRO) has confirmed that the tourist was asked to leave the country for visa violation.

Earlier this week, a German student of IIT-Madras was sent back for participating in anti-citizenship law protests on campus.

Dec 27, 2019 10:57 (IST) 124 arrested in UP for "inciting content", 19,000 accounts reported



Uttar Pradesh police have arrested 124 people in the last one week for posting "inciting content" on social media. Close to 20,000 social media, with over 9,000 Twitter and Facebook profiles, have been reported.

"124 people arrested for posting inciting content on social media. 93 FIRs registered. Action was taken on 19,409 social media posts. 9,372 Twitter, 9,856 Facebook, and 181 YouTube profiles blocked," the statement from Uttar Pradesh police said.

Dec 27, 2019 10:33 (IST)



"Law & order situation is absolutely under control, we continue to have strategic deployment of forces, Special Investigation Teams formed to investigate cases. We have suspended internet services in 21 districts, they will be restored as and when situation demands," UP top cop OP Singh was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Dec 27, 2019 10:09 (IST) No internet in parts of Uttar Pradesh



Internet connectivity has been suspended in Uttar Pradesh's Bijnor, Bulandshahar, Muzaffarnagar, Meerut, Agra, Firozabad, Sambhal, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Rampur, Sitapur and Kanpur. Mobile Internet services and sms messages of all mobile service providers except BSNL were also suspended in state capital Lucknow, which witnessed clashes between the police and protesters last week.
