MiG-27 goes into history: Legacy of Indian Air Force's bahadur valiant

Thirty-four years is a long time. It makes little difference whether we are talking about a human being or a military aircraft. In the armed forces, this period is commensurate to the length of the career of a high-ranking officer.

On Friday morning when the last squadron of the MiG-27 took off for its last sortie and soared into the skies of Jodhpur in Rajasthan, an era came to an end. After today's flight, all seven planes of this squadronScorpion 29will be decommissioned, following which none of them will fly anywhere in the country.

Based at the at Jodhpur Air Base, Scorpion 29 was the only remaining squadron comprising seven upgraded MiG-27. Before this, two squadrons of MiG-27 had been decommissioned at the Hashimara Air Base in West Bengal.

A MiG-27 gearing up for its last sortie at Jodhpur air base in Rajasthan on Friday. (Photo: PTI)

Commissioned into the Indian Air Force in 1985, the MiG-27 remained an integral part of the Indian Air Force's combat strength. It was due to the jet's heroics during the Kargil war that the aircraft earned the nickname "bahadur" from Air Force pilots.

A day before its scheduled decommissioning, the defence ministry in a statement said, "The MiG-27 fleet of earned its glory in the historic Kargil conflict when it delivered rockets and bombs with accuracy on enemy positions. The fleet also took active part in Operation Parakram."

#WATCH Indian Air Force's MiG-27 which retires today receives water salute at Air Force Station Jodhpur pic.twitter.com/qo1uX4o969 ANI (@ANI) December 27, 2019

STRENGTH OF MIG-27

The MiG-27 is a single-engine, single-seater tactical strike fighter aircraft. It was initially developed in the erstwhile Soviet Union and later indigenously manufactured by the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited in India.

Maximum speed: 1,700 km/hr (Mach 1.6)

Carries one 23mm six-barrel rotary integral cannon

Can carry up to 4,000 kg of other armament externally

SIGNIFICANCE IN IAF

The significance that Mig-27 had for the Indian Air Force over the past three decades can best be summarised in what the air force said about the jet in its farewell message on Thursday.

In a series of tweets to bid adieu to MiG-27, the IAF described the fighter aircraft as "lethal" and "mighty", words that perhaps also do justice to its role in the air force over the past three decades.

This formidable ground attack fighter aircraft has served the Nation for over three decades. Inducted in 1985, MiG-27 has been the mainstay of IAF's ground attack capability. It has participated in all major #IAF operations and has played a stellar role in the 1999 Kargil War. pic.twitter.com/sHke9FCEKI Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) December 26, 2019

In the words of the Indian Air Force, the MiG-27 was a "formidable" ground attack fighter aircraft that served the nation for over three decades. Since 1985, MiG-27 had been the "mainstay of IAF's ground attack capability".

"The MiG-27 participated in all major Indian Air Force operations and has played a stellar role in the 1999 Kargil War," the IAF said.

NICKNAMES MIG-27 EARNED

Bahadur (valiant): This name was coined for MiG-27 by the Indian Air Force pilots who flew the fighter aircraft to bombard enemy camps during the 1999 Kargil war with Pakistan.

Balkon (balcony): The MiG-27 also earned the nickname of 'Balkon' (balcony) from its test pilots. The reason for this name was that the aircraft's cockpit provided an enhanced view as compared to the previous variants of MiG planes.

Utkonos (platypus): This was a rather strange nickname that Mig-27 apparently earned from Russian pilots. The reason perhaps was its long nose, resembling a platypus.

The last squadron of the MiG-27 that was decommissioned from the Indian Air Fore today. (Photo: PTI)

BUT...

While MiG-27 had been the backbone of the Indian Air Force for the past three decades, the jets were also infamous for routine accidents throughout their career with the Indian Air Force.

For example, in 2019 itself, three MiG-27 planes of the Indian Air Force crashed during routine operations.

In 2012, the then defence minister AK Antony had told Parliament that in the past 40 years, as many as 482 MiG aircraft were involved in accidents.

WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THESE AIRCRAFT NOW?

Speaking about the future of these MiG-27 aircraft, Defence spokesperson Col Sombit Ghosh told news agency PTI that the exact fate of this MiG-27 squadron planes is not yet known. He said mostly after decommissioning, the planes are either be used as souvenirs or returned to the base or depot or even could be given to some other country.

Jodhpur had two squadrons of MiG 27, of which one had been decommissioned earlier this year.

ALSO READ | 12 planes lost, at least 20 air force personnel killed in crashes this year so far

ALSO READ | Indian Air Force lost half of MiG fighter jets in deadly crashes

ALSO READ | The IAF's airplane crisis

ALSO WATCH | The last sortie of IAF's Kargil star MiG-27 as it retires
