South Korean national dies in glider crash, one held by Satara police

A 45-year-old South Korean national was killed when his glider crashed into a forest during a paragliding event near Panchgani hill station in Satara district. The Satara police have arrested the event organiser who had not taken any permission from the administration to organise the event.

The Korean national identified as Sang Taek Oh was a professional paraglider and had come to India on a tourist visa. He had gone to Satara on February 10 to participate in the paragliding event on Tuesday when the incident took place.

According to police, the paragliding event was organised by a Mumbai based event organising firm at Rajpuri village in Satara on Tuesday. The paragliders were taking off from Rajpuri village and were supposed to descend at the designated spot.

Superintendent of police Pankaj Deshmukh said, "According to the preliminary information, Sang faced some problem while landing and descended into forest areas."

The rescue team of the event management firm rushed to the spot where Sang Oh's glider collapsed. According to police, he was still alive but had received critical injuries. Assistant inspector Trupti Sonawane of Panchgani police station who is investigating the case told DNA, "The glider had sustained a severe injury on his face and he was rushed to the hospital, where he succumbed to his injuries."

After his death, police checked the details of the event and found that the event management firm had not taken any required permission from the authority. The police have arrested the event manager who has been identified as Vistas Kharas. He has been arrested under Section 304 (a) of IPC for causing death by negligence.

Sang Oh's body was handed over to the Korean embassy after postmortem.

CASE DETAIL

After his death, police checked the details of the event and found that the event management firm had not taken any required permission from the authority. The police have arrested the event manager who has been identified as Vistas Kharas. He has been arrested under Section 304 (a) of IPC for causing death by negligence.
