'For humanity’, says Hajji Qadir, man who rescued UP cop from violent mob in Firozabad during CAA stir

Ajay Kumar, a policeman, rescued from a violent mob by Hajji Qadir | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Ajay Kumar, a policeman, termed Hajji Qadir an angel who saved his life after he was attacked by a violent mob during CAA protest Qadir said that he did not know the policeman’s name when he saved him and did the act of kindness was only for the sake of humanity Several incidents of clashes between police and protesters have been reported in UP during CAA protests and according to official figures 19 people have lost their lives in the state

Firozabad: Amid acts of violence and vandalism during CAA protests, Ajay Kumar, UP police personnel, witnessed a heart-warming act of kindness from a man named Hajji Qadir who came to his rescue when he was surrounded and was being beaten by a violent mob in Uttar Pradesh’s Firozabad district.

Kumar has sustained injuries on his head and hands after he was thrashed by a violent mob on December 20, during violent protests against the amended Citizenship legislation in the district. Qadir rescued Kumar and took him to his house. Later, when the situation was brought under control, Qadir dropped Kumar to the police station.

While speaking to news agency ANI, Kumar said, "Hajji Qadir Sahab took me to his home. I had sustained injuries on one of my fingers and head. He gave me water and his clothes to wear and assured me that I will be safe. He took me to the police station later."

He added that Qadir came like an angel in his life and had it not been for him then he would have lost his life.

Qadir recalled the incident and said that he was reading Namaz when he got the information that the mob has surrounded a policeman.

"He was severely injured, I assured him that I will save him. I didn't know his name at the time. What I did was for humanity," Qadir said.

On December 20, violence broke out in Firozabad during protests against the amended Citizenship Act and proposed National Register of Citizens. The demonstrators clashed with the police personnel.

Several districts in Uttar Pradesh have been affected by violence amid anti-CAA protests. Yesterday, the UP police confirmed that 327 FIRs and 1,113 arrests have been made in connection with violence during the protests. The police have set the death toll in the state to be at 19 during the violent protests.

On December 27, ahead of Friday prayers, the authorities suspended internet services till midnight in 21 districts of the state including Lucknow, Aligarh, Firozabad, and Shamli among others as a preventive attempt to avert the spread of any inflammatory content that might fuel that passions to protest and create law and order problem.
