Jamia Nagar, New Friends Colony protests: ‘Dec 15 rioters holding Tricolour incited crowd to pelt stones'

Agitators clash with police personnel during their protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019 in Northeast Delhi's Seelampur area | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights On December 15, unprecedented violence had erupted during the protest by the Jamia Millia Islamia students A few buses were set on fire or vandalised, besides various cars and a bike by the mob The Delhi Police have also prepared a database of all those who participated in the riots

New Delhi: Days after the violent protests occurred in Jamia Nagar, New Friends Colony, and Seelampur-Jaffrabad areas of the national capital, a report on Friday said that the Delhi Police crime branch has prepared a detailed report on the role of prohibited outfits during the demonstration against the new citizenship law.

On December 15, unprecedented violence had erupted during the protest by the Jamia Millia Islamia students. A few buses were set on fire or vandalised, besides various cars and a bike by the mob.

News agency IANS has cited a highly-placed Delhi Police source as saying, "We have gathered some sensitive information on the violence which took place on December 15 in Jamia Nagar and Friends Colony during anti-CAA protests. The information has been shared with the Union Home Ministry and intelligence agencies."

"The CCTV footage captured during the Jamia violence has revealed the hands of banned outfits. Most of the rioters are between the age group of 16-17 and 30-35 and had come from outside," he added.

After scrutinising the footage, the Delhi Police revealed that protesters, who carried the national flag in their hands, had incited the crowds to throw stones and stir riots.

"The rioters wanted to prove that they are patriots, which is nothing but a sham. This is a well thought out strategy," said a police officer.

The agency mentioned another source in the Delhi Police as saying: "In order to hoodwink authorities, PFI and affiliated outfits carry Tri-colours and sing the national anthem and also hold parades to show that they are patriots. But their intentions are disturbing."

The Delhi Police have also prepared a database of all those who participated in the riots, added the source.

Police have taken the help of intelligence agencies to probe the reasons behind the beginning of protests at Jamia Nagar. Notably, the Popular Front of India's headquarter is located in the vicinity of Shaheen Bagh, Jamia Nagar, Okhla, and Batla House.

As per the intelligence agencies, protests erupted in Delhi as the activists knew the media would cover them widely and eventually help them spread the stir.

They claim that nearly 150 PFI activists entered Delhi from other states and had been hiding in Jamia Nagar area since December 13, two days ahead of the violence. Intelligence agencies suggest that these were the youths who began stone-pelting and set buses ablaze.
