US Woman Reportedly Shot A 10-Month-Old Baby In The Face On Christmas Eve, Arrested

In a shocking incident, a woman from Alabama, US shot a 10-month-old baby in the face on Christmas eve. The Monroe County Sheriff said that the woman - Tamika Stallworth - opened fire at a car, hitting the baby in the face.



10-month-old Jamaya Austin, succumbed to her injuries at University Hospital, according to the authorities.

Tamika’s uncle, Charlie Stallworth, also told News 5, “I’ve never known Tamika to have a single violent bone in her body. She is always kind and compassionate, which makes the ordeal hard to grasp…I stand with my family… We are trying to keep everyone in prayer during this tragic and unfortunate time.”

Jamaya Austin -www.wkrg.com



The Sheriff said that the incident took place on County Road 42 in the Peterman community.

After the investigation, Tamika was produced before the court, where she was charged with murder. Her bond was set at $750,000 (Rs 5.35 crore).

In another tragic incident, a woman in UP’s Chitrakoot was shot in the face when she stopped dancing for a few seconds, at a wedding. The chilling incident took place on December 1 at Tikra village.

Screengrab

The horrifying video of the incident went viral on social media. In the video, a woman can be seen dancing on the stage with her co-performer when they suddenly stop. After which, a gun-wielding man can be heard saying “Goli chal jayegi (shots will be fired).” Another man, who is sitting next to him then says, “Sudhir bhaiya, aap goli chala hi do (Brother, you should fire the gun).”

After this, someone behind her shoots her in the face, which takes everyone by surprise.

Here’s the video of the incident:

This video is from UP's Chitrakoot .The lady was performing at a wedding and was shot by a man , possibly drunk, because she stopped after the music system development a glitch. She took a bullet in the jaw , hospitalised in Kanpur. @chitrakootpol says trying to make arrests pic.twitter.com/f9vVYopcYL — Alok Pandey (@alok_pandey) December 6, 2019





Misuse of power is a very common thing as people are not afraid of the law and the judiciary.
