Surat: Gujarat HC upholds death sentence to man accused of raping, murdering 3-year-old minor

Gujarat HC confirms death sentence to man for raping minor (Representational Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Anil lived in the same residence where the victim was living and even the girl's family knew him Anil was already conferred with a death sentence by the special POCSO court in Surat Anil Yadav was nabbed by the police from Buxar in Bihar, on October 19, 2018

New Delhi: The Gujarat High Court has given a death penalty to 22-year-old Anil Yadav from Bihar, on charges of raping and murdering a 3-year-old minor girl in Surat. Anil lived in the same residential area where the victim was living and the girl's family knew him.

The case came into light when the minor was found missing from her house in Godadara locality of Surat and later her body was found in a plastic bag in the nearby building which was not in use. Anil, who was accused of committing the crime was conferred with a death sentence by the special POCSO court in Surat in July, after taking special information from some 38 witnesses and medical evidence before coming to the conclusion.

Anil filed an appeal against the death sentence awarded to him by the POCSO court but his plea was rejected. The Gujarat High Court then upheld the death sentence conferred to him. The heinous crime took place last year in October 2018, where the accused raped the victim and packed her body in a plastic bag and dumped it in nearby locked building. Anil Yadav was punished on the grounds of rape, murder, unnatural sex and attempt to destroy the evidence as well.

Surprisingly, Yadav was also included in the party that was made to search for the missing minor whom he had raped but later he escaped to his village in Bihar. Anil Yadav was nabbed by the police from Buxar in Bihar, on October 19, 2018.

According to PTI, Justice Bela Trivedi and Justice AC Rao rejected the appeal filed by Yadav against his death sentence which was awarded by a special court and upheld the death sentence.
