Was Failed Marriage The Reason Behind Kushal Punjabi’s Suicide?

The television soap lovers woke up to sad news when the news about Ishq Mein Marjawan actor Kushal Punjabi’s demise broke out. The actor was found dead in his Bandra house this morning and the news was broken by his close friend Karanvir Bohra on social media. Kushal is reported to have committed suicide last night.

Advertisement

Ever since the news broke the internet, speculation about his death were made. While many reports suggested that Kushal took away his life because of the financial burden, others said that it was depression that made him take this drastic step. The Television industry was also in a state of shock as the news came out as no one could not believe that the actor left for heavenly abode so soon.

The police also found a suicide note where it was mentioned how his asset would be distributed amongst his family. While he asked to proffer 50 per cent of his property to his mom, dad and sister and the remaining 50 per cent to his 3-year-old son, Kiaan, he left nothing for his wife Audrey Dolhen. It is now speculated that his relationship with his wife was the reason why he committed suicide.

According to reports in SpotboyE, Kushal and Audrey had a failed marriage and this was the reason why he had no interest to live. A friend close to Kushal informed SpotboyE that Kushal and his wife were not living together in the same house anymore. Audrey had even taken away their son, Kian, and was living in Shanghai and the long distance between the couple led to a failed marriage.

Advertisement

Kushal used to fly to meet his son Kiaan as well but Audrey and he couldn’t save the marriage. Adding to this burden was the fact that Kushal was not doing well in his career. The crunch eventually got to his head and Kushal was affected by it emotionally to a great distance where he became a different man overall.

The hardships did not end here. Audrey and Kushal were moving towards divorce and the thought of losing on the girl he loved and his son Kiaan did not go well with him. In the suicide note left by Kushal, the actor has not mentioned any names or blamed anyone but he did post a picture of his son just before he committed suicide.

The last rights will take place in the afternoon in Mumbai today.

Karanvir Bohra shared a pic of Punjabi and wrote, “Ur demise has shocked the hell out of me.I’m still in denial @itsme_kushalpunjabi. I know you are in a happier place, but this is unfathomable. The way you lead your life really inspired me in more ways than one….but what was I to know.”

He continued, “Your zest for dancing, fitness, off-road biking, fatherhood and above all that, that smiling face of yours, your happy-go-lucky nature your warmth all that was such ingenuity. I’m gonna miss you so much #kushlani You will always be remembered sad a guy who lived a full life. #dancingdaddy #fit #lifeenthusiast #biker #smilingface #onelifeliveitright #restinpeace #omnamoshivaya.”

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
