Supermom! Ahmedabad event planner saves five critical infants by donating mother's milk

All of these five children were admitted in ICUs (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Rushina Doctor Marfatia (29) gave birth to a son in September of this year She is among 250 women who have donated 90 litres of mother's milk to save infants in need Doctors have time and again said that mother's milk acts as a miracle food for babies

Ahmedabad: In a time and age when people seldom go out of their way to help complete strangers, a woman from Gujarat saved the lives of five pre-mature babies by donating 12 litres of her breast milk. Aged 29, Rushina Doctor Marfatia not only acted as a saviour for these children who were battling for their lives in ICUs but also proved that humanity is the most worthwhile characteristic in any individual.

After giving birth to here own son Viaan on September 20 of this year, Rushina discovered that she could also feed other children who were in need. Upon her request, her father discovered the Arpan Newborn Care Center. Run by Dr Ashish Mehta, the center had recently started a "mother's own milk bank" as part of a pilot project earlier this year.

Rushina's milk served as a panacea for these babies weighing anywhere between 600 grams and 1.5 kilograms, senior neonatologist Dr Ashish Mehta told the Times of India. The biological mothers could not breast-feed their children either because the women were too week or at risk medically. This is where Rushina came into the picture and ended up saving the lives of five pre-mature children and she does not plan to stop anytime soon.

A former event manager who is currently teaching at a private college, Rushina is one of 250 mothers who have been donating their milk to Arpan MOM Bank. According to a report, the bank has received nearly 90 litres of breast milk in donations which can help feed 600 children doses of 150 ml each. Time and again, doctors have recommended mother's milk can act as a miracle food for infants. Reports also suggest that mother's milk contains antibodies that help babies fight off viruses. It goes without saying that mothers like Rushina are the real superheroes we need.
