Have evidence of protesters firing; 61 police officers received firearm injuries: UP Police on anti-CAA unrest

Visuals from a protest site in Uttar Pradesh. | File image

Key Highlights Over 1,100 people have so far been arrested and another 5,558 have been kept in preventive detention in the state following the violence in the past one week So far, 19 people have lost their lives in the violence that has lasted over a week now

Lucknow: The Uttar Pradesh Police, under a lot of fire over the continued violence in the state over the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019, on Friday said that they have solid evidences to prove that protesters engaged in arson against police personnel.

“As many as 61 police officers have received firearm injuries. We have recovered 687 empty cartridges of prohibited bores, such as .315 bore, .12 bore, .32 bore, etc., from the protest sites. Hence, it is clear that the police also faced severe firing and attacks at the hands of protesters,” a senior UP Police official said at a media briefing today evening.

The senior cop further said that the force also recovered live cartridges from areas where violence took place. “We also recovered live cartridges from several places. There is an SIT probe underway after forensic examination, post-mortem reports and analyses of CCTV footages. We will take action against those found guilty,” he said.

Security and patrolling were intensifited in sensitive areas across the state to avert law and order situations and ensure peace during Friday prayers of Muslims. So far, 19 people have lost their lives in the violence that has lasted over a week now.

Around 3,500 central paramilitary personnel and 12,000 UP provincial armed constabulary jawans were stationed on Friday, Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh said.

Pre-emptive measures of banning of Internet services, which resumed after a week, were once again suspended in Ghaziabad, Bulandshahr, Agra, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar and Shamli.

“There has been no reports of violence in the state the entire day and we are doing our best to maintain communal harmony, and law and order,” the top cop said in the briefing today.

Over 1,100 people have so far been arrested and another 5,558 have been kept in preventive detention in the state following the violence in the past one week.
