RWITC’s empty coffers cause another disruption

DARK HORSE



When the Mumbai police raided the bookmakers operating at the Mahalaxmi Race Course in December last, the nuisance value of this incident seemed temporary in nature. Few would have imagined then that the ramifications of the raid would condemn the Royal Western India Turf Club and horse-racing to an uncertain future.



The bookies, following a nightmarish experience of spending 12 days behind bars after their arrest during the raid, were in no mood to resume their business in a hurry. As such, the club’s main revenue stream, arising from bookmakers’ stall fees and service charges for mobile phone usage, has dried up completely.



Initially, the club decided to tide over this sudden crisis by pruning its prize-money allocation by 25 per cent. This decision was supposed to be an interim measure to avoid any disruption of the racing season.



The RWITC’s distress has aggravated since the Mumbaibased bookmakers — in the absence of a formal clearance or a license from the state government — are unwilling to take the risk of restarting their betting business.



Bitter truth



Amid all the chaos with respect to the bookies’ resumption, not once did the RWITC give a hint of the difficult phase it was passing through.



The turf club’s administration managed all the sponsored events including the Indian Oaks, the Indian Derby and even the Annual Auction Sale of Yearlings without ablemish.



A month and half after the raid, however, the bitter reality has come to bite the turf club. Its financial situation has apparently turned so precarious that halfway through the current racing season, the RWITC’s managing committee finds itself stranded.



Eventually, when the committee took stock of its cash reserves recently it had no option but to announce the cancellation of races that were scheduled to be held on February 27. This is the second time this season that the club took such an unpleasant decision. Unfortunately, it may not be the last of its kind this season.



Given the circumstances and the RWITC’s limited sources of revenue, of course, there is nothing the club’s managing committee could do to mitigate this unforeseen situation. Yet, the committee should have made an attempt to see how they could avoid the undesirable fallout of the raid bringing the bookmakers’ activity to a standstill.



Costly absence



Thecommittee simply waited for things to happen instead of making them happen. Rather than putting the onus on the bookmakers to get the state government’s clearance, the club should have made some back-channel attempts to lobby with home-department officials in support of the bookmakers’ cause.



Last heard, the bookies will have to apply afresh for a license and it’s unlikely that it will be granted soon. The absence of the bookmakers has already cost the club an estimated loss of Rs 4 crore till January end and this shortfall in income could rise to Rs 7-8 crore by the end of the current racing season.



Therefore, chances are that more race meetings will be done away with, unless the bookmakers return and there is a marked improvement in the club’s revenue inflow.



Probably the Mumbai season may even wind up earlier than was initially planned.


