Kareena Kapoor Khan and Akshay Kumar to head to Delhi to shoot a song for Good News?

When two Bollywood actors have worked together in several films, it becomes easy to work together again in a new project. The comfort level always transcends into the great on-screen chemistry between the two. Speaking of this, Akshay Kumar and Kareena Kapoor Khan will be seen as the leads of the upcoming film, Good News. The two have done tons of films together and their last full movie was Kambakkht Ishq. Now, Kareena and Akshay have joined hands for another film.

A few days back, Akshay took to Instagram to share a photo with his ‘super glamourous’ co-star Kareena Kapoor Khan. It was the day of the shoot and the two were snapped together with the crew. Now, as per reports, the entire crew of Good News including Akshay and Bebo might be heading for the capital to shoot the next schedule of the film. As per Mumbai Mirror, Kareena and Akshay will be going to Delhi to shoot for the next schedule which will include a song.

Choreographer Ganesh Acharya will also join them there for shooting. As per a source of Mumbai Mirror, “It will a five-day schedule, for which choreographer Ganesh Acharya has been brought on board. The actors will be shooting on the streets as well on a set. The upcoming schedule is crucial as it establishes Akshay and Kareena’s characters as a Delhi-based couple in the film, even though major portions have been shot on a Mumbai set.”

(Also read: Good News: Akshay Kumar REVEALS his Monday motivation is the ‘super glamorous co star’ Kareena Kapoor Khan)

Good News will mark the directorial debut of Raj Mehta and also stars Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani in the lead. The movie is based on the subject of pregnancy. Akshay and Kareena will play a couple who are trying to get pregnant after 7 years of being together. Diljit and Kiara will be helping them in doing so. Good News also marks the reunion of Diljit and Kareena who have worked together in Udta Punjab. Good News is slated to release on September 6, 2019.
