Congress releases AAP govt ‘post-mortem’ report, attacks BJP

The Delhi Congress president, Subhash Chopra, did an autopsy of the five-year report card of the Aam Aadmi Party. (Photo: Twitter/@SChopraINC)

The Delhi Congress on Friday released a post-mortem report of the five-year rule of the Arvind Kejriwal government in Delhi.

The Delhi Congress president, Subhash Chopra, did an autopsy of the five-year report card of the Aam Aadmi Party, terming the claims of development and governance by the party supremo and Delhi chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, as bundle of lies.

The AAP often brags about the development in education and health sectors in the Capital. The Congress alleged that 46% of the education budget has not even been used. Since the AAP took charge only one school has been built. Only 189 mohalla clinics have been opened; out of the 1,000 promised, 100 are inactive. Between April 2015 and March 31, 2019 not even a single hospital has been commissioned under the Delhi government, the Congress alleged.

Accusing the AAP of scam in the electricity sector, Chopra said that benefits of `8,532 crore have been provided to private electricity companies in name of discount.

If we give direct benefit to the consumer we can provide up to 600 units of free electricity to the Delhi people, said Chopra.

During the Sheila Dixit regime, Kejriwal used to ponder over CAG audit, but when the AAP came to power the party did not even utter a single word over CAG, Chopra added.

Another Congress leader claimed that 20% of Delhi residents are forced to consume packaged drinking water. The Kejriwal government’s actual performance report is that it provides only dirty drinking water and polluted air to the people of Delhi and the entire city is suffering from coughs and respiratory ailments. The report card is a bundle of lies. The AAP has been surviving on the strength of lies and falsehood and misleading advertisements, Chopra added.

The party leaders also slammed the AAP government for using only 5% of the Nirbhaya fund so far. Chopra also said it was the responsibility of the Delhi Congress to make people aware of the real issues and facts through its postmortem report. Congress leaders including party’s Assembly election campaign committee chairman Kirti Azad, JP Aggarwal and chief spokesperson Mukesh Sharma were present at the press briefing.

No immediate reaction was available from the AAP. Earlier, the AAP released a report card, highlighting works done in the field of education and health among other sectors. The Congress has also slammed both AAP and BJP over unauthorised colonies.
