EXCLUSIVE! Anjana Sukhani: Before ‘Good Newwz’ we've never spoken about IVF so openly in cinema

Bollywood actor Anjana Sukhani has been out-of-action from the movie biz for two years. The actor is now back in action and returning to the silver screen with debutant director Raj Mehta’s ‘ Good Newwz ’. The film starring Akshay Kumar Kareena Kapoor Khan, Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani releases today and promises to tickle your funny bone.In the film, Anjana plays the role of ‘Richa’, Akshay’s sister, a lawyer, who’s the voice of reason when hell breaks loose after an unfortunate mix-up in an in-vitro fertilization facility.In an exclusive conversation with ETimes, Anjana opened up about her latest film, ‘Good Newwz’, her journey as an actor and her battle with depression. Here are some excerpts from the candid conversation.I was in depression for a while and I needed to get over it to be happy again. That’s why I took a break. During the break, I evolved as a person. So when I look back, I thank god that I took the break from work. Dharma Productions is a great production house and the film had such an amazing star cast. Before ‘Good Newwz’ we've never spoken about IVF so openly in cinema. The makers were also handling it with a lot of humour yet sensitively. The character suited perfectly. So, I was absolutely happy about that.I play Akshay’s sister, ‘Richa’. She is a lawyer. It’s a very important part in the film because she’s the one who’s guiding them from a legal point of view post the confusion that happens after the exchange of sperm.As an actor, I have obviously craved for more space. But I'm fortunate that even though I got a lot of parts in films with an ensemble cast, whether it was in ‘Golmaal’ or ‘Department’ or ‘Salaam-e-Ishq’, I was able to stand out.For Punjabi films, you can be louder and caricature-ish with emotions. In Bollywood, you have to be more subtle. For Telugu films, you can go louder. For Kannada movies, you have to be resilient and hold your emotions. Marathi movies have a real depiction too.As an actor, you have a responsibility to talk about it so that it could change another person’s life. I should also thank Deepika Padukone because she was the first person to talk about depression and paved the way for others. I feel, we need to address the cost of the treatment for mental illness too. Therapists don't come cheap.It's a gangster film. So there's not much screen-space for girls in it. But Kajal Aggarwal and I do have our own stand as women in it. Though, John Abraham and I have a few scenes together.On humanitarian grounds, you feel that the refugees who are entering the country, do need help. But at the same time, you feel that there are millions of children and adults are starving in our own country. It’s a very catch 22 situation. But what doesn't work is barring someone because they belong to a certain community. I hope that we have a big heart to be able to accept everyone.
