Highs and lows of 2019

Nagar kirtan from Pak reaches Attari

In a historic moment, for the first time in 72 years after the Partition, the SGPC took out an ‘international nagar kirtan’ in which around 480 Sikh pilgrims participated. The nagar kirtan, dedicated to the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev started from Gurdwara Janam Asthan of the first Sikh master, Guru Nanak Dev, on August 1 and culminated at Gurdwara Ber Sahib in Sultanpur Lodhi on November 5. A sum of Rs 10.13 crore has been collected in the nagar kirtan during its 96-day journey through 17 Indian states. The SGPC intends to utilise the amount to open schools in the name of the first Sikh Guru.

Abhinandan returns, gets hero’s welcome

On March 1, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman crossed into India from Pakistan via the Attari-Wagah border at 9.20 pm. Abhinandan’s MiG-21 was shot and he was ejected out after bringing down Pakistan’s F-16 fighter during a dogfight. He was in Pakistan’s custody since then. Pakistan PM Imran Khan had announced later that Abhinandan would be released on the next day as a “peace gesture”. The BSF also cancelled Beating Retreat ceremony at the Attari-Wagah joint check-post due to security concerns.

B-town’s hot destination

The city became a hot destination for Bollywood as over five Bollywood films starring A-listers were shot and filmed in the city. The films include Manmarziyaan, Varun Dhawan’s Street Dance, Akshay Kumar’s Kesari, Aamir Khan’s Laal Singh Chaddha and Shaheed Udham Singh starring Vicky Kaushal.

1st woman principal at missionary college

On January 1, the SGPC breaks 92-year-old tradition and appoints Prof Manjit Kaur as the first woman principal of Shaheed Sikh Missionary College opened in 1927 as a memorial to martyrs of the massacre at Nankana Sahib. As per tradition, only male scholars headed the institute, which is now run under the auspices of the Dharam Parchar Committee of the SGPC.

Envoys from 85 nations pay obeisance at Golden Temple

For the first time, a delegation of the Resident Foreign Heads of Missions from nearly 85 countries paid obeisance at the Golden Temple dedicated to the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev. The visit was initiated by Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) head Vinay Sahasrabuddhe and led by Union Minister for Civil Aviation Hardeep Singh Puri. The event was a mark of respect to Guru Nanak Dev, who spread the eternal universal message of peace and oneness of humanity.

‘Guru ka Bagh’ to be a reality

On October 1, for the first time the project for a dedicated green belt, ‘Guru ka Bagh’, was kickstarted at the Golden Temple complex. Some unique, rare coloured flowers and saplings would be planted in the two-acre green belt. A Panchkula-based landscaping expert was hired to finalise the design while keeping in view the ambience of the shrine.

Rajnath opens upgraded spectator gallery at Attari

On January 22, the then union home minister Rajnath Singh inaugurated the upgraded spectator gallery to watch the 25-minute foot-stomping Beating Retreat ceremony of security forces of India and Pakistan during the sunset at the Attari-Wagah border. Besides enhancing its seating capacity to 20,000, the new gallery offers a comfortable view with its horseshoe shape design. The sitting arrangement goes to 32-metre high pedestals.

Major fire

On June 27, over 100 shanties were gutted in a major fire that broke out at Chamrang Road. As many as 12 children had received burn injuries. However, no casualty was reported.

Iqbal Singh removed as Jathedar of Takht Patna Sahib

On March 5, Giani Iqbal Singh was removed as ‘Jathedar’ of Takht Sri Patna Sahib. Akal Takht has directed the management to formally accept the resignation of “polygamous” Giani Iqbal Singh against whom many telephonic and written complaints were received.

Takht awards ‘tankhah’ to hit

On January 28, Akal Takht pronounced “tankhah” (religious punishment) on Takht Patna Sahib Management Board president Avtar Singh Hit for his alleged blasphemous act of equating Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar with “Guru” during a religious programme to observe Guru Gobind Singh’s Parkash Purb on January 13. Hit was summoned to appear before Akal Takht and perform sewa of cleaning shoes and dishes for one hour for a week at Gurdwara Patna Sahib and similar sewa at Golden Temple for five days as directed by Akal Takht.

Pulwama: 200% hike in import duty hits trade

The sharp increase in import duties on all goods from Pakistan by India in response to the Pulwama terror attack affected Indian importers. Trucks laden with cement, dates and other items from Pakistan were stranded at the Attari border since February 16 when import duties increased to 200 per cent by India. Around 6,000 porters, helpers and drivers were left without work.
