Raised voices

A cacophony of sound and fury is being heard from India. Protests against the amended citizenship act introduced by the BJP government continue in major cities. Writer Arundhati Roy has said it is these protests which give her hope; she has also lashed out at the agenda of the BJP government while attending the protest in New Delhi. A new National Register of Citizens planned by the New Delhi government is also creating controversy in the country, with critics believing it will be used to tamper with existing figures on the number of minorities and groups living in the country. But there are encouraging notes. Already, ten chief ministers in India have said they differ with the changed citizenship act and oppose the law under which non-Muslims from neighbouring countries would be granted citizenship on fast track but which would be denied to Muslims.

The Indian army chief has added to the fury. He has criticized opposition politicians for leading students in the ‘wrong direction’ by encouraging protests. In a country where the army has traditionally stayed clear of politics, opposition politicians have spoken out against what they see as his intervention in the ongoing political drama in a country the constitution of which declares it to be a secular state, granting equal rights to all citizens regardless of belief. Recent events raise doubts about these phrases. In the town of Meerut, four Muslims were shot dead this week. Observers believe members of security forces were behind the brutal acts, as an attempt to stop protests. Officially, this is being denied. But the credibility of the BJP government falls by the day even as the tussle over citizenship laws and the proposed new census heightens.

Tensions with Pakistan too have failed to quieten down. At least two Pakistani soldiers were martyred as a result of Indian firing over the LoC a few days ago. There have been a series of continuing skirmishes on the border. Delhi continues to make accusations of Pakistani interventions in Kashmir. The right-wing policies of the Narendra Modi government are tearing his own country apart in the meanwhile. The stand taken by Indian citizens is an example of what democracy can look like. We can only hope now it will win out in the end, even though Roy, in her statement, has expressed doubts over this and questioned the ability of the higher courts in India to make decisions which fall in line with the basic foundation stones on which India has stood since independence in 1947.
