Boy shot dead during tussle in Bawana: Delhi Police

Delhi police was informed about the murder on Friday night (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The boy was shot death during a scuffle, said Delhi Police He has been identified as Rahul, a resident of Bawana A case of murder has been registered and further investigation is underway

New Delhi: A boy was allegedly shot dead in the national capital's Bawana area on Friday night. He has been identified as Rahul, a resident of the same locality which falls in Delhi's north-west district. A case has been registered in this regard against unknown assailants and a police investigation is currently underway.

It is believed that Rahul died of a gunshot wound incurred during a tussle on the night of December 27. His body has been sent for post-mortem and more clarity is expected once the report is released. Meanwhile, raids are underway to nab the culprits. Forensic evidence is also likely to be collected from the scene of the crime to help Delhi police identify and track down the person(s) who shot Rahul to death. More details are awaited as the police is yet to identify any suspects or make any arrests in connection with the murder.

Known for its fertile soil and high water table owing to its location near the western Yamuna canal, Bawana is surrounded by a number of villages such as Daryapur, Holambi Kalan and Ghogha. It is also, however, known as a hotbed for violent crimes reported in the national capital. In 2016, an RTI response had revealed that the north-east district accounted for about 40 per cent of heinous crimes among Delhi's 11 police districts that year.

In May of this year, the father of a wanted criminal was found dead inside the Bawana police station premises. In its statement, the police claimed that the 58-year-old man had jumped to his death. He was later identified as Balraj Singh, a resident of Bajitpur. Employed as a labourer, Balraj was at the police station to gather information about his son who had been absconding after being charged with three counts of attempt to murder.
