CAA protests: Case filed against 1,000 unidentified AMU students, not 10,000, for Dec 15 violence

Aligarh Muslim University | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights On December 15, hundreds of AMU students, who were demonstrating against the CAA, clashed with police at a campus gate A fact-finding report has accused the UP Police of indulging in "unprovoked violence in AMU" Earlier this week, the Aligarh Police had filed an FIR against 1,200 unnamed AMU students

Aligarh: A case has been registered against 1,000 unidentified students of the Aligarh Muslim University in connection with violence which broke out during protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on December 15. Earlier, reports had suggested that 10,000 AMU students were booked.

However, Akash Kulhari, the SSP Aligarh, said that there was a clerical mistake in the report and clarified that the case was registered against 1,000 students and not 10,000.

The cases against the AMU students have been filed under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932, and Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984, for offences such as rioting and risking the life of others.

The FIR was filed on December 24 on the basis of a complaint lodged by Commandant 104 Battalion. It mentioned that on December 15 at 8:30 pm, more than 1,000 students had assembled around the AMU's circle to protest.

"They unlawfully raised anti-national slogans. The students then pelted stones on the personnel and also vandalized the official vehicles," said the FIR copy.

It added that police were directed to use minimal force to disperse the protesters. "When they did not disperse, tear gas and less intensity lathi-charge was done."

Notably, a fact-finding report on the showdown between the Uttar Pradesh Police personnel and protesters in AMU on December 15 had accused the cops of indulging in "unprovoked violence in AMU, more brutal than even in Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI)".

Earlier this week, the Aligarh Police had filed an FIR against 1,200 unnamed AMU students who took out a candlelight march against the CAA to express solidarity with the fellow students who faced police action in the UP university and Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia.

All were charged with Sections 188 and 341 of the IPC for breaching Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

In fact, the AMU Teachers' Association had on Friday called for a judicial investigation into the clashes. The association had also sought withdrawal of "false cases" against AMU students and punishment for the guilty police personnel.

"Nothing less than a judicial inquiry" will ensure justice to the victims of December 15 violence, the association said in a resolution.

The association added that "all false cases filed against students should be withdrawn immediately" in order to restore confidence in the rule of law.

On December 15, hundreds of AMU students, who were demonstrating against the CAA, clashed with police at a campus gate. In the aftermath of violence, the AMU administration announced the closure of the institution till January 5.

After the incident, cops alleged that the AMU students broke the police cordon and fought pitched battles with them. However, students had raised a question mark on the police's version.

On December 24, a report by news agency IANS had said that the protests in the AMU had been continuing peacefully in the AMU till December 15 evening when the news about clashes in Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia appeared on the social media.

The report added that besides visuals of the violence in Delhi, fake news regarding the death of two Jamia students worked as a trigger for the AMU students, who then started assembling in large numbers at the Bab-e-Sayed Gate of the university at around 8 pm.

The AMU authorities called the cops, which left the students restless.
