Delhi: Family decides to move into ‘Burari house of horror’ on rent

NEW DELHI: More than a year and a half after 11 members of a family died due to hanging from an iron mesh in the ceiling , a pathologist , along with his family, will move into the “horror house” of Burari on Sunday as a tenant. While ten members were found hanging, the body of Narayan Devi, 77, the head of the Chundawat family, was lying on the floor in another room of the house on July 1, 2018.Mohan Singh Kashyap plans to set up a pathological lab on the ground floor and stay on the first floor.The pathologist told TOI that he was aware of the “horror house” tag and would conduct a hawan before moving in on Sunday. His family too is open to the idea of moving into the “inauspicious” house.“People say a lot of things but it has been long since the incident. We can’t live in fear and I am glad I took the decision of shifting to this house. My children used to visit the house for tuitions earlier and are aware of everything,” said Kashyap.As Kashyap’s lab was located close to the Burari house, he had been looking for a place to stay in the vicinity. Kashyap’s children also study at a school, which is in the same area.Dinesh Chundawat, who took the possession of the house after the deaths, said that he was happy that it had been taken on rent. “At least there would now be life and happiness in the house. This rent deal has been fixed by the carpenter Pappu, who had been taking care of the house till now. He is close to the family, and like a brother to me,” he said, adding new people coming to stay in the house may dispel all fears.Virendra Tyagi, a social activist, said: “I told Kashyap there was no reason to worry and if there were any apprehensions then I was ready to sit with him in the house. People had spread several rumours in the area that we could not even digest. Some TV channels also showed things in a negative way. A person had earlier cancelled the deal last minute due to rumours.”Kashyap is currently living in Bhajanpura area. “No one’s life is governed by anyone and things are in the hands of God. Calling any house graveyard or by other names and trying to instil fear are not right,” he said.About the 11 pipes in the house, the pathologist said: “Some of them have been closed but a few kept open for ventilation purpose. I am also carrying out necessary repair work at the house.”
