Delhi's infamous Burari house to get new occupants, doctor decides to move in with family

The house in Burari where locals found the bodies of 11 family members on July 1, 2018 (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Eleven members of the Bhatia/Chundawat family committed suicide in the house in July 2018 The house is now owned by the only living member of the family, Dinesh Chundawat A police investigation had revealed that the deaths were the result of 'shared psychosis'

New Delhi: Almost 18 months have passed since 11 people of a family committed suicide at their residence in north-east Delhi's Burari area on July 1 of last year. After turning into the subject of neighbourhood ghost stories, the Chundawat/Bhatia family home is all set to get its new occupants. The house is being put on rent by Dinesh Singh Chundawat, the owner and sole living member of the deceased family.

In July of this year, Dinesh had rented out the house to two carpenter brothers who later gave media outlets conflicting accounts of their stay. While one of them claimed that the house was haunted by the spirits of its former occupants, the other rubbished these claims. After their departure, Dinesh tried to rent the house to several other people but horror stories floating around in the neighbourhood did not allow him to do so.

The owner has now found someone willing to live in the Chundawat/Bhatia family home. According to a report by the Times of India, Dinesh was approached by 45-year-old Dr Mohan Kashyap who was interested in renting the home. Kashyap, who runs a diagnostic lab in the same lane as the home in Burari, lives with his family in Bhajanpura and told Chundawat that he was willing to rent the apartment as long as it is clean. The doctor will move into the house once the rent-agreement is signed.

On the morning of July 1 last year, the bodies of 11 members of the Chundawat/Bhatia family were found in the same house. The deceased included the 75-year-old family matriarch, her sons (50 and 45-years-old), their wives (48 and 42-years-old) and their children aged between 25 and 15. The matriarch's 57-year-old daughter and her own 33-year-old daughter were also found hanging from the ceiling. It was later revealed that the family members died while performing a ritual to connect with their deceased patriarch.
