Why would a big leader know me: Prashant Kishor on Hardeep Singh Puri’s 'I don’t know him' remark

Union minister, Hardeep Singh Puri (L), Poll Strategist, Prashant Kishor (R) | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Prashant Kishor said that knowing an ‘ordinary man’ will go against the status and dignity of a big BJP leader like Hardeep Singh Puri He asserted that he knows Puri very well because it is very crucial to be well versed with political adversaries The AAP has teamed up with I-PAC, a political consultancy firm run by Prashant Kishor, for the upcoming Assembly polls

New Delhi: Just a day after Union Minister Hardeep Singh Puri said that he doesn’t know Prashant Kishor, the poll strategist sarcastically remarked that it is expected from a senior BJP leader like Puri to not know an ‘ordinary man’.

On Friday, Hardeep Singh, BJP’s co-in-charge for Delhi Assembly elections, on being questioned by the reporters about Prashant Kishor being taken on board by Aam Adami Party (AAP) for upcoming Assembly polls, downplayed Kishor’s relevance and said he doesn’t know him.

"Who is Prashant Kishor? I don't know him. There is a chap who used to work in the UN, then he joined one party, then another party and then another party," Puri told the reporters.

Reacting to Puri’s comments in a subtle but sharp manner, Kishor said, "He is a tall leader of the country and a union minister. Why will he know an ordinary man like me?”

Targeting the Union minister, Kishor added, “Over 50 lakh people like me from UP and Bihar live and struggle to make a space for themselves in Delhi. How will such a senior leader like Puri Ji know so many people?"

Further, the election strategist launched a blistering attack at the Union minister and said that knowing too many people will go against the minister’s status, dignity and post.

Kishor, however, stated that he recognises Puri because he is a Union minister and a well-known BJP politician in Delhi.

Kishor, also vice president of the Janata Dal-United, asserted that he knows Puri as it is critically important to be aware of political adversaries.

The national capital heads for Assembly elections as the tenure of incumbent Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal is coming to an end in February 2020. This time the AAP has teamed up with Prashant Kishor, who is a well know poll strategist and runs Indian Political Action Committee (I-PAC). I-PAC has worked on a number of successful election campaigns including the one that led to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s victory in 2014 general elections in the country.
