Not Army's business to tell politicians what to do: P Chidambaram's reply to Gen. Rawat's leadership comment

Former Finance Minister P Chidambaram

Thiruvananthapuram: Former finance minister P Chidambaram, while taking a dig at the current situation in the country and important officials of the Indian Army, said that it is a shame that the DGP and Army General are being asked to support the government. He also said that it’s no business of the army to tell politicians what they should do.

He, while speaking at a party event in Thiruvananthapuram, said, “DGP & Army General are being asked to support govt, it's a shame. Let me appeal to General Rawat, you head the Army&mind your business. It's not business of Army to tell politicians what we should do, just as it's not our business to tell you how to fight a war.”

He further added, “What politicians will do…politicians will do. It is not the business of the Army to tell politicians what we should do. Just as it is not our business to tell you how to fight a war. If you are fighting a war, we don’t tell you how to fight a war. You fight war according to your ideas and we will manage the politics of the country.”

Chidambaram’s comment came in response to General Rawat’s statement in which he questioned the leadership in connection with the ongoing CAA protests in the country. General Rawat, while speaking at an event in New Delhi, had said, “Leaders are not those who lead people in an inappropriate direction. We are witnessing in large number of universities and colleges that students are leading masses and crowds to carry out arson and violence in cities and towns. This is not leadership.”

General Rawat’s statement attracted attention from a lot of opposition leaders. While replying to his comment, AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said, ‘leadership is knowing the limit’s of one’s office’. Further, he, in his tweet said, “It is about understanding the idea civilian supremacy and preserving the integrity of the institution that you head.”








