Janhvi Kapoor wraps Gunjan Saxena The Kargil Girl: Feel blessed to have been on this special journey

Janhvi Kapoor today took to social media to announce the wrap of Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl. The actress share several unseen pictures from the shoot of the film and wrote an emotional post. In the film, Janhvi is playing the role of former Indian Air Force pilot Gunjan Saxena.

Sharing several behind-the-scene pictures of herself with director Sharan Sharma, Janhvi Kapoor wrote, "Spent two days trying to think of a caption that’ll do justice to what this experience has meant to me but nothing sums it up. It’s a film wrap and I feel blessed to have been on this special journey, and through it to find my best friend @sharansharma - like you say it’s all about the process; and I don’t think there will ever be one as pure, honest, adventurous and memorable as this one. Can’t wait for you guys to see it (sic)."

The shooting of Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl started last year in Luckow. Apart from Lucknow, the film is shot in Georgia. The film also stars Pankaj Tripathi, as Gunjan Saxena's father, and Angad Bedi, as her brother. Angad Bedi had earlier called Janhvi "extremely hardworking and talented."

On the real Kargil Girl Gunjan Saxena's birthday this year, Janhvi Kapoor wrote a heartfelt for the former Air Force pilot. She wrote, "Happy Birthday Gunjan mam! Thank you for teaching me the true meaning of bravery, the importance of working hard and sincerely and for paving the way for millions of women in our country. You’re an inspiration and a hero, without ever having tried to be. Your story has helped me believe in myself, and hopefully will help others too."

Gunjan Saxena played a pivotal role in the Kargil War of 1999. She made history when she flew into the combat zone during the war and evacuated injured soldiers from the war zone. Despite facing fire, Gunjan and lieutenant Srividya Rajan, managed to bring the soldiers home. For her courage, Gunjan was bestowed with the Shaurya Chakra later.

Directed by Sharan Sharma, the film is set to hit the screens on March 13, 2020.

ALSO READ | Kargil Girl Janhvi Kapoor on Gunjan Saxena's birthday: Your story has helped me believe in myself

ALSO READ | Gunjan Saxena The Kargil Girl first look: Janhvi Kapoor is ready to fly high

ALSO READ | Dostana 2: Kartik Aaryan and Janhvi Kapoor wrap 2nd schedule of film on Christmas
