Now, locusts swarm runway in Jaisalmer, delay flight operations

JAISALMER: After damaging crops and putting farmers under severe financial crisis, locusts flooded the runway here hitting flight operations on Friday.Airports Authority of India (AAI) officials said Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Delhi flights were delayed due to the locust menace. Flights resumed only after the runway was cleared. The IAF also had to stop operations for a few hours.With measures to control locusts falling flat, farmers have now decided to stage a protest at the district headquarters on December 30 to demand compensation for crop damage and waiver of power bills. Crops, including jeera, isabgol, jambha, sarson and raida, suffered heavy damages due to locusts.Expressing concern over the locust attack in western Rajasthan, chief minister Ashok Gehlot too on Friday wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi for help in controlling the menace. Gehlot urged the Centre to coordinate with neighbouring Pakistan and asked the latter to take result-oriented steps to control the menace.On Friday morning, hundreds of farmers came out of their homes despite the bone-chilling cold to destroy locusts hours after swarms of insects entered Jaisalmer city from Badabag Road and Gajrupsagar Road.On behalf of Kisan Jagriti Manch, farmers submitted a memorandum to district administration detailing hardships faced by them due to the menace. They will march from Hanuman Chowraha to the collectorate and submit a memorandum to chief minister on December 30.Manch convener Sawai Singh Devda said farmers had become helpless over locusts that have entered the country from Pakistan. They said acres of crop land had been damaged by the insects. He said the farmers had wanted spraying of pesticides from the air to combat the menace. But the government has turned down the request stating that such a move could boomerang.Lale Khan, a farmer, said that they were disappointed as all their hard work was being damaged by locusts. If this situation continues, farmers will be forced to commit suicide as they were not getting any help from the government, he said.In his letter to PM, chief minister Gehlot stated that districts like Jaisalmer, Barmer, Jodhpur, Bikaner , Jalore, Churu, Sriganganagar and Hanumangarh are close to Pakistan border and are badly affected by the locust attack.“The state government is constantly in touch with the Locust Warning Organization (LWO) to take effective measures to save the crops from locusts. I believe that the threat to crop damage would subside only if Pakistan too made efforts to control the locusts on their side,” Gehlot said in his letter.He added that the menace had started in Rajasthan in May. “Usually, their activeness decreases by October. But this year, so far, farms in western Rajasthan are still in the grip of locust attack. The Rabi crop has been badly affected,” he added.The CM further stated that since LWO is under the government of India, he had written a letter to the Union agriculture minister too on September 18 in which he had requested for additional physical and technical support from the Centre.“The state government is taking all measures to control the locust attacks. We have provided 37 vehicles for survey and inspection of locust affected villages in several districts. We are also giving 50 per cent financial subsidy to farmers for buying pesticide ,” Gehlot added.Agriculture minister Lalchand Kataria has also spoken to the district collector and sought information about efforts being made to control locusts.In May, the Kharif crop in Sriganganagar and Hanumangarh districts was the first to came under locust attack this year. The insects then wreaked havoc in Jaisalmer, Barmer, Jodhpur, Jalore and Churu. So far, the locusts have attacked about 3.19 lakh hectares of land this year. The state witnessed the last major locust attack in 1993.
