Trader murder case: Killer reached Patna from Saudi Arabia, say cops

PATNA: Police on Saturday arrested a woman whose alleged paramour had killed her husband, owner of a mattress shop, at Jagdeopath here by reaching the country from Saudi Arabia via an illegal route through Nepal on December 12.Police said the victim, Mohammad Navijan (40), was the maternal cousin of the killer, Mohammad Shami (41). Shami’s close friend Dinesh Thakur, who was also involved in the crime, had died after suffering a heart attack minutes after Navijan’s murder, police said. Shami, on the other hand, fled to Nepal after committing the crime.Navijan, a resident of Samanpura, was found murdered inside his shop on the third floor of a building at Jagdeopath on December 12.City SP (central) Vinay Tiwary said Navijan’s wife Zehra Khan was arrested from her Samanpura residence on Saturday on charges of conspiring with Shami to kill her husband. The SP said Shami is also a permanent resident of Samanpura.“There is no record available with immigration authorities regarding Shami’s travel to the country. However, during the course of investigation, Dinesh’s son Teja told police that Shami had stayed at their residence in Punaichak for around 10 days,” he said.Tiwary said Shami had an illicit relationship with Zehra. “Navijan’s family has told police that couple regularly used to quarrel over the issue,” he said.The SP said Shami, who works in Saudi Arabia with a private firm, first reached Nepal and then travelled to Patna taking advantage of porous Indo-Nepal border.“The sole motive of Shami was to kill Shami. He did not even contact Zehra after committing the crime,” the SP added.He said Shami and Dinesh reached the shop and killed Navijan by hitting him in head with a sharp weapon. “Shami and Dinesh’s movements were captured in CCTV cameras installed at Jagdeopath. Perhaps Dinesh was unaware that Shami would kill Navijan. As a result, he suffered a massive heart attack and died while trying to board a passenger vehicle,” Tiwary said.
