Giriraj Singh accuses Congress of dividing the country, asks Rahul Gandhi to take infiltrators to Italy

Giriraj Singh, Union Minister | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Union minister Giriraj Singh claimed that UPA government, during its tenure, mulled over the citizenship law but did not pursue it because of ‘appeasement politics’ The Union minister also said that only the Congress and ‘tukde-tukde’ gangs have problems with CAA He claimed that the BJP is cleansing sins committed by the Congress and alleged that the Grand Old Party is creating an atmosphere of fear in the country

Ranchi: On Saturday, Union minister Giriraj Singh alleged that the Congress is trying to "divide the country" by spreading misinformation and confusing people over the amended Citizenship legislation and also said that if the former Congress president has “love for infiltrators”, then he should take them to Italy.

Accusing the Congress of practising a "policy of double standards", the Union minister laid claims that the UPA government, during its tenure, was mulling over the citizenship legislation but abandoned it because of "appeasement politics" followed by the party.

"Congress wants to divide the country by speaking lies... If Rahul Gandhi has a love for infiltrators (immigrants), let him take them to Italy," the Union animal husbandry, dairy and fisheries minister said.

The Union minister’s remarks came in the wake of Rahul Gandhi’s rally in Assam where he slammed the BJP for bringing in the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Assam has witnessed violent protests against the CAA because the people of the state fear that the new law will threaten their cultural and linguistic identity. The former Congress president aired his apprehension that the state is going back to the path of violence because of the "anti-people" nature of the BJP’s policies.

While addressing a public rally in the state’s capital, Guwahati, Rahul Gandhi urged the people to unite and send a strong and clear message to the BJP that their identity and culture cannot be invaded.

The Union minister launched a blistering attack at the Congress and said that nobody else but the "tukde-tukde" gangs and the Grand Old Party has issues with the CAA.

"The BJP is cleansing sins of the Congress, which is spreading confusion and creating an atmosphere of fear," he added.

The minister even asserted that the Father of the Nation Mahatma Gandhi stated that Hindus and other minority communities of Pakistan were citizens of India, and if they wish to return to the country then they should be welcome and treated with equality and dignity.

Continuing his tirade against Congress, he claimed, "The Congress accepted Partition on grounds of religion. Thereafter, people following Hindu, Sikh, Christian, Buddhism, Jainism and Parsi religions faced persecution; the honour of sisters and daughters were robbed and people were intimidated into conversions."
