Pejavara mutt’s chief Vishwesha Teertha Swami dies at 88

The head of the Sri Pejavara Adhokshaja Mutt, Vishwesha Teertha Swami, died on Sunday in Karnataka’s Udupi after battling ill health for the past few days. He was 88.

Doctors at the Kasturba Hospital, where he was in the intensive care unit (ICU) since he was hospitalised on December 20 after developing breathing difficulties, had said on Saturday that his condition was very critical. They had also said that there was a further decline in his condition.

“Pejavara Mutt Seer Vishwesha Teertha Swami ji passed away at 9:30am today. His mortal remains will be kept at Ajjarakadu Mahatma Gandhi Maidan for three hours today, where he’ll be given state honours. CM BS Yediyurappa will be coming there.” Udupi legislator K Raghupati Bhat was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Watch | Pejavara Mutt Chief Vishwesha Teertha Swami passes away in Karnataka

“Later today, his mortal remains will be taken to Bengaluru. Several national leaders will be coming to pay last tributes to Swami ji at the National College in Bengaluru. Last rites will be performed at around 7pm at Vidyapeeth,” Bhat said.

Prime Narendra Modi called the seer a “powerhouse of service and spirituality” as he tweeted his condolence.

“Sri Vishvesha Teertha Swamiji of the Sri Pejawara Matha, Udupi will remain in the hearts and minds of lakhs of people for whom he was always a guiding light. A powerhouse of service and spirituality, he continuously worked for a more just and compassionate society. Om Shanti,” Modi wrote on Twitter.

“I consider myself blessed to have got many opportunities to learn from Sri Vishvesha Teertha Swamiji. Our recent meeting, on the pious day of Guru Purnima was also a memorable one. His impeccable knowledge always stood out. My thoughts are with his countless followers,” he said.

The pontiff was taken back to Udupi Sri Krishna Mutt with ventilator support early on Sunday as he had wished.

Teertha Swami was also known for his social and educational work. He was also active in Ram Janma Bhoomi movement and was a vocal supporter of cow protection movement.

The Pejavara mutt is one of the “Ashta” mutts of Udupi.
