Priyanka Chaturvedi gives 'tip' to Amruta Fadnavis after her 'bad leader' tweet

Shiv Sena leader Priyanka Chaturvedi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Hitting back at Amruta Fadnavis, Priyanka Chaturvedi said that judging people of Maharashtra doesn't come under the purview of an Axis Bank employee Amruta Fadnavis has said having a bad leader is not Maharashtra's fault but staying with one is

Mumbai: Shiv Sena leader Priyanka Chaturvedi on Sunday hit back at Amruta Fadnavis for attacking Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray and urging the state's people to introspect about the leader they have elected. Quipping at Devendra Fadnavis's wife, the Shiv Sena leader said that Amruta should not judge people of Maharashtra as it "does not come under the purview of an Axis Bank employee".

Earlier in the day, Amruta Fadnavis had launched a blistering attack at the Maharashtra CM over the Thane Municipal Corporation's move to shift salary accounts from Axis Bank to a nationalised bank.

Taking to her official Twitter handle, Amruta said, "The accounts were bagged by Axis Bank much before I married Devendra... during the tenure of the Congress-NCP regime. Private banks are also Indian banks and provide superior technological services. The government should think rationally. By doing this (shifting the accounts), they are trying to target Devendra and me."

"Having a bad leader was not Maharashtra's fault - but staying with one is. Jaago (wake up) Maharashtra," she added.

Hitting back at Amruta Fadnavis for targeting the Shiv Sena, Priyanka Chaturvedi said, "Surprised that she is calling it vendetta because if it were, she agrees that the fmr CM favoured moving accounts to Axis Bank as she was employed there. If the decision to move accounts was business as usual with zilch involvement of her&fmr CM then where is the question of targeting?"

The Shiv Sena leader the urged the Maharashtra government to investigate how moving accounts to Axis Bank is not a clear case of conflict of interest. She also asked the government to investigate how much CRS was given to the BJP schemes by Axis Bank after moving the accounts.

Priyanka Chaturvedi then took a jibe at Amruta saying, "Last but not the least, a tip to Ms Fadnavis, judging Maharashtra and teaching Maharashtrians what to do definitely doesn’t come under the purview of an employee of AxisBank. Those who scribble walls should learn to read the writing on the wall. Jai Maharashtra."
