Belgaum issue: Shiv Sena workers burn Yediyurappa’s effigy; bus services from Kolhapur to Karnataka suspended

As a precautionary measure all bus services from Kolhapur to Karnataka have been suspended | Source: ET

Key Highlights Shiv Sena workers also stopped screening of Kannada movie in Kolhapur Maharashtra claims Belgaum, as it once used to be a part of the erstwhile Bombay presidency The district is currently a part of Karnataka on linguistic grounds

Bengaluru: Bus services from Kolhapur district in Maharashtra to Karnataka have been suspended over an ongoing border dispute between the two states over Belgaum. Angry Shiv Sena workers today burned the effigy of Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa after a Kannada organisation burned posters of Maharashtra CM Uddhav Thackeray.

Talking to the media, a police official said as a precautionary measure all bus services from Kolhapur to Karnataka have been suspended since Saturday midnight.

Sena workers also stopped the screening of Kannada movie in Kolhapur.

The border dispute between Karnataka and Maharashtra is not new. While Maharashtra claims Belgaum, which once used to be a part of the erstwhile Bombay presidency, it is currently a district of Karnataka on linguistic grounds.

The MES has been fighting for the merger of 800-odd villages with Maharashtra and recently it submitted a memorandum of their demands to Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray after which the CM appointed ministers Chhagan Bhujbal and Eknath Shinde as co-ordinators to oversee the state government's efforts to speed-up the case related to the boundary dispute with Karnataka.

The case is pending in the Supreme Court from the past many years.

Thackeray had also raised the issue of the border dispute between Maharashtra and Karnataka over Belgaum in the state Assembly and accused the Centre of taking Karnataka’s side while ignoring Maharashtra in the legal battle before the apex court.

The dispute escalated recently after certain remarks by a Kannada organisation against the Maharashtra Ekikaran Samiti (MES), which has been fighting for the merger of Marathi-speaking villages of Karnataka into the western state since its foundation in 1948.

As per the reports in the local media a few days ago, Karnataka Navnirman Sena leader Bhimashankar Patil had said that MES leaders should be shot dead on the border between the two states.

Shiv Sena MP Dhairyasheel Mane, who represents Maharashtra's Hatkanangale constituency, condemned Patil's remarks.
