Woman found dead in Mumbai flat attempted to resist robbers, claim police

The residents of the building, which has four flats said they didn't hear any noise during the robbery at the victim's flat. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Mumbai woman killed during robbery tried to resist thieves Robbery and murder took place at a flat in Virar in Mumbai Valuables and cash worth Rs 7.28 were missing from the flat

Mumbai: A 63-year-old woman who was found dead at her house on Friday had tried resisted thieves during the robbery, the initial probe conducted by Mumbai police revealed.

The robbery-cum-murder took place at Grisham Palace in Virat Nagar area of Virar in Mumbai. The victim Manisha Dombal was found with a knife lodged in her chest.

According to a report in Times of India, the murder came to light when the victim's husband returned home after work.

The report suggested that the robbers had kept a vigil at the victim's house and struck when she was alone.

Police believe that the robbers entered the house at 5.30 pm when the woman was preparing dinner in the kitchen. The robbers possibly entered the house through the window.

According to police, the thieves stabbed the victim when she tried to raise an alarm and attempted to resist the robbers.

The residents of the building, which has four flats said they didn't hear any noise during the robbery at the victim's flat.

Police said valuables and cash worth Rs 7.28 were missing from the flat pointing to robber as the motive. The police also said they are probing whether any personal motive was involved in the crime.

In a similar incident, a 40-year-old woman was killed after she fell off a moving train near the Old Delhi Railway Station while resisting a snatching bid in September this year.

The woman identified as Sudhir Bansal, was accompanying her son who got enrolled in Delhi University, to help him find accommodation.

The two boarded Yoga Express from Rajasthan. The woman was standing near the door of a compartment and when the train slowed down near the Mithai Pul, a person tried to snatch her bag. The victim tried to fight off the robber but lost her balance during the scuffle and fell down on the tracks and came under the wheels of the train.
