Bareilly: Man slits wife throat with sickle after heated argument

The incident came to light after a group of women went to Harvati's home to meet her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man fled his home in Bareilly allegedly after murdering his wife The accused slit his wife's throat with a sickle allegedly after an argument The police have not arrested anyone in relation to the incident

Bareilly: A man allegedly slit his wife's throat in Bhartara village of Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh. The incident took place in the Bhartara village within the limits of the Behjoi police station. The accused allegedly attacked his wife after they had an argument.

The accused has been identified as Virendra Singh. Singh allegedly fled the spot after the incident. The accused's wife has been identified as Harvati.

The incident came to light after a group of women went to Harvati's home to meet her. According to Times of India's report, the women found Harvati lying in a pool of blood. The couple's two sons- Rahul and Rohit were not at home when the incident took place.

Some of the villagers claimed that they had seen Virendra Singh in an inebriated condition before the incident. Ravindra Pratap Singh, station house officer (SHO) Behjoi said that they are yet to ascertain the reason behind the incident.

He said that as per preliminary investigation, Virendra Singh attacked his wife after they had a heated argument. The police registered a case under section 302 (murder) against Virendra Singh. The SHO said that they are trying to locate the accused.

Mumbai man pushes pregnant wife from moving train after minor tiff

A similar incident came to light from Mumbai in November this year, where a 25-year-old man allegedly pushed his pregnant wife out of a moving train. The accused was identified as Sagar Dhodi. Dhodhi escaped after the incident. The victim was Dhodi's second wife Rani.

Sagar allegedly did not want his second wife to have children. Her pregnancy led to a lot of arguments between the couple. On the day of the incident, Dhodi and Rani were travelling from a Virar local. They were standing close to the door of the general compartment. After they had an argument in the train, Dhodi allegedly pushed his wife out of the train. Rani suffered several injuries on her arms, legs and face. She was rushed to the hospital, following which, treatment was administered to her.
