Travel Advisories Due To CAA Protests Have Resulted In 60 % Decline In Tourist Arrivals In India

Ever since the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) began from the northeast earlier this month, several countries have issued advisories to its citizens planning to travel to India or are already in the country.

This includes the US, UK, Canada, France, Israel, Singapore, and Russia, with several nations deeming India as “an unsafe travel destination”. The travel advisories could not have come at the worst possible time for the tourism industry in the country.

December is the beginning of the Holiday season in most of the western countries and this is the time most of them use to travel the world. But due to the ongoing situation in the country, many foreign tourists have already cancelled or have postponed their trip to India.

Reuters, quoting officials reported that about 200,000 domestic and international tourists cancelled or postponed their trip to the Taj Mahal in the past two weeks.

“There has been a 60% decline in visitor footfalls in December this year,” Dinesh Kumar, a police inspector overseeing a special tourist police station near the Taj Mahal who has access to visitor data told Reuters. He said the decline was compared to December last year. “Indian and foreign tourists have been calling our control rooms to check security. We assure them protection, but many still decide to stay away,” said Kumar.

Uttar Pradesh has seen the most violent clashes between the anti-CAA-NRC protesters and police, resulting in nearly 20 civilian deaths. Several parts of UP including Agra were cut off from the rest of the world for days after the internet and mobile services were suspended there to prevent the spread of the unrest. “Blocking the internet has affected travel and tourism in Agra by about 50-60%,” said Sandeep Arora, president of the Agra Tourism Development Foundation that groups over 250 tour operators, hotels and guides.

According to the hotel industry in Agra, last-minute cancellations during the festive season have further dampened business sentiment at a time when the country’s economic growth has slowed to 4.5%, its slowest pace in more than six years. The Taj Mahal alone attracts over 6.5 million tourists every year.

It is not just Agra that has taken a pounding, in Assam, another hotbed of the anti-CAA protests, the situation is no different. According to the Assam Tourism Development Corporation, the state sees around 500,000 tourists during December, but this time it has been down by as much as 90 percent.

Goa, another highly sought after destination for holidaymakers, especially this time of the year too is feeling the heat. Though the state has not reported many protests or violence over CAA, the travel advisory by several countries meant that there was a reduction of nearly 50 percent in tourist arrivals.

A group of European tourists travelling in a group across India said they now planned to cut short their 20-day trip. “We are all retired folks, for us travel has to be slow and relaxing. The newspaper headlines have led to a sense of concern and we will leave sooner than we had planned,” said Dave Millikin, a retired banker from London, who was in Delhi for an India trip told Reuters.

Earlier this week, two foreign nationals, a German student at IIT Madras and a Norwegian tourist who was in Kerala were expelled from the country for taking part in anti-CAA NRC protests.




