Won't tolerate educational institutions turning into politicking hub: HRD minister warns universities on CAA

Protest against CAA at Jamia campus | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Pokhriyal further said that anyone is free to engage in political activities, but colleges and universities should stay out of it The Union minister also alleged that the opposition parties are deliberately spreading misinformation over the CAA He said the central government will not tolerate educational institutions turning into hubs of politicking

New Delhi: In a stern warning to several universities that have been protesting against new citizenship law, Union HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal, on Sunday, said the central government will not tolerate educational institutions turning into hubs of politicking "at any cost".

Pokhriyal further said that anyone is free to engage in political activities, but colleges and universities should be refrain from indulging in politics, as many students come to study from far-off places.

"The Narendra Modi government is not going to tolerate this at any cost," he was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

The Union minister also alleged that the opposition parties are deliberately spreading misinformation over the CAA. "It is the Congress, which is responsible for the country's division on religious grounds, that is spreading misinformation about CAA," Pokhriyal said, accusing the Opposition of misleading people against the amended law.

Students from several universities across the country, including Jawaharlal Nehru University, Jamia Millia Islamia, Aligarh Muslim University, Delhi University, Jadavpur University, and Presidency University, have been protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) for the past few weeks.

Earlier this month, a high-voltage drama was unfolded at Delhi’s Jamia Milia Islamia university after clashes erupted between the Delhi Police and the students.

The clashes first broke out between protesters, who allegedly torched four public buses and two police vehicles, and the police in New Friends Colony, near Jamia Millia Islamia, during a demonstration against the amended Citizenship Act.

Following the scuffle on roads, police allegedly entered the Jamia university campus and detained several persons for alleged involvement in the violence, triggering tension. Nearly 60 people including students, police personnel and firefighters were injured in the scuffle.
