Man in police uniform threatening to shoot anti-CAA protesters took VRS in 2014, arrested

Delhi witnessed massive violence by anti-CAA protesters who resorted to stone pelting and torched government as well as private vehicles

Key Highlights The man identified as Rakesh Tyagi was seen wearing Delhi Police uniform and threatening anti-CAA protesters Tyagi was arrested by the Delhi Police two-days ago Delhi witnessed massive violence by anti-CAA protesters who resorted to stone-pelting and torched government as well as private vehicles

New Delhi: Delhi Police personnel who had threatened to shoot anti-CAA protesters had taken voluntary retirement in the year 2014 from the police force and is now a private citizen now, said Delhi Police.

The man identified as Rakesh Tyagi was seen wearing Delhi Police uniform and threatening anti-CAA protesters. Tyagi was arrested by the Delhi Police two-days ago.

Delhi witnessed massive violence by anti-CAA protesters who resorted to stone-pelting and torched government as well as private vehicles in front of the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police. Later, they gathered at the Delhi Police HQ at ITO and shouted slogans.

Around 12 policemen received injuries in the violence and cops arrested 40 persons over the violence at Delhi Gate.

The stone-pelting began in the evening after protesters were stopped from marching from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar.

The crowd raised slogans against the Centre and Prime Minister Narendra Modi after which the cops used water cannons on the crowd.

According to Delhi Police sources, protesters from Seelampur and Jafrabad area in east Delhi joined in the protest and indulged in violence. They not only pelted stones at the police but also the media gathered to cover it and even torched a car parked nearby.

The Delhi Police Special Branch in its report had said that illegal Bangladeshi Muslim migrants were responsible for the attack on the cops.

The report further stated that an organised group of Bangladeshi infiltrators were behind the massive violence in the Seelampur area.

Meanwhile, in the backdrop of violence that broke out in various parts of the country during National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) protests, Vice President M. Venkaiah Naidu today said that violence and democracy do not go together.
