Lok Sabha formula can't be repeated: JD(U)'s Prashant Kishor seeks lion's share of seats in 2020 Bihar polls

Prashant Kishor | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Prashant Kishor demands greater share of seats for JD(U) in next year's Bihar polls The Lok Sabha election formula cannot be repeated in the assembly polls, Kishor said The state's ruling allies had contested equal number of seats in the Lok Sabha elections this year

Patna: In what could rile up its ally BJP, Janata Dal (United) national vice president Prashant Kishor, on Sunday, said that his party should get the lion's share of seats in next year’s Assembly elections as it is the senior partner in the NDA in Bihar.

Kishor, who has been vocally cirticising the BJP over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC), said that the JD(U) should contest more seats than the BJP, unlike this year’s general elections. The state's ruling allies had contested the Lok Sabha elections this year on a 50:50 seat-sharing formula.

"In my view, the Lok Sabha election formula cannot be repeated in the assembly polls," Kishor was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

"If we look at the 2010 assembly polls, which the JD(U) and the BJP had last contested together, the ratio was 1:1.4. Even if there is a slight change this time, it cannot be that both parties fight an equal number of seats. The JD(U) is a bigger party, has close to 70 MLAs while the BJP has just over 50. Moreover, the Assembly elections are to be fought with Nitish Kumar as the NDA face,” he added.

The poll strategist-turned-politician further said that the formula of Lok Sabha polls 2019 could not serve as the basis for the Assembly polls in the state next year.

In the Lok Sabha polls this year, JD(U) and BJP had both fought 17 seats each, leaving six for Ram Vilas Paswan's Lok Janshakti Party (LJP).

"The seat-sharing formula in 2019 was decided without taking the 2014 poll results into account. I see no reason why a future election should be decided on the basis of 2019," he said.

In 2014, the BJP had fought the Lok Sabha elections along with the LJP and Upendra Kushwaha's RLSP and the three parties had together won 31 out of 40 seats in Bihar with the saffron party alone bagging 22 seats. The JD(U) had contested alone and managed to bag only two seats. The remaining seven seats were won by the RJD-Congress-NCP combine.

Meanwhile, the BJP said that all the decisions related to the 2020 elections will be taken by the top leadership of both parties.

"The BJP believes in maintaining decorum, discipline and not making any public statement which has only news value. All the decisions in NDA related to 2020 elections are a matter of discussion between our top leadership," state party spokesman Nikhil Anand said.
