Five held for killing RTI activist in Kandhamal

BERHAMPUR: Police on Sunday arrested five persons, including two contract killers, in connection with the murder of a Right to Information ( RTI ) activist at Baliguda in Kandhamal 19 days ago.K Biswajit Patra (42), S Balaji Achary (29) and Rasa Bihari Das (39) along with two contract killers were caught for allegedly gunning down 46-year-old Abhimanyu Panda at Baliguda near his house on December 10.Police did not disclose the names of the two contract killers. “Disclosing their names will hamper further investigation,” said SP (Kandhamal) Prateek Singh. One more accused is on the run, police said.A country-made pistol, three rounds of live ammunition, six mobile phones, a motorcycle, two pairs of shoes, a bag, two pairs of dresses and a jacket were recovered from the possession of the accused persons.The SP said though the deceased was an RTI activist, his murder was not related to his RTI activities. “Previous enmity between the deceased and Biswajit over a land in the Jagannath Temple was the main reason behind the murder,” he added. Abhimanyu was one of the members of the Jagannath Temple development committee, Baliguda.“Biswajit had approached Balaji and Rasa Bihari to teach Abhimanyu a lesson. The trio had hatched a conspiracy to attack the deceased. Balaji and Rasa Bihari had allegedly taken Rs 1 lakh to give a middleman the contract of finding the supari killers to eliminate Abhimanyu,” police said.The contract killers had gone to the house of Abhimanyu on a motorcycle. Police said when Abhimanyu came out of the house, they opened fire at him from a close range. He was taken to a hospital at Baliguda where doctors declared him brought dead. Nirmal Sahu, one of his relatives, lodged an FIR with police.“We formed five teams to investigate the murder from different angles and to search for the accused persons,” said the SP. He added that the accused persons were picked up from different areas.People of the area had put up a road blockade recently demanding the arrest of the accused persons, while RTI activists in the state had submitted a memorandum to Governor Ganshi Lal seeking his intervention in the matter.
