Defense news on: 2019 December 30 (acquisition and contracts)

Americas

Rolls-Royce won a $20.4 delivery order for C-130J Propulsion Long Term Sustainment. The deal provides funding for Option III. The Lockheed Martin C-130 is the US Air Force’s principal tactical cargo and personnel transport aircraft. The C-130J Hercules features a glass cockpit, digital avionics and a new propulsion system with a six-bladed propeller. The C-130J is equipped with four Allison AE2100D3 turboprop engines, each rated at 4,591 shaft horsepower. The all-composite six-blade R391 propeller system was developed by Dowty Aerospace. Work will take place in Indiana and is expected to be finished by February 1, 2020.

Boeing won a $265.2 million modification to the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) development and sustainment contract, under which the contractor will support the GMD Communications Network Modernization, the in-flight interceptor communications system data terminals technology upgrade, and complete the GMD fire control communication ground systems software build 8 early integration. The Ground-based Midscourse Defense is part of the United States’ ballistic missile defense system. It provides commanders with the ability to target and eliminate intermediate and long-range ballistic missile threats in space. It’s the second modification to the contract. The deal was originally awarded in January 2018 and obligated $6.56 billion for upgrades to the GMD system. In March Boeing received a $4.1 billion modification to the contract. Boeing will perform work in Alabama and Florida. Estimated completion will be on December 31, 2022.

Middle East & Africa

Mena Defense reports that Algeria signed contracts for the Su-34 and Su-57. The African nation is buying 14 examples of each type. The contract is allegedly set to be implemented by 2025. By this deadline the Algerian army will deploy two wings of Su-30MKA, one squadron of Su-57, one of Su-35 and one of Mig-29M2 for air domination, two squadrons of upgraded Su-24 and one of Su-34 for the bomber fleet. The decision makes Algeria the first foreign country to receive the Russian Su-57 fighter jets. The decision to obtain Su-57E jets was reportedly made by the Algerian leadership during the MAKS-2019 Air Show. The Su-57 jet is already in serial production for the Russian Aerospace Forces. The Russian military seeks to receive a total of 76 Su-57 fighters by 2028.

Europe

Russian Helicopters disclosed that the Russian Ministry of Defense has started joint state tests of Mi-26T2V heavy-lift military transport helicopter. The tests will take place on four proving grounds, according to a press release. The crew of the helicopter will include representatives of the Russian Aerospace Forces. As part of Russian Helicopters’ program on upgrading the heavy Mi-26 helicopter for the Russian Aerospace Forces, in 2018 Rostvertol produced a prototype of the modernized Mi-26T2V helicopter. The modernized Mi-26T2V helicopter, which can be used at any time of the day, is a heavy-lift military and transport helicopter which can carry up to 20 tonnes of cargo. The rotorcraft has the NPK90-2V integrated avionics which ensures piloting during the day and at night, enabling the helicopter to fly the route in an automatic mode, come to a preset point, perform approach and final approach maneuvers, and return to the main or alternate aerodrome.

Asia-Pacific

The Indian Air Force retired its last squadron of upgraded MiG-27ML ‘Flogger’ tactical ground-attack aircraft on 27 December. The move further reduces the service’s overall combat strength. Officials said that the IAF has “number-plated” the No. 29 ‘Scorpions’ Squadron based in Jodhpur, western India, until it is re-operationalized with new aircraft and manpower at a later stage. The move comes after the IAF retired its other MiG-27ML squadron in December 2018. License-built by India’s state-owned Hindustan Aeronautics Limited or HAL, some 165 single-engine, ‘swing-wing’ MiG-27s entered IAF service from 1985.

Raytheon won a $768.3 million deal for the Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile or AMRAAM Production Lot 33. The deal provides for the production of the AMRAAM missiles, captive air training missiles, guidance sections, AMRAAM telemetry system, spares and other production engineering support hardware. It involves unclassified Foreign Military Sales to Australia as well as Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Thailand, Turkey and the United Kingdom. The AIM-120 AMRAAM is a new generation all-weather, missile manufactured by Raytheon. The AMRAAM is in service with the US Air Force, US Navy, and over 25 US-allied nations. Work will take place in Tucson, Arizona. Expected completion will be on February 28, 2023.

Today’s Video

Watch: WARRIOR UPGRADE: Is This The Future Of The British Army’s Armoured Vehicle? | Forces TV
