A liberal pontiff who was bridge between all faiths

Udupi’s Pejawar Mutt

paryaya

Bengaluru

Poornaprajna Vidyapeeth

.

Ram Janmabhoomi

.

BENGALURU TO HAVE SEER’S VRINDAVANA

After breathing his last, the mortal remains of Swamiji were airlifted from Ajjarkad Maidaan in Udupi after a one-hour of public viewing. It arrived in National College grounds on Sunday afternoon and after one hour of public viewing it was straightway taken to Vidyapeeta for the consecration of Vrindavana. In fact, this is the first Vrindavan to be built outside Udupi in the last 700 years or so as all Swamijis of Ashta mutts (eight monasteries) of Udupi have their Vrindavanas in the precincts of Udupi Krishna mutt complex (except the Vrindavan of Madhava Thirtha first direct disciple of the 13th century Dwaitha philosopher Madhwacharya, which is built on the banks of Bheema river in Munnur in Afzalpur taluka of Gulbarga district).



.

Vishwesha Theertha Swami, aged 88, the revered and outspoken seer of, passed away on Sunday after he was hospitalised on December 20-1931 Pre-SanyasaVenkataramana Sanyasa-1938 Firstin 1954- January 2016-2018Swamiji breathed his last in the mutt on Sunday, at around 9.30 am after he was shifted from the Kasturba Hospital as his health condition deteriorated despite being on ventilator. The pontiff was admitted to the private hospital on December 20 after he was diagnosed to have pneumonia.The pontiff’s cortege was later brought towhere public paid homage at National College grounds before taking him tofor last rites.*****The sheer number of aspirants making a beeline outside the temple showed the enormous popularity the 88-year-old religious leader enjoyed in the southern part of India. In line with his principles, he had opposed Shiroor Mutt chief Sri Laxmivarateertha Swamiji’s move to enter the electoral fray during the 2018 Karnataka assembly elections. Besides being closely associated with the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, he was highly regarded by top BJP leadership including late AB Vajpayee, LK Advani and also Prime Minister Narendra Modi among many others. Though he had several politicians as his disciples and followers, the swamiji was opposed to spiritual leaders taking the plunge into electoral politics, saying it would tantamount to compromising their loftiness.Born in 1931, his outspoken comments on controversial issues attracted both praise and criticism. He stood his ground on three issues throughout his life; building the Ayodhya temple, abolition of the caste system and banning cow slaughter across the country.He was closely associated with the Vishwa Hindu Parishad and themovement in the past and had also demanded that cow be made the national animal of the country in the place of tiger. Despite speaking in favour of Hindu tradition including ban on cow slaughter, he never wanted to be perceived as anti-Muslim. He had also invited Muslims to break their fast during Ramzan in a ‘Souharda Upahara Koota’ (harmony breakfast meet) in the temple premises. Ahead of the Ayodhya Verdict, he had also stressed on harmony among the Hindus and the Muslims. “There should be no victory processions if the verdict comes in favour of Hindus,” he said. Despite having won several praises for visiting Dalit colonies, the Paryaya Swaiji was also caught up in a controversy about ‘Pankti Bheda’, a historical practice in which priests of the Brahmin caste are served food separately in the Krishna Temple in Udupi.Born on April 27, 1931 as the second child of Narayanacharya and Kamalamma from Ramakunja with the name Venkataramana, he was initiated into asceticism by the then head of the Pejawar Mutt Vishva Manya Theertha Swamiji at the tender age of eight, at Chakratheertha, near Hampi. He had written a Sanskrit poem called Samba Vijaya, and at the age of 25 he became the President of the Agamatraya Conference, organised by the Maharaja of Mysore. The Swamiji has ascended the ‘Paryaya Sarvajna Peetha’ for a record five times in 1952, 1968, 1984, 2000 and 2016. It was said Vishwesha Theertha Swamiji did not want to ascend the Paryaya Sarvajna Peetha for fifth time considering his age (85 then) and wanted his junior Vishwaprasanna Teertha to take the honour.According to his close aides, the Vishwesha Teertha Swamiji had a great admiration for Bengaluru. “He had confided in many of us at the Vidyapeeta that his Vrindavan had to be consecrated here for the reason that the Vidyapeeta was one of the projects that were close to his heart. This institution was a centre of higher study in Aagama, Tattwa, Madhwa philosophy, Sanskrit and many other facets,” Prasad Rao, of Brahmana Maha Sabha (Bengaluru) told MirrorThis is something like what we call a mausoleum as known in the west. “Mortal remains of the holy person like a Swamiji will placed in the designated place around which work of masonry will be done and lined with ornamental rough granite stone of a prescribed variety. This will be built at the height of 4-5 feet on a pedestal,” said Prahlad Acharya an elder of the Brahmin Community. The Vrindavana that is planned in Bengaluru Vidyapeeta will have simple outlook and structure.—M Raghuram
