Dense Fog Envelopes National Capital, Zero Visibility Claims 6 Lives, Air And Rail Traffic Disrupted

New Delhi:

Dense fog enveloped the national capital on Monday morning reducing the visibility to bare minimum. Three flights were diverted from Delhi airport due to heavy fog, an official said. Flights are operating at the airport under CAT III B conditions, which means that the runway visual range (RVR) is between 50 metres and 175 metres. Giving an update on flight operations at 7 am, the airport official said there was dense fog but no “flight has been cancelled” yet. The northern railways have announced that 30 trains are running late.

In Uttar Pradesh’s Greater Noida, six people, including two minors, were killed when their car skidded off the road and fell into a canal in Uttar Pradesh's Greater Noida, apparently due to fog, police said. Five other occupants of the vehicle sustained injuries in the incident that took place around 11.30 pm on Sunday, they said. “Altogether 11 people were on board the Maruti Ertiga. The car fell into the Kherli canal in Dankaur area. All 11 were taken to a hospital, where doctors declared six of them dead, while the remaining five are undergoing treatment,” a police spokesperson said. Prima facie, the accident appeared to have taken place due to low visibility caused by fog, the official added.

Low visibility in Delhi due to fog,visuals from Vasant Vihar area. Minimum temperature(in Safdarjung) at 4.6 degrees pic.twitter.com/y9YNPtrTZq — ANI (@ANI) December 30, 2019

Delhi continues to reel under a severe cold wave with the minimum temperature settling at 2.5 degrees Celsius on Monday morning.

Schools in Haryana will remain closed on December 30 and 31. "In view of the prevailing severe cold, the government has declared a holiday in all government and private schools in the state on December 30 and 31," an official statement said. In Haryana, minimum temperatures have been hovering close to the freezing point at some places, while day temperatures too have been settling in the range of 10-13 degrees Celsius at most places.
