Devoted to idea of India, a eulogy to social reformers who passed away this past lustrum

A statue of Dr BR Ambedkar (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The architect of India's constitution, Dr BR Ambedkar once said, "Political tyranny is nothing compared to the social tyranny and a reformer who defies society is a more courageous man than a politician who defies government." His words stand true, now more than ever, with social activists working even in the most remote parts of the country to uplift the dense fog of societal oppression.

Between 2015 and 2019, India lost a number of social reformers who dedicated their lives in the service of the people of India and the democracy that has held our country together, either from inside or outside the system of governance. It is impossible to name each reformer but here are some whose contributions to India continue to have a lasting impact even in this day and age.

Mahasweta Devi

Social reformer and Ramon Magsaysay awardee Mahasweta Devi passed away at the age of 90 in a nursing home in Kolkata on July 28, 2016. Honoured with the Jnanpith Award in 1996, she was a celebrated poet and novelist who addressed the oppression of tribals and the economically disadvantaged through her works. Throughout her life, she advocated equal rights for all and education for the girl child.

Justice PN Bhagwati

The 17th chief justice of India PN Bhagwati passed away on June 15, 2017, at the age of 90. A former chief justice of the Gujarat High Court, Bhagwati was later appointed to the Supreme Court of India. His contribution to judicial activism in India is considered to be unparalleled since it was he who introduced the concepts of public interest litigation (PIL) and absolute liability to the Indian judiciary. A champion of fundamental rights, he also addressed issues concerning the rights of prisoners in the prison reform system.

Gauri Lankesh

One of India's most well-respected journalists and editor of the Lankesh Patrike, Gauri Lankesh was shot dead outside her home in Bengaluru on the night of September 5, 2017. She wrote vociferously about issues related to gender equality, caste reservations, press-freedom, conservatism, and the true measure of patriotism.

Justice Rajinder Sachar

A former chief justice of the Delhi High Court, Sachar passed away on April 20, 2018, at the age of 94. A noted human rights activist, Sachar was the head of a committee which presented a report on the social, economic and educational status of Muslims in India. He was also closely associated with the People's Union for Civil Liberties.

Anna Rajam Malhotra

India's first woman Indian Administrative Services (IAS) officer, Anna Rajam Malhotra passed away on September 17, 2018. She was 91. Born in Kerala, she was first posted in Hosur as a sub-collector. Throughout the course of her life, she worked extensively to break the gender ceiling that covered the Indian civil services. She was also known for her effective handling of law and order situations and her efforts to protect wildlife.

TN Seshan

India's 10th and most remembered Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) TN Seshan passed away on November 10, 2019, due to a cardiac arrest in Chennai. He was 87. An Indian Administrative Services (IAS) officer of the 1955 batch from Tamil Nadu cadre, Seshan was appointed as the head of India's election body at a time when booth rigging and violations of model code of conduct were rampant. He single-handedly enforced election guidelines with a tight grip along with ensuring that even larger-than-life politicians adhere to it. It was during his tenure that voter IDs were issued to all eligible voters in the country.
