Police launch manhunt after woman’s mutilated body found in Mpumalanga

The South African Police Service (SAPS) released a statement on 29 December 2019, saying it has launched an intensive search to track down the perpetrator(s) of a gruesome murder that took place in Tweefontein, near Zamani Primary School, in Mpumalanga, Whiteriver

Police greeted by gruesome scene

According to reports, on Saturday 28 December 2019 at about 8:30, police were called by members of the public to attend to the gruesome murder scene.

Police rushed to the scene and upon arrival, they found the lifeless and semi-naked body of a 25-year-old woman. Some of the woman’s body parts were missing.

The body of the woman, who has since been identified as Sphiwe Mtshweni, also had multiple stab wounds.

A case of murder has been opened.

Suspect arrested for woman’s murder in separate incident

Meanwhile, police in Emzinoni, Mpumalanga, arrested a 28-year-old man in connection with the murder of 48-year-old Mapule Jaquiline Thekiso. Her body was discovered floating in a dam on 17 November 2019, at Mzinoni.

Thekiso was reported missing in Vosman on 18 November 2019.

Rudolph Ngwenya was arrested in Calcutta near Hazyview in Mpumalanga, for being in possession of a stolen motor vehicle which belonged to Thekiso. Ngwenya has also been linked to her murder.

Ngwenya first appeared at the Bethal Magistrate’s Court on 24 December 2019 where the case was postponed to 7 January 2020.

Police commissioner condemns ‘heartless killing’

The provincial commissioner of police in Mpumalanga Lieutenant General Mondli Zuma has strongly condemned the women’s murder and has appealed to the community to assist with information that can assist in apprehending Mtshweni’s killers.

“I am disturbed by the heartless killing of women in this province. It is paramountly important that people should talk if they have differences than killing each other,” said General Zuma.

The police appeal to the public to assist with information that could lead to the arrest of the suspect(s) by calling Captain Vusimuzi Mahlangu at 082-318-9894 or contact Tweefontein SAPS on 082-922-9412.

Members of the community can also anonymously call 08600 10111. Alternatively, the public can download MYSAPS APP to anonymously send valuable information to the police.
