Luhajhar mishap which claims lives of nine labourers completes one year

Gumma: The Luhajhar mishap which claimed the lives of nine labourers has completed a year Wednesday.

Nine labourers of Gumma block died in a road accident at Luhajhar ghat under Parttada panchayat of Kashinagar block in Gajapati district February 13 last year.

The accident happened when a brick-laden truck overturned and rolled down to a 40-50 feet gorge. Six others sustained critical injuries.

Some of the injured persons are still trying to recover, while for some it is difficult to make life normal again.

One among them is Jubula Gamang of Anukumba village. He had slipped into a comma after the mishap. After spending six months in hospital, he had returned home. At that time his family members were hopeful that Jubula would be able to recover. But Jubula is still under the care of his parents.

At the time of accident, the administration had provided only Rs 30, 000, while the family has so far incurred Rs 4 lakh cost as medical expenses.

“It has been one year since the mishap occurred, but it has left me a physically challenged person. I cannot move like a normal person. My treatment is still going on,” said Jubula.

Inash Gamang has also suffered like Jubula. Prior to the accident, he used to be the sole bread earner for his family. Now he is confined to bed as he is yet to recover fully.

“I was severely injured in the accident. My treatment is still going on. I am not able to earn anything for my family now. My condition has forced my wife to work as a daily labourer. Whatever she earns is falling short to meet family expenses. It is difficult for us to manage the medicine costs,” Inash said, adding that the district administration had given him Rs 5000 from the Red Cross fund.

Rahul Gamang used to read at a residential school in Parlakhemundi till his mother Milkha Gamang’s death in the mishap. Now he is reading at his village school while his father has gone to Mumbai as a labourer. “The loss of mother is still haunting me,” he said.

The family of Sita Gamang, who died in the mishap, has suffered a lot. Her two sons and one daughter are now being brought up by their grandmother. “The eldest of the three has been enrolled at a village school. But all the three children are crying at the mere mention of their mother,” said the elderly woman.

Three villagers from Aarabhal were killed in the accident. The government had given Rs 2 lakh as ex gratia to their families.

However, all the victims who survived that accident are leaving a wretched life. They don’t have BPL cards, nor have they been included in any government programmes or schemes. Suman Bhuyan, a physically challenged woman, lost her earning son Ebijan in the accident. She is also not getting disabled pension. “ Sometimes she is found crying sitting near the place where her son was laid to rest,” a villager said.

Block development officer Natabar Garada said an investigation is necessary to ascertain the condition of these families before providing assistance.

PNN
