Hyderabad: Battling for life for over a month, supervisor thrashed by delivery boy dies

The entire incident was caught on CCTV camera and went viral on social media. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Supervisor V Sivaram was thrashed by Muneer delivery boy on November 20 after he had taken up the matter about Sivaram had slipped into coma after being hit by the delivery boy against whom he had raised a complaint Accused was angry after a complaint was made against him that his work as a delivery boy was not upto the mark

Hyderabad: A supervisor has died a month after he was badly thrashed by a delivery boy named Muneer. The victim, 20-year-old V Sivaram was working for the ASCA Management Services, a third-party for Amazon. The attacker had entered the office premises of ASCA Management Services in Tolichowki area of Hyderabad on the pretext of apologising to Sivaram, according to The Times of India. Muneer caught hold of Sivaram, dragged him from his desk and thrashed him mercilessly in a fit of rage.

After he attacked Sivaram rather viciously on the head, the colleagues pacified Muneer and Sivaram had apparently returned to his hostel on a short leave, complaining of a headache. Later, his hostel-mates found him unresponsive and took him to a hospital. He had been in a coma ever since.

According to a report in Times of India, Sivaram succumbed to his injuries on Sunday, 30 December.

The entire incident was caught on CCTV camera and went viral on social media. The victim's father previously told TOI that the company that his son worked for had not told the victim's family about the mishappening at the office and that they learnt about it two days after the assault. After he came to know about the background of the assault, Sivaram's father Shankaraiah lodged a complaint at Golconda station in Hyderabad under Sec 325 of the IPC that covers the charge of voluntarily causing grievous hurt. The family also told TOI that they were demanding that Muneer be tried under Sec 307 of the IPC under charges of attempt to murder. The victim's father also said that the company that employed his son should also take responsibility as the life-threatening incident took place in its premises.

After the victim's death, police have converted the assault FIR into murder. The accused was arrested after a complaint was made against him.
