Gujarat: Three dead, one missing in fire at bulk storage tank in Kutch

RAJKOT: At least three persons were killed and one was missing after a fire broke out in a bulk liquid chemical storage tank in Kandla of Kutch Monday noon. The bodies were charred beyond recognition, said police.They added that while the fire had been brought under control, but it was yet to be doused completely. The chances of the missing man surviving the blaze were negligible, added police.According to eyewitness, the smoke billowing from the bulk storage tank was seen from two kilometres away from the Deendayal Port Trust (DPT). Some also claimed that they heard an explosion before the fire and saw the cover of tank being blown away.The fire broke out around 1.45pm at the facility of independent bulk liquid storage company IMC, when the maintenance work was being carried out."The tank was used to store methanol in bulk. The top cover of the storage tank blew up due to high pressure generated inside after the fire. The reason for the fire is yet not clear. We have called the forensic experts who will examine the tanks once the fire is doused,” Kutch (east) superintendent of police Parikshita Rathod told TOI.VF Zala, police inspector at Kandla marine police station, who was at the spot, confirmed that three charred bodies have been recovered, while one of the workers was missing.“Four men were carrying out maintenance work on the tank when the incident took place. Bodies of all three have been charred beyond recognition,” said Zala.Venu Gopal, secretary of DPT said, “The tank contained about 2,000 metric tonnes of methanol. We have provided all the possible support in dousing the fire. Fire tenders from DPT, Kandla Timber Association, Salt Association and Gandhidham Municipality were pushed into service to douse the fire.”According to witness, a number of slum dwellers were residing near the bulk storage facility. If the fire would have not been controlled on time, it could have engulfed the slum area too.
