CBI raids premises of 2 serving IAS officers, 6 retired J&K officers over issuing of arms licenses to non-J&K residents

SRINAGAR: The CBI raided 17 locations across the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir on Monday, besides places in Gurgaon, Noida and Mohali, in connection with the alleged involvement of two serving IAS officers and six retired Jammu and Kashmir Administrative Services (KAS) officers in an arms licence scam unearthed by the J&K police CID in 2017.

It is the first CBI operation in J&K after the nullification of Article 370 on August 5, 2019 and the bifurcation of the state into two Union Territories. The agency acted after acquiring original jurisdiction to act against corruption after the reorganisation of the state.

The eight officers during their tenure as district magistrates of various districts across J&K had issued two lakh illegal arms licenses between 2012 and 2016 to non-residents of the erstwhile state.

CBI sleuths raided the offices and residences of the then district collectors and district magistrates of Kupwara, Baramulla, Udhampur, Kishtwar, Shopian, Rajouri, Doda and Pulwama.

In Noida, the CBI raided the residence of IAS officer Yasha Mudgal. “A nine-member CBI team arrived at her house in Sector 61 early on Monday and searched it. They left after 4.15 pm,” an official said. Local police were not in the loop. “We have heard about the raids but did not receive any official communication about it,” SP (city) Ankur Aggarwal said.

The FIR, registered in 2018, names two IAS officers — Yasha Mudgal of the 2007 batch and Rajeev Ranjan of the 2010 batch. While Mudgal was DM of Baramulla and Udhampur , Rajeev Ranjan was DM of Kupwara when they issued the arms licences. Both IAS officers are at present working in the government of the now Union Territory of J&K— Mudgal is currently CEO and MD of Power Distribution Corporation Jammu and Ranjan is CEO of Jammu Metro Rail Corporation.

The six retired KAS officers allegedly involved in the issuing of “arms licenses to non-residents of J&K in violation of rules after receiving gratification” are Itrat Hussian, former DM of Kupwara; Salim Mohammed, former DM of Kishtwar; Mohammed Javed Khan, former DM of Kishtwar and Shopian; F C Bhagat, former Rajouri DM; Farooq Ahmed Khan, former DM of Doda; and Jehangir Ahmed Mir, former DM of Pulwama.

A communication, along with a report from a security agency with regard to the “indiscriminate issue of gun licenses in J&K”, from the Union home ministry in 2018 had sped up the investigation, official sources said. The CBI had taken over the investigation on October 25, 2018.

Sources said an unusually large number of gun licenses were issued in Kupwara by officials posted in the office of the DM. The sources claimed the procedure to issue these licenses was flouted and also mentioned the involvement of a Jammu-based arms dealer who allegedly acted in collusion with officials in the DC’s office.

A Rajasthan police anti-terrorist squad investigation in that state, too, had reported the racket where only 10% of the over 2 lakh gun licenses issued across the Valley had been issued to residents of J&K.

Mudgal served in various positions, including as DM of Udhampur and Baramulla districts, between 2015 and 2016. In June 2016, she was transferred to New Delhi as the additional resident commissioner.

FIRs were registered for alleged criminal misconduct and criminal conspiracy under the Ranbir Penal Code and Section 3/25 of the Arms Act, besides provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, by the CBI’s Chandigarh unit.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
