Koregaon Bhima: Cop on duty at site of violence which killed brother

It is duty first for policeman Vishnu Phatangade, brother of 30-year-old Rahul Phatangade, who was killed in the Koregaon Bhima violence on January 1, 2018. Attached to the bomb detection and disposal squad (BDDS) of Pune Rural police, Vishnu has already reached Koregaon Bhima area with his team and will be on duty at the site till January 1.

Lakhs of people, mainly from the Dalit Ambedkarite community, are expected to gather at Jaystambh in Perne village for the 202nd anniversary of the Battle of Koregaon Bhima on the day.

On January 1 this year, exactly a year after his brother was killed in the Koregaon Bhima violence, Vishnu was on duty at the Jaystambh between 4 am and 10 pm. On Monday, while Vishnu did not comment saying he was on duty, his mother said the main accused in the case had not been arrested yet.

Vishnu resides at the police quarters in Pune with his mother Janabai, who has not been keeping well since Rahul’s death.

A member of the Maratha community, Rahul ran a garage at Chandan Nagar in Pune city and was a resident of Sainath Nagar in Sanaswadi. Around 5 pm on January 1, 2018, Rahul was allegedly picked up by a mob, which allegedly beat him to death.

According to police, the mob had chased Rahul as he was wearing a jacket with a picture of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj.

Rahul’s friend Datta Sitaram Pardhe had lodged the FIR on charges of murder in the case at the Shikrapur police station. Pune Rural police subsequently arrested three suspects in this case before the investigation was transferred to the state Criminal Investigation Department (CID).

Based on clues obtained from a video, where some suspects were purportedly seen attacking Rahul, the CID identified a few more accused and arrested one of them from Daund taluka in Pune district in June 2018. The CID had also released the video and photographs of the suspects while appealing to people to provide information about them.

A family member of Rahul said that even after having vital details, like videos and photographs, the investigators had not been able to arrest the main accused till now.

Several others, including persons from various communities and also police personnel, were also injured in the Koregaon Bhima violence.

‘Want permanent rehabilitation’

Ashok Athavale, a Dalit whose rented house in Sanaswadi, from where he ran a fabrication shop, was torched during the Koregaon Bhima violence on January 1, 2018, has now shifted to PMC Colony in Kasba Peth. Two years later, the incident is still fresh in his mind.

“It (the rented house and the shop) was torched by a mob around 1.20 pm during the violence. Then, around 7 pm, I was beaten up, too. The government has shifted my family to Kasba Peth and has also given us Rs 60 lakh in compensation… But what we want is a permanent rehabilitation. Also, we want strong action against those who attacked our house,” Athavale said. He added that his wife and children were unwell ever since the incident.

“We were under fear after the riots and so on January 7, 2018, I lodged an offence at Shikrapur police station. Police have not done satisfactory investigation in this case and those who damaged our house, shop and attacked me are still moving freely,” he said.

Claiming that he no longer felt safe in Sanaswadi, Athavale added that like every year, he would still go to Jaystambh on January 1 to mark the anniversary of the Battle of Koregaon Bhima.

“I am the president of a social organisation, Panchsheel Bahu-uddeshiya Trust, which has made arrangements for providing food to around 10,000 visitors on January 1,” he said. He added that there has been massive police deployment in the area and he was hopeful there would be no untoward incidents this year.
