Robbers’ chase of ATM cash van ends at police station, two held

ALLAHABAD: It appeared to be a scene straight out of an action movie. A cash-loaded van with robbers in a car chasing it, while firing bullets. Except in this case, the chase ended with two of the robbers being arrested.A group of six unidentified men tried to rob an ATM cash van unsucessfully near Nansaini near Narwa turn, under Saini police station, in Kaushambi on Monday.Deputy IG (Allahabad range) KP Singh said the van’s driver Anees Kumar Pal was driving the vehicle to Kaushambi from Allahabad to refill ATMs of a nationalised bank in Dadanagar on Monday.Around 10.30am, a group of six unidentified men in a car overtook the Pal’s vehicle and hurled two crude bombs to scare the driver. Pal injured his right hand in the attack, but continued to drive. The front mirror of the cash van was also damaged.The robbers then fired at the tyre, but missed. Pal sped up and stopped the van at Kada Dham police station.He got out of the van and alerted the police. Police teams from three police stations — Kada Dham, Saini and Pura Mufti — started chasing the robbers in the car.The police cordoned off the Allahabad-Fatehhpur Highway and adjacent routes.Acting on tip-offs about the whereabouts of the accused, police nabbed one of them, Balwant Kushwaha, near Gulamipur Road.The DIG said that Kushwaha allegedly opened fire on the police, after which the police also retaliated leaving him injured. He sustained a bullet injury on his right leg and was referred to Kaushambi district hospital.Police also nabbed another accused near Khaga bus stop, while he was planning to flee to Fatehpur. An FIR was registered under section 395, 398 and 286 of the Indian Penal Code and section 7 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act. Police also seized the car in which the accused were travelling.Singh also said that the police are trying to trace the other four accused. Meanwhile, Pal, a resident of Sarayinayat, was taken to hospital for treatment.
