Maharashtra Cabinet Expansion: After snub to brother, Sanjay Raut skips swearing-in

Sunil Raut

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut

NCP-Congress alliance

Aaditya Thackeray

Sunil Prabhu

Untitled Carousel Aaditya Thackeray will have major say in his father’s Cabinet, but will also face challenges An alumnus of Bombay Scottish School, Mahim, Aaditya is a graduate in History from St Xavier’s College and has a law degree from KC College. On Sunday, the eve of the Cabinet expansion, he was in Nashik with his father. It was only around 8 am on Monday that he was told about his inclusion in the Cabinet.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut

Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray

Sena MP was upset as his brother, MLA from Vikhroli, was denied a cabinet berth, sources said.skipped the cabinet expansion on Monday. Sources said he was upset as his brother Sunil Raut, an MLA from Vikhroli, was denied a cabinet berth. Sanjay Raut was one of the most vocal voices against the BJP and a key player who got the Sena andtogether.Amid buzz that Sunil Raut had threatened to resign, Sanjay Raut denied that he was unhappy. “My family and I are always with the Shiv Sena. We are loyal to the Thackeray family. Our family has contributed to the government’s formation in the state. It is a government of three parties, so whatever is given in quota has to be accepted,” said Raut. “We have never asked for anything. Instead, we believe in giving to the party. My brother Sunil never demanded a ministerial berth. Some people are only spreading rumours,” he added.A senior Sena functionary said that Sunil Raut was a front-runner for a ministerial berth but was dropped afterwas inducted into the cabinet. “Sunil Raut and other MLAs likeand Ravindra Waikar were in the race for ministerial berths. But since Aadityaji made an entry they had to be dropped. There was a limit on the number of MLAs from Mumbai who could be accommodated,” the functionary said.Sunil Raut’s being dropped as a minister came as surprise as his brother Sanjay Raut and the paper he edits, Sena mouthpiece Saamana have single-handedly taken on the BJP over the last two months. While all Sena leaders had maintained a studied silence, it was Raut and Saamana that had attacked the BJP-led government. Raut had not only hit out at the BJP for failing to adhere to the reported 50:50 power sharing deal between the two parties, but he met NCP supremo Sharad Pawar several times and played a key role in stitching together a Sena-led government in the state with help from NCP and Congress.Raut was so popular in Sena circles that his memes were going viral and his photographs were being used as wallpapers on mobile phones.had said that there was a 50:50 power-sharing deal between the Sena and the BJP but it was Raut who had taken the BJP head on, creating pressure on the BJP, with his acerbic attacks through tweets, statements and editorials.Other old timers like MLCs Diwakar Raote and Ramdas Kadam, MLA Deepak Kesarkar and Tanaji Sawant were also dropped from the council of ministers.
