Police probe PFI for CAA stir deaths in Uttar Pradesh's Meerut

File photo of an anti-CAA protest in Meerut. At least 4 people were killed in the city during the protests.

The Meerut police has been investigating links between the recent violent clashes in Meerut to the Popular Front of India (PFI). According to sources, the events of December 20 were not a one-off incident. The PFI has been spreading their tentacles in Meerut since July 2019. It was the first time when a working office was established near Nauchandi area in Meerut, sources said.

Police sources said that the first pamphlet issued was titled 'Bekhof jiyo, Baizzat jiyo (Live fearless, live with honour)'.

This was right after moblynching incidents related to alleged cases of cow slaughter became rampant in Uttar Pradesh. The pamphlet reminded the reader about the cold-blooded murder of Tabriz Ansari in Jharkhand.

"Tabrez Ansari was attacked by a mob, was beaten for hours and forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram and Jai Hanuman'", the pamphlets read.

The Meerut Police registered two cases of making inciting statements in a religious context - one in Lisadi Gate police station and another in Nauchandi police station - and arrested PFI zonal head Mufti Shazaad and his accomplice Mohm Waseem. Waseem is out on bail. While keeping track of the activities of PFI, another pamphlet came to light on December 15. This time, the pamphlet was stuck to the back on an e-rickshaw in the area. It was to remind people of the demolition of Babri Masjid, which occurred on December 6, 1992.

"Let's not forget 6 December 1992 when Babri Masjid was demolished and 9 December 2015 when the verdict went against justice! Let's recall the first defence!" the pamphlet reads. Another pamphlet was seen again on December 18, just two days before the violence erupted in the city.

The pamphlet was distributed during the anti-CAA and NRC protests. It appealed to people to come out in huge numbers after the Friday prayers and block roads outside the main masjid in the area. Statements like, 'Muslims' right to vote will be taken away, Muslims will be stripped off their right to buy/sell land or property, and Muslims will be kept away from welfare schemes' were written on such pamphlets.
