Meerut police announce bounty of Rs 20,000 each on 3 people accused of firing at the cops

Protests have been turning violent in several places | Photo Credit: ANI

Meerut: Amidst the ongoing violence in the state of Uttar Pradesh, owing to the protests against the amended Citizenship Act, Meerut police have announced a bounty of Rs 20,000 each on three persons who have been accused of firing at police during the protests on December 20.

SSP Meerut, Ajay Sahani, while talking about the same, said, "Three people are accused of firing on police during the protest. They have been identified on the basis of video footages. Bounty of Rs 20,000 is declared on their head.”

He also added, "On the basis of photographs and videos of the incident that took place on December 20, many people have been identified and names of 50-60 people are included in the investigation. We are getting a non-bailable warrant (NBW) issued against them from court and their properties are being mortgaged."

Protests in various parts of Uttar Pradesh turned violent as there were clashes between the protesters and the police. Lucknow, Kanpur, Gorakhpur, Meerut and Sambhal are some of the areas that have been worst-hit by the anti-CAA protests. It was also reported that the protesters had indulged in stone-pelting or more serious clashes with police in Bhadohi, Bahraich, Amroha, Farurukhabad, Ghaziabad, Varanasi, Muzaffarnagar, Saharanpur, Hapur, Hathras, Bulandshahr, Hamirpur, and Mahoba districts.

To curb the violence and any further untoward incidents, the government ordered for mobile Internet services to be shut down in various parts of the state including Aligarh, Mau, Azamgarh, Lucknow, Kanpur, Bareilly, Shahjahanpur, Ghaziabad, Bulandshahr, Sambhal and Allahabad. In addition to that, police had resorted to lathi-charge and tear gas shells in many places after they were unable to contain the angry, protesting mobs. Recently, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had said that the protesters who destroyed the public property during the protests will have to pay for the damages. Simultaneously, in several places, notices were sent to the residents to demand compensation for the damages.
