Mumbai Murder Case: Woman’s body found without head and legs in Mumbai

MUMBAI: In the third such case in a month, Ghatkopar police on Monday morning found the headless body of a woman near Naval Gate in Vidyavihar. The body, with the legs below the knees missing too, had been wrapped in a bedsheet and was spotted by passersby, who alerted the police. The woman is believed to be in her late 30s.Police said they were scanning CCTV cameras to establish who dumped the body. According to them, the woman could have been killed at another place and the body dumped at Vidyavihar. “The most important thing is to establish her identity, which will give us the direction for a speedy probe. We are also checking the records of missing persons,” an officer said.Akhilesh Singh, zonal DCP, said, “We have sent the body of the woman, who was in a nightie, to Rajawadi Hospital for post-mortem.” Ghatkopar police have registered a case of murder and destruction of evidence against unidentified killers.The passersby noticed blood stains on a bedsheet near a nullah on Vidyavihar Road and immediately informed police. “The autopsy report will help us to know the time of her death,” an officer said.This is the third unidentified body to be found in the city this month. On December 2, a suitcase was discovered in the Arabian Sea near Mahim Dargah containing a shirt, a sweater, trousers, one hand, one leg and the genitals of a man. In a week, police the city crime branch identified the deceased as Bennett Rebello (59), a Vakola resident, and arrested his adopted daughter who turned out to be a minor. Her 16-year-old boyfriend and a 19-year-old friend were arrested with her. Rebello was reportedly killed as he disapproved of their relationship. The girl told police that Rebello would sexually assault her. Both the girl and her boyfriend have been lodged in a children’s correction home, while her friend is in Arthur Road jail.In the second such incident, a man’s body bundled into a gunny bag was found floating in a drain in Chembur. RCF police said the corpse was in a highly decomposed condition and the limbs were trussed. After the autopsy, the man was identified as Devendra Akhade (32), an alcoholic, who would harass his family. Akhade’s Reshma Avhad alias Sonu (29) and brother-in-law Sumit Patankar (32) were arrested in the case.
