Modi Government in 2019: Key decisions taken by the Narendra Modi government in 2019

Here is a look at some of these decisions taken by the government —

1.

2. Reservation for economically weaker sections

3. Instant

becomes a criminal offence

4. Jammu & Kashmir loses special status

5. CAA/NRC

NEW DELHI: In 2019, the BJP-led NDA government came to power with a resounding victory. In the runup to the Lok Sabha elections and following its decisive mandate, the Narendra Modi government has taken several deicsion which hogged the national news headlines this year.On February 26, a vehicle-borne suicide bomber carried out a ghastly attack on a CRPF convoy on its way from Jammu to Srinagar leading to the death of 40 paramilitary personnel.The attack, the deadliest on Indian security forces since 1989, was carried out by Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed.A week later, on February 26, India retaliated by launching pre-dawn airstrikes destroying terror camps in Balakot, Pakistan, killing a large number of terrorists. Within hours, the Pakistan Air Force responded and in the ensuing dogfight, IAF lost a MiG-21 fighter leading to the capture of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman by the Pakistan forces.After 60 hours in captivity, Varthaman was released by Pakistan. The tensions between the two countries prevailed for several months.Ahead of 17th Lok Sabha elections in 2019, the BJP government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi brought the 124th Constitution Amendment Bill, 2019, which provided 10 per cent reservation to people from economically weaker sections (EWS) in government jobs and educational institutes.The amendment allowed those in the general category with an annual income of up to Rs 8 lakh to seek a reservation in government jobs and education.The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019 was given the presidential assent in July 2019 amidst objections from the Muslim community. In December 2017, the Supreme Court had declared instant triple talaq unconstitutional. Drawing upon Supreme Court's verdict, the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill was tabled in the parliament in 2017 but it failed to pass in both the houses.However, in July 2019, the Bill was passed in both the houses and the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019, made instant triple talaq by Muslim men a criminal offence punishable by a jail term of up to three years.The Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led BJP government in August announced the scrapping of Article 370 which gave special status to the state. In addition to scrapping to Article 370, the government also announced to split the state into two union territories— one was J&K with a legislature and second was Ladakh without a legislature.Abrogation of Article 370 was heavily condemned by various stakeholders in the country as well as witnessed scepticism from the international community.The abrogation was followed by a massive clampdown in the Valley, which included a heavy deployment of security forces, arrest of political leaders, including former chief ministers Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, and snapping of internet connections and phones lines.After a heated debate in Parliament, the Citizenship Amendment Bill was passed leading to country-wide protests. The controversial Act grants citizenship status to religious minorities, barring the Muslims, persecuted in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The passage of the Bill led to widespread protest across the country.In several places, the protests turned violent leading to loss of life and property. Opposition parties accused the government of trying to divide the country on communal lines with the introduction of the Act. The government refuted the allegations, claiming that the Act grants refuge to persecuted minorities in neighbouring countries.
