Why India needed a Chief of Defence Staff

Here's why it was much needed:

Blast from the past:

Back to the future:

Becoming efficient:

NEW DELHI: Outgoing army chief General Bipin Rawat 's appointment as India’s first Chief of Defence Staff CDS ), even though along expected lines, comes after a steep price paid in terms of India's defence.The lack of a CDS was most evident in the 1962 war with China, when a coordinated attack by the army with the air force, against Chinese troops who lacked air support, could have changed the outcome of the war. Even in limited offensive operations, such as the IPKF in Sri Lanka from 1987-89, the commanders from the navy and air force, under the Overall Force Commander (OFC), are said to have been no more than liaison officers. Perhaps the most acute need for a CDS was felt in the aftermath of the Kargil War 1999 which saw the army's request for air support get rejected by the CCS — thereby delaying the air assault by several weeks. Contrast that with the successful coordination in the 1947-48 hostilities with Pakistan and the India-Pak war of 1971 — both of which underlined the benefits of 'jointmanship'.With India being a nuclear weapons power, a CDS will not only serve as the government's go-to man for military advice but will also act as the military advisor to the Nuclear Command Authority which is headed by the PM. Additionally, in 2008, India also established its aerospace command — the Integrated Space Cell — for better coordination between the military, the Department of Space and ISRO. The CDS will also have under his charge the cyber warfare division. Moreover, unlike the current Chief of Staff Committee (COSC) — reserved for the senior most among the three service chiefs — General Rawat, as CDS, will have executive authority.Even though General Rawat, who, as CDS, will serve till he's 65, will have no operational or military command — including over the three service chiefs — he will help streamline the logistics as well as the capital acquisition needs of the three services, based on the anticipated budget. The newly created Department of Military Affairs (DMA) will also be under his command. The DMA, under the CDS, will restructure the military commands by establishing joint or theatre commands — India at present has 17 single-Service commands — on the lines of the one at Andaman & Nicobar Islands or the Strategic Forces Command that's incharge of India's nuclear weapons, in order to facilitate optimum utilisation of men and materials.Meanwhile, the Indian Navy on Monday banned the use of smartphones and social media by its personnel at naval facilities, days after seven Navy personnel were arrested on espionage charges. The Navy had only discouraged the use of social media by its staff previously.
