Biggest news of 2019 India: News that defined India in 2019

1. First time in history women enter Sabarimala Temple

Bindu Ammini , the woman activist who has had darshan at Sabarimala last year.

2. Terrorists attack Indian Army in Pulwama; IAF retaliates with cross-border airstrikes

Defense security force giving gun salute to CRPF jawan Vasanthakumar.

3. Reservation for economically weaker sections

4. Lok Sabha elections 2019

5. Instant Triple Talaq becomes a criminal offence

6. Jammu & Kashmir loses special status



7. Chandrayaan-2



8. Ayodhya verdict

9. CAA/NRC

10. Abhijit Banerjee wins Nobel Prize in Economics along with two others

The year 2019 proved dynamic for India, to say the least. Marked by key political decisions, space missions and Indians winning honours across the world, 2019 saw much activity round the year. And as we bade farewell to this year, here is a review of the events that defined India in 2019:For centuries no woman of menstruating age was allowed to enter the Sabarimala Temple in Kerala until January 2019 when two women, Kanakadurga (39) and Bindu Ammini (40), amid heavy police security, stepped inside the temple for the first time.The entry of women in the temple was banned by a Kerala high court in 1991. But in September 2018, a Supreme Court bench lifted the ban allowing women of all age groups to enter the temple. Following which, in January 2019, Kanakdurga and Bindu became the first-ever women to enter the temple.The SC order drew violent protests from the community which saw the verdict as interference in their religion. The 2018 apex court order, delivered by a five-judge bench, has now been referred to a larger seven-judge bench for review.On February 26, a vehicle-borne suicide bomber carried out a ghastly attack on a CRPF convoy on its way from Jammu to Srinagar leading to the death of 40 paramilitary personnel.The attack, the deadliest on Indian security forces since 1989, was carried out by Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed.A week later, on February 26, India retaliated by launching pre-dawn airstrikes destroying terror camps in Balakot, Pakistan. Within hours, the Pakistan Air Force responded and in the ensuing dogfight, IAF lost a MiG-21 fighter leading to the capture of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman by the Pakistan forces.After 60 hours in captivity, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was released by Pakistan. The tensions between the two countries prevailed for several months.Ahead of 17th Lok Sabha elections, the BJP government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in January brought the 124th Constitution Amendment Bill, 2019, which provided 10 per cent reservation to people from economically weaker sections (EWS) in government jobs and educational institutes.The amendment allowed those in the general category with an annual income of up to Rs 8 lakh to seek a reservation in government jobs and education.India witnessed its 17th Lok Sabha elections in 2019 which proved to be historic for the ruling BJP. For the first time in three decades, a party was able to secure a clear majority in the Lok Sabha after BJP won 303 out of 543 seats. The BJP-led National Democratic Alliance won 353 seats.The massive mandate decimated the opposition parties. The Indian National Congress failed to impress and could win a mere 52 seats.Despite facing a massive anti-incumbency, the saffron party increased its vote share. Out of the 60.37 crore votes polled, BJP's vote share was 37.36 per cent and NDA's combined vote share was 45 per cent. The Congress, the largest party in the opposition, secured a vote share of 19.5 per cent.The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019 was given the presidential assent in July 2019 amidst objections from the Muslim community. In December 2017, the Supreme Court had declared instant triple talaq unconstitutional. Drawing upon Supreme Court's verdict, the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill was tabled in the parliament in 2017 but it failed to pass in both the houses.However, in July 2019, the Bill was passed in both the houses and the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019, made instant triple talaq by Muslim men a criminal offence punishable by a jail term of up to three years.The Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led BJP government in August announced the scrapping of Article 370 which gave special status to the state. In addition to scrapping to Article 370, the government also announced to split the state into two union territories— one was J&K with a legislature and second was Ladakh without a legislature.Abrogation of Article 370 was heavily condemned by various stakeholders in the country as well as witnessed scepticism from the international community. The abrogation was followed by a massive clampdown in the Valley, which included a heavy deployment of security forces, arrest of political leaders, including former chief ministers Farooq Abdullah, Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, and snapping of internet connections and phones lines.It was both a moment of joy and despair for the country after Isro's lunar exploration mission succeeded in reaching the lunar orbit but Vikram lander failed to make the intended soft landing and crashed. The Pragyan lunar rover also crashed along with the Vikram lander. The objective of Isro's Chandrayaan-2 mission is to map and study the variations in lunar surface composition, as well as the location and abundance of lunar water. The spacecraft was launched on July 22 by GSLV Mark III. It reached the Moon's orbit on August 20.The Supreme Court of India brought the curtain down on one of the longest and the most historic legal disputes in the history of modern India. The apex court on November 9 delivered the final verdict in the Ayodhya land dispute case. The court ordered the disputed land (2.77 acres) to be handed over to a central government-created trust to build the Ram Janmabhoomi temple. It also ordered the government to give an alternate five acres of land in another place to the Sunni Waqf Board to build a mosque.After a heated debate in Parliament, the Citizenship Amendment Bill was passed leading to country-wide protests. The controversial Act grants citizenship status to religious minorities, barring the Muslims, persecuted in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The passage of the Bill led to widespread protest across the country. In several places, the protests turned violent leading to loss of life and property. Opposition parties accused the government of trying to divide the country on communal lines with the introduction of the Act. The government refuted the allegations, claiming that the Act grants refuge to persecuted minorities in neighbouring countries.Banerjee became the tenth Indian or a man of Indian-origin to win the prestigious Nobel Prize. Banerjee shared the prize with his economist-wife Esther Duflo and another US-based economist Michael Kremer.The Indian-American economist who is currently the Ford Foundation International Professor of Economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology won the prize "for an experimental approach to alleviating global poverty."
