Hyderabad woman dies in horrific car accident in Michigan, organs harvested for donation

Chareetha Reddy Aella, Hyderabad woman who died in car crash in Miichigan [Photo credits: Facebook]

Key Highlights Chareetha Reddy Aella, 25, a Indian software developer in the US, lost her life in a car accident in Michigan Chareetha's organs have been donated as, earlier, she had expressed her desire to donate her organs in case of any tragedy The deceased last visited her parents in Hyderabad in 2016

New Delhi: On Sunday night in Michigan, a 25-year-old Indian woman from Hyderbad, suffered grievous injuries in a deadly car accident and was declared brought dead by the Mercy Health Hackley Campus in Muskegon. The deceased identified as Chareetha Reddy Aella was an employee at a software firm in the United States and hailed from Secunderabad. Three other people also got injured in the accident and are currently recovering and being treated in the hospital.

The deadly crash occurred at 9 pm at Ottawa County’s Crockery Township. Reportedly, the Toyota car in which Chareetha Reddy Aella was travelling along with three others, took to the right side with activated blinkers. A man from Muskegon Heights, who was driving on the right lane lost control and crashed his luxury car into the Toyota.

Chareetha, who was seated in the rear end, received the maximum impact of the collision. The man who was driving the luxury car was believed to be drunk at the time of the crash.

The hospital declared Chareetha to be brain dead and harvested her organs for donation. Reportedly, Chareetha had, earlier, pledged to donate her organs to the needy in case of any tragedy.

“Two years ago, she had documented her wish to donate organs to the needy. As per her wish, the family has decided to donate the organs in the United States itself. The doctors would harvest heart and other organs,” one of Chareetha’s relatives who arrived in the US told Telangana Today.

It is expected that Chareetha’s mortal remains will be flown back to Hyderabad to perform her funeral rituals.

Chareetha, who worked as a software developer in the States, graduated from GITAM, Hyderabad and later relocated to the US to pursue post-graduation. Her father runs a business and her mother is a homemaker. She last visited her family in Hyderabad in 2016.
