Fact Check: Are Mamata supporters thrashing this man for favouring NRC in Bengal ?

Screen grab of a video whcih is going viral on the social media in which a mob can be seen badly thrashing a helpless person

Mamata Banerjee has staunchly opposed the idea of National Register of Citizens and has also led anti-NRC protests in West Bengal.

Meanwhile, a video is going viral on the social media in which a mob can be seen badly thrashing a helpless person. It is being claimed that the people thrashing him are Mamata Banerjee's supporters and are beating a BJP worker for speaking in favour of National Register of Citizens (NRC) in West Bengal's Basirhat.

A Facebook page 'Modi Sarkar' has posted this 35-seconds video with a caption in Hindi that translates to "Jihadis of Mamata brutally thrashed a BJP worker in Bengal's Bashirhat for speaking in favour of NRC. When will Jungle Raj end in Bengal?"

Till the time of filing of this story, the video has already been viewed by over 1.51 lakh times and shared more than 3,500 times. The archived version of the Facebook post can be seen here.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading. The man being thrashed in the video has nothing to do with the NRC.

In fact, this was a result of fight between two rival groups of BJP's Barasat's unit. The person being thrashed was a former Mandal president of BJP and he was beaten by the rival faction of the party. Mandal President is an organizational post in BJP.

To verify the claim, we reverse-searched key frames from the video using InVID tool. It led us to a news report of Aaj Tak aired on December 5 this year. According to the report, two groups of the BJP workers had clashed during a meeting in North 24 Parganas of West Bengal.

We spoke to the Aaj Tak correspondent who had reported this news that that time. He confirmed that the person beaten up in the video is Rajkumar Pal, a former BJP Mandal President in Barasat.

We contacted Rajkumar Pal to know the reality of the viral video. Pal told us that there was dispute over election of a BJP Mandal President in Barasat. He too confirmed that the fight was regarding the the election of a party post and has nothing to do about NRC.

Rajkumar Pal also shared copy of the FIR he had lodged regarding this incident. The FIR also confirms that the incident was about fight over rivals groups of the party.

Bengali newspaper Sangbad Pratidin has also published a news on December 4 reporting this incident. This news reports also does not mention any NRC angle in it.

It was now evident that the fight in the viral video has nothing to do with the NRC issue.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Mamata Banerjee's supporters thrashed BJP Worker for speaking in favour of NRC in West Bengal. Conclusion Viral video has nothing to do with the NRC issue. Internal factionalism between BJP workers had led to this ugly fight. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
