Tamil Nadu: Woman smashes ex-boyfriend’s head in front of husband

In the melee, the actor smashed Ravi's head with a hammer who collapsed after bleeding profusely and died on the spot. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman kills ex-boyfriend in front of her husband in Chennai Accused is identified as 42-year-old small time TV actor S Devi After killing Ravi, Devi reached police station and confessed to murder

Chennai: In a shocking incident, a woman allegedly killed her former boyfriend by smashing his head after he insisted that the woman resume her relationship with him. The victim has been identified as 38-year-old M Ravi, a film technician.

The 42-year-old woman, who is said to be a Television actor, killed the man after hitting him on his head with a log and a hammer at her sister's house in Kolathur area of the city.

According to a report in the Times of India, the accused actor identified as S Devi later surrendered to police. Police have also arrested Devi's husband, her sister Lakshmi and Lakshmi's husband in connection with the murder.

All four accused have been sent to jail by a local court. According to the police, the victim, a resident of Madurai, befriended the smalltime TV actor and started a relationship with her.

Around two years back, the actor's husband came to know of her alleged affair with Ravi and persuaded her to end her relationship with the man to which she agreed.

After some time, the victim managed to trace Devi in Kolathur area where she had been living and running clothing her smalltime business.

On Monday, Ravi reached Devi's sister's house at around 1.30 am and pleaded her to help him get to reunite with the actor. Devi's sister Lakshmi lives in the same neighbourhood. After Ravi's insistence, Lakshi allegedly called Devi to her residence in the middle of the night. Devi's husband also accompanied her to Lakshmi's house.

As Devi and her husband reached Laskhmi's home, Ravi kept the same demand before the actor and a heated exchange erupted.

In the melee, the actor allegedly smashed Ravi's head with a hammer who collapsed after bleeding profusely and died on the spot. Later, the actor reached Rajamangalam police station and confessed to killing the film technician.


