8 Spas to Seek Out in the New Year

For all the merriment in the air, the holidays can take a lot out of you—mentally, physically, emotionally. To speed healing, and keep your body in fighting shape for the year ahead, consider seeking out a restful, restorative spa treatment. Fortunately, the wellness offerings couldn’t be more varied right now. Whether you want to sculpt your facial muscles with firming physiotherapy, stretch your limbs with watsu massage or energize your entire body in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber, these newly opened—and soon-to-open—spots combine ancient, holistic wisdom with modern, high-tech touches to deliver a total-body tune-up. Here’s to starting 2020 with a calm, clear head and skin to match.

Shou Sugi Ban House Photo: Courtesy Shou Sugi Ban House

Shou Sugi Ban House, New York

For a slow-beauty-style Hamptons retreat, head to Shou Sugi Ban House in Water Mill, N.Y., an intimate, Japanese-inspired ryokan (or inn) set on three pastoral acres designed by landscape architect Lily Kwong. Itineraries are entirely customized and might include craniosacral massages to break up fascia and align your spine, skin-firming micropuncture facials or ceremonial-like body treatments: The Roots Unbound, for example, starts with a frankincense-, hyssop- and ginger-infused massage to boost immunity and finishes with a fresh serving of digestive bitters (and more plant-based delights await in the restaurant, which is overseen by Danish culinary wonder Mads Refslund).

Remedy Place Photo: Courtesy of Remedy Place

Remedy Place, Los Angeles

The latest addition to the wellness club scene, Remedy Place is the go-to spot in Los Angeles to train your body, relax your mind and reboot your system with tailored health tonics (a dash of oregano for immunity, a bit of turmeric to ease inflammation...). Founded by chiropractor Jonathan Leary, D.C., Remedy offers monthly memberships, but non-members can book everything from rebalancing hyperbaric oxygen therapy to muscle-rejuvenating ice baths to vitamin-infused IV treatments. Just chilling in the interior is soothing, too—the setting subtly emits 7.83hz and 40hz sound frequencies to ground and energize the brain.
