Within 2 Months, Another RTI Activist Killed in Pune: Slain RTI Activist Satish Shetty’s Brother Again Pleads with CBI for Not Closing the 2010 Case

The gruesome saga of a violent deaths continues for those who take head-on the land or the builder mafia in Pune, a city that has the dubious distinction of having witnessed the first ever murder of a right to information (RTI) activist in the country.

On 13 February 2010, Satish Shetty, who procured vital information of illegal land deals along Pune-Mumbai Expressway in February 2010, was brutally killed in broad daylight, while returning from his morning walk.

- Eight years later, on 12 February 2019, the body of 32-year old RTI activist Vinayak Shirsat, allegedly murdered, was found in the thickets of Mulshi.

-This was preceded by the brutal killing of another RTI activist of Pune, 27-year old Rohit Junavane on 1 November 2018.

-There was another murder that of RTI activist Suhas Haldankar on 9 April 2018 for exposing several civic lapses and inefficiencies of corporators in the Kharalwadi area of Pimpri-Chinchwad.

Investigations in Shirsat’s case are on; two people have been arrested a couple of days back. When Mr Shirsat did not return home on 1st February, his family lodged a `missing’ complaint with the Bharati Vidyapeeth Police Station located in South Pune.

Thereafter, his brother lodged another police complaint of `kidnapping’ when the `missing’ complaint seemed to go nowhere. However, police were on the search in Mulshi area based on the last location of his cell phone. On 12th February, his body was found in the thickets of Mulshi.

Mr Shirsat had recently filed an RTI application against a builder in the Wadgaon Dhayari neighbourhood, resulting in some action from the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC).

Police are exploring the possibility of revenge taken due to the use of RTI and perhaps the motive of the murder. Shirsat had political affiliations and used RTI for building violations.

Similarly, 27-year old Rohit Junavane was brutally killed on 1 November 2018, in the upper crust neighbourhood of Aundh. He too, as per police reports, had filed an RTI application to procure details about a particular construction project. The murder took place at 5.30am when a group of people attacked him violently with sickles. Mr Junawane was rushed to the hospital but passed away while being treated.

Nine people have been arrested.

Mr Junawane belonged to a family who were in the milk delivery business. As per police information, a few days before Mr Junawane was killed, he had filed an RTI application for information on the building plan of a house belonging to a man called Gajendra alias Dada More, a resident of Aundh. Mr More had gone to the office with his friend where Mr Junawane was submitting the application and allegedly threatened him with dire consequences.

One can safely say that, emboldened by the Satish Shetty murder, which is still languishing in the CBI, the case allegedly being hushed, thanks to some prominent entrepreneurs embroiled in it, the spiteful elements have got a boost. Will the cases of Shirsat, Junavane and Haldankar be objectively investigated and solved?

Hope is bleak. The following letter to Rishi Kumar Shukla, the new CBI director on 9 February 2019 speaks a lot about Mr Shetty’s angst and frustration, as the CBI is trying to close the case, violating its own rules and regulations, despite its investigation report having nailed the 13 accused, including the top boss of Ideal Road Builders which operates and maintains the Mumbai – Pune Expressway.

“My name is Sandeep Shetty, brother of the late Satish Shetty, who was an RTI activist and was murdered on 13 January 2010 in Talegaon Dabhade, Pune , Maharashtra. The case was handed over to CBI in April of 2010 by the Maharashtra state govt. through a notification during an ongoing suo motu writ, filed by the Hon. Bombay High Court.

Sir, it’s over 8 years now and there has been little progress in the investigation , and with due respects to the institution that CBI is, I have no hesitation in stating that this is not due to incompetence of the Investigating officers but the malafide intent of some senior officers in CBI.

The CBI had deployed three teams till date, beginning with STF, Mumbai, the I.O. being Mr. Pramod Kumar Manzhi , then taken over by ACB , Pune, the I.O. being Mr. Sushil Pratap Singh and currently CBI SC II I.O. Mr. Vijay Kumar Shukla .

Sir, I have more than enough evidence to prove my claims and I have already filed a writ in the matter in Hon. Bombay High Court, but I would also admit that I have no intentions to malign the agency per se, but want to bring to your notice some very relevant acts of omission on the part of the investigating team and also its very conspicuous attitude to protect the wealthy and powerful accused in the case.

Sir, I had met your predecessor Mr. Alok Verma in February 2017, he had literally grilled the DIG of SCU II who was supervising the investigation and had questioned the dubious conduct of the Investigating team in the matter in front of me during this meeting, he also assured me that he will personally look into the investigation. But we all know the turmoil the agency has gone through for the past 2 years and thus nothing has changed even after this assurance

Sir, I can assure you the facts in the case will literally alarm you about the functioning of the CBI, and also this will bring further embarrassment for the agency in the higher courts when argued.

Sir, I am as concerned about the eroding integrity and credibility of the agency as any right thinking citizen of this country, and I want the CBI to come back again as a credible agency as this is the only hope for people like us who fight for justice for their murdered family members who gave up there life in the service of the this nation.

Sir, I have great hope, now that as you have taken over the agency and I can now expect to bring justice to my deceased brother who sacrificed his life for the good of our society. Sir I request that if you give me some of your valuable time, I may explain to you the facts of the case…

… Sir I have mailed you with great hope, and will be obliged if you look into this matter.’’

– Sandeep Shetty (brother of Satish Shetty)
