Fight not over, will ensure Kamal Nath, Tytler go to jail: Phoolka

Following his resignation from the Aam Aadmi Party, senior advocate and activist HS Phoolka on Friday said that the fight for him is not yet over. "After sending Sajjan Kumar to prison, I will now ensure to send Kamal Nath and [Jagadish] Tytler to jail."

Congress leaders Kamal Nath and Jagadish Tytler have been accused of inciting mobs during the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. Last month another Congress leader Sajjan Kumar was sentenced to life imprisonment by the Delhi High Court for his role in anti-Sikh pogrom.

At a press conference today (Friday, December 4), Phoolka said that there was a lot to learn in the past five years of his political career.

"Today, I realise that the decision to quit LoP [Leader of Opposition in Punjab assembly] was a right decision," he said.

Talking about the party, Phoolka said that the decision to convert this social movement into a political party in 2012 was incorrect.

Talking about Anna Hazare, Phoolka said that parties could have emerged from such movements. "There is a need to create a movement like Anna Hazare," he said.

Phoolka also said that many social workers who were with Aam Aadmi Party are different now. "Such people will have to put Anna Hazare movement together again," he said.

He said that he has always stayed away from all political meetings."I refused to become a minister because 1984 was a personal mission for me. Recent achievement can now prove, it was correct decision," he said while referring to Sajjan Kumar's arrest.

Phoolka has been leading the legal fight for justice for the victims of 1984 anti-Sikh riots, taking up cases against several Congress leaders accused of involvement despite the government cover-up.

Does HS phoolka want to become Punjab's Anna Hazare?

Phoolka also said, "If Anna Hazare can be a movement, a second movement can also begin in Punjab. In next 6 months, we will have a new outfit. The fight will especially be against drugs. I will go door to door."

He seems to be focussing all his energy now toward Punjab, after a seeming victory vis-a-vis 1984.

"It is a matter of shame that even gurudwara committee polls and panchayat elections had drugs being used in Punjab. I want to assure people in Punjab I shall not contest upcoming Lok Sabha elections and begin a movement for people."

Phoolka had stopped attending AAP's political meetings and even quit from positions. His reason was to focus solely on fight for victims in 1984.

AAP has not yet responded to Phoolka's plans.

After Shazia Ilmi, Prashant Bhushan, Yogendra Yadav, Ashish Khetan, and Ashutosh, Phoolka is recent big face to leave AAP.
