New Dorp Lane: Is a food renaissance in the drag’s future?

STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- For native Staten Islanders, especially those from the East Shore, New Dorp Lane once served as the heartbeat of the borough, back when the 117 bus traveled past The Melody Club, Chinatown Restaurant, Marty’s Soda Shop, the New Dorp Butcher Shop, Aida’s Bakery and Pinky & Jack’s candy store.

To understand New Dorp Lane’s past is to appreciate its future and potential as a restaurant row -- “potential” because it has arguably been in a little funk for the past two decades, with a heavy presence of nail salons on The Lane and new strip malls along Hylan Boulevard competing with better parking accommodations.

Yet it’s the charm of The Lane that attracts chefs and the food dreamers.

Giorgio Giove, owner of Pizzeria Giove, moved onto New Dorp Lane a few years ago because it had a small-town feel to it. Avi Shaiovici brought SoBol Acai Bowls & Beyond’s second Staten Island location to the block because of its proximity to schools and its “walk-ability.”

Shaiovici said on the restaurant’s first day in early January, “I think you have a mix of everything here. I like the diversity."

While such enterprising restaurateurs hope to drive the future of New Dorp Lane and make it Staten Island’s next booming food destination, changing demographics and a new Asian influence are also poised to make a mark on the strip’s rebirth.

RESTAURANTS TAKING ROOT

To have a restaurant row, you need to start with a diversity of food options -- lots of them.

Luckily, one fact has been clear in the history of restaurants taking root along New Dorp Lane: Once a building becomes a restaurant, it doesn’t usually go back to its old usage. The infrastructure is in place for a chef to easily set up shop.

Take the former post office at Clawson Street. It became King Chef for decades until new ownership established Jade Asian Bistro and redesigned the facade.

Before the Three J’s (Joe, Jack and John Mansueto) moved to Great Kills, it lived at 201 New Dorp Lane, a building to beget Toto’s and its current resident, Crown Palace.

After the 39-year-old Chinatown Restaurant at 366 New Dorp Lane shut down, it rolled into a series of eateries that ranged from upscale Greek to Twisters, a curious merging of 1950s music and decor with ’80s-style eats like stuffed potato skins and a deep-fried blooming onion. It is now Precious Island.

The entrenched plumbing, exhaust and firepit in place at 174 New Dorp Lane hails from its days as Nardino’s, then Rugantino’s, Johnny’s, Jubileo and now Brioso.

Giacamo’s Pizzeria and Restaurant of Brooklyn will occupy the former digs of Villa Monte. And restaurant owners from around the Island have expressed interest in taking over the recently shuttered Dominick’s Bakery, a corner property known to natives as Lemole Pharmacy.

Former New Dorp Lane retail spots now occupied by restaurants include SoBol Acai Bowls and Beyond and the soon-to-open ViVi Bubble Tea. Talk in the neighborhood is that 172 New Dorp Lane where B&A Jewelers lived for decades has been viewed by entrepreneurs looking to build a new restaurant.

FAR EAST FLAVORS

Ask some of the food service operators what they think about New Dorp Lane’s future and they see a budding new Chinatown.

Indeed, there is a distinct Asian influence on The Lane with restaurant ownership and food themes with Crown Palace; Precious Island Tea Shop, which serves dim sum; Chikurin with its mix of Chinese food, sushi and dim sum; Jade Asian Bistro’s upscale fusion concept, and the aforementioned ViVi Bubble Tea. On the periphery of The Lane, the Asian influence continues at New Dorp Plaza with Vietnamese fare at Pho Rainbow and Nori Sushi.

Dim sum is the mainstay of the Precious Island Tea Shop menu, a new restaurant in New Dorp. (Staten Island Advance/Pamela Silvestri)

Nicole Li of Something Sweet recognizes the blossoming Asian community on Staten Island, particularly on the East Shore. She came to New Dorp Lane eight years ago when the longtime ice cream spot, formerly home to Sedutto’s, became available.

Li’s sister-in-law was the one who spotted the location while working in the family business, the successful Fresh Tortillas. That, by the way, is the first Mexican restaurant in the neighborhood and one established by Chinese-Americans: Chinese-born Chun Qi Chen opened his “tienda,” Fresh Tortillas, on New Dorp Lane in 1999.

Angela Chow, a managing partner at Jade Asian Bistro, concludes the same about the influx of Asian business owners to the strip. While she feels her restaurant’s Chinese and Japanese food is distinct -- every dish has its own unique sauce and the sushi rolls contain mostly fish, not rice, she underscores -- the sheer number of restaurants in the neighborhood draws visitors to the area.

“I think it should be all food on New Dorp Lane. I think they should rename it ‘New Dorp Food Commons.’ People would come for food. It’s about drawing more audience to New Dorp Lane,” said Chow.

GETTING PATRONS TO NEW DORP LANE

Are there too many eateries on the drag?

One New Dorp Lane restaurant owner who asked not to be named lamented, “We don’t have enough guests right now.” Business was typically slow most of the time in his place except on Friday and Saturday nights.

But Cake Chef James Carrozza of Piece A Cake and Cookie Jar of New Dorp is decidedly hopeful.

“If more quality restaurants come, it will be a good thing,” he said.

Councilman Steven Matteo, a founder of the New Dorp Merchants Group and Business Improvement District, launched a program to bring Staten Islanders to The Lane’s restaurants in 2015 when the organization and the Staten Island Economic Development Corp. set in motion a well-orchestrated restaurant crawl.

The effort was a natural one with such a high concentration of eateries already in place with participants such as a Brioso, La Strada, John’s Deli (known for its hot roast beef), Pizzeria Giove, Piece A Cake, Taste of India II and Cantina Mexicana, a sit-down restaurant in the former digs of The Lane Diner.

“I worked with local business owners to form the BID not just to help them succeed, but also so that they could have more control over the future of New Dorp Lane," said Matteo.

“They now have the flexibility and the marketing expertise to adapt to the changing consumer market -- something they could not necessarily do as individual businesses working alone. New Dorp Lane is thriving, and that is a good thing. It has become a destination for Staten Islanders to shop, eat and obtain unique, local services,” said the councilman.

Extra steam from Piece A Cake and Cookie Jar on New Dorp Lane comes on particularly frigid days. (Staten Island Advance/ Jan Somma-Hammel)

MORE RESIDENTS, MORE DINERS?

New Dorp architect Phil Rampulla appreciates the possibilities of The Lane.

“I think it’s great as an urban planner because [restaurants] are busy at night when the retail businesses are closed. There’s plenty of parking. It’s well lit. It’s walkable. It’s attractive,” he said.

As for its future, Rampulla wants to see more residential use of the strip.

“I’d like see two to three stories above the stores. That would bring nighttime street life to New Dorp Lane, more demand for local retail services, which is slipping toward the nail salons. It’s not exactly what it was 20 years ago,” he added.

And the railroad, he said, should drive development upward into low- and mid-rise buildings.

“We don’t have a housing typology for young millennials and seniors because they’re leaving the Island. We’re catching that demand in St. George," Rampulla said.

Dongan Hills, on the other hand, is dotted with three- and four-story apartment buildings because of the zoning and demand for apartments.

“And it works,” Rampulla said.
