Man critically wounded in shooting attack in Bihar drops daughter to exam centre first

Patna: A man in Bihar, India, drove more than six kilometres on his bike despite being critically injured in a shooting attack so that he could drop his daughter at the examination centre. He took the serious risk just to ensure his daughter who was appearing at the grade 12 examination being conducted by the state school examination board didn’t miss her paper.

50-year-old Ram Kripal Mahato was carrying his daughter Damini Kumari on his bike to drop her at the examination centre located in Begusarai district on Wednesday when some six criminals riding on two bikes surrounded him from all sides midway and placed a revolver on his temple.

They were about to press the trigger when his daughter scuffled with the miscreants and pushed the revolver aside as a result of which the bullets hit her father’s chest. She raised an alarm and shouted for help, but by the time the villagers could rush to the scene, the miscreants fired another shot which hit another part of her father’s body as he bled profusely.

When the girl tried to rush him to the nearest hospital, the father told her to clutch his wounds tightly and then drove his bike for the next 20 minutes to drop her off at the JK School examination centre, more than 6km away. Reports said the daughter sitting behind continuously placed her hands tightly on his wounds to check the bleeding while the man drove fast to reach her to the school.

It was only after dropping her off to school that he sought help from the local villagers who admitted him to a local private clinic where his condition is still stated to be critical.

“I asked Papa (father) not to care about my exam and rush to the hospital when he got injured in the attack but he told me to sit behind so that he could drop me at the examination centre lest my one year will get wasted,” Damini told the media on Thursday. She said her father drove very fast and by the time they reached the exam centre quite many people had come for help.

“They (local villagers) carried him to the hospital while I rushed to the exam hall (to write the English paper),” she recounted.
