'Sacrifices will not go in vain,' says PM, others condemn Pulwama attack

Jammu and Kashmir politicians Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah were among the first to condemn the attack.

At least 18 soldiers were killed in an terror attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in J&K’s Pulwama.(Photo: @Irfansm_1 | Twitter)

Srinagar/New Delhi: Politicians across parties expressed their shock at the terror attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in J&K’s Pulwama on Thursday in which at least 30 soldiers were killed.

Terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack.

Decrying the attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, “Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. Sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly.”

Congress minister Navjot Singh Sidhu condemned the cowardly act and expressed 'dialogue' as the way out.

Navjot Singh Sidhu: It is condemnable, it's a cowardly act. It needs a permanent solution through dialogue, how long will the Jawans sacrifice their lives? How long will the bloodshed continue? People who do this must be punished. Hurling abuses won't help. #PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/R927il2bx1 — ANI (@ANI) February 15, 2019

I spoke to martyred #CRPF soldier H Guru's family over the phone and consoled them. Their grief is heartwrenching. We are with them.

I have instructed officials to speed up the process of compensation.#Pulwama — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) February 15, 2019

I spoke to martyred #CRPF soldier H Guru's family over the phone and consoled them. Their grief is heartwrenching. We are with them.

I have instructed officials to speed up the process of compensation.#Pulwama — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) February 15, 2019

Jammu and Kashmir politicians Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah were among the first to condemn the attack.

Disturbing news coming in from #awantipura . Twelve of our security personnel have been martyred and several have been injured. No words are enough to condemn the gruesome terror attack. How many more lives will be snuffed out before this madness ends? — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) February 14, 2019

Terrible news coming from the valley. A number of CRPF soldiers are reported to have been killed & injured in an IED blast. I condemn this attack in the strongest possible terms. My prayers for the injured & condolences to the families of the bereaved. #Kashmir — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) February 14, 2019

Governor Satyapal Malik said, “Forces responsible for the insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir are desperate and frustrated and just want to prove presence. Visibly it seems to be guided from across border as Jaish-e-Mohammad has claimed responsibility.”

As a soldier and a citizen of India, my blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks. 18 brave hearts from the @crpfindia laid down their lives in #Pulwama. I salute their selfless sacrifice & promise that every drop of our soldier’s blood will be avenged. #JaiHind — Vijay Kumar Singh (@Gen_VKSingh) February 14, 2019

Condemning the attack, Arun Jaitley said, “Attack on CRPF in Pulwama, J&K is cowardice and condemnable act of terrorists. Nation salutes martyrs and we stand united with families of martyrs. We pray for speedy recovery of the injured. Terrorists will be given unforgettable lesson for their heinous act.”

Hon'ble CM Sri KCR condemned the attack on CRPF Jawans in Kashmir. CM has stated that he is extremely moved on the grave loss of lives in the ghastly incident. CM conveyed deep condolences to the bereaved families of the martyrs and wished speedy recovery of the injured. — Telangana CMO (@TelanganaCMO) February 15, 2019

“We strongly condemn this cowardly attack, we extend condolences to the kin of the jawans who were martyred. This is the 18th big terror attack in the last 5 years under this Modi government,” Randeep Surjewala said.

I’m deeply disturbed by the cowardly attack on a #CRPF convoy in J&K in which many of our brave CRPF men have been martyred and a large number wounded, some critically. My condolences to the families of our martyrs. I pray for the speedy recovery of the injured. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 14, 2019

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee expressed her condolences to the families of the CRPF soliders who were killed.

Saddened that 13 CRPF jawans became martyrs today in Pulwama. We salute our brave jawans and extend our solidarity and condolences to their families. Our prayers for those injured. We wish them a speedy recovery — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) February 14, 2019

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said the country must stand united in this moment of grief.

Extremely shocking news coming from Pulwama (J&K). I strongly condemn the terror attack on CRPF convoy in which many casualties are feared. India must stand united in this moment of grief — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 14, 2019

Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik and his Rajasthan counterpart Ashok Gehlot also expressed their sadness.

Deeply saddened by the martyrdom of so many @crpfindia #jawans in terrorist attack in #Pulwama district of #JammuAndKashmir. Strongly condemn the cowardly act and condolences to the bereaved families. — Naveen Patnaik (@Naveen_Odisha) February 14, 2019

Reports suggest that the terrorists triggered the blast while the CRPF personnel were plying through the Srinagar-Jammu highway.
