Time Capsule buried to preserve glimpse of today’s technology for 100 years

Welcome Guest! You are here: Home » Science & Technology

Time Capsule buried to preserve glimpse of today’s technology for 100 years

The Time Capsule is made by students from various departments of Lovely Professional University

New Delhi: A Time Capsule with items representing today’s technology and India’s scientific prowess was buried today by Nobel Laureates Avram Hershko from Israel and F.Duncan M. Haldane from USA on the occasion of the on-going 106th Indian Science Congress at Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar.

The Capsule made by students from various departments of Lovely Professional University, was buried at a depth of 10 feet and will remain buried for the next 100 years. A plaque has been erected wherein It has been written that the Time Capsule will be opened on 3rd January, 2119.

"The Capsule contains 100 items that represent modern-day technology as experienced in India. Besides replicas of Mangalyaan, Brahmos Missile and Tejas fighter jet representing India’s scientific prowess, the Capsule contains laptop, landline phone,smart phone, drone, VR glasses, stopwatch, Amazon Alexa etc", the Ministry of Science & Technology said.

"The Capsule also includes consumer durables like air filter, induction cooktop, air fryer etc which are part of our day-to-day life. Some other products preserved are solar panels, hard disk with latest documentaries and movies and current science books being used for teaching class 12 students and a mirror-less camera", the ministry said.

"New technological capabilities are being added every few years. The Time Capsule has been developed to represent the technology know-how as it stands today and will provide an opportunity for future generations to have a glimpse of today’s technology a century later", it added.

For all the latest News, Opinions and Views, download ummid.com App .

Select Language To Read in Urdu, Hindi, Marathi or Arabic.
