Union minister Arun Jaitley says Pulwama attack will be avenged

The well-planned attack used a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device (known as VBIED) to target a CRPF bus that was part of a 50-vehicle convoy. (Photo: IANS)

Reacting to the worst terror attack since Uri, Arun Jaitley said the attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama district that killed at least 20 CRPF jawans was "cowardice and (a) condemnable act of terrorists."

"Attack on CRPF in Pulwama, J&K is a cowardice & condemnable act of terrorists. Nation salutes martyred soldiers and we all stand united with families of martyrs. We pray for speedy recovery of the injured. Terrorists will be given unforgettable lesson for their heinous act," Arun jaitley tweeted.

Attack on CRPF in #Pulwama, J&K is a cowardice & condemnable act of terrorists. Nation salutes martyred soldiers and we all stand united with families of martyrs. We pray for speedy recovery of the injured. Terrorists will be given unforgettable lesson for their heinous act. Arun Jaitley (@arunjaitley) February 14, 2019

Earlier, former Army chief General VK Singh said his blood boiled "at the spineless and cowardly attacks".

ALSO READ | In last 5 years, J&K saw 93% rise in death of security personnel in terror attacks

"As a soldier and a citizen of India, my blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks. 18 brave hearts from the CRPF laid down their lives in Pulwama. I salute their selfless sacrifice & promise that every drop of our soldier's blood will be avenged, "General VK Singh tweeted.

As a soldier and a citizen of India, my blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks. 18 brave hearts from the @crpfindia laid down their lives in #Pulwama. I salute their selfless sacrifice & promise that every drop of our soldier’s blood will be avenged. #JaiHind Vijay Kumar Singh (@Gen_VKSingh) February 14, 2019

At least 30 jawans of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were killed in a dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama. The well-planned attack used a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device (known as VBIED) to target a CRPF bus that was part of a 50-vehicle convoy.

Follow live updates here

The convoy was on the Srinagar-Jammu highway and was on its way to Pulwama when a suicide bomber driving an explosive-laden SUV crashed into the bus. The bus had around 45 jawans on board when the SUV crashed into it.

The bus was completely destroyed in the attack. The site of the attack resembled a war zone with body parts and vehicle debris strewn about.
