Pulwama Attack: Salman Khan, Vicky Kaushal and Abhishek Bachchan among other Bollywood celebs express anger

Follow us on Pulwama Attack: Salman Khan, Vicky Kaushal and Abhishek Bachchan among other Bollywood celebs express anger

The worst terror strike till day took place in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on Thursday. At least 30 entral Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed while other 40 are left injured. Terrorists had their target set on a convoy with around 200 kilos of explosive planted in a vehicle. According to television reports, terrorists triggered the terror attack when the convoy of more than 70 CRPF vehicles were plying through the Srinagar-Jammu highway. Terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack. Political leaders across all political parties have condemned this cowardly attack of terrorism on the Indian Army personnel. Many Bollywood celebrities including Salman Khan, Vicky Kaushal, Abhishek Bachchan, Farhan Akhtar, and Ajay Devgn have also strongly condemned this harrowing attack on humanity.

Salman Khan wrote, "My heart goes out for the Jawans of our beloved country and their families who lost their lives as martyrs to save our families... #YouStandForIndia"

Vicky Kaushal too stitched his words and said: "Deeply saddened and shocked to hear the news of the terror attack in #Pulwama . My heart goes out to the families of the brave CRPF soldiers we lost today and praying for the speedy recovery of those injured."

Abhishek Bachchan: Such terrible news coming from #Pulwama. Today when people are celebrating love, hate raises it’s ugly head too. My thoughts and prayers for the martyrs and their families.

Ajay Devgn took to his Twitter and wrote, “Horrible and disgusting. Anger can't be put into words. #KashmirTerrorAttack”

Uri actor Mohit Raina also condemned this cowardly act and wrote, "Rest in Peace,brave sons of India. When will they realise there is no FREEDOM because there is no SLAVERY.Just being played by few self centered,greedy people with malicious intentions.Loss of life is just pure loss of life.Hope someday sense will prevail"

Riteish Deshmukh: Absolutely tragic news coming from #Pulwama - Condolences to the families of the martyrs- & prayers for the injured jawans. Cowards are at it again. Absolutely deplorable

Swara Bhasker: Shameful! Tragic & shocking. Jaish-e-Mohammed has brazenly & shamelessly claimed responsibility. These monsters have no soul, no humanity. Pure evil! Why does this terrorist group have safe haven in #Pakistan ? @ImranKhanPTI RIP our brave soldiers, strength to bereaved families.
