Dozens of Indian paramilitaries killed in Kashmir car bombing

Dozens of Indian paramilitaries have been killed in the first suicide car bombing in the disputed region of Kashmir in nearly two decades.

A lone militant is believed to have driven a vehicle laden with explosives close to a central reserve police force (CRPF) convoy and detonated it just after 3pm on Thursday on a busy highway outside the state capital of Srinagar.

“The convoy was coming into Kashmir valley and was hit by a vehicle explosion which was carried out by a suicide bomber,” Sanjay Sharma, a CRPF spokesman, said. “It was a very powerful explosion and a bus has been completely shredded.”

Photographs from the scene showed the blackened, twisted remains of a vehicle surrounded by debris. No official death toll has been announced, but a senior police source in Srinagar told the Guardian 33 people had been killed and the toll is expected to rise as more of the dead are identified.

A former Jammu and Kashmir state police chief, SP Vaid, tweeted that 42 people had been killed which, if true, would make the attack one of the deadliest outside of a war zone in the country’s history.

The attack took place on a heavily guarded highway that serves as a key supply route for troops stationed in the Kashmir valley and along the ceasefire line with Pakistan. There were about 2,500 troops travelling in the convoy and more than 40 soldiers were on the bus that was targeted.

Indian soldiers stand guard near the site of the suicide attack. Photograph: Javed Dar/Xinhua/Barcroft Images

India’s prime minister Narendra Modi on Friday promised a strong response.

“We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilise us,” Modi said in a speech soon after he called his security advisers to consider a response to the attack.

The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility for the bombing. It said it was carried out by Adil Ahmad Dar, a locally recruited fighter from south Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The group released a video showing Dar delivering his will and a photograph of him surrounded by guns and grenades.

Militant groups have been fighting Indian security forces in Kashmir for 30 years. Control of the Himalayan region is divided between India and Pakistan and claimed in full by both, with a smaller patch administered by China.

Quick Guide Kashmir Show Who controls Kashmir? The region in the foothills of the Himalayas has been under dispute since India and Pakistan came into being in 1947. Both claim it in full, but each controls a section of the territory, separated by one of the world's most heavily militarised borders: the ‘line of control’ based on a ceasefire border established after a 1947-48 war. China controls another part in the east.

India and Pakistan have gone to war a further two times over Kashmir, most recently in 1999. Artillery, mortar and small arms fire are still frequently exchanged. How did the dispute start? After the partition of colonial India in 1947, small, semi-autonomous ‘princely states’ across the subcontinent were being folded into India or Pakistan. The ruler of Kashmir dithered over which to join until tribal fighters entered from Pakistan intent on taking the region for Islamabad. Kashmir asked Delhi for assistance, signing a treaty of accession in exchange for the intervention of Indian troops, who fought the Pakistanis to the modern-day line of control. In 1948, the UN security council called for a referendum in Kashmir to determine which country the region would join or whether it would become an independent state. The referendum has never been held. In its 1950 constitution, India granted Kashmir a large measure of independence. But since then it has eroded some of that autonomy and repeatedly intervened to rig elections and dismiss and jail democratically elected leaders. What was Kashmir’s special status? Kashmir’s special status, given in exchange for joining the Indian union, had been in place since 14 May 1954. Under article 370, the state was given a separate constitution, a flag, and autonomy over all matters except for foreign affairs and defence.

An additional provision, article 35a, prevented people from outside the state buying land in the territory. Many Kashmiris believed this was crucial to protecting the demography of the Muslim-majority state and its way of life. The ruling Bharatiya Janata party repeatedly promised to scrap such rules, a long-term demand of its Hindu nationalist support base. But analysts warned doing so would almost certainly ignite unrest. On Wednesday 31 October 2019, the government formally revoked Kashmir’s special status. The government argued that the provision had only ever intended to be temporary and that scrapping it would boost investment in Kashmir. Critics, however, said the move would escalate tensions with Pakistan – which quickly called India’s actions illegal – and fuel resentment in Kashmir, where there is an insurgency against Indian rule. What do the militants want? There has been an armed insurgency against Indian rule over its section of Kashmir for the past three decades. Indian soldiers and Pakistan-backed guerrillas fought a war rife with accusations of torture, forced disappearances and extra-judicial killing.

Until 2004, the militancy was made up largely of Pakistani and Afghan fighters. Since then, especially after protests were quashed with extreme force in 2016, locals have made up a growing share of the anti-India fighters. For Indians, control of Kashmir – part of the country’s only Muslim-majority state – has been proof of its commitment to religious pluralism. For Pakistan, a state founded as a homeland for south Asian Muslims, it is the last occupied home of its co-religionists.



Michael Safi and Rebecca Ratcliffe Was this helpful? Thank you for your feedback.

Though assaults by so-called fedayeen (“those who sacrifice themselves”) who will fight to the death are relatively common in Kashmir, Thursday’s attack is the first using a car bomb in 19 years. It follows the deadliest year for militants in a decade. Three gunfights this week left eight insurgents and one Indian soldier dead.

The last car bomb attack in Kashmir was carried out in 2000 by a Birmingham-born man who was using the name Mohammad Bilal.

Jaish-e-Mohammed is designated by the UN and Britain as a terrorist group and is alleged to have links to elements within the Pakistani government. China has repeatedly blocked attempts by the Indian government to have the UN security council declare the group’s leader, Masood Azhar, a terrorist.

The group carried out the most recent major attack in Kashmir in September 2016, when its fighters stormed an army camp in Uri, a garrison town near the ceasefire line with Pakistan, and killed 19 soldiers.

That attack prompted India to announce it had carried out an incursion into Pakistan-controlled Kashmir to destroy a militant staging ground, an operation referred to as “surgical strikes” and turned into a patriotic blockbuster film that is currently screening.

“The Pakistanis are wanting to up the ante again ahead of the election,” said Khalid Shah, an associate fellow at the Delhi-based Observer Research Foundation. India will hold general elections starting in April.

Modi, called the bombing despicable. “I strongly condemn this dastardly attack,” he tweeted. “The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly.”

Rahul Gandhi, the president of the main opposition Congress party, sent condolences to the victims. “I’m deeply disturbed by the cowardly attack on a CRPF convoy … in which 10 of our brave men have been martyred and many others wounded,” he said, quoting an earlier death toll.

The fact the alleged perpetrator was Kashmiri reflects a growing radicalisation of local youths in a militancy that was once dominated by Pakistani or Afghan fighters crossing the border. “That is the most worrying factor,” Shah said.

He said the Modi government appeared not to have a coherent policy in the region since 2016, when the killing of the militant leader Burhan Wani sparked mass protests that continued for months and which were often met with force by Indian security personnel.

“The government has focused on the number of terrorists killed in a particular year, but it’s lost sight of the fact that the recruitment of Kashmiri boys has gone up from 88 in 2016 … to 191 last year,” he said.

Modi campaigned in 2014 promising to adopt a hardline approach to militancy in Kashmir, and, with the election campaign about to begin in earnest, he is likely to face pressure from his Hindu nationalist supporters to respond strongly to this latest attack.
