In 93% cases, 'cow meat' seized in various states is not actually of cows

Welcome Guest! You are here: Home » India

In 93% cases, 'cow meat' seized in various states is not actually of cows

The findings are important as there has been a sharp increase in crimes against Muslims and Dalits in the name of cow slaughter and beef eating

Mumbai: Only 7% of the "cow meat" samples seized from 2014 to 2017 by authorities in various states and sent for DNA test were found to be of cows, the rest 93% were actually of bulls or baffaloes, a yet to be published report by the National Research Centre on Meat said.

Out of the 112 samples of meat analysed by the National Research Centre just eight samples (7%) were found to contain beef, while the remaining were of bull and buffalo. The samples were of the meat that was seized by police and animal husbandry officials in various states, according to a report published in The Times of India .

The National Research Centre on Meat is an institute under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and is located at Hyderabad.

The samples were collected by the police and animal husbandry departments from Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

The findings are important as there has been a sharp increase in crimes against Muslims and Dalits in the name of cow slaughter and beef eating ever since the BJP came to power in Delhi and other states.

According to data analysis website IndiaSpend, a total of 88 incidents of cow-related violence were reported since 2012, of which 86 were reported during BJP rule. A total of 33 persons were killed in such incidents. The opposition and various NGOs have alleged that fabricated charges of "cow slaughter" is being used to target Muslims and Dalits.

The National Research Centre on Meat suspected that as many as 69 of the samples would be cow meat. But this was disproved. “Interestingly, three samples suspected to be cow meat were found to be camel meat, and the sample suspected to be a dog was a sheep,” the researchers said.

The institute has received 80 more samples of meat in 2018, and their analysis followed a “similar trend”, The Times of India reported.

Cow slaughter is banned in India since 1976. However, BJP governments in various states banned consumption of beef which led to rise in violence against Muslims and Dalits. Besides, the ban has also affected badly the farmers and rural economy.

Recently, a police inspector was murdered in Bulandshahr district of Uttar Pradesh while confronting a violent mob protesting after cow carcasses were found in a nearby jungle area.

For all the latest News, Opinions and Views, download ummid.com App .

Select Language To Read in Urdu, Hindi, Marathi or Arabic.
