Gujjar agitation in Rajasthan: The hurdles in granting them quotas

Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Amid continuing Gujjar agitation in Rajasthan for reservation in educational institutions and state services, the Congress government acting presumably under the pressure introduced a bill in the state Assembly on Wednesday.

The bill named Rajasthan Backward Classes (Reservation of seats in educational institutes in the state and of Appointments and posts in services under state) Amendment Bill, 2019, proposes to increase the backward reservation from the present 21 per cent to 26 per cent with 5 per cent reservation to Gujjars, Banjaras, Gadia Lohars, Raikas, and Gadaria.

The demand for the reservation by the members of the Gujjar community in Rajasthan is more than one decade old. But this time the community led by Kirori Singh Bainsla, a retired Lieutenant Colonel in the Indian Army gave a deadline to newly the installed Ashok Gehlot-led Congress government. They asked him to start the process for granting quota to the Gujjars, including other communities, which ended on February 8.

Following this, the unrest began with eight to ten thousands protestors sitting on the tracks of Delhi-Mumbai train routes in Maksoodanpura near Malarna Dungar in Sawai Madhopur - a district with a sizeable population of people of Gujjar community.

Background of agitation

With their major presence in the Sawai Madhopur, Karauli, Dausa, Dhualpur and Bharatpur districts, members of Gujjar community come under the category of Most Backwards castes in the OBC category in Rajasthan. Since the majority of people from this community are engaged in agrarian activities like farming and animal husbandry, their presence in the educational institutions and state governments services are relatively low.

The initial demand for reservation can be traced from the fact that compared to other communities in the OBC category like Jats and Bishnoi’s, Gujjars are socially, educationally and financially backward and hence have not been able to reap the desired benefits of the reservation given under OBC category.

In the beginning, based on the above logic Gujjars raised the demand for their inclusion in the category of Scheduled Tribes. This led to the setting up of Justice Jasraj Chopra committee to examine the grounds of the Gujjar community. The Commission gave a negative report and clearly mentioned that Gujjars do not qualify for ST status.

Later, citing the findings of Justice Jasraj Chopra Committee (December 2007), the state government rejected their demand for inclusion in the ST category. The rejection of demand by the Raje government brought the Gujjars in conflict with the state administration and ‘Meena community’ who were the biggest beneficiary of ST reservation in Rajasthan.

The conflict soon engulfed the whole state leading to violent clashes which took the life of around 30 people. The ensuing violence and instances of loot and arson came to halt only when Raje government in July 2008 (Gujjar quota bill ) agreed to give five per cent reservation to the Gujjar and other communities under the special category.

But the granting of 5 per cent reservation by the state government didn’t fully result in the peace and stability in the state’s socio-political environment. The ground for the next phase of agitation soon got prepared as Rajasthan High Court stayed the provision of the five per cent reservation to Gujjars based on the ground that it exceeded the 50 per cent limit.

In 2010, the Congress government under Ashok Gehlot following talks with Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla, provided one per cent reservation to the Gujjars. The government could not provide 5 per cent quota again citing the 50% ceiling imposed by the apex court. Currently, the members of the Gujjar community are availing the one per cent quota given under the Congress regime.

In 2015, BJP government under the chief ministership of Vasundhara Raje introduced the Rajasthan Special Backward Classes Reservation Act, 2015, paving the way for 5% quota for the Gujjars but the legislation was struck down by the Rajasthan High Court on the grounds that it exceeded the 50% ceiling again.

Coming close to Assembly elections which were to take place at the end of 2018, the Raje government made another attempt to pacify the people of Gujjar community and brought the Bill to hike the Other Backward Classes quota from 21% to 26%. This too was rejected by the High Court in 2017.

According to legal and constitutional experts, in the present scenario trade-off between the demand of Gujjar community (5% reservation in educational institutes and state services) and requirement of the constitution (reservation beyond 50% limit is permissible only in special circumstances) can only be done if the suitable amendment is brought about in the Constitution.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
