Indonesian police carry out Valentine's Day raids to quash casual sex

Valentine's Day wasn't getting much love in Indonesia as authorities carried out raids to quash any casual sex and wayward gift-giving, while high school students protested against the celebration.

About 100 pupils in the country's second-biggest city, Surabaya, demonstrated against the chocolates-and-flowers celebration, saying it promoted Western decadence and casual sex.

'Say no to Valentine's now!' the group chanted, most of them teenage girls in hijab head coverings. Some held placards with phrases like 'Sorry Valentine's Day, I am Muslim'.

A group of Indonesian Muslim students took part in an anti-Valentine's Day rally in Surabaya on Thursday

School principal Arief Himawan warned that couples giving each other chocolates or other treats can quickly lead to sin.

'We want to remind our young generation not to be caught up in Western culture,' he said.

Authorities urged amorous couples to call it quits and carried out raids on Thursday in Surabaya, and Makassar city on Sulawesi island to snuff out any celebrations.

But it was a different story in Saudi Arabia, where for the first time no religious police could be found patrolling the towns confiscating Valentine's Day gifts of roses, chocolates and teddy bears.

The two Muslim nations had both previously banned the celebration, which originated in the Christian West; Saint Valentine is thought to have been a Roman bishop martyred in the third century.

But while Indonesian authorities doubled down on their stance - issuing a fresh Valentine's prohibition in conservative Aceh province - the Saudi leadership seemingly relaxed its own.

Anti-Valentine's Day rallies are not uncommon in Indonesia with some conservative Islamic groups denouncing the day as un-Islamic, saying it promotes promiscuity, casual sex and consumption of alcohol as well as being a foreign cultural influence

About 100 students in Indonesia's second-biggest city, Surabaya, demonstrated against Valentine's Day

In Saudi, a 2008 religious fatwa (order) decreed that restaurants must refrain from creating an romantic 'atmosphere' on February 14, and shops are banned from selling Valentine's Day merchandise.

Ordinary people tend to avoid wearing red and most ignore the occasion entirely.

But this year, despite no official announcement, there were signs that the government is quietly permitting discreet festivities to take place.

Some florists are displaying roses in their windows, patisseries are selling heart-shaped cakes and restaurants are decorating tables with red candles and petals, Bloomberg reported.

They likely took their cue from Ahmed Qassim al-Ghamdi, former head of the religious police in Mecca. The senior Islamic figure said Valentine's Day was secular and therefore not haram (forbidden) under Sharia law.

'It's a positive social event and to exchange good wishes for this is not against sharia', he said in an interview with Al-Arabiya.

'It is a kind gesture to share greetings on the occasion of social celebrations or Western parties, including Valentine's Day. It is legitimate to give roses, as long as this is done with peaceful people, who have no resentment or malice towards Muslims', al-Ghamdi added.

Meanwhile in India, anti-Valentine's Day protests by right wing groups, which say they are defending traditional values from western promiscuity, have also become an annual event.

Activists of India's right-winged Bajrang Dal today shouted slogans as they burned an effigy symbolizing Valentine's Day during a protest in Hyderabad.

Activists of India's right-winged Bajrang Dal shout slogans as they prepare to burn an effigy symbolizing Valentine's Day during a protest in Hyderabad, India

Indian students taking an oath to not marry without their parents' consent, at a school in Surat in India's western Gujarat state

Elsewhere more than 10,000 schoolchildren, some as young as six, made a Valentine's Day pledge not to marry without their parents' consent.

The vast majority of Indian marriages are arranged by families and couples who defy tradition to marry outside caste and religion face a severe and sometimes deadly backlash.

Some 10,000 pupils aged six to 17 and even some teachers took a vow at 25 schools to 'love and respect their parents till eternity' in the western state of Gujarat - the stronghold of Hindu nationalist Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman was widely hailed as a modernizer but the murder of Jamal Khashoggi in October has harmed his reputation

'I will always respect their decision because no one in the world has sacrificed for me like them,' said student Samadrita Banerjee.

People in swiftly-changing but still largely conservative India also often frown upon unmarried couples who can find themselves being abused and harassed in public places.

In Saudi, modernisation is happening more slowly, despite a serious of high-profile reforms brought in by the young crown prince Mohammed bin Salman since he came to power in 2017.

Men and women may now attend sporting events together, concert halls and cinemas have re-opened, and women were given the right to drive.

But the crown prince is also widely believed to have ordered the brutal murder of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi inside the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul on October 2.

And reports have surfaced that at least 10 women's rights activists imprisoned in Saudi for more than six months have been subjected to psychological and physical abuse, including sexual assault.
