Death toll in Pulwama attack breaches 40, double than Uri attacks which sparked surgical strikes by govt

The site of the blast where a car bomb rammed into CRPF convoy inflicting heavy casualties I Photo credits: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The terrorist attack carried out by the banned terrorist outfit JeM in Awantipora of Pulwama district on Thursday comes two years after a similar attack on army camp in Uri. The attacks in both Uri and Pulwama were carried out by the same Pakistan-based terror organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed. The attack on Thursday claimed the lives of 42 CRPF soldiers whereas the September 2016 on the 12th Brigade of the army claimed 18 lives.

Attack on security forces: Uri & Pulwama

Briefing the media on 2016 Uri attacks, Director General of Military Operations (DGMO) Lt General Ranbir Singh said all four terrorists belonging to JeM faction were neutralised by the security forces. After entering the compound of the Army facility in Uri sector, four terrorists lobbed multiple grenades in a short span of time which led to a massive fire in the barracks and tents where 13 jawans were instantly burnt alive and many other were injured. The exchange of fire between the Army personnel and terrorists lasted for six hours after which the terrorists were killed.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh: The attack was carried out by Pakistan backed Jaish e Mohammed. A strong reply will be given and I assure the people of the country this. The country pays tribute to the brave jawans who were martyred #PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/ATxYV6Q7sn — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

In the 2016 attack, the terrorists had come prepared with the knowledge of the camp in Uri. The attack came when security personnel were changing duties. On Thursday, a car bomb was used to target a convoy of CRPF vehicles. A Mahindra Scorpio driven by JeM terrorist Adil Ahmad Dar was rammed into a 78-vehicle convoy of the CRPF when it was moving from Jammu to Srinagar on the Srinagar-Jammu highway in Goripora area.

Surgical strikes in 2016: Govt reaction then and now

In a covert operation, Indian forces, in the dead of the night, carried out the surgical strikes inside Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) on September 29, 2018, inflicting heavy casualties on terrorists and "those protecting them". The operation was carried out in Bhimber, Hotspring, Kel & Lipa sectors, on Pak's side of LoC.

Shortly after the attacks in Pulwama on Thursday Home Minister Rajnath Singh said the attack was carried out by Pakistan-backed JeM and India will give a befitting reply to the dastardly attack. A meeting of the Cabinet Committee of Security will be held on Friday.

The sentiment was echoed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi who said the ultimate sacrifice of the brave soldiers "shall not go in vain". Union Minister Arun Jaitley vowed to give an "unforgettable lesson" to the terrorists.

Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba cut short his visit to Bhutan and rushed to Srinagar to attend a high-level security meeting on Friday.
