Pulwama attack on CRPF convoy: International community stands united with India in condemning attack

US Envoy to India Kenneth Juster along with other nations in condemning Pulwama attack | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: As Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists attacked the CRPF convoy in Awantipura, Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir, killing almost 40 Indian security men, the world stood by India and joined hands in condemning the ghastly attack. US, Russia, Bhutan, Nepal, Sri Lanka expressed condolences over the deaths of CRPF men in the suicide attack claimed by the JeM.

"We denounce terrorism in all its forms&reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with a decisive and collective response without any double standards. We express condolences to families of the deceased and wish a speedy recovery to injured," said the Embassy of the Russian Federation in a statement.

The US envoy to India Kenneth Juster said that the US Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in J&K. "We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it," he said in a statement.

US Envoy to India Kenneth Juster: U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in J&K. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it. #PulwamaAttack (file pic) pic.twitter.com/TwqnHwpIfs — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

"I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district — the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to @narendramodi and the families of police officers who lost their lives," said Sri Lankan PM Ranil Wickremesinghe.

Maldives Foreign Minister Abdulla Shahid said, "Strongly condemn the suicide terrorist attack on the convoy carrying Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir today. I extend my prayers and condolences to the bereaved families of the dead and injured." Meanwhile, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) said that the JeM is led by Masood Azhar, 'who has been given full freedom by Government of Pakistan to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under the control of Pakistan&to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity'.

"We reiterate our appeal to members of international community to support the proposal to list terrorists, including JeM Chief, as a designated terrorist under 1267 Sanctions Committee of UN Security Council&ban terror organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan," MEA said.
