Pulwama Terror Attack: US, Russia and others condemn killing of CRPF jawans

The worst terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir that killed over 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) men saw immediate global condemnation. The attack was claimed by Pakistan based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad.

US ambassador to India Kenneth Juster tweeted , "U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it."

The U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it. #KashmirTerrorAttack — Ken Juster (@USAmbIndia) February 14, 2019

French Ambassador Alexandre Ziegler said, "Our thoughts go out to the families of the fallen soldiers." & "France has always been and always will be by India’s side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms."

France most firmly condemns the heinous attack perpetrated in Jammu & Kashmir. Our thoughts go out to the families of the fallen soldiers.



France has always been and always will be by India’s side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms.#Pulwama #KashmirTerrorAttack — Alexandre Ziegler (@FranceinIndia) February 14, 2019

In a release, the Russian Embassy said it "condemns in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attack in Kashmir’s Pulwama district, which claimed precious lives of more than 40 CRPF personnel and left numerous people injured."

Calling for a strong response to terror, Russian embassy said, "We denounce terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with decisive and collective response without any double standards."

.@RusEmbIndia condemns in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attack in #Kashmir’s #Pulwama district, which claimed precious lives of more than 40 CRPF personnel and left numerous people injured.#pulwamaterrorattack@mfa_russia @MEAIndia @IndEmbMoscow pic.twitter.com/di2JTjQZXx — Russia in India (@RusEmbIndia) February 14, 2019

The response in the neighbourhood was also quick. Maldives President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih tweeted, "I strongly condemn the deadly terrorist attack in Kashmir today killing at least 40 people. We send our thoughts and prayers to those affected. The Maldives will continue to work with India and the international community to combat terrorism in our region and the world at large."

I strongly condemn the deadly terrorist attack in Kashmir today killing at least 40 people. We send our thoughts and prayers to those affected. The Maldives will continue to work with India and the international community to combat terrorism in our region and the world at large. — Ibrahim Mohamed Solih (@ibusolih) February 14, 2019

Maldivian Foriegn Minister Abdulla Shahid wrote a message to external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj condemning the terrorist attack & conveying sympathy to the Government and people of the Republic of India. In the message, he said, "The Maldives is fully committed to the fight against terrorism and will continue to work closely with India, and the international community in eliminating this global menace."

Strongly condemn the suicide terrorist attack on the convoy carrying Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir today. I extend my prayers and condolences to the bereaved families of the dead and injured.@MEAIndia — Abdulla Shahid (@abdulla_shahid) February 14, 2019

Nepal Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli was one of the first foreign leaders to speak to PM Modi and expresses his condolences on the terror attack. In a statement, Nepal govt said, "In line with its principled position, Nepal unequivocally condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and believes that such heinous acts of terrorism cannot be justified on any ground."

I called Prime Minister Modi ji this evening and condemned terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir today and also conveyed our heartfelt condolenses and sympathies to the families of the victims. — K P Sharma Oli (@kpsharmaoli) February 14, 2019

Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe in a tweet also expressed his condolences. He said, "I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district — the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to @narendramodi and the families of police officers who lost their lives."

I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district — the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to @narendramodi and the families of police officers who lost their lives. — Ranil Wickremesinghe (@RW_UNP) February 14, 2019

Former Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa tweeted, "The world should continue to combat terrorism."

I condemn the terror attack in Jammu & Kashmir that attacked a convoy, killing 44 soldiers. I extend my heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased. The world should continue to combat terrorism. — Mahinda Rajapaksa (@PresRajapaksa) February 14, 2019

The Bhutanese foreign minister said, " Shocked and saddened to hear of the dastardly terrorist attack in Kashmir" adding, "Hope the perpetrators will be brought to justice."

Shocked and saddened to hear of the dastardly terrorist attack in Kashmir, which has resulted in the loss of 30 precious human lives. We strongly condemn this heinous attack and express our solidarity with the families of the victims, and the people and Government of India. — ForeignMinisterBhutan (@FMBhutan) February 14, 2019

Israeli Ambassador Ron Malka in a tweet said, "Israel strongly condemns the terror attack in #Pulwama and stands by our Indian friends during this difficult hour."

Israel strongly condemns the terror attack in #Pulwama and stands by our Indian friends during this difficult hour. We send our deepest condolences to the CPRF and their families, the people of India and the Indian government following the terrible #KashmirTerrorAttack February 14, 2019

India had tried to put Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar on United Nations Security Council ban list but was blocked by Pakistan's all-weather friend China.
