Pulwama Attack: List of 42 CRPF Jawans Who Were on Bus Attacked by JeM in Jammu & Kashmir

Pulwama, February 14: In the latest tweet from a credible source, a list 42 jawans on travelling on the bus – the convoy of 76th Batallion of the CRPF attacked by Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist in Awantipora area of Pulwama district on Thursday – has come to light. However, there is no confirmation whether all these jawans were either martyred or injured. In the gruesome Fidayeen strike by JeM terrorist Aadil Ahmad, around 43 CRPF jawans were martyred, and about 45 others were wounded.

According to the tweet shared, there were 41 jawans travelling on the bus, while the other name is of the driver. There is no official information on who among the 42 was martyred or injured in the gruesome attack. Till the report was published, 40 CRPF jawans were martyred, where 46 were injured, reports IANS. Pulwama Terror Attack: Here's What We Know So Far About The Suicide Attack That Killed 40 CRPF Jawans in Jammu And Kashmir.

Taking cognisance of the incident, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has called for a Union Cabinet Committee on Security to meet at 9:15 am tomorrow and would discuss on the future course of action. The Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh has cancelled all his meeting and would be visiting the blast site tomorrow morning. Also, the National Investigation Agency has been given the charge of probing the incident, and a 12-member team will go to the blast site tomorrow morning.

Condemning the gruesome attack, Ambassadors of Russia, United States of America and France have expressed their condolences. Even the Prime Minister of Nepal and Sri Lanka and Foreign Minister of Maldives have condemned the incident.

The Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik urged all the Security Forces Commanders to enhance surveillance on every front and directed the District and Divisional Civil and Police Administration to immediately review the security management of all important installations and establishments. He has even stated that the attack was carried out with the help from across border, i.e. Pakistan.

(The above story first appeared on LatestLY on Feb 15, 2019 12:53 PM IST. For more news and updates on politics, world, sports, entertainment and lifestyle, log on to our website latestly.com).
