Pulwama Attack: Abhishek Bachchan, Arjun Kapoor condemn the terror attack on Indian army

While Valentine’s Day is all about celebrating and spreading love, in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir, it was hate and terror which shook the Reserve Police Force (CRPF) of India. In a harrowing attack, 30 CRPF personnel were killed today, February 14, by terrorists belonging to the Jaish-e-Mohammed group. As soon as the news broke, politicians from all over the country condemned the attack on social media including Prime Minister Narendra Modi. A lot of B-town celebrities also took to the micro blogging site Twitter and expressed their grief on the disturbing terror attack.

Offering his condolences to the martyrs’ kin, PM Modi tweeted, “Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly.” On the other hand, Abhishek Bachchan wrote on Twitter, “Such terrible news coming from Pulwama. Today when people are celebrating love, hate raises its ugly head too. My thoughts and prayers for the martyrs and their families.”

Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 14, 2019

Such terrible news coming from #Pulwama. Today when people are celebrating love, hate raises it’s ugly head too. My thoughts and prayers for the martyrs and their families. — Abhishek Bachchan (@juniorbachchan) February 14, 2019

Apart from Junior Bachchan, actor Riteish Deshmukh also offered his condolences. He wrote on Twitter, “Absolutely tragic news coming from #Pulwama – Condolences to the families of the martyrs- & prayers for the injured jawans. Cowards are at it again. Absolutely deplorable.” Arjun Kapoor, who is currently busy shooting for his upcoming film Panipat, tweeted, “Saddened & Shocked to hear of the cowardly attack on our #CRPFJawans in #Pulwana my heart goes out to their families…”

Absolutely tragic news coming from #Pulwama – Condolences to the families of the martyrs- & prayers for the injured jawans. Cowards are at it again. Absolutely deplorable. #pulwamaterrorattack — Riteish Deshmukh (@Riteishd) February 14, 2019
