Pakistan has given full freedom to terrorists who killed over 40 CRPF men in Kashmir, says India

New Delhi, Feb 14 (IBNS) India on Thursday said it strongly condemned "the cowardly terrorist attack on our brave security forces in Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir earlier today" by Pakistan based terrorists claiming the lives of over 40 CRPF personnel.

"This heinous and despicable act has been perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based and supported terrorist organisation proscribed by the United Nations and other countries. This terror group is led by the international terrorist Masood Azhar, who has been given full freedom by Government of Pakistan to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under the control of Pakistan and to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity," said India's Ministry of External Affairs in a statement.

"The Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard national security. We are equally resolved to fight against the menace of terrorism. We demand that Pakistan stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries," it said.

India also appealed to the international community to take note of the developments.

"We strongly reiterate our appeal to all members of the international community to support the proposal to list terrorists, including JeM Chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the 1267 Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council and to ban terrorist organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan," the MEA said.

"We express our sincere condolences to the family members of our fearless security personnel who have made the supreme sacrifice," it added

India condemns in the strongest possible terms the cowardly terrorist attack on our brave security forces in #Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir earlier today perpetrated by Pakistan based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammedhttps://t.co/qDRGM7CmYc pic.twitter.com/yObauXBnHS — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) February 14, 2019



.

More than 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were martyred and 14 others injured in a fidayeen (suicide) attack by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) militant outfit at Awantipora in south Kashmir district of Pulwama on Srinagar-Jammu national highway on Thursday afternoon.

{image_1}

Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) has claimed responsibility for the attack.

Militants rammed an IED-laden vehicle into a vehicle carrying CRPF at Goripora, Awantipora causing heavy casualty to the security personnel.




