Condolences pour in from across the globe for Pulwama terror attack

The site of the Pulwama attack resembled a war zone with body parts and vehicle debris strewn about. (Photo: Reuters)

Representatives of various countries condemned the attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district which resulted in the deaths of at least 44 CRPF jawans.

US ambassador to India Ken Juster in a tweet said the US stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it.

"The U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today's terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it," Ken Juster tweeted.

The U.S. Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it. #KashmirTerrorAttack Ken Juster (@USAmbIndia) February 14, 2019

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Maldives in a press release said it had conveyed its condolences to the Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj.

In a tweet, Foreign Minister of Maldives, Abdulla Shahid said, "Strongly condemn the suicide terrorist attack on the convoy carrying Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir today. I extend my prayers and condolences to the bereaved families of the dead and injured."

Strongly condemn the suicide terrorist attack on the convoy carrying Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir today. I extend my prayers and condolences to the bereaved families of the dead and injured.@MEAIndia February 14, 2019

Prime Minister of Sri Lanka Ranil Wickremesinghe said he condemned the terror attack in Pulwama district. He called it the worst terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989.

"I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district - the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to Narendra Modi and the families of police officers who lost their lives," Ranil Wickremesinghe tweeted.

I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to @narendramodi and the families of police officers who lost their lives. Ranil Wickremesinghe (@RW_UNP) February 14, 2019

Nepal Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli spoke to Prime Minister Modi and expressed his condolences, concern and condemnation over the attacks.

Nepal's Ministry of Foreign Affairs in a statement said, "The Government of Nepal strongly condemns the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir today that has resulted in the loss of many precious lives. It extends heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims as well as the Government and people of India, and wishes speedy recovery of those injured. In line with its principled position, Nepal unequivocally condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and believes that such heinous acts of terrorism cannot be justified on any ground."

Nepal Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli speaks to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and expresses condolences, concern and condemnation over #PulwamaAttack (file pics) pic.twitter.com/henzuXUZ9N ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

French Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian in a stement said, "I most firmly condemn the heinous attack just perpetrated in India. My thoughts go out to the families of the fallen soldiers and my deepest solidarity to the Indian government and people. France has always been and always will be by India's side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms. I call on every State to fight effectively against terrorist networks and their financing channels and to prevent cross-border movements of terrorist groups, such as the Jaish-e-Mohammed, which has claimed responsibility for this attack."

At least 44 jawans of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were killed in a dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

Follow live updates here

The well-planned attack used a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device (known as VBIED) to target a CRPF bus that was part of a 70-vehicle convoy.

The SUV -- a Tata Sumo -- was carrying explosives weighing nearly 300 kgs and the bus had 39 jawans on board.

The bus targetted by the suicide bomber, who the Jaish-e-Mohammad identified as Adil Ahmad Dar, was completely destroyed in the attack. The site of the Pulwama attack resembled a war zone with body parts and vehicle debris strewn about.
