J&K separatists warn youth against Islamic State

‘Plot to hijack Kashmir struggle’

Kashmir’s top separatist leaders, including Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Yasin Malik, in a joint address at Srinagar’s Jamia Masjid on January 4 asked youth “not to get swayed by the Islamic State ideology”.

Addressing a large number of devotees, who had also congregated to condemn last Friday’s bid by masked youth to unfurl the IS flag inside the mosque, Mr. Geelani and the Mirwaiz described the incident as “a plot to link Kashmir’s ongoing struggle with terrorism and global agenda.”

“Any effort to weaken this movement by diverting its course and linking it to some global agenda is unacceptable and will not be allowed,” said the Mirwaiz.

Mr. Geelani, who delivered his speech on phone, said the Jamia Masjid incident was a brazen “attempt to link the Kashmir struggle with the global terror groups.” Mr. Malik said youth were welcome to meet the separatist leaders with their ideas.

Rajnath made no talks offer: separatists

The separatist leaders have rebutted Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh’s statement made in Parliament on January 3 that “an unconditional dialogue offer was made to separatists in the Valley”.

The Mirwaiz said to put the record straight there was no such offer at any point. “On the contrary, all focus by the present regime in Delhi has been on a military solution. It made no attempt to make the dialogue institution credible or viable, to pave the way for the final solution of the dispute. It only created hurdles in ensuring that all the stakeholders, including Pakistan, comes to the table.”

He said there was a mismatch in what Mr. Singh said inside Parliament and their policy of no-talks on the ground.

“The Hurriyat sees Mr. Singh’s statement as an attempt to hoodwink the pro-dialogue constituency in India and on the international fora and keep them away from the reality on the ground,” said the Mirwaiz.

Mr. Geelani said the Centre never officially invited them. “But at the same time the Centre is accusing us of rejecting dialogue. It is not only shameful but speaks volumes about their truthfulness, sincerity and clarity. India is scared of any meaningful dialogue with the Hurriyat and Pakistan. The sole intention of the Parliamentary delegation (in 2016) was to act as firefighters,” said Mr. Geelani.

Civilian killed

Meanwhile, unknown gunmen shot dead a civilian in Pulwama’s Tral on January 4.

A police official said the victim, Simranjeet Singh, a resident of Tral’s Khasipora area, was shot from close range by gunmen in an open field.

The victim was shifted to a Srinagar hospital but died of his injuries. Singh is the brother of a local sarpanch Rajindar Singh. Rajindar was earlier with the Congress and contested the recent polls as an independent candidate.
