Bring People Together; Gandhian Art of Dialogue

Today is Mahatma Gandhi’s death anniversary. This is also the year that we are celebrating his 150 years birthday. On this day we should remember that the greatest apostle of peace lost his life in trying to bring different groups together.



All his life Gandhi ji tried to bring people of different communities together because he believed in all inclusive growth and development; something that was possible only when everybody worked for common good.

Why have we lost this art of dialogue and the ability of taking all the people together? Gandhi ji’s example holds the mirror to present leadership.

During the freedom struggle there was a diversity of opinions and paths on how to get independence. There were militant elements lead by B. G. Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, and Lajpat Rai; then there were the divisions created by the British between Hindus, Muslims, scheduled class and others; together with this were fringe elements of RSS and finally there was the direct attack by Subhash Chandra Bose.

Yet Gandhi ji never gave up the path of dialogue and always explained in great details the reasons for taking a particular path and his actions. He gave a spiritual tone to the freedom struggle and generally kept the dialogue with different factions at a high moral level.

Gandhi ji gave Indians a confidence in themselves; that they were equal to the British and showed that we can defeat the greatest power of the world through peaceful means.

The economic situation during the freedom struggle was really grim. Yet Gandhi ji’s higher calling brought people together and gave them a sense of doing something wonderful with their lives and achieving the impossible. Thus the richest industrialists like Tata, Birla, Bajaj, etc. took very active part in the freedom struggle.

Today the situation is different. We are economically well off and increased exposure through mass media and internet has resulted in raising the aspirations of our population manifold.

With problems of not achieving the aspirations of the huge population, there are daily struggles in their lives which bring in frustrations. When conditions are created by political parties to instigate them and appeal to their baser instincts, as that happens daily, then it provides a spark to make any situation explosive and the general strife that we see and read about daily is the result of these frustrations.

In a pluralistic society like India with 26 different languages, many cultures and religions, and huge population, divergent issues exist in every walk of life. It is all the more necessary that the political leadership should diffuse these issues and inspire and unite us to fight poverty, blind faith and general ignorance rather than each other.

It has been shown world over that human beings react very positively to call for higher purpose in life and with proper dialogue they are capable of making sincere and honest decisions. This is how Gandhi ji inspired the freedom movement.

What is therefore needed at this juncture is that a good political leadership provides balm to the frayed nerves by showing the path where every section of the society can take part in nation building.

However when the whole purpose of present political parties is to win the next election and remain in power rather than taking the nation on the path of general development and well-being of its population then it is difficult for them to provide leadership and the Gandhian balm.

So like Gandhian way what we need is that each of us becomes the agents of change. We can do it by working to our best capability and in doing our work honestly. This single thing can throw up good leaders and help in creating a great and prosperous country.

All of us are part of this great country. We are born and raised in India and may have different points of view or religions or ways of life but all of us want to live in a holistic, emotionally satisfying and economically viable India.

That was the dream of Gandhi ji. So on this day let us all remember him and try to follow his path of taking everybody together and his appeal to higher emotions in all of us so that we show love and peace for our fellow countrymen.

http://nariphaltan.org/writing- s.htm




