Campaign to fight flu in 5 districts, Jaipur included

In a meeting convened late on Saturday night, chief minister Ashok Gehlot held a high-level review with the health department officials of the spread of the swine flu in state and seeking preventive measures to control the disease.

On directions of the CM, a plan has been devised to make special arrangements in the districts with most positive cases, an official said. “The districts where intensive screenings would take place include Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota, Udaipur and Baran,” the official said.

According to the decision taken in the meeting, principals of all medical colleges in the state, superintendents of hospitals, PMOs at district hospitals, district Chief Medical and Health Officers and block level medical officials will hold a video conference every Monday to review the swine flu status, facilities of investigation & treatment, availability of medicines and to plan and execute door-to-door survey campaigns.

It is worth mentioning here that the swine flu is presenting a challenge to the state health department as hospitals continue to register new cases and deaths due to Influenza H1N1 virus. Rajasthan has become the number two state after Maharashtra in number of deaths due to swine flu in the country. Total 2,315 cases of swine flu have been reported and 218 people have lost their lives in the state till last week.

January and February have always been challenging month for health department in combating swine flu. This year, in January 2018, a total of 705 people were tested positive for swine flu while 53 succumbed to the disease. For the month of February, the figure stood at 383 positive cases and 43 deaths.

With the onset of winter season, Gehlot directed the health officials to ensure the availability of essential medicines at the hospitals and at the primary health centers in state. He also instructed to ensure the presence of necessary medical staff at all health facilities. An awareness campaign that will go right up to the village level to prevent the spread of swine flu has also been planned.

Gehlot said public awareness about the flu strain should be improved with the help of public representatives and educational institutions. Health minister Dr Raghu Sharma directed the control rooms in state for following up the flu status so that the cases can be brought down. He said school students can be a powerful medium for spreading awareness about swine flu.

In the meeting Sawai Man Singh Medical College principal Dr Sudhir Bhandari updated the officials about swine flu status in Jaipur. He informed about the tests and treatment facilities for the swine flu which are being made available round-the-clock at the SMS Hospital.

Team To Keep A Check

Superintendents, PMOs at district hospitals, CMHOs and block level medical officials to hold a video conference every Monday.

They will review swine flu status, investigation facilities for treatment & availability of medicines.

District administration will plan and execute door-to-door survey campaigns for spreading awareness.

Rajasthan has become the number two state after Maharashtra in number of deaths due to swine flu in the country.
