US, Russia embassies condemn Pulwama attack on CRPF convoy

gspannu7@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 14

The US Embassy and the Embassy of the Russian Federation in India condemned the terrorist attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy at Lethpora along the Srinagar-Jammu highway which left at least 39 personnel dead.

“The US Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims. The United States stands alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it,” the statement said.

The Embassy of the Russian Federation in India also condemned in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attack.

“We denounce terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with decisive and collective response without any double standards,” it said in a statement.

“May we express sincere condolences to the grieving families of the deceased and wish a speedy recovery to those injured,” it added.

Nepal also strongly condemned the terrorist attack and said such heinous acts of terrorism cannot be justified on any ground.

“The Government of Nepal strongly condemns the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir today that has resulted in the loss of many precious lives,” the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement here.

It extended heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims as well as the Government and people of India.

“In line with its principled position, Nepal unequivocally condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and believes that such heinous acts of terrorism cannot be justified on any ground,” it said.

In one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir’s three decades of militancy, a suicide bomber from the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror group rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district on Thursday, killing at least 39 personnel and leaving many critically wounded. — With PTI
