34 Indian soldiers killed in Kashmir blast

New Delhi: At least 34 members of Indian Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were killed and 40 others injured in a deadliest militant attack in the Indian-administered Kashmir on Thursday.

The Pakistan-based terrorists launched the attack with a car carrying over 350 kg explosives on the heavily guarded Srinagar-Jammu highway about 20km from Srinagar, the largest city of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.

The Pakistan-based Islamist group Jaish-e Mohammad claimed they had carried out the suicide bombing.

Agencies add: Kashmir is a Muslim-majority region at the heart of decades of hostility between India and Pakistan, which both claim the entire territory as theirs while ruling part of it.

India accuses Pakistan of giving material support to the militants. Islamabad says it only offers moral and diplomatic support to Muslim Kashmiris in their struggle for self-determination.

Indian forces have sporadically battled Islamist militants in mountainous Kashmir since an armed revolt in 1989 in which tens of thousands were killed, but car bombings are rare.

“I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs,” Modi said in a tweet.

Pakistan denied any involvement.

Thursday’s explosion was heard from several miles away, according to witnesses. Mohammad Yunis, a journalist who reached the site minutes later, told Reuters he saw blood and body parts scattered along a 100-metre stretch of the highway.

A Jaish-e-Mohammad spokesman, in a statement carried by GNS new agency, said dozens of security force vehicles were destroyed in the attack.

Jaish-e-Mohammad, one of the most powerful militant groups operating in Kashmir, was blamed for a 2001 attack on the Indian parliament that led to India deploying its military on the border with Pakistan.

On Wednesday, an explosion at a school in Kashmir wounded a dozen students. The cause of the blast remains unclear.
