Aero India 2019: Europe’s top missile maker to take part

Bengaluru: MBDA, Europe’s high-ranking developer and manufacturer of missiles, will showcase a full range of missiles and missile systems, including METEOR, a beyond visual range (BVR) air-to-air missile, widely recognized as a changer for air combat, and which would be fitted on the Indian Air Force (IAF)’s Rafale combat jets, at Aero India 2019, commencing on February 20.

In addition, MBDA will also display MICA, nicknamed “silent killer” being delivered for Rafale and upgraded Mirage 2000, and the only missile in the world featuring two interoperable seekers (active radar and imaging infrared) to cover the spectrum from close-in dogfight to long beyond visual range. ASRAAM (Advanced Short-Range Air-to-Air Missile), set to arm the upgraded Jaguar fleet and other military jets of the IAF, will also be on display. With its large rocket motor, and clean aerodynamic design. ASRAAM has unrivalled speed and resultant aerodynamic manoeuvrability and range. ASRAAM gives it a high kinematic capability that delivers superior end-game performance for within visual range air combat. ASRAAM will arm the IAF’s upgraded Jaguar fleet, and potentially other IAF platforms.

MISTRAL ATAM (air-to-air missile), delivered to equip HAL’s weaponised version of the Advanced Light Helicopter, the ALH Rudra, and integrated on the Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), SMARTGLIDER, another long-range strike weapon optimized to counter anti-access strategies and emerging battlespace threats, will also be put on show at Aero India 2019.

And next week’s air show will be the first event where L&T MBDA Missile Systems Ltd will display its products, according a spokesperson of MBDA.

Meanwhile, BEML Ltd announced it would unveil its capability to support the growth of India’s aviation, defence and aerospace sectors, particularly through Make-in-India initiative. BEML would showcase its competence in manufacture of airborne structures, ground support and ground handling systems. It would also display missile aggregates for Akash and Quick Response Surface-to-Air-Missile (QRSAM) along with ISRO Motor, bomb pallets and aviation hoses, which are critical components for the aviation sector.
