Kashmir attack on Indian paramilitary members kills 37

Russia President Vladimir Putin chairs a video meeting of the Pobeda (Victory) organising committee at the Novo-Ogaryovo state residence outside Moscow on July 2, 2020, as he thanked Russians today after a nationwide vote approved controversial constitutional reforms that allow him to extend his rule until 2036. (Photo by Alexei Druzhinin / Sputnik / AFP) (Photo by ALEXEI DRUZHININ/Sputnik/AFP via Getty Images)

See the moment a brawl broke out in Honduran Congress

'He knows he will get away with it': Analyst predicts Putin's move

Russia President Vladimir Putin chairs a video meeting of the Pobeda (Victory) organising committee at the Novo-Ogaryovo state residence outside Moscow on July 2, 2020, as he thanked Russians today after a nationwide vote approved controversial constitutional reforms that allow him to extend his rule until 2036. (Photo by Alexei Druzhinin / Sputnik / AFP) (Photo by ALEXEI DRUZHININ/Sputnik/AFP via Getty Images)

TOPSHOT - Yemen's Shiite Huthi rebels shout slogans during a gathering to mobilise more fighters to battlefronts to fight pro-government forces, on June 18, 2017, in the Yemeni capital Sanaa. / AFP PHOTO / MOHAMMED HUWAIS (Photo credit should read MOHAMMED HUWAIS/AFP via Getty Images)

Pets travel in style as their owners race to get them out of Hong Kong

Still unvaccinated? You could be fined $4,000 in this EU country

A medic prepares a dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine against the coronavirus at a private nursing home in the Israeli central coastal city of Netanya on January 5, 2022. - Israel began on January 3 administering fourth Covid vaccine shots to people over 60 and health workers amid a surge driven by the Omicron variant. (Photo by JACK GUEZ / AFP) (Photo by JACK GUEZ/AFP via Getty Images)

Russia expert: Putin wants a 'replay of the end of the Cold War'

An Indian army soldier looks towards the site of a gunbattle between Indian army soldiers and rebels inside an army brigade headquarters near the border with Pakistan, known as the Line of Control (LoC), in Uri on September 18, 2016. Militants armed with guns and grenades killed 17 soldiers in a raid September 18 on an army base in Indian-administered Kashmir, the worst such attack for more than a decade in the disputed Himalayan region. / AFP / TAUSEEF MUSTAFA (Photo credit should read TAUSEEF MUSTAFA/AFP/Getty Images)

Srinagar, India CNN —

At least 37 people were killed Thursday afternoon when a bomb exploded near a convoy of Indian paramilitary personnel in Indian-administered Kashmir, one of the deadliest attacks in the disputed region in recent years.

Bharat Bhushan, spokesperson for India’s Ministry of Home Affairs, told CNN Friday that 37 soldiers had died, with five wounded.

Earlier reporting from CNN affiliate News 18 had the death toll at 40 but has since revised down to 37.

The convoy, which was transporting members of the Central Reserve Police Force, was on the national highway when it was struck by a blast from an improvised explosive device, said Muneer Khan, the state’s director general of police.

“One vehicle which was part of the convoy carrying the CRPF personnel bore the brunt of the blast resulting in multiple casualties,” a police statement said.

The Indian government has blamed Pakistan-based terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammed for the attack.

“We demand that Pakistan stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries,” India’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement.

Pakistan responds

Pakistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs released a statement hours after the attack, describing it as “a matter of grave concern.”

“We have always condemned acts of violence anywhere in the world,” the statement said. It continued: “We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations.”

Jaish-e-Mohammed, which translates to the Army of the Prophet Mohammed, is a Pakistan-based group that operates on both sides of the border of the disputed state and seeks to unite the Indian-controlled area of Kashmir with Pakistan.

Thursday’s attack took place in the Pulwama district – about 15 miles (25 kilometers) from Kashmir’s capital, Srinagar.

A damaged bus is towed away following the attack. STR/AFP/Getty Images

Indian PM condemns ‘dastardly attack’

India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted support for soldiers in the state.

“Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly,” he wrote.

Modi has taken a stronger stand toward terrorism in the state since he came to power almost five years ago. In 2018, 253 terrorists were killed by Indian security forces – more than double the number of terrorists killed in 2015, according to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

India’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, also condemned the attack: “Attack on CRPF in #Pulwama, J&K is a cowardice & condemnable act of terrorists. Nation salutes martyred soldiers and we all stand united with families of martyrs. We pray for speedy recovery of the injured. Terrorists will be given unforgettable lesson for their heinous act,” tweeted Jaitley.

Kashmir has had a tumultuous history since the India-Pakistan partition resulted in a predominantly Hindu India and a Muslim Pakistan.

After India gained independence in 1947, Kashmir has been bitterly contested by both nations, resulting in three wars and numerous other skirmishes.

The latest attack comes more than two years after armed militants entered an army base in the garrison town of Uri, about 63 miles (102 kilometers) from Srinagar – killing at least 18.

Separatist violence in the region has killed more than 47,000 people since 1989, although this toll doesn’t include people who have disappeared due to the conflict. Some human rights groups and nongovernmental organizations put the death toll at twice that amount.
