Pulwama attack: US urges countries to deny safe haven to terrorists

Washington DC [USA], Feb 15 (ANI): The United States on Thursday strongly condemned the terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district and called on countries from across the globe to deny safe haven and support for terrorists designated under UN Security Council resolutions.

In the deadliest terror attack on security forces in Kashmir, around 40 CRPF personnel were killed when their convoy was targetted in Pulwama district on the Srinagar-Jammu National Highway.

"The United States condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist attack today on an Indian Central Reserve Police Force convoy in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. We extend our deepest condolences to the victims and their families, and wish a speedy recovery to those injured," State Department deputy spokesperson Robert Palladino said in a statement.

Underlining that the US is resolutely committed to work with India to fight terrorism, Paladino added, "The UN designated, Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Muhammad has claimed responsibility for this heinous act. We call on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to UN Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists."

The convoy comprised 78 buses in which around 2,500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar.

A bus, in which 42 CRPF personnel were travelling, was extensively damaged in the blast which was followed by firing on the vehicle.

The JeM claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was carried out by a suicide bomber, according to a local news agency.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi strongly condemned the attack and asserted that the sacrifices of the brave security personnel will not go in vain.

President Ram Nath Kovind too condemned the attack and assured that the entire nation is united to fight against the forces of terror and evil.

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh will be travelling to Jammu and Kashmir today to take stock of the situation. Condemning the attack, Rajnath told ANI that a strong reply will be given to the perpetrators.

Several countries from across the globe stood in support of India in the wake of the attack. (ANI)


