CCS meets today, India slams Pak - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

NEW DELHI, Feb 14: The Cabinet Committee on Security will meet tomorrow morning to discuss the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir against the backdrop of the Pulwama terror attack that claimed lives of 44 CRPF personnel, sources said.

The meeting is likely to take place at 9:15 am on Friday, the sources said.

The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) is headed by the Prime Minister and comprised Defence Minister, Home Minister, External Affairs Minister and the Finance Minister.

The CCS takes decisions on matters related to security and strategic affairs.

Meanwhile, India has slammed Pakistan over the Pulwama terror attack carried out by Jaish-e-Mohammed and asked the neighbouring country to stop supporting terrorists and dismantle terror infrastructure operating from its soil.

India also strongly reiterated its appeal to all members of the international community to support the proposal to list terrorists, including JeM chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the 1267 Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council, and to ban terrorist organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan.

The Indian Government condemns in the strongest possible terms the cowardly terrorist attack on India’s brave security forces in Pulwama, the Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement.

This heinous and despicable act has been perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based terrorist organisation proscribed by the United Nations and other countries, it said.

This terror group is led by the international terrorist Masood Azhar, who has been given full freedom by the Pakistani government to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under Pakistan’s control and to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity, the MEA said.

The Indian Government is firmly and resolutely committed to take all necessary measures to safeguard national security, it said.

“We are equally resolved to fight against the menace of terrorism. We demand that Pakistan stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from their territory, and dismantle the infrastructure operated by terrorist outfits to launch attacks in other countries,” the statement said.

“We express our sincere condolences to the family members of our fearless security personnel who have made the supreme sacrifice,” the MEA said. (PTI)
