Chandrababu Naidu takes on Centre in Capital

Andhra Pradesh chief minister and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) supremo Nara Chandrababu Naidu is bracing for a fullfledged combat against Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

On Sunday, Naidu and his Cabinet colleagues, besides legislators and other party leaders, including MPs, stayed away or left for Delhi when the PM visited Guntur for the first time since he came to lay the foundation stone for the green field capital Amaravati.

Though Modi was there only for a flying visit for a BJP rally that day, Naidu chose to gloss over the courtesies to be extended by the state government when the Prime Minister came on a visit.

On Monday, their face-off gained a new dimension. Naidu sat on a 12-hour fast called Dharma Porata Deeksha (protest for justice) at the Andhra Pradesh Bhavan in Delhi to focus on his cause célèbre - grant of special category status (SCS) to the state to compensate for the losses truncated Andhra Pradesh faces following reorganisation into two Telugu states in 2014.

On Tuesday, Naidu stepped up that campaign by leading the Prathyeka Hodha Vibhajana Hameela Samithi, which is steering the agitation for SCS and other assurances under the AP Reorgnisation Act, 2014, to submit a memorandum to President Ramnath Kovind urging that assurances and promises made to the state during bifurcation be fulfilled in a timebound manner.

To top it all, on Wednesday, Naidu along with his West Bengal and Delhi counterparts, Mamata Banerjee and Arvind Kejriwal, as well as leaders of several parties opposed to the BJP, gathered at Jantar Mantar for the Save Democracy protest staged by Kejriwal.

Naidu believes that though political parties can compete in the states, they can join hands nationally to cobble and offer an anti-BJP national alternative.

The prospects of the Congress, TDP, Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata Dal (Secular) and the Trinamool Congress joining hands for such an endeavour are high. While admitting it is still an idea, Naidu says it is compelling to adopt a holistic and idealistic approach to present an alternative to voters against the BJP.

"Parties that do not have direct conflict with each other at the state level can come for a pre-poll alliance. We are talking to all parties. Let us see," he said.

The TDP chief is pushing for a formula wherein strong regional parties will fight it alone in their respective states while joining hands nationally.

The advantage of such a grouping, in the event of a hung verdict, is the likelihood of being perceived and treated as a grouping when the President takes a call on whom to invite first to form the government, "At the national level, there is the common interest to save the nation, save democracy," said Naidu.

Beyond that rhetoric he is striving hard to get diverse political parties to agree on a common minimum programme to highlight the farm crisis, joblessness and corruption that impacts all states. However, as the party in power in Andhra Pradesh, TDP is focusing on the failure to grant SCS to the state and is squarely laying the blame at Modi's door.

Both are locked in a bitter no-holds barred battle. Naidu is compelled to make this the major campaign issue to stave off anti-incumbency.

This is also why he is not aligning with the Congress in the race for the Lok Sabha and Assembly polls in the state. While going to the Supreme Court against the Central government's failure to implement the AP Reorganization Act 2014 is an option, Naidu senses the SCS issue strikes an emotive chord with voters and could contribute to his comeback.

The TDP chief is unsure. He hopes to fight and win the elections and continue his campaign for SCS. But he is up against a doughty challenger YS Jaganmohan Reddy and the YSR Congress, which lost narrowly by a 2 per cent vote share, in 2014.

"He is facing so many cases and in trouble. Let us see," says Naidu about Reddy, with a swish of his hand to suggest the TDP shall overcome. But, at the moment, it appears to be wishful thinking.
