Pulwama Attack: In hour of crisis, world stands with India

Hours after the suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama claimed lives of over 40 CRPF men, the world has spoken in one voice and stood united behind India.

The US State Department while condemning the attack, called "on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to UN Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists."

The Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad has claimed responsibility for the act.

Chairman of the US House Foreign Affairs Committee Eliot Engel said, "Countries must not allow terrorist groups like Jaish-e-Mohammed to operate with impunity."

US Department of State: US condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist attack today on an Indian CRPF convoy in the Indian state of Jammu & Kashmir. We extend our deepest condolences to the victims & their families, & wish a speedy recovery to those injured.#PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/tzeCbZzEsE — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

US Department of State: US is resolutely committed to working with the Indian govt to combat terrorism in all its forms. UN designated, Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Muhammad has claimed responsibility for this heinous act. #PulwamaAttack — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

US Department of State: We call on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to UN Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists. #PulwamaAttack — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

A close ally of India, UAE's Foreign Ministry in a statement said that the country "stands in solidarity with the government and people of India in their fight against violence and extremism".

Iran’s Foreign Ministry Spokesman Bahram Qassemi while offering condolences went on to say that "as a country that has been a victim of terrorism and has taken major and effective steps to root out terrorist groups in the West Asia region.. we believe using such bloody and inhumane methods by any group and with any motive and under any name is unacceptable".

Australian foreign minister Marise Payne tweeted, " We extend our deepest sympathies to those killed and injured, their families & the people of India. We stand with India in the fight against terrorism."

The Pulwama attack is the worst terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir in the last 20 years.

In a message to President Ram Nath Kovind and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Russian President Vladimir Putin said, "Perpetrators and sponsors of this attack, should be punished."

"I would like to confirm the readiness for the further strengthening of counterterrorism cooperation with our Indian partners," he added.

Spokesperson of the UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres reacting to the terror attack said, "Call for those behind the attack to be brought to justice".

India's neighbours - Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and the Maldives - also condemned the attack.

Sri Lanka PM Ranil Wickremesinghe: I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir's Pulwama district — the worst ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to PM Modi and the families of police officers who lost their lives. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/iAwSFmU2O8 — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

Bhutan Foreign Minister Tandi Dorji: Shocked & saddened to hear of the terror attack in Kashmir. We strongly condemn this heinous attack & express our solidarity with families of victims,&people&Govt of India. Hope perpetrators will be brought to justice. #PulwamaAttack — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

Maldives Foreign Minister Abdulla Shahid: Strongly condemn the suicide terrorist attack on the convoy carrying Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir today. I extend my prayers and condolences to the bereaved families of the dead and injured. #PulwamaAttack (file pic) pic.twitter.com/1pUrzGvfjI — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

Bangladesh PM Sheikh Hasina: At this sad moment, we stand by the people and govt of India. We offer was condolences to the members of the families who lost their dear ones. Our thoughts and prayers are speedy recovery of those who got injured. #PulwamaAttack (File pic) pic.twitter.com/4X9fGq5fcO — ANI (@ANI) February 14, 2019

Nepal's PM KP Sharma Oil was the first foreign leader to call on Prime Minister Modi while Maldives Foreign Minister Abdulla Shahid wrote to external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj.

Pakistan's flip flop

Pakistan rejected India's allegations after New Delhi called on the country "stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from the territory and dismantle the infrastructure operated".

The foreign ministry of Pakistan said, "We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian government and media circles that seek to link the attack to the State of Pakistan without investigations."

It's interesting to know Pakistan issued two press releases in a span of 15 minutes later wherein the second release had minor changes such as "Kashmir" was replaced by "Jammu and Kashmir".

Without taking China's name, India has called on the member of the "International community" to list Jaish-e-Mohammed Chief Masood Azhar under the 1267 sanctions committee of United Nation security council (UNSC).

Bejing has repeatedly blocked listing of Masood Azhar as an internationally designated terrorist under the UNSC 1267 Committee.
