Terror may dominate election discourse: Rajnath Singh

The car bomb attack in Pulwama is a setback for the Centre which has built a political narrative of being tough on terrorism. With Lok Sabha elections less than two months away, the happenings may dominate the political discourse across the country, especially in North India. The high casualty figure in the terror attack, which surpassed Uri, may compel the government to take some strong steps too.Home Minister Rajnath Singh will be in Srinagar on Friday to look into the lacunae that led to the attack. Sources said that the Intelligence Bureau had shared an input on a possible IED attack on the security forces during the Afzal Guru death anniversary week. Guru was hanged in the Parliament attack case on February 9, 2013. JeM had claimed responsibility for the attack. The last such attack had happened in 2005, when a truck was used for exploding IED leaving at least four dead.Sources said Prime Minister Narendra Modi spoke to National Security Advisor Ajit Doval on the Pulwama attack. Union home minister Rajnath Singh also had discussions with the NSA, Director, Intelligence Bureau, Rajiv Jain and Special Director IB. An NIA team will leave on Friday morning to assist the Jammu & Kashmir Police in forensic work at the attack site.The Centre as well as the BJP have often hinted that Mehbooba Mufti was ‘soft on terror’ and its hands were tied during the tenure of the elected government in J&K. However, governor’s rule was imposed on June 19, 2018, followed by president’s rule six months later, and the Centre will not be able to shift blame. The Uri attack had also taken place under another stint of governor’s rule. It saw India conducting a surgical strike 11days later, on September 29, 2018. Thereafter ministers and BJP leaders have highlighted it and even promoted a movie based on the strike. Though they are likely to increase the verbal attack on Pakistan now, it would be a difficult job to apportion blame for an attack that happened under the watch of its government. The Opposition has refrained from attacking the government but may point to the unabated terror attacks despite the surgical strike to dent BJP’s claims in the coming days.
