"Stand With India," Says Bangladesh PM Sheikh Hasina Assuring Commitment Of Cooperation With India To Fight Terrorism

Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina offered her condolences to the families of the martyrs in the CRPF terror attack in Pulwama on Thursday and said it maintains a zero-tolerance policy against terror activities.

"At this sad moment, we stand by the people and government of India. We offer was condolences to the members of the families who lost their dear ones. Our thoughts and prayers are speedy recovery of those who got injured. Bangladesh remains steadfast in its commitment against terrorism of all forms and maintains a zero-tolerance policy against any kind of terrorist activities. We would continue to work and cooperate with international community including India to eradicate menace of terrorism," she said.

The 76 Battalion of CRPF was attacked by Pakistan backed Jaish-e-Mohammed on Thursday. Thirty-seven CRPF soldiers were martyred in the attack and several were injured.

READ | "Worst even Terror attack since 1989", says Sri Lankan PM Ranil Wickremesinghe expressing solidarity to PM Modi and families of martyrs over attack in Pulwama on CRPF forces

The attack has received the strongest condemnation from across the globe.

The United Nations in a statement said: "We strongly condemn today's attack in J&K's Pulwama. We express our deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their lives & to the people & Govt of India. We wish a speedy recovery to injured & call for those behind the attack to be brought to justice."

Prime Minister Narendra Modi strongly condemned the 'dastardly' terror attack in which CRPF convoy, which was moving from Jammu to Srinagar, was targeted by the terrorists. The attack appears to be the biggest terror strike in Jammu and Kashmir since the Uri Army camp strike of September 18, 2016, following which surgical strikes were conducted in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

'The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain', tweeted the Prime Minister adding that the entire 'nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs', PM Modi wrote to Twitter.

President Ram Nath Kovind too condemned the attack and assured that the entire nation is united to fight against the forces of terror and evil.

India Stands With Forces | 37 CRPF Jawans Martyred And Several Injured In Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammed's Dastardly Terror Attack In Pulwama: LIVE UPDATES
