When rat hole mining offers the only job opportunity

Survivor Sayeb Ali

Civil society groups want a freeze on all land registrations in and around the mining areas but for the youth the tiny mines are often the only way out of joblessness.reports.The arterial road linking Shillong to Guwahati, the gateway to the Northeast, snakes past a clump of low hills beginning at Khanapara , an outlying suburb of the Assam capital. The road acts as the geographic divider between Assam and Meghalaya, the south side dotted with numerous auto-fuel stations and liquor vends because taxes are lower in the hill state. Any visitor to the region four years ago would also have found another commodity rather plentiful on that side of the motorway – heaps of coal piled right along the sidewalk, with handscribbled price tags for each variety of the solid fuel being sold.That was the output of what’s called rat-hole mining, a practice unique to Meghalaya and banned by the National Green Tribunal in on April 17, 2014. Back then, industrial units located in the region used the production at these mines that had mushroomed in virtually every backyard. Although illegal, the practice seems to have continued even more than four years after the green ban was announced, as is evident in the crisis at the forested East Jaintia Hills, where 15 miners have been trapped in underground shafts at a rat-hole mine for more than three weeks.Meghalaya has 576 million tonnes of coal. The sub-bituminous solid fuel is spread across South Garo Hills, West Khasi Hills, East Garo Hills, Jaintia Hills and the East Khasi Hills. After the environmental ban came into effect, ostensibly only the transportation of extracted output is allowed. The Supreme Court on December 4 allowed the transportation of an estimated 176,655 tonnes of coal already mined.Unlike the elaborate establishments at mines owned byLtd, these pits in Meghalaya are called small-scale coal mines, operating beyond the purview of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act.The six-party-led state government is in favour of an exemption for Meghalaya from the federal laws on mining.Until that happens, extractions appear to be continuing, albeit illegally and jeopardizing lives. Former miner Shahjan (name changed) is waiting for a vehicle at a makeshift camp to go to Ksan village in Meghalaya’s East Jaintia Hills district , where a multi-agency operation is on to rescue 15 miners trapped inside a rat-hole mine since December 13.Shahjan is from Rajabala in West Garo Hills, one of the prime suppliers of labour to the coal mines across Meghalaya. Of the 15 miners trapped at Ksan, at least seven are from this area.The fear of local coal barons prevented Shahjan from revealing his identity. His fears are not unfounded. Recently, prominent anti-corruption and rights activist Agnes Kharshiing was attacked allegedly by the coal mafia in East Jantia Hills. She was gravely injured and is still recuperating.“I have been a miner for six years, working for six to seven hours a day for Rs 2,000 per day. There is no other gainful employment opportunity and people risk their lives working in the mines,” Shahjan told ET.He left this job after the green ban on rat-hole mining was announced. The rescue teams, comprising members of the Odisha Fire Service, the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), the Indian Navy and miners, have roped in Shahjan for his knowledge of the terrain and the nature of these mines.“Initially, there was hardly any equipment, including high-power pumps to drain the copious amounts of water. Now that high-tech machinery is being used, I am hopeful that those miners will be rescued,” Shahjan said.The search for the miners is feasible only when the water level in the narrow coal mine recedes, the district administration said, citing the rescue workers. Hounded by the horror of being trapped, Sayeb Ali (21), a survivor of the incident, is barely able to talk these days. “I only see the pit and people being trapped before my eyes. Those are my friends and relatives with whom I have worked over the last couple of years,” says a distraught Sayeb Ali.A sardar (head) engages a group of personnel, around 10 to 15, for extraction from Meghalaya mines. Lower Assam, Nepal, Bhutan, and Garo Hills are the major manpower suppliers to these hazardous mines.Zubar Ali, another miner who previously worked here, used to mobilize labour earlier. He now lives in a small village in Dhubri district, along the Indo-Bangladeshi border. The majority of the people in this marginal locality used to work in the coal mines of Meghalaya and property sites at Guwahati.“Earlier, in these mines a small hole was dug and children were employed as they can enter through the hole. However, the depths have increased over the years and these days, one has to go 250 to 300 feet down to extract coal,” said Zubar Ali. “In Meghalaya, East Jaintia Hills happens to be the hotbed of illegal coal mining.”Miners say that there have been several incidents where people were trapped, and many may be missing from earlier incidents. In a similar incident in 2012, around 15 miners were trapped in an illegal rat-hole coal mine near the Nangalbibra area in South Garo Hills. Their bodies were never recovered.Meghalaya Chief Minister Conard Sangma acknowledged the prevalence of illegal coal mining in the state, but said his government is seeking to completely enforce the ban.Congress MLA from Rajabala, Azad Zaman, said: “Seven people trapped in the mine belong to my area. The situation is such that the educated unemployed, with bachelor degrees, go to work as labour hands in the mines. In the absence of employment opportunity here, they move out and risk their lives.”A citizens’ report prepared by civil society groups in Meghalaya submitted in the Supreme Court alleged that politicians might have stakes in the mining business.“Unregulated mining in Meghalaya has resulted in serious environmental degradation and large-scale violations of labour laws and livelihood disruptions because of the flow of cheap labour brought in by coal miners,” the report said. “Strict enforcement of existing laws is urgently required. Until such time, the National Green Tribunal- monitored stay should continue.”Civil society groups have suggested the need to freeze all land registrations in and around the mining areas until regulations are strengthened.“…uphold the NGT ban until proper regulatory framework on prospecting, granting of leases and necessary clearances, environmentally sustainable mining, mine reclamation, land laws and labour laws are in place… and the area properly mapped to indicate forest land, community land etc,” said the citizens’ report.
