One year on, Luhajhar mishap survivors living in misery

Gumma: The Luhajhar mishap which claimed nine labourers completed a year Wednesday. Nine labourers of Gumma block died in a road accident at Luhajhar Ghat in Parttada panchayat of Kashinagar block in Gajapati district February 13, 2018.

The accident occurred when a brick-laden truck overturned and rolled down into a 40-50-ft deep gorge. Six people were injured seriously. Some of the injured are still recovering while for some it is difficult to lead a normal life again.

One of them is Jubula Gamang of Anukumba village. He slipped into coma after the mishap. After spending six months in hospital, he returned home. At that time his family hoped that Jubula would recover. But he is still being taken care of by his parents.

At the time of the accident, the administration had provided only Rs 30,000, but the family has so far spent Rs 4 lakh on his medical treatment.

“A year has passed after the mishap, but it left me physically challenged. I cannot move normally. My treatment is still going on,” said Jubula.

Inash Gamang has also suffered like Jubula. Before the accident he used to be the sole breadwinner of his family. Now he is confined to bed.

“I was seriously injured in the accident. My treatment is still on. I am not able to earn anything now. My condition has forced my wife to work as a daily labourer. Whatever she earns is not enough for our family. It is difficult for us to manage medical expenses,” Inash said, adding that the district administration had given him Rs 5000 from the Red Cross Fund.

Rahul Gamang used to study at a residential school in Parlakhemundi till his mother Milkha Gamang’s death in the mishap. Now he studies in his village school while his father has gone to Mumbai to work as a labourer. “The loss of my mother is still haunting me,” he said.

The family of Sita Gamang, who died in the mishap, has suffered a lot. Her two sons and one daughter are now being brought up by their grandmother.

“The eldest of the three is now in a village school. But the children cry even now at the mention of their mother,” said the elderly woman.

Three villagers from Aarabhal were killed in the accident. The government had given Rs 2 lakh as ex-gratia to their families.

However, those who survived that accident are leaving a miserable life. They don’t have BPL cards, or have been covered by any government programmes.

Suman Bhuyan, a physically challenged woman, lost her son Ebijan in the accident. She does not get the disabled pension. “Sometimes she is found crying sitting near the place where her son was laid to rest,” a villager said.

Block Development Officer Natabar Garada said an investigation is necessary to ascertain the condition of these families.

PNN
