US condemns Pulwama terror attack, asks Pakistan to deny support to terrorists

Not just the US but many other countries have condemned the heinous attack that has claimed the life of over 37 paramilitary troopers and left many injured. (Photo: Reuters)

The United States of America has condemned the terrorist attack that killed at least 37 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

In a press release, the US Department of State said it condemns the terrorist attack on the Indian CRPF convoy and asked Pakistan to "uphold its responsibilities" to deny support to terror groups.

"US condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist attack today on an Indian CRPF convoy in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. We extend our deepest condolences to the victims and their families and wish a speedy recovery to those injured," it said.

"UN designated, Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Muhammad has claimed responsibility for this heinous act. We call on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to UN Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists," the statement added.

On Thursday, at least 37 CRPF paramilitary troopers were killed in a terror attack while several others are battling for their lives. It is being termed as the deadliest terrorist strike in three decades of Kashmir's insurgency.

The unfortunate incident occurred after an explosive-laden SUV rammed into one of the buses in the CRPF convoy at Awantipora town in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. The bus, which was a part of the convoy, was passing through Gundipoora section when it was attacked.

JeM has identified the suicide bomber responsible for the attack as Adil Ahmed Dar and released a video of him soon after the attack. He was reportedly part of the Pakistan-based terror group since 2018.

Currently, the situation in the Valley remains tense as all police convoys have been halted and an NIA team will be sent to Kashmir soon. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has cancelled all his political programmes and chaired a Cabinet Committee on Security meet in Delhi.

Not just the US but many other countries have condemned the heinous attack that has claimed the life of over 37 paramilitary troopers and left many injured.
