Awantipora terror attack: Aamir Khan, Ranveer Singh, Alia Bhatt and others express angst over death of soldiers

New Delhi: On Thursday afternoon, a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a car loaded with explosives into a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) bus in Jammu and Kashmir's Awantipora. At least 44 soldiers were killed in the attack which is believed to be the worst attack on security personnel in the last two decades. Many Bollywood celebs including Aamir Khan, Alia Bhatt, Ranveer Singh, Sonam Kapoor, Farhan Akhtar and others took to Twitter and expressed their angst over the death of soldiers.

Here's what they wrote,

Aamir Khan: I am heartbroken to read about the terrorist attack on our CRPF Jawans in Pulwama. It's so tragic. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the Jawans who have lost their lives.

I am heartbroken to read about the terrorist attack on our CRPF Jawans in Pulwama. It's so tragic. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the Jawans who have lost their lives. — Aamir Khan (@aamir_khan) February 15, 2019

Ranveer Singh: Disgusted at the cowardly terror attack on the #CRPF soldiers in #Pulwama - my sincere condolences to the families of our brave jawans. Saddened. Angry.

Disgusted at the cowardly terror attack on the #CRPF soldiers in #Pulwama - my sincere condolences to the families of our brave jawans. Saddened. Angry. — Ranveer Singh (@RanveerOfficial) February 14, 2019

Alia Bhatt: The Pulwama attack is despicable. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the martyrs. I pray for the recovery of the injured.

The Pulwama attack is despicable. My heartfelt condolences to the families of the martyrs. I pray for the recovery of the injured. — Alia Bhatt (@aliaa08) February 14, 2019

Sonam Kapoor: #PulawamaTerrorAttack this is just an act by the worst kind of disgusting cowards. All my compassion and prayers for the souls lost and the loved ones affected. No words .

#PulawamaTerrorAttack this is just an act by the worst kind of disgusting cowards. All my compassion and prayers for the souls lost and the loved ones affected. No words . — Zoya Singh Solanki (@sonamakapoor) February 14, 2019

Anushka: It is extremely painful to read about the attack on our brave #CRPF jawans in #Pulwama. My deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of our martyred soldiers.

It is extremely painful to read about the attack on our brave #CRPF jawans in #Pulwama. My deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of our martyred soldiers. — Anushka Sharma (@AnushkaSharma) February 14, 2019

Tiger: Deeply saddened and appalled on the cowardly attack on our brave heroes. Prayers and condolences to their families. May their souls RIP

Deeply saddened and appalled on the cowardly attack on our brave heroes. Prayers and condolences to their families. May their souls RIP — Tiger Shroff (@iTIGERSHROFF) February 15, 2019

Farhan Akhtar: Just learnt of the horrific and cowardly terror attack in Pulwama. Disgusted and saddened.

United in grief with families of the CRPF jawans who lost their lives. My deepest condolences to them.

Just learnt of the horrific and cowardly terror attack in Pulwama. Disgusted and saddened.

United in grief with families of the CRPF jawans who lost their lives. My deepest condolences to them. — Farhan Akhtar (@FarOutAkhtar) February 14, 2019

Shahid Kapoor: Just heard about the horrific cowardly attack on our jawans. Thoughts and prayers with their families. Deeply saddened and shocked.
