"Stand In Solidarity With India", Says Australia Condemning Attack In Pulwama On CRPF Forces

Australia on Thursday officially condemned the terrorist attack carried on CRPF in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14.

Expressing shock over the attack, Australian High Commissioner to India Harinder Sindhu said that the country stands in solidarity with India.

"Deeply shocked by today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. Our thoughts are with the families of those killed and injured. Australia stands in solidarity with India in condemning all forms of terrorism," she said.

Deeply shocked by today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. Our thoughts are with the families of those killed and injured. Australia stands in solidarity with India in condemning all forms of terrorism. #Pulwama #KashmirTerrorAttack — Harinder Sidhu (@AusHCIndia) February 14, 2019

On Thursday evening, Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammed carried an attack on a CRPF convoy leading to the deaths of 37 soldiers on the Srinagar-Jammu National Highway. The 76 battalion of the CRPF was targeted by the terrorists. Several were injured in the attack. As per CRPF sources, 100 kg of explosives were used in IED blast.

READ | US Department of State expresses commitment to work with Indian govt to combat terrorism, condemning attack in Pulwama by Pak backed JeM

The attack has been condemned across the globe. The United Nations issues a statement condemning the attack and expressing condolences to the families.

A 12-member team of the NIA will conduct a probe on the attack on Friday.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi strongly condemned the 'dastardly' terror attack in which CRPF convoy, which was moving from Jammu to Srinagar, was targeted by the terrorists. In probably the biggest terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since the Uri Army camp strike of September 18, 2016, following which surgical strikes were conducted in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, at least 30 soldiers were martyred on Thursday.

'The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain', tweeted the Prime Minister adding that the entire 'nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs', PM Modi wrote to Twitter.

President Ram Nath Kovind too condemned the attack and assured that the entire nation is united to fight against the forces of terror and evil.

India Stands With Forces | 37 CRPF Jawans Martyred And Several Injured In Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammed's Dastardly Terror Attack In Pulwama: LIVE UPDATES
