Pakistan No Longer ‘Most Favoured Nation’: India

New Delhi: Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Friday announced that the "Most Favoured Nation" status which was granted to Pakistan stands withdrawn.

The decision was taken in the Cabinet Committee on Security meeting held a day after the worst-ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since militancy erupted in 1989, when a suicide bomber on Thursday rammed his SUV packed with explosives into a Central Reserve Police Force bus on the Srinagar-Jammu highway in Pulwama district, killing at least 45 troopers, injuring 38 and leaving the security establishment stunned.

Protest shutdown against terror attack affects life in Jammu

Life in Jammu and Kashmir was adversely affected on Friday due to a protest shutdown called against the terror strike in the valley in which 45 CRPF personnel were killed in a suicide attack.

The shutdown has been called by the Jammu Chamber of Commerce and Industry (JCCI), an influential body of local traders and industrialists. Transporters in the region and the National Conference have extended support to the shutdown appeal. "We condemn the brutal attack and stand in solidarity with the families of those who lost their dear ones in this attack," B. Rajesh Gupta, President of JCCI told IANS here. "We also appeal to all sections of the society to maintain the traditional harmony and brotherhood for which Jammu has been known ever since the fires of violence spread in the valley," he added.

All shops, business establishments and public transport remained closed in the city in response to the JCCI shutdown appeal. Authorities have suspended mobile Internet services in the city while the speed of fixed line broadband connections has been slashed down. Authorities made deployments in law and order sensitive areas of Jammu to prevent anti-social elements from exploiting the situation and the anger among the people. In the worst-ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since militancy erupted in 1989, a suicide bomber on Thursday rammed his SUV packed with explosives into a Central Reserve Police Force bus on the Srinagar-Jammu highway in Pulwama district, killing at least 45 troopers, injuring 38 and leaving the security established stunned. (IANS )

Also Read: 42 CRPF Personnel Killed In IED Blast In Jammu And Kashmir
