JCCI, transporters call for Jammu bandh today

JCCI, transporters call for Jammu bandh today

# NC, others extend support # JU postpones exams

JAMMU, Feb 14: Jammu Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the transporters Thursday called for Jammu bandh tomorrow against the terror attack in Lethpora, Awantipora in which at least 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

Various political, social and religious organizations have extended their support to the Bandh call. Bar Association Jammu, while supporting the bandh call, announced to suspend work tomorrow in the J&K High Court, its subordinate courts.

In the wake of Jammu Bandh call, Jammu University has also postponed all the exams scheduled for Friday.

Earlier in the evening, the Jammu Chamber of Commerce and Industries and Matador Operator Association announced to observe a peaceful Jammu Bandh on Friday to protest against the brutal killing of CRPF jawans in Kashmir division.

CCI Jammu president Rakesh Gupta while speaking to reporters here this evening also asked the state administration to take immediate action against those responsible for shouting anti-India slogans in Jammu the other day.

JCCI president, joined by Chamber office bearers and presidents of different affiliated associations including Matador Operator Association, appealed the people to observe peaceful bandh against dastardly attack. Gupta said that hehad spoken to Kashmir Chamber also on this account.

The Chamber president also said that they would not allow anyone to spoil the peaceful atmosphere and brotherhood in Jammu as people from all religions always felt safe in Jammu.

He also prayed for peace to the departed souls of CRPF jawans killed in Kashmir and appealed to the Prime Minister Narendra Modi to wake up to the factual security situation on the ground and act accordingly.

Among others present in the press conference included Rajesh Gupta, senior vice president CCI, Rajeev Gupta, junior vice president CCI, Manish Gupta, secretary general CCI, Gaurav Gupta, secretary and Ashu Gupta treasurer CCI.

Later Traders Federation Ware House Nehru Market and Transport Welfare Association (TWA) also extended their support to bandh call. TWA president T S Wazir stated that in protest against dastardly killings of security personnel, no mini-bus, auto rickshaw or any form of public transport would ply tomorrow.

In the meanwhile, National Conference provincial president Devender Singh Rana late this evening also announced his party’s support to the Jammu Bandh call for tomorrow to express anguish over, what he said, “the martyrdom of the CRPF personnel in dastardly and most barbaric terror act in Lethpora in Kashmir.”

“National Conference supports the call and expresses solidarity with the families of those who lost their brave-hearts in the terror act,” Rana said in a statement, adding that terrorism had no place in a civilized society. “We all must join hands to fight the menace of terror,” he said.
