Awantipora attack martyrs' kin seek revenge, want toughest action against Pakistan

NEW DELHI: While the entire nation on Friday paid its heartfelt tribute to the families of 40 CRPF troopers, who were killed in a suicide attack in J&K's Pulwama on Thursday, their bereaved families demanded a befitting reply to Pakistan for its covert support to terrorism.

A pall of gloom descended at the homes of the CRPF personnel who were killed in the Pulwama terror attack, even as the bereaved await the arrival of the mortal remains of the bravehearts.

''I have sacrificed a son in Mother India's service, I will send my other son as well to fight,'' Bihar-based CRPF trooper Ratan Thakur's (who lost his life in Pulwama attack) father said in Bhagalpur. ''We are ready to give him up for Mother India, but Pakistan must be given a befitting reply,'' the teary-eyed father said.

CRPF Personnel Ratan Thakur's (who lost his life in #PulwamaTerrorAttack ) father in Bhagalpur: I have sacrificed a son in Mother India's service, I will send my other son as well to fight, ready to give him up for Mother India, but Pakistan must be given a befitting reply.#Bihar pic.twitter.com/rI6cM38Agh — ANI (@ANI) 15 February 2019

Meanwhile, father of Ramesh Yadav, a soldier who lost his life in the terror attack, urged the government to initiate a probe into the matter and give a befitting reply to Pakistan.

"My son came home 25 days back. We received a call from Srinagar yesterday evening. The officer on the line told us that a terror attack has taken place and they have not yet recovered the body of my son. Each year, many soldiers are dying in India. He was the only breadwinner of the family. Now, we will face trouble in educating his child. I request the government to give a befitting reply (muh-tod jawab) to Pakistan and also start an investigation at the earliest," he told ANI.

Father of slain CRPF constable Pankaj Yadav also said no information has been received regarding his son`s mortal remains.

"Till now, we do not have any information about my son`s body. The officials present at the incident spot have recovered his licence, identity card and other documents. We are trying our best to get more information."

Meanwhile, nationwide protest erupted across the country against the Pulwama attack. Effigies of Masood Azhar, the chief of Jaish-e-Mohammed (who claimed responsibility for the attack), were burnt in Varanasi as a sign of protests against the killing of the security personnel on Thursday.

A large number of youths protested in Jammu and Kashmir over the incident. "We are protesting against the killing of our 44 CRPF jawans. This is shameful. There should be stern actions now, there should be another surgical strike," some protesters said.

Protests were also held in Kathua against Pakistan.

Jammu and Kashmir: Locals protest in Kathua against Pakistan. #PulawamaTerrorAttack pic.twitter.com/o48ZcPo4QA — ANI (@ANI) 15 February 2019

Protesters thronged the streets with placards that read ''Aakhir Shahadat kab tak?" (how long will this martyrdom continue) and festoons displaying various demands and needs of the Indian soldiers.

Another protest took place in Bhopal by the workers of BJP, who also expressed their grief over the loss of lives.

One of the workers said, "Very painful and shameful incident. The terrorists are bred by Pakistan. We want Prime Minister Modi to attack Pakistan and teach it a lesson."

Similar protests were reported from states like Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and other states where protesters condemned the Pulwama suicide attack in the strongest terms and demanded justice for the martyred CRPF troopers and their families.

Varanasi: Locals hold protest against Pakistan and terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar over the #PulwamaAttack. pic.twitter.com/fXqXuRue0F — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 15 February 2019

Several school students in Moradabad paid tribute to the 40 CRPF personnel who lost their lives in Pulwama terror attack on Thursday.

Moradabad: School students pay tribute to the CRPF personnel who lost their lives in #PulwamaTerrorAttack yesterday. pic.twitter.com/oBYqVRYlE7 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 15 February 2019

In the deadliest attack on security forces in Kashmir, around 44 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday when their convoy was targeted by a suspected suicide bomber of Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammad in Pulwama district on the Srinagar-Jammu National Highway.

The convoy of 78 buses, in which around 2500 CRPF personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar, came under attack at around 3.15 PM at Ladhu Modi Lethpora.

This is the deadliest attack on security forces in Jammu and Kashmir so far.

Earlier in September 2016, an Army camp was stormed by terrorists in Uri, killing 19 soldiers.

Prior to that, 28 BSF personnel were killed in an attack on a convoy of the paramilitary force in 2004.

Strongly condemning the attack, the Prime Minister termed it as “despicable” and asserted, “The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs.”

Several countries from across the globe stood in support of India in the wake of a deadly suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir`s Pulwama district that killed 40 security personnel on Thursday.

The convoy comprised of 78 buses in which around 2,500 personnel were travelling from Jammu to Srinagar.

From Bangladesh, Israel to the US, all expressed their condolences over the deaths of the CRPF personnel in the suicide attack claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).
