Pulwama terror attack: Complete list of martyred CRPF jawans - Details inside

The site of the deadly Pulwama terror attack that was carried out on Thursday. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The ghastly terror attack carried out by banned Pakistani terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed killed 38 Central Reserve Police Force jawans in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on Thursday. The terror group carried out a well-planned onslaught on the Indian security forces claiming it as an attack to counter the “atrocities meted out to Kashmiris in the Valley”.

Families of the slain jawans have not yet been able to comprehend the huge void left behind with the loss of their sons/husbands/brothers who were part of the convoy that was attacked by a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber yesterday.

While one jawan belonged to Jammu and Kashmir’s Rajouri, some belonged from Moga and Gurdaspur in Punjab. Two of the martyrs belonged to Uttar Pradesh’s Maharajganj and Bihar’s Bhagalpur. From Tamil Nadu to Kerala, the entire country lost one son in the dastardly terror attack.

1. Rathod Nitin Shivaji

2. Bhagirathi Singh

3. Virendra Singh

4. Awadhesh Kumar Yadav

5. Ratan Kumar Thakur

6. Pankaj Kumar Tripathi

7. Jeet Ram

8. Amit Kumar

9. Vijay Kr Mourya

10. Kulwinder Singh

11. Maneswar Basumatari

12. Mohan Lal

13. Sanjay Kumar Sinha

14. Ram Vakeel

15. Naseer Ahmad

16. Jaimal Singh

17. Sukhjinder Singh

18. Tilak Raj

19. Rohitash Lamba

20. Vijay Soreng

21. Vasantha Kumar V.V.

22. Subramanian G.

23. Guru H

24. Manoj Kr Behra

25. Narayan Lal Gurjar

26. Mahesh Kumar

27. Pradeep Kumar

28. Hemraj Meena

29. PK Sahoo

30. Ramesh Yadav

31. Sanjay Rajput

32. Koushal Kumar Rawat

33. Pradeep Singh

34. Shyam Babu

35. Ajit Kumar Azad

36. Maninder Singh Attri

37. Bablu Santra

38. Ashvni Kumar Kaochi

Also read: Pulwama terror attack: Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber Adil Ahmad Dar threatened of more attacks – Watch video

The attack took place after a suicide bomber in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy carrying over 2500 CRPF troops on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday condemned the Pulwama terror attack that was carried out on Thursday where 37 CRPF jawans were brutally killed. "The terrorists have committed a huge mistake, they will pay for it," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said.

“I pay tribute to soldiers who lost their lives in the Pulwama attack. Our security forces have been given full freedom. We have full faith in their bravery,” the Prime Minister said. “The forces behind this act of terrorism and those responsible for it will be definitely be punished.”

PM Modi further said, “If our neighbour which is totally isolated in the world thinks it can destabilise India through its tactics and conspiracies, then it is making a big mistake.”
