Driver of blown-up CRPF bus from Moga; father wants befitting reply to Pak

monicakchauhan@gmail.com

Kulwinder Sandhu/Arun Sharma

Tribune News Service

Moga/Ropar, February 15

After coming to know that her husband CRPF jawan Jaimal Singh had been killed in a terror attack in J&K, Sukhjit Kaur almost fainted on the bed in her room trying to come to terms with the irreparable loss.

Her mother-in-law could be seen trying to console her with a heavy heart with tears in her eyes, her son having fallen victim to a suicide bomber.

The villagers tried all they could to raise the spirit of the aggrieved family saying “Jaimal Singh has died a martyr and done the country proud”.

Jaimal Singh, a resident of Ghalauti village in Dharamkot sub-division of the Moga distirct, was the driver of the bus that was blown up after the suicide bomber rammed his explosive-laden SUV into the bus on the Srinagar-Jammu highway in Awantipora area of J&K yesterday. As many as 42 CRPF jawans were killed and dozens of others injured in the incident.

Jaimal Singh’s father Jaswant Singh told The Tribune that his son Jaimal Singh was born on April 26, 1974. He studied from the village school and joined the central force on April 23, 1993. He had spoken to his wife and five-year old son on Tuesday night informing them that his company was being shifted to another place.

Jaswant Singh has demanded from Prime Minister Narendra Modi that India must give a befitting reply to the terrorists and the neighbouring country Pakistan, which is harbouring them. “It is high time for India to end terrorism forever so that no other parents or wives lose their sons or husbands in such tragic incidents”, he said, his voice choking with grief.

“Officials informed us about Jaimal’s martyrdom late on Thursday night. We were informed that the bus was blown up by the terrorists. We are proud of his sacrifice,” said Jaswant Singh.

The family members were yet to get any information on the arrival of mortal remains.

Earlier, as the news reached the village, hundreds of people thronged Jaimal’s house to console the grieving family and express their solidarity with them.

The villagers said Jaimal was a brave man and a great son who cared a lot for his family.

Kulwider Singh of Rauli village in Ropar district too was martyred in the blast.

Kulwinder, the only son of his parents, was to get married in October at nearby Lodhipur village.
