AP Photos: Editor selections from the past week in Asia

Young Buddhist novices attend a dance festival as part of Tibetan New Year celebrations in Kathmandu, Nepal.

In other images from the Asia-Pacific region this week, South Korean high school seniors clad in traditional attire bow during a joint graduation and coming-of-age ceremony in Seoul.

Thousands of students and faculty from the Catholic-run St. Scholastica's College in Manila, Philippines, flash No. 1 sign at the end of a mass dance performance as part of a campaign to combat violence against women and children on Valentine's Day.

___

This gallery was curated by Associated Press photo editor Masayo Yoshida in Tokyo.

___

In this Wednesday, Feb. 13, 2019, file photo, young monks get distracted by a drone as they watch a traditional dance during Cham dance festival as part of Tibetan New Year celebrations, at the Triten Norbutse Monastery in Kathmandu, Nepal. According to Bön Tibetan Buddhism, this mask dance is a purification ceremony that eliminates negative energy and bad luck in the beginning of the new year. (AP Photo/Niranjan Shrestha, File)

Visit the AP Images blog: http://apimagesblog.com

Visit AP Images online: http://www.apimages.com

In this Thursday, Feb. 14, 2019, file photo, South Korean seniors clad in traditional attire bow during a joint graduation and coming-of-age ceremony at Dongmyung Girls' High School in Seoul South Korea. (AP Photo/Ahn Young-joon, File)

In this Thursday, Feb. 14, 2019, file photo, thousands of students and faculty from the Catholic-run St. Scholastica's College, flash No. 1 signs at the end of a mass dance, dubbed "One Billion Rising" at their campus on the 7th anniversary of the global movement to help eradicate violence against women and children on Valentine's Day in Manila, Philippines. The annual mass dancing is being held every Valentine's Day. (AP Photo/Bullit Marquez, File)

In this Sunday, Feb. 10, 2019, file photo, Chinese travelers wait for their trains at a railway station in Hangzhou in east China's Zhejiang province. Millions of Chinese are start returning to work after spending a weeklong Lunar New Year holiday with families in their hometown. (Chinatopix via AP, File)

In this Saturday, Feb. 9, 2019, file photo, fire dragon dancers perform under a shower of sparks from molten iron during a temple fair at the Happy Valley amusement park in Beijing. Chinese people are enjoying a weeklong holiday for the Lunar New Year and visiting various temple fairs and carnivals held in the cities around China. (AP Photo/Andy Wong, File)

In this Sunday, Feb. 10, 2019, file photo, thousands of Hindu pilgrims take a ritualistic dip on the auspicious day of Basant Panchami at Sangam, the confluence of sacred rivers the Yamuna, the Ganges and the mythical Saraswati, during the Kumbh Mela or the Pitcher Festival, in Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh state, India. The Kumbh Mela is a series of ritual baths by Hindu sadhus, or holy men, and other pilgrims at Sangam that dates back to at least medieval times. Pilgrims bathe in the river believing it cleanses them of their sins and ends their process of reincarnation. (AP Photo/Rajesh Kumar Singh, File)

In this Feb. 10, 2019, file photo, Naga Sadhus or naked holy men arrive in a procession for a dip at Sangam, the confluence of three holy rivers during Kumbh Mela, or pitcher festival, in Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh state, India. At every Kumbh, including this year's, thousands of devotees were initiated into the reclusive sect of the Naga Sadhus, naked, ash-smeared cannabis-smoking Hindu warriors and onetime-armed defenders of the faith who for centuries have lived as ascetics in jungles and caves. (AP Photo/Rajesh Kumar Singh, File)

In this Tuesday, Feb. 12, 2019, file photo, a paramilitary policeman stands guard outside the Tiananmen Gate as snow falls in Beijing. China's capital is mostly dry in the winter but a storm system brought snow to the city on Tuesday morning. (AP Photo/Andy Wong, File)

In this Tuesday, Feb. 12, 2019, file photo, The Arpit Palace Hotel is reflected in a puddle after an early morning fire at the hotel killed more than a dozen people in the Karol Bagh neighborhood of New Delhi, India. (AP Photo/Manish Swarup, File)
