Assam boy Maneshwar Basumatary martyred in Pulwama attack

Guwahati: Maneshwar Basumatary, a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawan from Assam has been martyred in the terror attack that took place in Pulwama in Jammu & Kashmir on Thursday where at least 37 jawans have been martyred living five others injured.

Maneshwar Basumatary, a jawan of 98th Battalion who hails from Tamulpur in Baksa district of Assam has been martyred in the biggest ever terror attacks on the Indian Security Forces. The attack was made by Jaish-e-Mohammad, a Pakistan based terror group.

Basumatary (48) has left behind his wife Sanmati Basumatary and two children Didwmsry Basumatary and Dhananjoy Basumatary respectively.

Speaking to the Sentinel Digital, Nephew of Maneshwar Basumatary said that it has been a very sad incident where more than 37 jawans have been martyred. "I appealed to the Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi to take step against this terrorist groups who repeatedly attack India. The central government has said earlier that these problems would be solved but till date no such problems have been solved. I requested the government to take necessary steps against this attack so that no more jawans have to lose their life anymore," he added.

He further appealed the state government that the son and daughter of Maneshwar Basumatary should be provided with jobs so that the family could earn their livelihood.

Another jawan from Bongaigoan, Pabitra Barman was also in the convoy and a rumor has been spread in the social media soon after the attack that Barman has also been martyred. But he himself has provided the information that he was safe and that he had a minor injury in the attack.

Chief Minister of Assam Sarbananda Sonowal condemned the attack and tweeted, "Strongly condemn the cowardly attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama Terror has no place in India and we must together fight this menace as a nation. My heart goes out to the martyrs who have sacrificed their lives today. Deepest condolences”.

According to local police of Srinagar the suicide bomber-driven vehicle came along the CRPF bus when a 78-vehicle convoy carrying 2,547 security personnel was going from the transit camp in Jammu to Srinagar and rammed it into the bus around 3.15 pm. The blast was followed by gunshots by terrorists. The attack happened in Goripora area of Awantipora in district Pulwama.

Also Read: Assam News
