5 deadliest terrorist strikes on Jammu and Kashmir soil

This is not the first time that Indian security soldiers were martyred due to Pakistan’s nefarious designs. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The cowardly terrorist attack on the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir’s Awantipora, Pulwama district left over 40 soldiers martyred. The strike was perpetrated by Pakistan-backed terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and is the deadliest attack on security personnel posted in Jammu and Kashmir.

This is not the first time that Indian security soldiers were martyred due to Pakistan’s nefarious designs. Here is a look at the five deadliest Jammu and Kashmir terrorist strikes in history:

OCTOBER 1, 2001 – Terrorists of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) rammed a Tata Sumo packed with explosives on the main gate of the Jammu and Kashmir State Legislative Assembly in Srinagar. This attack claimed lives of 38 people and the terrorists were neutralised after a long gun battle.

MAY 14, 2002 – According to information by the Ministry of External Affairs, three terrorists who were travelling a Himachal Tourism bus from Pathankot to Jammu, stopped the vehicle near Kaluchak, Jammu. They then shot the driver and the conductor of the bus and sprayed bullets on the innocent passengers.

Army sentries rushed to the spot and the terrorists then ran into army family lines, throwing grenades on some vehicles in the vicinity. They were neutralised by the Army but the deadly terror attack resulted in 31 casualties, including 3 Armymen, 18 Army family members and 10 civilians.

Also Read: Pulwama attack details: 5 key points about the cowardly terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir

RAGHUNATH TEMPLE ATTACKS, 2002 – Two terrorist attacks in March and November saw suicide bombers storming the sacred temple and throwing bombs and firing indiscriminately on the devotees. The first attack, on March 30, 2002 saw 11 casualties which included three martyred security personnel. The second attack happened on November 24, 2002 in which two suicide bombers killed 14 people and injured another 45 before they died.

SEPTEMBER 18, 2016 – The deadly terrorist attack orchestrated by the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) on the Army brigade headquarters in Uri, near the Line of Control saw four terrorists lob as many as 17 grenades in a span of just three minutes. A total of 23 casualties were reported which included 19 soldiers who were martyred.

Home Minister @rajnathsingh present at the wreath-laying ceremony of the 40 martyred CRPF jawans in Budgam, J&K. #KashmirTerrorAttack pic.twitter.com/XrzcFuO1ml — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 15, 2019

The dastardly attacks prompted India to carry out surgical strikes on terror camps operated from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. Terror launch pads were destroyed with swift action of the Army and around a dozen terrorists were neutralised.

FEBRUARY 14, 2019 – A large convoy of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldiers was attacked in Jammu and Kashmir’s Awantipora, Pulwama district by a lone bomber, identified as Adil Ahmad Dar. The terrorist packed hundreds of kilograms of explosives in an SUV and rammed into the CRPF convoy. This resulted in the martyrdom of over 40 soldiers who were on duty to serve their country. Terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) has claimed responsibility of the attack.
