St. John's rapper's new song denounces domestic violence

Chantel John, a member of Miawpukek First Nation in Conne River, was murdered in January, allegedly by her ex-boyfriend.

The tragedy has inspired a number of people to advocate for the survivors of domestic violence in the province in addition to the many missing and murdered Indigenous women (MMIW).

Kielley Koyote — Josh Kielley, a 23-year-old rapper from St. John’s — was one of those people who was moved to act. He was inspired to write his latest song “She Belongs To Me” after receiving a poem written by Cindie Lush, an Indigenous woman known as “storm born.”

Her poem, “Call Her Home” talks about her own experiences with domestic violence that she endured as a child and, later, as an adult, at the hands of a lover. It was dedicated to John.

The poem inspired Kielley to write “She Belongs to Me”, storm born’s title, and the video, shot by Riley Harnett Photography was released at 12:01 a.m. on Valentine’s Day.

“I wanted to raise awareness that this happens to the women in our lives,” Kielley said, noting the negative tone toward women in rap music would never fly with him.

Chantel John and her mother, Jennifer John.

“Within the hip hop culture, we often see lyrics involving violence and objectification of women. I wanted to describe what that violence looked like through the eyes of a family member. That way, I hope — as men — that we can have open dialogue and make changes for the daughters, sisters, mothers, aunts of tomorrow.”

It was the combination of the poem and collecting red clothes for the Red Dress movement just outside Conne River that really hit home for Kielley.

“We were collecting red clothes because Cindie and my girlfriend are friends and she had asked Wendy and I if we could drop off the red clothing for the campaign,” he said.

“They wanted motorists to see the red dresses on their way to Chantel’s funeral. Cindie later messaged me and said her spirit guide told her to give me this poem.”

“She Belongs to Me” was released on Feb. 14.

The song is meant to shine a light on abuse victims who more than likely will experience an entirely different kind of day.

John was 28 when she was killed in Conne River on Jan. 9. The Miawpukek community rallied around the family, as have communities across the province and the country. People have donned red in Chantel’s honour, and hung red dresses along the road into Conne River and on their own porches. They gathered for a vigil Jan. 14 in her parents’ yard.

Composing the song came with a few challenges, as Kielley realized how important the message of violence against women is, and he wanted to ensure he told John’s story in a respectful way.

“I knew this was a subject that needed to be addressed. What is happening is barbaric,’’ he said.

“I wanted to know what we can do now, how do we get these women to shelters who don’t have a car, all the factors they are faced with in getting help.’’

He said if he can inspire one woman to get the help they need through the message of this release, “then the song will have done what it was intended for.”

“Who knows, if something like this had been available sooner, perhaps there would have been a better outcome for Chantel.”

Who collaborated?

Kielley Koyote has been making hip hop music for over two years at home with the help of producer Ryan Paddle (a.k.a. Dienamix).

He’s been reviewed in Rolling Stone India and calls Sweden his second home after playing there in Live at Heart, a conference about international music connections.

Kielley comes from a feminist mother and cool dude father with a smattering of abstract with brother Joe.

Cindie Lush, or “storm born,” is an Indigenous woman of Northern Cree decent who now lives in Glenwood. Her father is from a tribe on Vancouver Island.

“I am from the lost and stolen generation,” she said.

Always homesick, but no home to go to, she endured abuse from a tender age that involved a family member and a spouse. It wasn’t until a compassionate RCMP officer picked her up off her front deck after her husband almost killed her that she made a change for the better.

The RCMP officer said, “Someday he’s gonna hurt your baby girl, too.”

Cindie left her husband and started a new life, but she fears for others who still live in fear.

“Survive. Stand strong in your roots and beliefs. Protect your sisters. Stand up for what’s right and wrong. Always put good out and life will be good to you,” she said.

Source: Get Faced Art & Entertainment

RELATED
