Jaish-e-Mohammed's new strategy to hire local Kashmiris for terror attacks set alarm bells ringing

Adil Ahmad Dar in the video that was released soon after the Pulwama terror attack on Thursday.

Adil Ahmad Dar, who was part of Jaish-e-Mohammed's lowest rung of terrorists and not considered a threat, was assigned the task of carrying out the devastating terror attack in Pulwama on Thursday as part of the outfit's latest strategy.

Intelligence officials believe Adil Ahmad Dar was categorized as a Grade C terrorist in the ranks and thus didn't invite intense scrutiny by the security agencies.

This new strategy has sent the alarm bells ringing among security agencies.

With top leaders of these banned outfits either eliminated or forced to lie low in wake of the recent spurt in encounter killings of terrorists, this new tactic of looking for new recruits who are considered less threatening is a dangerous trend.

Intelligence officials believe this to be the new strategy of Jaish-e-Mohammed to pick up young Kashmiris who keep a low profile and can escape the strong gaze of counter-terror agencies.

"This is a rarest of rare case. There's been no such attack in recent times," said an officer.

This is a modus operandi that resembles attacks in Syria and Afghanistan, terror officials said.

With local recruitment peaking last year as 192 youth got enlisted in terror outfits, this could set a dangerous trend.

The categorisation of terrorists varies from A++ to A+, which is the most hardened and wanted, followed by B++ and B+.

Sources said Dar was not alone was part of a group of 4-5 young men who were part of the conspiracy behind the whole attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama.

While top leaders were either eliminated or forced to lie low in wake of the recent increase in killings of terrorists, this new tactic seems alarming, officials observed.

"He was not someone who could execute a deadly fidayeen attack using an explosives loaded car that he rammed into the CRPF bus."

Dar, like hundreds of young men, was also recruited last year. "He left home last year after completing Class 12 and went to Jammu," said his father Ghulam Hasan Dar.

The family lives in a small village Kakapora in district Pulwama, barely 10 km from Lathpora, where Dar rammed his car into the bus carrying troops of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF).

The hamlet of Lathpora around 25 km from Srinagar on the highway connecting Jammu is lined with saffron and fruit shops that cater to tourists. A day after the deadly attack, the shops had their shutters down with Army troops keep a close vigil on movements of locals, at times stopping some to frisk and question them.

The neighbouring town of Pampore also wore a deserted look with little activity throughout the day. While there were no incidents of stone pelting or protests, there was an uneasy calm as security for carried out search operations making efforts to zero in on those who were part of the terror plot.

Recent intelligence inputs about the possibility of a car suicide bomber had alarmed security forces prompting high level meetings to combat the threat, but no viable solutions could be reached, security officials told India Today TV.

"Based on some inputs, ways to combat car bombs were discussed in the forces, including CRPF," said a source.

The attack on Thursday targeting a CRPF convoy using a car with explosives resembles the modus operandi of terror attacks in Syria and Afghanistan.

Sources said despite checking of cars, no viable solution was there in the offing.

One solution that was discussed was to run convoys late in the night since traffic is very less and manageable.

As there would be very few vehicles, it would be possible to check them or halt them till the convoy passes, was one of views discussed in a recent meeting to mitigate such a threat.

It is not possible in day time as the number of civilian vehicles is too much to be controlled.

At night Road Opening Parties can use portable lights to illuminate the area on the sides of the road to see intruders.

Soon after the attack took place and death toll continued to mount, Jaish-e-Mohammed released a video of Adil Dar claiming responsibility for the attack and saying he was recruited in 2018 and was honoured to have been assigned with Thursday's attack.

40 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday when Adil Dar drove an explosive-laden SUV into the 78-vehicle CRPF convoy on the Jammu-Srinagar highway. Dar rammed the car into a CRPF bus, killing 40 of its occupants and injuring others in nearby vehicles.

The attack has triggered a hue and cry across the nation and among the global political circles with the United States and United Nations leading nations to condemn the attack.

India has pulled up Pakistan asking the neighbours to not shield terror organisations and international terrorists like Masood Azhar. Pakistan has however denied any role in the attack and slammed India's attacks.
