Pulwama terror attack: Javed Akhtar, Shabana Azmi say no to Karachi Arts Council event

Javed Akhtar and wife Shabana Azmi have cancelled an invitation from Karachi Arts Council in light of the Pulwama terror attack.

Veteran lyricist-screenwriter Javed Akhtar and wife Shabana Azmi have canceled their plan to visit an event in Pakistan organised by the Karachi Arts Council in light of the Pulwama terror attack.

The duo was earlier invited to join the 2-day event but they have now decided to skip it as a sign of protest against the dastardly terror attack by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

Shabana Azmi later tweeted to express her grief.

"I am filled with pain and grief and all else ..by the dastardly #Pulwama attack. For the 1st time in all these years I feel weakened in my belief that people to people contact can force the Establishment to do the right thing. We will need to call halt to cultural exchange," she wrote.

She added, "There is no way we can carry on with cultural exchanges between India and Pakistan even as our martyrs are laying down their lives for us. I stand in solidarity with the grieving families. Javed Akhtar and I have cancelled Karachi Arts Councils celebration of my father Kaifi Azmi's centenary and Rekhta’s 3 day celebration in Dubai which included a show of our play Kaifi aur Main by IPTA. All Indians stand united as one."

"But lets not lose sight of d fact dat there is a difference between d Pakistani Establishment n d people of Pakistan n vice versa. On both sides of d border stand sisters n brothers divided by circumstances with which they had nothing 2 do."

I am filled with pain and grief and all else ..by the dastardly #Pulwama attack . For the 1st time in all these years I feel weakened in my belief that people to people contact can force the Establishment to do the right thing.We will need to call halt to cultural exchange Azmi Shabana (@AzmiShabana) February 15, 2019





#Pulwama attack There is no way we can carry on with cultural exchanges between India and Pakistan even as our martyrs are laying down their lives for us. I stand in solidarity with the grieving families. Azmi Shabana (@AzmiShabana) February 15, 2019





@Javedakhtarjadu and I have cancelled Karachi Arts Councils celebration of my father Kaifi Azmi’s centenary and Rekhta’s 3 day celebration in Dubai which included a show of our play Kaifi aur Main by IPTA . All Indians stand united as one . Azmi Shabana (@AzmiShabana) February 15, 2019





But lets not lose sight of d fact dat there is a difference between d Pakistani Establishment n d people of Pakistan n vice versa. On both sides of d border stand sisters n brothers divided by circumstances with which they had nothing 2 do.

Read in continuity of previous tweets Azmi Shabana (@AzmiShabana) February 15, 2019





Earlier in the day, a host of leaders condemned the attack and slammed Pakistan for harbouring terrorism. Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned the terror group responsible for the attack and vowed to avenge their death.

He said soldiers have been given full freedom to avenge the heinous attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama.

Meanwhile, India has also revoked "Most Favoured Nation" status given to Pakistan to isolate it on the international platform.

The CRPF has also vowed to avenge the death the paramilitary forces who were killed in Thursday's suicide bombing attack.

"WE WILL NOT FORGET, WE WILL NOT FORGIVE: We salute our martyrs of Pulwama attack and stand with the families of our martyr brothers. This heinous attack will be avenged," it said.

Several international leaders have also condemned the incident while the United States directly warned Pakistan to refrain from supporting terror outfits.

On Thursday, at least 40 CRPF paramilitary troopers were killed in a suicide bombing attack when an explosive-laden SUV rammed into a CRPF bus, belonging to a 78-vehicle convoy carrying at least 2,500 soldiers.
