RJ Balaji lands a crucial role in Shankar’s ‘Indian 2’?

RJ Balaji lands a crucial role in Shankar’s ‘Indian 2’?

Starring Kamal Haasan in the titular role, the film will reportedly have Abhishek Bachchan playing the antagonist.

Flix Kollywood

If the industry grapevine is anything to go by, RJ Balaji is the latest addition to the cast of Shankar’s Indian 2, which stars Kamal Haasan in the titular role. The shoot of the highly anticipated sequel resumed earlier this week in Chennai after the makers shot briefly in January in Hyderabad. Balaji is expected to join the sets very soon. The film also stars Kajal Aggarwal as the leading lady, but the makers are yet to reveal the complete cast list.

Having teased fans with the first poster of the film on the occasion of Pongal, the makers are now gearing up to complete shooting the project in the next six months as planned. The first poster featured Kamal displaying his ‘varma-kalai’ skill as the octogenarian vigilante Senapathy from the first part. The poster, which was released sans any hullabaloo, was received very well and trending on social media in no time. There are rumours that Siddharth, who had worked with Shankar in Boys, has been roped in for a crucial role as a cop. According to industry sources, Siddharth plays Senapathy’s grandson who sets out to avenge the death of his father. Abhishek Bachchan is believed to be playing the antagonist; according to reports, Shankar has already approached him with an offer.

In what could be his last onscreen appearance, Kamal Haasan is believed to have shed weight for this project. Last December, reports emerged that special fitness trainers were flown down from the US to work closely with the actor to help him achieve the desired look. The film, bankrolled by Lyca Productions, has music by Anirudh Ravichander.

Last seen playing a police officer in Sai Pallavi’s Diya, RJ Balaji awaits the release of the political satire LKG, his debut lead hero movie that has been confirmed to hit the screens on February 22. The film is directed by Prabhu, a long-time associate of actor, director and choreographer Prabhu Deva.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
