Ex-Armymen Stage Protest At Jantar Mantar, Blame Politicians For Loss Of Jawans' Lives To Terrorist Attack In Pulwama

In the wake of dastardly terrorist attack on Indian Army convoy on Thursday in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama that killed more than 44 jawans, ex-servicemen today protested at the Jantar Mantar in New Delhi.

“We remember the government said that they vowed to behead ten people if they (terrorists) behead one of ours. Where are those 10 heads? We have seen Uri, we’ve seen Pathankot and now Pulwama. Why have we let terrorists kill our jawans? Army had actionable intelligence. Revenge is very easy. Pakistan Occupied Kashmir is ours and we should demolish all terrorist camps from that area. PM Modi said in Varanasi today that the Army has full freedom to take necessary action, I wish he said that four-and-a-half years back and we may not have to see this day today. We don’t want our soldiers to be martyred at the hands of such terrorists,” said Major General Satbir Singh at the protest.

Also Read: PM Modi Comes Down Heavily On Pakistan After Pulwama Attack, Says Will Give Befitting Reply

Also Read: One Jawan From Assam Martyred, Another Injured In Pulwama Terror Attack That Killed Over 40 Soldiers

The killing of CRPF soldiers has seared the nation with grief.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today said warned Pakistan that it cannot weaken Indian by orchestrating attacks such as the one on CRPF jawans in Pulwama. He said those responsible will pay "a very heavy price" and security forces will be given a free hand to deal with terrorists.

In a hard-hitting speech, Modi said the “blood of the people is boiling” and the forces behind the gruesome act will be punished.

Also Read: Bollywood Celebs Condemn Pulwama Terror Attack That Claimed The Lives Of Atleast 44 CRPF Jawans

"Security forces have been given complete freedom, the blood of the people is boiling...Our neighbouring country, which has been isolated internationally, thinks such terror attacks can destabilise us, but their plans will not materialise," Modi said at a function.

The ex-servicemen have blamed the indecisiveness of the government and lack of strong action on their part.

Also Read: Martyred In Pulwama Terror Attack, CRPF Jawan's Father Says Will Send Other Son Too For Mother India

Major Priyadarshini Choudhary said that this is not the time to politicise the matter. “Local youth are freely picking up arms. They have seen the cycle of violence for years now and this is something that cannot be used by politicians for their politics.

This is the time for a decisive move. This is not the time to hold talks with Pakistan. We made it the most preferred nation and it backstabbed us.”

Modi today announced that India has withdrawn ‘Most Preferred Nation’ status to Pakistan after Jaish-e-Mohammad took responsibility of the deadly attack at Army convoy. JeM has found a safe haven in Pakistan and its mastermind Azhar Masood controls the group’s activities from the neighbouring country.

Also Read: India Withdraws 'Most Favoured Nation' Status To Pakistan After Pulwama Terror Attack That Killed Over 44 CRPF Jawans

Police identified the suicide bomber as Adil Ahmad Dar, who officials said joined Jaish in 2018.

He was driving a vehicle packed with more than 300 kilogrammes of explosives on the wrong side of the road and hit the bus, in which 40-45 personnel were travelling, head-on.

Questioning the security and political lapse, Hannan Mollah, head of the Indian Kisan Sabhan said that this is the failure of the government. “The All India Kisan Sabha condemns the ghastly attack on our soldiers. We say Jai Jawam, Jai Kisan and we are fighting together.

The attack was the result of the security failure, intelligence lapse and political failure. It is the failure of the government. Our young soldiers are dying. Modi promised a solution five years ago but he has clearly failed. What we need right now are concrete measures to solve this issue.”

Criticising the government, Mollah added that the vote campaign and politicisation of the grave situation has already started.

The powerful explosion, which reduced the bus to a mangled heap of iron, was heard kilometres away. Body parts could be seen strewn around the area.

The bus that was the focus of the attack belongs to the 76th battalion of the force.
