Pulwama attack: world condemns the terror act

World body United Nations and countries from across the globe, including the U.S., Russia, Australia, France, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, have condemned the brutal Pulwama terror attack carried out by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), and extended their support to India in the fight against terrorism.

United Nations

U.N. Secretary General Antonio Guterres “strongly” condemned the terror attack and called for those behind the attack to be brought to justice.

“We strongly condemn today’s attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district and express our deepest condolences to the families of those who lost their lives and to the Government and people of India,” Mr. Guterres’s spokesperson Stephane Dujarric said at the daily press briefing on Thursday.

Responding to a question from PTI on the attack, he said, “We, of course, wish a speedy recovery to those injured and call for those behind the attack to be brought to justice.”

When asked about New Delhi’s appeal to the international community to support India’s proposal to list terrorists, including JeM chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the UN Security Council’s Sanctions Committee and to ban terrorist organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan, he said the “issue of listing of terror organisations is one that is in the hands of the Security Council”.

The U.S.

In a statement, the U.S. State Department said it was resolutely committed to working with the Indian government to combat terrorism in all its forms.

“The US condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist attack today on an Indian Central Reserve Police Force convoy in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir,” State Department Deputy Spokesperson Robert Palladino said. He extended his deepest condolences to the deceased personnel and their families.

''The UN designated, Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Muhammad has claimed responsibility for this heinous act. We call on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to UN Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists,'' he said.

Cutting across party lines, over 50 Congressmen and Senators took to social media to express their solidarity with people of India and called for strict action against the JeM) and its state sponsors.

Russia

Russia stressed need to combat such “inhuman acts” with a decisive and collective response, without any double standards.

The Russian Embassy in New Delhi condemned in the strongest terms the horrific terror attack, which claimed the precious lives of CRPF personnel and left numerous people injured.

A statement from the embassy said, “We denounce terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and reiterate the need to combat these inhuman acts with decisive and collective response without any double standards.”

The embassy conveyed its condolences to the grieving families and wished a speedy recovery of those injured.

Putin's message to Kovind, PM

In a message to President Ram Nath Kovind and Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday, Russian President Vladimir Putin said: “Please accept the most sincere condolences in connection with the loss of Indian law enforcement officers in the terrorist act in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. We strongly condemn this brutal crime. The perpetrators and sponsors of this attack, undoubtedly, should be duly punished.

“I would like to reiterate the readiness for further strengthening counterterrorist cooperation with Indian partners. In Russia, we share the grief of friendly people of India and hope for speedy recovery of the injured.”

China

Chinese State Councilor and FM WangYi has written to External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj condemning the Pulwama attack and expressed deep sympathy to families of the victims and the injured, ANI quotes Chinese Envoy to India Luo Zhaohui as saying. “They stressed that China resolutely opposes and strongly condemns all forms of terrorism,“ Mr. Luo adds.

France

France’s Ambassador to India Alexandre Ziegler reiterated that France would collaborate with India in its fight against terrorism.

“France most firmly condemns the heinous attack perpetrated in Jammu and Kashmir. Our thoughts go out to the families of the fallen soldiers. France has always been and always will be by Indias side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms,” he tweeted.

Germany

“Horrible terror attack on a police convoy in the Indian State of #Jammu&Kashmir: at least 40 police personnel reportedly killed, many injured. We condemn terrorism in all its forms. Germany stands by its strategic partner #India,” German foreign ministry wrote on the micro-blogging site.

Canada

Canadian High commissioner in India Nadir Patel condemned the cowardly terrorist attack. “Our deepest condolences to the families of the victims of today’s cowardly terrorist attack in #Pulwama. Canada strongly condemns this attack, and stands with India in the fight against terrorism. #KashmirTerrorAttack #Pulwamaattack @MEAIndia @IndianDiplomacy @CanadainIndia,” he tweeted.

Saudi Arabia

Saudi Arabia on Friday said it stood with India in its fight against terrorism and extremism and denounced the suicide attack as “cowardly” .

The Saudi Foreign Ministry said Riyadh denounced the explosion that killed a number of people and injured many others.

The official Saudi Press Agency, quoting a Foreign Ministry source, stressed the Kingdom rejects these “cowardly terrorist acts” and the Gulf Kingdom stood with the “friendly Republic of India against terrorism and extremism.”

Riyadh also offered condolences to the families of the victims, the Indian government and the people and wished a speedy recovery to the injured.

UAE

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the United Arab Emirates said in a statement that the UAE “condemns this terrorist act”, and reiterates the country’s “principled and unequivocal position rejecting all forms of violence and terrorism“.

“The UAE stands in solidarity with the government and people of India in their fight against violence and extremism,” the ministry said. The UAE also called on the international community to unify efforts in confronting extremism and terrorism that pose a threat to global security and stability.

Israel

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu wrote to his Indian counterpart, "To my dear friend, Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi, we stand with you, the security forces and the people of India following this heinous terrorist attack. We send our condolences to the families of the victims."

Israel’s Ambassador to India Ron Malka on Twitter: “Israel strongly condemns the terror attack in #Pulwama and stands by our Indian friends during this difficult hour. We send our deepest condolences to the CPRF and their families, the people of India and the Indian government following the terrible.”

Czech Republic

“The Czech Republic strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack perpetrated in Jammu & Kashmir. Our thoughts and condolences go out to the families of the victims. The Czech Republic will stand by Indias side in the fight against terrorism in all its forms,” Czech Republic’s foreign ministry tweeted.

Bangladesh

Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina expressed her distress over the Pulwama attack, adding that Dhaka remained committed to fighting terrorism and continue to maintain a zero—tolerance policy against terrorist activities.

“At this sad moment, we stand by the people and government of India. We offer was condolences to the members of the families who lost their dear ones. Our thoughts and prayers are speedy recovery of those who got injured,” she said.

“Bangladesh remains steadfast in its commitment against terrorism of all forms and maintains a zero-tolerance policy against any kind of terrorist activities. We would continue to work and cooperate with international community including India to eradicate the menace of terrorism,” she added.

Afghanistan

Spokesperson for Afghanistan’s interior ministry Sediq Seddiqi tweeted: “While strongly condemning the heinous #KashmirTerrorAttack on CRPF personnel, we stand united with India to combat terrorism in any form as we have done it as a nation in the past 18 years.”

Maldives

Maldives President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih expressed his condolences and condemned the terror attack.

“I strongly condemn the deadly terrorist attack in Kashmir today killing at least 40 people. We send our thoughts and prayers to those affected. The Maldives will continue to work with India and the international community to combat terrorism in our region and the world at large,” he tweeted.

Sri Lanka

Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe said on Twitter, “I strongly condemn the brutal terrorist attack in Kashmir’s Pulawama district — the worst-ever terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir since 1989. I express my condolences to @narendramodi and the families of police officers who lost their lives”.

Former president and leader of the Opposition Mahinda Rajapaksa also took to Twitter to condemn the attack.

“I condemn the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir... I extend my heartfelt condolences to the families of the deceased. The world should continue to combat terrorism,” he said.

Bhutan

Tandi Dorji, Foreign Minister of Bhutan tweets: “Shocked and saddened to hear of the dastardly terrorist attack in Kashmir, which has resulted in the loss of 30 precious human lives. We strongly condemn this heinous attack and express our solidarity with the families of the victims, and the people and Government of India. Hope the perpetrators will be brought to justice.”

Diplomatic Corps

The Diplomatic Corps in India also expressed “deepest sympathy” to the government as well as the families of this horrendous act.

“We firmly support the Government of India in their fight against terrorism,” Hans Dannenberg Castellanos, the Ambassador of Dominican Republic and head of the Diplomatic Corps said in a statement.

Pakistan

Pakistan said the terrorist attack was “a matter of grave concern” even as it strongly rejected Indian media and government’s allegations of the country’s link to the strike “without” probe.

The Pakistan government said in a statement that Pakistan had “always condemned acts of violence” anywhere in the world. “We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations,” it said.
