Maharashtra: 2,500 kgs of 'fake paneer' seized from Vasai

Around 700 kilograms of the fake paneer was seized from Ajay Dairy and 1,800 kilograms from Sainath Dairy. (Representational Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Vasai: A series of swift raids revealed that fake ‘paneer’ was being made in a dairy in Vasai. Police have seized 2,500 kilograms of this adulterated cottage cheese after raiding two locations on Thursday.

Police had received information that several restaurants, resorts and dhabas were being delivered cheap and fake paneer in Vasai, Virar city. Accordingly, police raided Ajay and Sainath Dairy located at Chinchoti Kaman Road. It was found that adulterated and fake paneer was made which is extremely harmful for one’s health. In both the places, no regulations were followed and hazardous paneer was made in very unhygienic environment.

Around 700 kilograms of the fake paneer was seized from Ajay Dairy and 1,800 kilograms from Sainath Dairy. A total of 2,500 kilograms of adulterated fake cheese and paneer material have been recovered. Food and Drug Administration officials have taken possession of the dubious paneer samples for further inspection. Food and Drug Administration officials said that action will be taken to shut down the units of these two dairy units.

1000 kg of fake butter being sold in Amul packaging seized in Mumbai

Last year, On December 27, Police in Mumbai's Bhayander area arrested five men for selling spurious butter by packaging it as popular Amul butter. According to reports, a team led by Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Atul Kulkarni made the arrests after busting the gang's hideout at Bhayander Road under the limits of the Kashimira Road police station.

Pictures accessed by sections of the media show adulterated butter being filled into Amul packaging. At the time of the raid, police seized a staggering 1,000 kilograms of butter along with packaging used by Amul Butter. An investigation has been launched into the case to ascertain how members of the gang got their hands on the packaging used by Amul cooperation.
