Pulwama Terror Attack: 'Civilian traffic to be restricted during movement of security convoys IN J-K', Rajnath spells out key directive

Follow us on Rajnath Singh/PTI

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Friday announced that civilian traffic would be restricted on highways and major roads in Jammu and Kashmir during the movement of convoys of army and security forces. The decision has been made in wake of the Pulwama attack that claimed lives of 41 CRPF jawans.

He also said that the security given to people getting funds from Pakistan and its snooping agency ISI should be reviewed, in a veiled reference to separatists and hardline Hurriyat Conference leaders.

"Civilian traffic movement will be restricted for some time during movement of army and security forces convoys. This may cause inconvenience and I apologise for this but this is necessary for safety of jawans," he told reporters after a high-level security review meeting here.

The Home Minister is on a visit to Jammu and Kashmir following the worst terror attack on security forces in the state in the past three decades.

"Some elements in Jammu and Kashmir have links with the ISI and terrorist organisation. We will win decisive war against terrorism," he said.

He said he has instructed the state government to ensure communal harmony.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured on Thursday in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish-e-Mohammad suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

The bus was part of a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying CRPF personnel from Jammu to Srinagar.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday said those responsible for the attack will pay "a very heavy price" and security forces will be given a free hand to deal with terrorists.

In a hard-hitting speech, Modi said the "blood of the people is boiling" and forces behind the act of terrorism will be definitely punished.

FULL VIDEO:

(With PTI inputs)

Latest India News
