'#PulwamaRevenge' will only turn Kashmir more bloodied

After the deadliest suicide attack on the paramilitary forces in Kashmir, the word revenge is trending all across India, but is that how such attacks could be stopped from execution. It doesn’t seem so. This attack, which took lives of at least 49 paramilitary troops, has been carried out by a young Kashmiri boy from South Kashmir’s Pulwama district; a part of Kashmir, where anti-militancy operations and civilian killings have been on the rise. While the anger could be justified regarding the bloodied killings, as so many families lost their sons, but at the same time, the sane minds can’t turn a blind eye towards the cause, and situations which led to such an attack.

As former General Ata Hasnain correctly pointed out that there is “great anger among all of us Indians and justifiably so but that’s exactly what our adversary wants.” He added, “Decisions taken in anger always blows back. My job-absorb your anger and offer sane options. I would be failing my 40 years of experience dealing with this if I do not.” So responses of #PulwamaRevenge or #BadlaKab and the protests against local Kashmiris in Jammu won’t help.

Several vehicles have been burnt and clashes going on in parts of Jammu, where a curfew has now been imposed. Such response will only open floodgates of more violence and conflict. It is always easy to blame one another but accessing the root of the situation is undoubtedly a tougher job for any government.

No one gets happy with killing of humans. But there are elements on all sides who celebrate death —whether it is a killing of a civilian, militant or a paramilitary forces’ personnel. The celebration of death in itself is a point where situation in Kashmir has reached.

The question is why so?

When the violence crosses all scales — carried out by anyone, it turns society numb. In recent years, we have seen thousands thronging at the gunfight sights in Kashmir; dying, facing bullets, trying to save the trapped militants. School children have come out on streets, knowing it can lead to death, and often it does. In Kashmir, mothers have mourned their fallen sons for decades but also finding dignity in their death. This is where Kashmir is today — and it hasn’t happened in one day, but it is lack of any serious policy of political engagement.

The violence has led Kashmir to such a point where we have seen another local Kashmiri boy blowing himself up only to kill, and as he says in his video address recorded beforehand that the situation made him so. The question to ponder over is what is he talking about? What led a school dropout turned mason become a suicide bomber?

It can’t just be indoctrination as he didn’t get raised in a seminary, as many would argue. He was here — part of Kashmiri society — which has always been considered against such attacks. As the investigation into the attack is going on – the aim shouldn’t be only to find who was involved in the attack, but also what transformed a young boy to be a suicide bomber.

Solutions nor lie somewhere, neither come walking, but need to be worked on and picked up. Many have been continuously saying that the situation in Kashmir is going out of control – and it is likely that things will change only for worse. This is that time. India will change its policy towards Kashmir – but if it happens negatively, than the loss will be higher, the change or the shift must be towards finding answers and solutions to open sores, and not to take revenge, that will only become fodder to more bloodshed.
