Corporates offer jobs, financial help to Pulwama martyrs' families

At a time when the entire nation is shocked at the cowardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama in which over 40 of paramilitary jawans attained martyrdom, corporate bodies have offered jobs to the kin of the deceased.

The Global Association for Corporate Services (GACS) at its knowledge conclave in Delhi decided to offer jobs to the families of the slain CRPF personnel.

"We are deeply saddened by the incident. We wanted to do something for those bravehearts who lost their lives serving the nation, so we have decided to offer jobs to families of the martyrs," said Captain (Retd) Rajesh Sharma, Managing Director, Cushman Wakefield.

GACS has over 700 corporate houses as its members and the organisation has unanimously decided to support the families of the Pulwama martyrs.

"It's our responsibility as a citizen of this country and as members of GACS to help those who are defending our country. The entire nation is with the family of the martyrs and we are taking the responsibility of ensuring jobs to families of martyrs," said Kapil Khera, head administration, Idemia.

Corporate houses gathered in Delhi for the knowledge conclave and started Friday's event with two minutes of silence to pay tribute to the martyrs.

"Many of us in the corporate houses are also from armed forces and we feel like this is our responsibility to bring the forces and corporates closer. We have found a unique way to do this by supporting the families of the martyrs. Also, we are exploring possibilities to help the aggrieved families financially," said Col (Retd) Ashok Prabhakar.

40 Central Reserve Police Forces (CRPF) jawans were killed in the biggest terrorist attack in decades on the armed forces in Kashmir on Thursday.

Rahul Lal, national head (infrastructure and facilities) Damlia Bharat Group said, "This will be a very small help for those who have sacrificed their lives for the country but this is an initiative to bring the corporates actively closer to armed forces."

Sameer Saxena, one of the founder members of GACS said, "May be the corporates remained in their own world doing their own good business but now it's time for us to show our love and respect to the fallen heroes and act accordingly."


