India FURY: 'We’ll hit back’ - PM warns Pakistan after terror attack kills 44

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

We will give a befitting reply Narendra Modi

And Pakistan’s ambassador Sohail Mahmoud has been summoned by Indian’s Foreign Minister Vijay Gokhale and issued with a demand that Islamabad takes action in the wake of the atrocity, while another senior Government figure warned it faced “complete isolation”. The car bomb attack on a security convoy on Thursday, the worst in decades of insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir, India's only Muslim majority state, was later claimed by Pakistan-based Islamist militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM). Speaking today after a meeting with security advisors, Mr Modi said: "We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilise us.”

Jaish said it was behind the attack, in which a suicide bomber rammed a explosives-laden car into a bus carrying police personnel. Soon after Thursday's attack, it released photographs and a video of a young Kashmiri villager, Adil Ahmad Dar, who it said was responsible. In the video, Dar warned of more attacks to avenge alleged human rights violations in Kashmir. On Friday, hundreds of people gathered at his village of Lethipora to mourn his death.

India has for years accused Muslim Pakistan, where Osama Bin Laden was able to hide for several years before being assassinated by US Navy Seals, of backing separatist militants in divided Kashmir, which the neighbours both claim in full but rule in part.



Narendra Modi vowed there would be a "befitting reply"

India's Foreign Minister Vijay Gokhale summoned the Pakistani ambassador after the attack

Pakistan denies that, saying it only offers political support to the Himalayan region's suppressed Muslim people. The White House urged Pakistan in a statement "to end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil".



India said it had "incontrovertible evidence" of Pakistani involvement in the attack. The Pakistan government responded with a stiff denial, calling the attack a matter of "grave concern”, with Mr Gokhale telling Mr Mahmood his country expected “verifiable action” to be taken. Crowds gathered in Jammu, the Hindu-dominated part of Jammu and Kashmir state, demanding stronger action against Pakistan.

Indian Home Minister Rajnath Singh helps carry one of the coffins

Five Indian soldiers killed after gun battle in Kashmir

A curfew was briefly imposed in Jammu after crowds overturned and set fire to some vehicles. Protesters were also marching to the Pakistani embassy in New Delhi.



India's home minister Rajnath Singh flew into Srinagar, the main city in Indian Kashmir, and joined mourners carrying the coffins of the dead policemen, before they were sent to their homes across India. As outrage and demands for revenge flooded Indian social media, Arun Jaitley, one of the most senior figures in the Hindu nationalist-led government, told reporters India would work to ensure the "complete isolation" of Pakistan. The first step, he said, would include removing most favoured nation (MFN) trade privileges that had been accorded to Pakistan - though annual bilateral trade between the countries is barely $2 billion.

The attacks have triggered widespread demands for action

Activists shout slogans during a protest against the bus attack
