From Parliament to Pulwama: A list of Jaish-e-Mohammed's deadliest terror attacks

December 13, 2001: This was a terrorist attack on the Parliament of India in New Delhi. The perpetrators belonged to Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM). Five fidayeen terorrists fired indiscriminately in a bid to hold MPs captive. Fourteen security personnel died in the attack along with the neutralized terorrists. January 2, 2016: The attack took place a week after Prime Minister Narendra Modi made an impromptu visit to meet Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif. Six fidayeen disguised in Indian Army uniforms entered the Indian Air Force's Pathankot base. Seven security personnel were killed in an operation that lasted for over 96 hours. September 16, 2016: This was among the deadliest against security forces in Kashmir history and sparked grief and anger across India. At least 18 soldiers who were sleeping in ther tents were killed in the fire set by the terrorists after hurling 17 grenades in a couple of minutes. February 14, 2019: More than 2,500 Central Reserve Police Force personnel, many of them returning from leave to rejoin duty in the Valley, were travelling in the convoy of 78 vehicles when an SUV driven by a Jaish terrorist ploughed into one of the buses at the Srinagar-Jammu highway at Latoomode in Awantipora in south Kashmir. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed terror group had claimed the responsibility of the attack that took place just 20 km from Srinagar.

New Delhi: Investigative agencies have often highlighted the role of terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed in spreading mayhem in India and also their nefarious plans. From 2001 to 2019, the Pakistan-backed terror group has been orchestrating the most deadliest attacks in the sensitive region of Kashmir. The group was founded by Masood Azhar in the early 2000s. The group uses violence in its relentless pursuit of forcing the withdrawal of Indian security forces from Indian Administered Kashmir with the objective of giving Pakistan the control of Jammu & Kashmir. It is directly or indirectly involved in plotting, preparing, planning, assisting in conducting terror strikes in the Valley with the help of Pakistan's ISI.The J&K assembly was attacked by Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists. Three fidayeen rammed their SUV into the assembly complex. Thirty-eight civilians and three fidayeen were killed in this attack.
