Time to recreate Anna movement, says HS Phoolka

A day after resigning from Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), senior advocate HS Phoolka on Friday said there is a need to "recreate" a movement like the one started by anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare in 2012.

"The decision to covert the 2012 anti-corruption movement, led by Anna Hazare, into a political party was wrong," Phoolka said addressing reporters in New Delhi.

The AAP was formed by Arvind Kejriwal and others following the anti-corruption movement led by Anna Hazare.

"We should recreate a movement like the one created by Anna Hazare in 2012. Those who have left AAP need to unite to form an organisation parallel to political parties," Phoolka said. "We will form a big organisation within six months," he added.

Phoolka said his resignation as an MLA of Punjab Assembly has not been accepted by the Speaker.

Phoolka, who has been leading the legal fight for justice for the victims of 1984 anti-Sikh riots, said, "After sending Sajjan Kumar to prison, I will now ensure that Kamal Nath and Jagadish Tytler are sent to jail."

"When I started taking up 1984 anti-Sikh riots cases, I was only 28 years old and had a mere three-year experience as a lawyer. With that I tried to challenge the then powerful government of Rajiv Gandhi," he said.

Phoolka, who maintains that he has "stayed away from politics" for the last one year, said he wants to be always "among the people".

"In the last five years, I have got enough of people's support. In the last one year, I have distanced myself from active politics. Rather, I have been concentring on social service," he said.

Phoolka said he won't contest the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. "Although after the conviction of Sajjan Kumar, people in Punjab said that I could easily win from any seat. But I won't contest," he said.

Phoolka, who had launched a campaign to make Punjab drug-free, said he will continue with his campaign with "full force".

Phoolka's resignation from the AAP had come amid speculations of a possible alliance between the Congress and Arvind Kejriwal-led party in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls.

The AAP, however, has not ruled out the prospects of such an alliance, saying that its political affairs committee will take a final call after considering opinions of its leaders and workers from Delhi, Punjab and Haryana.

Fight for justice
