It does not become of a man to tolerate such an attack quietly, teach Pakistan a lesson: Uddhav Thackeray

uddhav thackeray | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Following the dastardly attack by Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists, in Awantipora, Pulwama of Jammu and Kashmir, in which 40 CRPF jawans were martyred, the nation has reacted sharply. Many are demanding a befitting reply to Pakistan-backed terror outfits. The Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray also echoed the nation's sentiments. Uddhav Thackeray says the Centre should send an Army team into Pakistan and carry out surgical strikes. The Sena chief says that India should teach a lesson for good this once to Pakistan.

Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray convened a press conference on the backdrop of the attack in Pulwama. In this press conference, he asked the Modi government to take a firm stand on the issue against Pakistan.

Answering to a reporter who claimed that there were intelligence inputs that warned of a sinister attack on a huge scale, Thackeray demanded to know why such signals were ignored. He also demanded that an enquiry should be carried out about who is responsible for not giving the correct importance to such intel inputs and responsibility be fixed.

The Shiv Sena chief alleged that this government is guilty of giving out slogans and doing little on the ground when it comes to such serious issues. He demanded that the government must set aside the impending elections and send in the boys to teach rogue nation Pakistan a lesson.

Uddhav reiterated that tolerating such attacks silently is not a sign of masculinity. "It is not a macho trait, this tolerating such attacks in silence. We are a proud of the surgical strikes after the Uri attacks. However, we carried out a surgical strike in Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir. Those people (Pakistani terrorists) are entering into the our country and making an ambush," he pointed out.

He said that the people are angry and since they are on the government's side, India must have the troops enter Pakistan and teach them a lesson.

Answering a question about his meeting with Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis, Uddhav Thackeray said, "Fadnavis had a discussion with me about farmers' woes and many other issues. However, all these things can be spoken later. Alliance, elections will continue. But do not spare Pakistan," he warned.
