Sabarimala protests: ‘Those opposing Sabarimala tradition anti-religion’

NEW DELHI: Making a strong intervention on the Sabarimala controversy, BJP MP Meenakshi Lekhi said on Friday the issue is being raised in Parliament by people who neither understand Hinduism nor know the practice of rituals.Making a case for constitutional morality, Lekhi argued that the Left-led government in Kerala has chosen to trample over tradition. “These are people, who, in the name of feminist rights, are actually transgressing. They are not followers of Ayyappa. They’re anti-religious people. They have a right to be anti-religious but they have no right to transgress. I may have personally any belief but I’m not going to judge others for their belief. That is what the theory of constitutional morality is,” she said.Intervening after CPI MP P Karunakaran defended the LDF government’s move to facilitate entry of women into the temple’s sanctum sanctorum in keeping with the a[ex court’s order, Lekhi batted for tolerance towards Sabarimala’s ritualistic practises.Even as Congress and the Left accused BJP of “promoting violence” in Kerala, Lekhi shot back at the Left MPs. “This narrative is coming from people who neither understand Hinduism nor do they know practices of rituals. From Kamakhya to Chenguluru, goddesses are worshipped as rajaswala in the menstruating form. That is what Hinduism is. We have space for everything. Sabarimala has its own ritualistic practices,” Lekhi said.Lekhi also argued that religion cannot be seen from a logical angle alone. “Will the SC decide how the birth of Jesus took place? Will the SC decide which body should be buried and which body should be burned? The SC has to act in accordance with law and Article 25 says it all,” she said.The BJP MP also accused the Kerala government of facilitating entry of women activists “surreptitiously” as transgenders. “Ritualistic practices practised by certain religious groups need to be left alone and this is what tolerance is all about. This isn’t the question of civil right,” she said, arguing that it was “not the court’s business”.Later, around 11.45pm, bombs were also hurled at the ancestral house of BJP leader and Rajya Sabha MP V Muraleedharan in Thalassery.Police and locals said the house of CPM member Vazhayil Sasi was targeted by a motorbike gang with crude bombs around 6pm. Within minutes, senior RSS leader Kolakkoottu Chandrasekharan’s house also came under attack in similar fashion.
