Pulwama attack: Islamabad denies any role, reaction mixed on Pak social media and TV

ISLAMABAD: Pakistan has denied having any role in the suicide attack in Kashmir carried out by Jaish-e-Muhammed, a terrorist organisation believed to be based on Pakistani soil.Following Thursday’s attack in Pulwama, Islamabad rejected any allegation linking the attack to Pakistan without any evidence. India, however, strongly believes that the deadly suicide attack on it troops was the handiwork of Pakistan. The presence of Jaish chief Maulana Masood Azhar , reportedly in Bahawalpur region of Pakistan’s Punjab province, gives credence to the Indian government and media’s claims that Pakistan has long given safe haven to Jaish-e-Muhammed militants and accused it of having a “direct hand” in the Pulwama attack that left 44 CRPF troops dead. India has demanded Masood Azhar’s extradition a number of times but Islamabad has always refused citing lack of evidence.“The attack in Pulwama is a matter of grave concern. We have always condemned acts of violence anywhere in the world,” Dr Muhammad Faisal, the Pakistan foreign office spokesperson, said in a tweet on Friday. “We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations,” he asserted.A mixed sort of reaction was seen on social media and TV channels in Pakistan regarding the attack in the Kashmir valley and the Indian government and media’s response towards it.“2 terror attacks in Pakistan’s 2 neighbours (Iran and India) this week, 2 Pak based militant outfits (jaish-ul-Adl & JeM) accepted responsibility for the attacks. Isn’t the tail still wagging the dog? Who will believe Pak claims with LeT, JeM & “good Taliban” operating unhindered? … (sic)” tweeted Afrasiab Khattak, a prominent Pakistani politician, human rights activist and former senator.Sherry Rehman, a Pakistani senator and former ambassador to the US, said Modi’s India was escalating its response to a heinous terror attack in Kashmir by premising Pakistan’s hand in it. “Yet Islamabad makes no gains from such an attack. Instead of a political response to years of brutal repression in Kashmir, hysteria is being amplified against Pakistan,” Rehman said in a tweet.
