PM Modi warns Pakistan after deadly Kashmir attack

India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned Pakistan on Friday to expect a strong response to a suicide attack that killed 44 paramilitary policemen in Kashmir, ratcheting up tension between the nuclear-armed neighbours.

The car bomb attack on a security convoy on Thursday was the worst in decades of insurgency in the disputed region, reported Reuters.

The Pakistan-based Islamist militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) claimed responsibility soon after a suicide bomber rammed a explosives-laden car into a bus carrying police personnel.

India said it had “incontrovertible evidence” of Pakistani involvement - though that was quickly denied by Islamabad.

Promising a "crushing response" to the suicide bombing, Modi said: “We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilise us.

"Our neighboring country thinks such terror attacks can weaken us, but their plans will not materialize," the PM said in a speech, after meeting security advisers to discuss options.

He also added that government forces have been "given total freedom" to deal with the militants.

Later in the evening, PM Modi led the nation in paying last respects to the CRPF personnel martyred in the Pulwama terror attack. With his hands folded and head bowed, he walked around 40 coffins draped in tricolour, reported PTI.

The mortal remains of the troopers reached Delhi's Palam air force area in a special Indian Air Force (IAF) plane in the evening. The bodies were received by Union home minister Rajnath Singh.

Decorated with white floral arrangements, 40 coffins wrapped in tricolour were neatly arranged in the hanger, where senior officials of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) laid wreaths one by one in a solemn ceremony, officials said.

The attack is ratcheting up already hostile tensions between the nuclear-armed neighbors, who both administer parts of the disputed territory but each claim it entirely.

Pakistan has denied any involvement and warned India against linking it to the attack, but that hasn't stopped India from taking action.

India's Finance Minister Arun Jaitley announced Friday that New Delhi was withdrawing the most favored nation trade status given to Pakistan and would take all possible diplomatic steps "to ensure the complete isolation from international community of Pakistan of which incontrovertible evidence is available of having a direct hand in this gruesome terrorist incident."

The US also specifically singled out Pakistan in its statement condemning the attack.

The attack comes months before national elections in India, reported AP.

India has for years accused Pakistan of backing separatist militants in divided Kashmir, which the neighbours both claim in full but rule in part.

They have fought three wars since gaining independence from Britain in 1947 and regularly exchange fire along their highly militarized border in Kashmir, reported Associated Press..

In a strongly-worded statement the White House urged Pakistan “to end immediately the support and safe haven provided to all terrorist groups operating on its soil”.

Pakistan is due to host peace talks next week between the Afghan Taliban and the US as part of efforts to seek a political settlement to the Afghan war, but escalating tensions with India could divert Pakistan’s attention.

As outrage and demands for revenge flooded Indian social media, Jaitley, one of the most senior figures in the government, told reporters India would work to ensure the “complete isolation” of Pakistan.

The last major attack in Kashmir was in 2016 when Jaish militants raided an Indian army camp, killing 20 soldiers. Weeks later, Modi ordered a surgical strike on suspected militant camps across the border in Pakistan Kashmir.
