Dead man spending

bank accounts

ATM cards

Two held for raping woman, forcing her to take drugs The alleged incident took place on December 31; one more accused is missing.

Kotak Mahindra Bank

State Bank of India

A former merchant navy captain, Ralph Coutinho was found dead in his Chembur flat on June 2, 2018. Right: The accused, Rehan Memon, who allegedly stole Ralph’s bank cards while monitoring the cleanliness work at his house after his death

Five people nabbed for poaching leopard, sambar The Thane forest department has arrested five people in connection with the poaching of a leopard and a sambar near two studios in Film City. The security wing of Film City informed the forest department’s territorial wing about the carcasses of the animals

Ralph Coutinho’s brother received SMS alerts about withdrawal of over Rs 10 lakh from histwo months after his death; one held for stealingA dead man’s family received a major shock when SMS alerts about withdrawal of over Rs 10 lakh from his bank accounts started arriving in his phone number being used by his youngest brother months after his death.Ralph Coutinho’s kin approached the Govandi police, who, after scanning CCTV footage at ATMs from where the money was withdrawn, tracked down a 39-year-old owner of a small eating joint in Kurla for stealing his debit and credit cards. The suspect, Rehan Ismail Memon, was arrested from his Nehru Nagar residence on December 30. He had stolen the cards during cleaning work at Ralph’s residence after his death.Police said that he had an accomplice, who is at large. They are trying to find out his name and whereabouts by interrogating Memon.A former merchant navy captain, Ralph, 57, was not married and lived alone in Chembur. He was found dead in his apartment on June 2, 2018, after neighbours complained of foul smell. Police said that his last rites were performed by his elder brother, Richard, 62, who lives in Kurla.“Richard also sent four people to clean Ralph’s house — once on June 2 and then on June 5. Since then, the house has been closed. However, we didn’t find his mobile phone in the house,” said an officer from Govandi police station.In August, Ralph’s Canada-based younger brother, Ronald Coutinho, 52, came to Mumbai. As he had to live in the city for a long period because of some property-related issues, Ronald decided to use the phone number that belonged to Ralph.He got a new SIM card of the same number. When the SIM card got activated, Ronald received SMS notifications about a total of Rs 10,50,000 being withdrawn from two of Ralph’s bank accounts. Ralph had a debit card and a debit-cum-credit card.Suspecting that something was amiss, Ronald froze the accounts, one atand the other at, besides lodging acomplaint with Govandi police.“On further investigation, we found out that between June 6 and June 20, an amount of Rs 40,000 was withdrawn from one of the accounts in three attempts. We asked the bank for CCTV footage. Connecting the time of the withdrawal and the recordings, we got a picture of the accused. They were using ATMs located in three locations to take out cash and we started keeping a vigil on these ATMS,” said investigating officer API Deepak Kharat.The cops then decided to wait for the card to be used another time, which happened in December. Memon tried to withdraw cash from one of the ATMs that were under the police’s watch. He was unsuccessful as the card had been blocked, but gave an opportunity to the cops to nab him.The police then raided his home and arrested him.“Memon has admitted to stealing the credit cards while overseeing the cleaning operation at Ralph’s flat. We have got his custody till January 5. We are also looking for his accomplice, who had somehow managed to lay his hands on the PINs. We are trying to find out how he did that,” said senior PI Shashikant Mane.
