Family of slain CRPF jawan in Pulwama terror attack disappointed with Modi govt

The terror attack in Pulwama has come as the biggest shock for Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawan Pradeep Singh's family who lives in Azan village of the Kannauj district in Uttar Pradesh.

Singh's wife Neeraj is disappointed with the Narendra Modi government.

Speaking to India Today TV, she said, "PM Modi has said that sacrifice made by the jawans in Pulwama will not go in vain. However, we don't trust him and his government anymore. Terror attacks have taken place earlier in Kashmir as well but why were the security forces not given a free hand before. Our jawans should have been given the power to act strictly against the stone pelters in the Valley."

"Even if the forces launch a crackdown against terrorism after this incident my husband will not come back. He came on a leave for 40 days and had left for Kashmir on February 11. Our family had no idea that we will never be able to see Pradeep alive again," Neeraj, who is in a state of shock after hearing the tragic news, added.

The slain jawan's father Amar Singh, a retired sub inspector, said, "The government has never valued the contribution of our jawans. People will forget my son's sacrifice within three days and will get busy in their own affairs. The government created a hype about the surgical strikes but terror activities are still happening. It's very important for all political parties to unite and take a very firm stand against Pakistan and terror groups operating in the country."

The jawan's mother Sarojani Devi said, "My son wanted to serve the nation since childhood but we never thought that his determination will see such a barbaric end. He has left behind his wife and two children. It will be very difficult for us to live without him."

Kuldeep, brother of the CRPF jawan said, "The compensation given by the state government holds no value in front of my brother's life. If the government is serious about crackdown against terrorism then it should end permanently after the strict action which has been promised by PM Modi and his ministers."

The Samajwadi Party chief and former UP CM Akhilesh Yadav also met the bereaved family in Kannauj.
