Sena-BJP alliance: Watch: CM Devendra Fadnavis takes three steps to seal deal with Shiv Sena at Matoshree

Ayodhya

Property tax waiver

farm loan waiver

Assembly elections

Watch: Are the BJP and Shiv Sena any closer to firming their alliance? 01:46

PHOTO BY SATISH MALAVADE

Shiv Sena’s preconditions for alliance talksGuarantee construction of a grand Ram temple infor under 500 sq ft houses in Mumbai and Thane100%for state; no conditions applying.Ram temple in Ayodhya, 100% farm loan waiver, and a complete property tax waiver on houses measuring less than 500 sq ft in Mumbai and Thane. These are the three big demands of the Shiv Sena if the BJP wants an alliance for the Lok Sabha and. The demands emerged from the 30-minute meeting between Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Sena president Uddhav Thackeray at the latter’s residence in Bandra East last evening.Call it an outreach, or the BJP extending an olive branch to its sulking ally, but there were enough indications yesterday that the alliance talks were going through the right channels and going very well. Leaders from both parties said the talks were “positive”, and a formal announcement could happen anytime soon.“While the seat-sharing remains a primary issue, Sena also wants assurance on key issues,” a source said.Fadnavis was joined by senior minister Chandrakant Patil in the meeting that was arranged amid reports that Sena had given the BJP a 48-hour ultimatum to decide on the alliance.A senior Sena functionary told Mirror that Uddhav asked the BJP to “clarify its stand on Ram mandir in Ayodhya”. Uddhav himself had recently visited Ayodhya, and Sena has been taking pot-shots at Narendra Modi over the issue. “Talks between the CM and Uddhav were positive but the Sena chief made it clear that the BJP must be transparent on the Ram temple and loan waiver issues. We have also conveyed that the people of Mumbai must be given a stake in the development of the Eastern seafront,” a senior Sena functionary said.The functionary said Uddhav had also demanded crop insurance scheme for all farmers and an increased minimum support price. “The ball is in the BJP’s court now,” he said.Regarding the contentious issue of seat-sharing, the Sena sources said both parties could agree to a 50-50 arrangement for the Assembly elections. “Sena wants the BJP to not behave like ‘big brother’. Show us respect and share power with dignity,” the party source said.If an alliance does happen, it will be a massive climbdown for the Sena, which had said that it will not settle for an alliance with the BJP and will fight all elections on its own. The BJP sources said seat-sharing will require detailed discussions and plenty of fine-tuning. “But the fact that Fadnavis and Uddhav had a lengthy discussion is an indication that talks are on and the alliance can materialise,” the BJP source said.Fadnavis confirmed the talks revolved around issues faced by farmers and the economically weak. “We obviously discussed the alliance and talks were positive. They have listed their concerns and we will go ahead on a positive note,” Fadnavis said after the meeting.
