Sabarimala temple row highlights: ‘State-sponsored violence’, BJP accuses Pinarayi Vijayan of ‘vote bank’ politics

Be ready to face ‘constitutional consequences’ of violence, BJP warns Kerala CM

“We advise, warn and caution the chief minister to stop this violence. failing which the CPI-M government will have to face constitutional consequences,” Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) spokesman G.V.L. Narasimha Rao said.

BJP accuses Kerala government of fanning violence

BJP on Saturday accused Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan-led Kerala government of fanning violence in the state over Sabarimala row.

“This is an issue of devotees, and not an issue of the BJP. This is an issue concerning the Hindu society,” BJP leader GVL Narasimha Rao said at a press conference.

More than 3,000 arrested for violence

3,178 persons have been arrested in connection with violence across Kerala; 1,286 cases registered against 37,979 persons, reports ANI.

BJP, CPM engaged in unprecedented violence: Congress

“Both the BJP and the ruling CPM are engaged in unprecedented violence, and are making the lives of common people miserable,” said Kerala leader of opposition Ramesh Chennithala, urging CM Pinarayi Vijayan to take immediate steps to restore peace in the state.

CPM govt indulging in votebank politics: BJP

A few days ago, the Supreme Court issued an order over control of a church between two factions. The state government is yet to implement the order citing law and order problems. What is compelling them to attack Sabarimala devotees now? This is appeasement politics: GVL Narasimhan Rao, BJP spokesperson.

Kerala CM making false statements: BJP

A few days ago, a peaceful protester was hit on the head by stones and he died. The CM said he died of heart attack. But the post mortem showed otherwise. The CM should stop making such statements: GVL Narasimhan Rao, BJP spokesperson.

Pinarayi Vijayan politicising Sabarimala issue: BJP

Pinarayi Vijayan politicising Sabarimala issue. He has given a free hand to his party workers. Our party workers are being targeted. The CM is using the Supreme Court order as a shield to clamp down on Hindu beliefs and BJP workers. This govt is doing appeasement politics: GVL Narasimhan Rao, BJP spokesperson.

State-sponsored violence, says BJP

The Kerala government has decided to wreak havoc instead of dealing with the Sabarimala issue sensibly. They are not sparing even devotees. It is state-sponsored violence: GVL Narasimhan Rao, BJP spokesperson.

PM to address rallies on January 15 and 24

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address two rallies in Kerala, one in Kollam on January 15 and the other in Thrissur on January 24.

BJP march to secretariat on January 15

BJP decides to intensify agitation on Sabarimala. On January 15, the party will organise a march to the secretariat.

Police take out flag march in Thalassery

Police take out flag march in Thalassery, a sensitive town, and scene of violence during Thursday’s shutdown. Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan hails from the town.

WATCH | Violence continues in Kerala, CPI(M) worker stabbed

Police crackdown after violence in Kannur and Pathanamthitta districts

33 people have been taken into preventive detention in connection with the violence in Kannur district last night. 76 cases have been registered in connection with attacks in Pathanamthitta district where 25 people have been remanded and 204 taken into preventive detention; 110 people have been arrested: Kerala DGP Loknath Behera, reports ANI.

99 buses damaged during Thursday’s shutdown

Kerala State Road Transport Corporation managing director Tomin Thachankery said at least 99 buses were damaged during Thursday’s shutdown. Employees of KSRTC later staged a rally with the damaged buses.

8 women entered Sabarimala since SC verdict: Kerala police

Kerala police say eight women entered Sabarimala temple since the Supreme Court verdict of September 28. But the Sabarimala Karma Samithi rejects the claim, saying it is a ploy to give a wrong picture to invite more women to the temple. It reiterated that Sri Lankan woman Sasikala’s entry in the temple was farce.

Operation Broken Window

Police on Thursday began a clampdown operation, named ‘Broken Window’, following the shutdown call by Sabarimala Karma Samithi and subsequent clashes. Prohibitory orders were imposed in three municipal towns — Palakkad and Nedumangad in south Kerala, and Mancheawaram in north Kerala.

Explanation sought from tantri for ‘purification ritual’

The Travancore Devasom Board, which runs the hilltop shrine, has sought an explanation from the tantri (supreme priest), Rajeevaru Kandarau, for performing a purification ritual on Wednesday after the two women managed to enter and pray at the temple.

Bombs hurled at will

Bombs were hurled at the house of Malabar Devasom Board member Sasikumar in Perambra in Kozhikode district in the early hours of Friday, which the CPI(M) blamed on RSS. At least 50 houses of CPI(M) and BJP workers were attacked on Thursday night. In Adoor in Pathanamthitta district, 40 houses were attacked.

PM Modi’s rally in Kerala postponed

The BJP had earlier postponed the visit of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the state.

“The PM’s visit to Pathanmathitta on January 6 was postponed due to some other engagements. Though it has nothing to do with the current situation, we don’t want to aggravate the situation further,” said a BJP leader.

This was to be Modi’s first political rally in south India this year.

Kannur district administration calls for peace meet

Prohibitory orders clamped in many areas as tension mounts. A worried Kannur district administration calls for peace meeting to contain the violence.

CPI(M) blames RSS for violence

“Sangh Parivar out to vitiate peace in the state,” says CPI(M) MLA AN Shameer whose house was attacked.

Situation in Kannur tense

Most fresh attacks took place late on Friday night or early Saturday morning. The situation in Kannur is quite tense, notorious for retaliatory political killings.

RSS office set on fire in Kannur

An RSS office was set on fire in Kannur. More police have been deployed in the trouble-torn district. Intelligence agencies have warned of more trouble.

CPI(M) worker’s house attacked in Kozhikode district

Bomb blast reported in Perambra in Kozhikode district. A CPI(M) worker’s house was attacked. Authorities express concern over sporadic incidents of violence.

BJP MP V Muralidharan’s house bombed

Bombs were thrown at the house of BJP Rajya Sabha MP V Muralidharan in Thalassery. Police have taken 18 people into preventive custody in Kannur, notorious for red-saffron clashed that have claimed more than 300 lives in the last three decades.

CPI(M) worker stabbed, MLA’s house attacked

Violence continues in many parts of Kerala. One CPI(M) worker was stabbed in Iritti in Kannur on Friday night. Party MLA AN Shameer’s house was attacked.
