JDF.org The Official Website of The Jamaica Defence Force

Tit Bits Church at Up Park Camp used to be held in a building that doubled as a school house before it was destroyed on January 14, 1907 in an earthquake. The present building is constructed at a new site and was dedicated on the Feast of the Ascension in 1912. At the Evening Service preceding the consecration, old Colours of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Battalion, the West India Regiment were handed over to be laid up in the Church. These had formerly been kept at the Kingston Parish Church. The building was constructed by S. R. Eustace Fielding Esq. with assistance from the West India Regiment Engineers. The style of the building is said to be Jacobean from the Gothic Revival era. The structure is reinforced concrete walls bound together on a steel frame and resting on a deep and strong foundation. It is built to accommodate 500 persons.The ceiling is described as being a barrel vault ceiling with a series of arches. There are also seven columns on either side and each is crowned with Ionic Capitols. The columns are for decorative purposes only. Note must be made of the Obelisk which stands to the west of the Church. According to the tablet at its base, it was built to commemorate the Officers, NCOs, men, women and children of the 2nd Battalion, the West India regiment who lost their lives in the earthquake of 1907. It was erected by the past and present Officers, WOs, NCOs and men of the 2nd Battalion, the West India Regiment.Garrison Church of the Ascension stands as a place to provide roots, ‘groundedness’ and respite from the challenges of military life. It is our place from which to draw strength and spiritual renewal both in times of active duty and times of relative calm. Children’s Chapel – The south transept houses a Children’s Chapel. The plaque laid in the chapel indicates that it was dedicated to the memory of Officers, Soldiers and their families lost at sea in 1953.The band is accommodated in that area on the occasions when they play for Worship. Bells – There are two bells located near the west entrance to the church. The inscription on them is as follows: Right Bell: John Taylor and Co. founders of Loughborough, England, 1957. Left Bell: J.A. F FANAPATNAM J763 The bell on the right is still rung on Sunday mornings five minutes before the start of each service.

The Pipe Organ The Pipe Organ was renovated February 2014 and is fully functional. It was commissioned by HM the King and built by J W Walker and Sons in 1949. Stained Glass Windows –The original stained glass in the old church building was given by ‘the Colonel and Officers in memory of men of the 2nd West India Regiment killed and who died from wounds received in the Ashante War of 1873-4. The stained glass windows in the present building are ‘presented by Colonel Barchard and Officers of the 2nd Battalion West India Regiment to replace the one destroyed in the January 14, 1907 earthquake. Candle Stands – The inscription on the pair of candle stands on the altar reads ‘presented to Garrison Church by Marie Louise, Princess of Schleswig Holstein, 1915. Princess Marie Louise (Franziska Josepha Louise Augusta Marie Christina Helena; formerly Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig-Holstein; 12 August 1872 – 8 December 1956) was a member of the British Royal Family, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria. Altar Rails – The altar rails were erected by the congregation in memory of two stalwart Churchwardens. The right side was given in memory of Major A.T. DE M Martin of the West India Regiment killed in Palestine 1917 while the left side was given in memory of Lt. Col RR Lawrenson, DSO of the West India Regiment killed in France 1918. Altar Cross – The Altar Cross which is on a shelf on the ‘reredos’ behind the altar was given as a gift to the former Church in 1905 by the Garrison Church in Portsmouth and is the only thing salvaged from the building destroyed in the earthquake. Reredos – The reredos which forms the backdrop to the altar was given by the West India Regiment in memory of their brethren who died in the war 1914 to 1918. It features carvings of a bundle of wheat and a twig of grapes (bread and wine of the Eucharist). Baptismal Font and Bowl – The font and bowl were given to Garrison Church by Mary Emily Swettenham in 1913. The font is ornately carved and features a Dove on the front. Mary Emily Swettenham, nee Copeland, was the widow of Sir (James) Alexander Swettenham (1846-1933) who served as Governor of Jamaica 1904 to 1907. Communion Vessels Among the communion vessels is a paten inscribed ‘in memory of two mothers 1907-1912.
