Is a second surgical counter-attack the answer?

The whole nation is shocked and outraged at the loss of 44 brave CRPF jawans in the suicide SUV attack in Pulwama, Kashmir. Occurring at 3:37 p.m. on the afternoon of 14 February, this ghastly assault made it the saddest and most savage ever Valentine’s Day in recent memory. Who is responsible? The terrorist outfit, Jaish-e-Mohammed (Army of Mohammed), has of course claimed responsibility. But the actual attack was carried out by a relatively “junior” operative, Adil Ahmad Dar, formerly a sawmill worker. Already on the radar of intelligence agencies as a Category “C” militant, 22-year-old Adil, was a high-school dropout, who went missing last March, turning rogue soon after. Adil hails from Gundibagh village, not too far from the site of his fidayeen attack on the CRPF convoy. He must have known the terrain well. He used that knowledge to kill his own soldiers and countrymen.

The question on everyone’s mind is just how could such a brazen ambush happen? How could such a large convoy, comprising 78 buses, trucks, bullet-proof vans, and carrying nearly 2,500 troops be set upon by a single suicide bomber and knocked out? The whole four-lane route had been monitored and evacuated, with tight security at check points every few hundred metres. Yet, an SUV, fully laden with explosives, not only travelled alongside the convoy for some five-seven minutes, but rammed right into the middle of it, setting off a huge blast. An entire bus was blown to smithereens, its precious payload of soldiers, horrific and gory mass of mangled, burning flesh and smoking debris. How did such a huge cache of explosives enter what is practically a war-zone? How were the explosives loaded onto the SUV without detection? Worse, why was such a ferocious and brutal blitz allowed to happen despite ample intelligence warnings and reports?

So huge was the security breach that Jammu and Kashmir Governor, Satyapal Malik, himself admitted that there had been “a serious security lapse.” He was reported as saying, “Definitely, there was a security lapse. Security forces would now have to sit together, analyse and take measures to plug the loopholes.” While national agencies, under the direction of the PMO and the Cabinent Committee on Security (CCS), will surely investigate, sending experts and crack commandos to the site, the situation demands that we take a broad and calm view of the whole matter.

Lest we forget, Masood Azhar, the mastermind who founded and still heads Jaish-e-Mohammed, was an Indian prison for five years, from 1994-1999. He and two other terrorists were released on 31 December 1999 in Kandahar. Why were we compelled to give up this India-hating monster, also believed to be the brains behind several bloody and murderous attacks on India? That’s because of an exchange of the passengers of Indian Airlines flight IC814 hijacked from Kathmandu in return for these dreaded extremists. Few remember that the airliner not only landed, but refuelled in Amritsar, then touched Lahore, and Dubai, before landing in Taliban-controlled Afghanistan.

Azhar, who was let free, is blamed for several other high-casualty offensives against India. These started with the 20 April 2000 suicide car bombing at the entrance of the Indian headquarters in Badamibah, Srinagar. Eighteen-year old Afaq Ahmad blew himself up in a car laden with explosives killing five of our soldiers. Sounds familiar? Since then there have been dozens of suicide strikes in which an estimated over 150 Indian soldiers, not counting the recently slain 44, have lost their lives. These numbers do not include the ghastly 26/11 Mumbai Lashkar-e-Taiba aggression in 2008 which left nearly 175 people dead.

It is believed that the first gun surfaced in the Valley in 1989, around the same time that the Kashmiri Pandits were driven out. In these thirty years, Pakistan sponsored and trained activists have managed to indoctrinate, brainwash, train, operate, and deploy hundreds of young and vulnerable Kashmiris to attack their own army and paramilitary forces, waging war against their own state. What have we achieved in comparison? This is the question we should be contemplating and debating. Our multiple failures—political, social, cultural, narrative, intelligence, and military—stare us in the face.

What is the way out? A second surgical strike? But such a counter-attack might escalate into extended and expensive hostilities on either side. Without question, neither India nor Pakistan, armed to the teeth besides being nuclear weapons capable, wants war. What we should do, instead, is to liquidate the terrorists who are enemies of India. The US too, waited and watched, but eventually liquidated Osama bin Laden. Similarly, no enemy of India should be able to sleep in peace nor be sure that each night he goes to bed will not be his last one.

Author is Director, IIAS, Shimla

Views are personal
