Pulwama Attack: India bids farewell to CRPF martyrs, patriotic slogans reverberate as scores join in to pay tribute

Follow us on Pulwama Terror Attack Latest Updates: Sacrifice won’t go in vain, says PM Modi

The Pulwama terror attack, which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans on Thursday, has enraged a nation. As the families prepare for the funeral of their sons, fathers and husbands, a nation is preparing to fight back.

Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) on Thursday carried out the deadly suicide attack on the CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district, claiming the lives of at least 40 CRPF jawans. Several among martyred were returning from leave to rejoin duty.

In retaliation to the attack, India has issued a stern warning to Pakistan and has launched a major diplomatic offensive. India held a briefing for envoys of 25 countries on Friday, including from P5 nations -- US, China, Russia, the UK and France -- to highlight Pakistan's role in using terrorism as an instrument of state policy.

Domestically, the security forces have turned the state into a cantonment. Apart from a massive investigation in Pulwama, the army has also deployed nine columns with air support in Jammu to keep stone-pelters and protests in check. A curfew has been clamped down in several parts of the state.

Also read | Pulwama Terror Attack: India mourns loss of CRPF bravehearts, launches major diplomatic offensive against Pakistan

Latest Updates:

08:35 pm: Air Force personnel raised slogans of "Bharat Mata Ki Jai" and "Veer Jawan, Amar Rahe" at Guwahati International Airport, as the mortal remains of CRPF Head Constable Maneswar Basumatari were being taken to his native village Baksa in Assam.

08:20 pm: Upon India's withdrawal of MFN (Most Favoured Nation) status to Pakistan after the Pulwama Terror Attack, basic customs duty on all goods exported from Pakistan to India has been raised to 200% with immediate effect.

07:30 pm:

07:05 pm:

07:01 pm:

06:45 pm:

06:25 pm:

06:07 pm:

05:40 pm:

05:28 pm:

04:47 pm:

04: 32 pm:

04:10 pm: As a nation, our work starts now. We stand with the families of those who have sacrificed themselves for the nation, says PM Modi while addressing rally in Maharashtra.

03:40 pm: RAW chief AK Dhasmana, Additional Director IB Arvind Kumar, Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba & NSA Ajit Doval arrive at Home Minister Rajnath Singh's residence for a high-level meeting. The meeting has begun.

02:30 pm: Famous comedy serial the Kapil Sharma Show has dropped Navjot Singh Sidhu after he advocated a dialogue with Pakistan in the light of Pulwama attack. Sidhu's comment had received widespread criticism on the internet, with several people on Twitter pledging to boycott the comedy serial due to Sidhu's presence in it. On Friday, Sidhu had said that an enire country cannot be blamed for the actions of terrorists.

02:13 pm: Cricketer Virender Sehwag offers free education to children of 40 martyred CRPF jawans at his school.

01:55 pm: Sea of humanity have descended on the sites of last rites of each and every Pulwama braveheart as heartbroken nation bid farewell to them in of rage and sorrow. The funeral processions are being stretched into kilometres as locals gather to pay respects. Emotions are running high as several people in the crowd are breaking into tears while chanting 'Vande Mataram' and 'Pakistan Murdabad' and demanding a strict and swift action against the terror outfits.

01:44 pm: Mumbai Police baton charge protesters blocking local train service in Nalasoprara. Services resumed.

01:05 am: Adil Ahmad Dar had a Pakistani accomplice in the car: The sources have found that suicide bomber Adhil Ahmad Dar was accompanied by a Pakistani fedayeen. It is not clear who was driving the car which rammed into the CRPF bus, killing 40 jawans on Thursday.

01:04 pm: Suicide attacker's video 15-days-old: According to India TV sources, the video of suicide bomber released after the attack has been found to be 15 days old, which indicates that it was a well-planned attack.

01:00 pm: Indian polity 'stand united' against terrorism: All political parties came together to give a strong message of unity in the all-party meet chaired by Home Minister Rajnath Singh in New Delhi today. Congress reiterated its backing for government's appropriate retaliation against the Pulwama terror attack. Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad said that since 1947, this is the highest casualty our security forces have endured, the whole party has decided that they stand united with police, army and CRPF. "We stand with the government in its fight against terrorism," he said after the all-party meet. The Congress leader said that PM Modi should convene the all-party meet on the subject. Other parties also agreed. JP Yadav from RJD said that security forces' sacrifice will not go in vain. We are united, he said, while adding that the action should be taken soon to end terrorism.

11:55 am: I know that we are all in immense pain after what happened in Pulwama, I understand your anger. Two sons from Maharashtra lost their lives in the attack, their sacrifice won’t go in vain: PM Modi in Maharashtra

11:45 am: Shaheed amar rahe, Pakistan murdabad, Vande Matram, abki baar jiska khoon a khuala woh khoon nahi pani hai jiska khoon na garam ho woh Pakistani hai, Badla chahiye and Pakistan hosh mein aao... are among the chants reverberating across the country as the thousands of people holding posters and tricolour attend funerals of martyrs across India.

11:30 am: Curfew was imposed yesterday, no casualties were reported. The situation is under control but as a precautionary measure, we have continued with the curfew. We will decide whether to continue it or not by evening, after assessing the situation: Ramesh Kumar, DC Jammu

11:14 am: Jammu & Kashmir: A team of National Investigation Agency (NIA) has reached the site of Pulwama attack for further investigation.

11:11 am: All-party meet begins in New Delhi: Leaders of political parties have together for all-party meet called by Home Minister Rajnath Singh in New Delhi. The parties will be briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far, a home ministry official. The decision to convene the all-party meeting was taken at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday.

11:00 am: Security forces start major hunt for Abdul Rashid Ghazi: Top sources have told India TV that the security forces have started a major hunt for Abdul Rashid Ghazi, the main conspirator in the Pulwama attack. Ghazi's location has been traced to forest regions in Pulwama or Tral. The sources say that Ghazi has recruited nearly 70 youths between the age group of 18-23. Out of these recruits, Ahmed Dar was category C recruit, they said. Read full story

10:35 am: Protesters chanting 'Vande Matram' block Mumbai locals: Daily commuters have taken over the train tracks in Mumbai at Nalasupara and Virar stations, blocking local train traffic. They are raising slogans against Pakistan and demanding quick action against the neighbouring nation for Pulwama terror attack. According to sources on the ground, the public gathered has not been mobilised by any political party or outfit, it is impromptu protest by the commuters. Several parts of Mumbai and Thane are observing shutdown as a mark of respect to the martyrs. The trains ervices have been blocked for over two hours now. Read full story

10:10 am: Bihar: CM Nitish Kumar and RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav pay tribute to Constable Ratan Kumar Thakur and Head Constable Sanjay Kumar Sinha of CRPF who lost their lives in Pulwama Attack.

10:00 am: Funerals of CRPF martyrs being held in UP's Shamli, Bihar's Patna and Uttarakhand's Dehradun with full state honours. Either Union ministers or state ministers are attending the funerals.

09:40 am: Dehradun: Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat pays tribute to CRPF ASI Mohan Lal who lost his life in Pulwama Attack

09:20 am: Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan Ajay Bisaria arrives in Delhi for consultations with senior officials and leadership: Sources tell ANI

09:00 am: Parts of Thane observe shut down as a mark of respect: Businessmen in parts of Maharashtra's Thane have decided to pay homage to martyrs of Pulwama terror attack by observing a shutdown. The streets in Mumbra area bore a deserted look.

Image Source : ANI Daughter of a CRPF braveheart salutes father's mortal remains in Dehradun

08:30 am: Thousands gather for the funeral of each martyr: A pall of gloom has descended in the villages, towns of martyrs who gave their lives for the nation in Pulwama terror attack. Huge crowds have gathered as the mortal remains are making their ways to their homes. People are shouting slogans Bharat Mata ki Jai, Pakistan Murdabad as they walk with the mortal remains, turning into a massive procession. Senior political leaders from respective states are expected to pay their last respects to mortal remains of the jawans.

08:20 am: All-party meet on Pulwama: An all-party meeting will be held today to brief political parties on the terror attack. The meeting has been convened by Home Minister Rajnath Singh and invitations have been extended to all major political parties. The parties will be briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far, a home ministry official. The decision to convene the all-party meeting was taken at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday.

07:30 am: Funerals for Pulwama bravehearts to be held today: Several states in India will witness the funerals of brave CRPF soldiers who gave their lives to the nation during the Pulwama terror attack today. The mortal remains of the soldier were flown from Kashmir to New Delhi on Friay, where political leaders of the country paid their last respects. Then, the remains will were sent to the respective families. Funerals are likely to be held today with full state honours in Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Assam, West Bengal, Odisha, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.

Image Source : PTI PHOTOS PM Modi (R), Rahul Gandhi (L) pay tribute to CRPF jawans killed in Pulwama terror attack at Palam airport in New Delhi.

07:00 am: Govts, NGOs step up to provide relief for families of martyrs: While the Centre is planning a major crackdown on terror outfits, the state governments and non-government organisations have come together to support families of the martyrs in the time of crisis. MP government has announced an ex-gratia amount of Rs 1 crore for the kins of one jawan from the state, UP has announced Rs 25 lakh each for 12 families of jawans, Maharastra Rs 50 lakh each for two families, Rajasthan Rs 25 lakh each, Odisha rs 10 lakh, while Punjab has announced Rs 12 lakh compensation and a government job to the next of kin of the four CRPF jawans from the state. Read full story

Image Source : PTI Howrah: Relatives and neighbours gather at the residence of CRPF martyr Bablu Santra, who lost his life in Thursday's Pulwama terror attack

06:40 am: India slams Pak for claiming it had no role in Pulwama terror attack: India slammed Pakistan for stating that it had no role in the Pulwama attack carried out by Pakistan-based terror group JeM, saying Islamabad could not claim that it was unaware of the presence of terror groups on its soil as the links of such outfits to the country were there for everyone to see."Pakistan cannot claim that it is unaware of their presence and their activities. They have not taken any action against these groups despite international demands, especially against groups and individuals proscribed by the UN and other countries," MEA spokesperson said.

06:30 am: US backs India’s right to self-defence: US National Security Adviser John Bolton told his Indian counterpart Ajit Doval on Friday that America supports India’s right to self-defence. Bolton telephoned Doval Friday morning (night in India) to express his condolences for the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir and offered the US' full support to India in confronting terrorism. "I told Ajit Doval today that we support India’s right to self-defense. I have spoken to him twice, including this morning... and expressed US' condolences over the terrorist attack,” he told PTI. Bolton said the US has been very clear to Pakistan on ending support to terrorist safe havens. “We have been very clear on that score... And, we are continuing to be in discussions we are going to have with the Pakistanis,” he said.

Portraits of martyred CRPF jawans who lost their lives in Pulwama terror attack

Portraits of martyred CRPF jawans who lost their lives in Pulwama terror attack



06:20 am: Nine security columns with air support deployed in Jammu: The Army has deployed nine security columns with air support in Jammu following massive protests over the terror attack. "The Army has reacted promptly. Nine Internal Security Columns (ISCs) of the Army from Tiger division were deployed in Gujjar Nagar, Janipur, Shahidi Chowk, Talab Khatika and other areas of Jammu city. They have been provided air support from the White Knight Corps," a senior army officer said.

06:10 am: Curfew in Jammu following stone-pelting: A curfew has been imposed in Jammu and Kashmir's winter capital after stray incidents of violence and torching of vehicles. Earlier on Friday, incidents of stone pelting and clashes between different factions were reported. The police resorted to cane charge and teargas shelling to disperse crowds. Nine persons were injured in the clashes, officials said.

06:00 am: UK condemns Pulwama terror attack: The UK government has condemned the terrorist attack in Pulwama, which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans in Kashmir, as a "senseless and brutal act". "Shocked by today's senseless and brutal act of terror in...Kashmir. I offer my sincere condolences to the victims' families. We stand with India," UK Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt said on Twitter.

Also read | Hafiz Saeed, Masood Azhar should meet Osama's fate, says Baba Ramdev

Latest India News
