Special meet on Pulwama today, all options, including military, on table

Agencies

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s warning that those behind Thursday’s Pulwama terror attack which killed over 40 CRPF soldiers would pay a “very heavy price” came after the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) agreed that strong retaliatory action must be taken.ET has reliably learnt that besides diplomatic measures, military options are also being considered. These range from targeting Jaish-e-Mohammad camps in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir to directly taking on the Pakistan Army in areas along the Line of Control where India has an advantage. Jaish had claimed responsibility for the terror attack.The CCS, which was briefed on the attack, came to the conclusion that evidence of Pakistan’s role was incontrovertible. It was agreed that a cross-border military response must be pursued. Besides the PM, the meeting was attended by Rajnath Singh, Sushma Swaraj, Arun Jaitley and Nirmala Sitharaman. After the CCS meeting, the PM hit out at Pakistan for trying to destablise India. “Security forces have been given complete freedom (to act),” he said at a railway function.The CCS also gave its go-ahead to a strategy to isolate Pakistan diplomatically. The meeting also discussed the possibility of withdrawing India’s high commissioner in Islamabad, Ajay Bisaria.The external affairs ministry, it was agreed, will ask Indian diplomats to engage with other countries and the UN to build global opinion against Pakistan’s support to terror, said government sources.The diplomatic offensive would mean that, if required, envoys may travel to key countries to present information about Pakistan’s role in fostering terror in Kashmir and elsewhere in India.Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale has opened conversations with the Delhi-based ambassadors of key countries, conveying to them that this was a highly provocative attack by Jaish, which enjoys the support of Pakistan Army.India also revoked the MFN status accorded to Pakistan and summoned its high commissioner to hand him an official protest.It was also decided that home minister Rajnath Singh, who went to Srinagar on Friday, will convene a meeting of all political parties on Saturday to demonstrate political unity. The Centre may also push for holding a special session of Parliament to condemn the attack.Since Thursday, national security adviser Ajit Doval has held several rounds of meetings with the chiefs of Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), Intelligence Bureau and the armed forces to assess the situation. He has also been in touch with his counterparts in several countries, including the US.
