5 ridiculously expensive things Rana Daggubati owns; the Baahubali star’s car costs Rs 2.73 crore – see photos

Rana Daggubati will be seen playing N Chandrababu Naidu in the NTR biopic | Photo Credit: Instagram

Rana Daggubati is not only one of the biggest superstars of Telugu cinema, but his riveting performance as Bhallaladeva in Baahubali: The beginning and Baahubali: The Conclusion, has turned him from a south star to a pan India icon. The actor, who made his debut in 2010 with Leader and later also appeared in a Bollywood film with Deepika Padukone and Abhishek Bachchan titled Dum Maaro Dum, has come a long way since then and delivered many blockbusters.

In just 8 years in the movie business, the actor has garnered for himself, a net worth of Rs 142 crore. His superstar status also gets him an annual salary of Rs 6 to Rs 8 crore. Though Rana is known more for his humanitarian work, rather than the fancy brands he sports. Yet, what is a superstar without a few fancy items in his kitty and while he isn’t as into expensive things as Karan Johar, but Rana does have a few items that are luxurious. (Also Read: 5 ridiculously expensive things that Allu Arjun owns; His house in Hyderabad costs Rs 100 crore – see photos)

Without further adieu, here are 5 ridiculously expensive things that Rana Daggubati owns:

1) TAGHeuer Grand Prix - Rs 3.25 lakh

2) Hublot Mexican - Rs 8.16 lakh

3) BMW 7 series – Rs 1.32 crore

4) Mercedes Benz S-Class – Rs 2.73 crore

5) Hyderabad house – Rs 4.8 crore

On the workfront, Rana Daggubati is a busy bee. The actor is currently shooting for the N.T.R biopic, in which he will be playing popular politician N. Chandrababu Naidu. According to reports, he will also been seen in the Bollywood film Housefull 4. The Baahubali actor replaced Nana Patekar in the film.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
