Rehman Malik holds India responsible for Pulwama attack

ISLAMABAD: Former interior minister and Chairman Senate Standing Committee on Interior Senator Abdul Rehman Malik holds India responsible for Pulwama attack saying the incident had been engineered by RAW to divert world attention from the violation of human rights in Kashmir and to sabotage Kulbushan Yadav case.

He strongly condemned the attack wherein 40 Indian soldiers were killed in district Pulwama.

Senator A. Rehman Malik was addressing a press conference here on Friday at his residence in Islamabad wherein he exposed the evil designs of India against Pakistan and made the public a letter he sent to the President FATF. He said it is sad affair that Indian leadership is inhabit of levelling generic allegation without any investigation adding that Pulwama incident has been attributed to Pakistan without any proof like in the past similar fake charges were levelled in the incidents of attacks on Indian Parliament, Samjhauta Express, Mumbai attack and URI attack. He said that Indian own investigators proved that these terrorist attacks were the skillful job of RAW and Indian Army to damage Pakistan and to defame it internationally.

He said PM Modi is using five techniques in his election campaign i.e. to escalate tension on Pak-India border, create a war like situation, instigate Muslim-Hindu clashes, create impressions of surgical strikes and to do few Pulwama like attacks. Former interior minister Senator A. Rehman Malik said that Pulwama incident is engineered by RAW to influence Kulbushan Yadav’s trial in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) that will hold public hearing in the case from February 18 to 21.

He questioned that how a vehicle with 350kg explosive can come to the highway and attack a well-protected convey unless facilitated by their own army. “The movement of convey is always confidential how come some one knew in advance to attack that particular convey,” he questioned.

He said that India always issues highly unprofessional and biased generic statement after such incidents levelling false allegations on Pakistan. He said Samjhauta Express attack was engineered, conspired and executed by Indian spy agency Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) only to blame Pakistan for it before the international community.

He said that DIG Hemant Karkkare had exposed RAW and RSS in Samjhauta Express before the Supreme Court of India but was killed by RAW and he is sure someone like Karkare will come forward among Indian Forces to expose RAW for the Pulwama attack also.

Senator Rehman Malik said he will continue to expose Indian historical mindset against Pakistan adding that India has a history of false and persistent motivated flag operations.

He said it is a proven fact that India has history of interference in Pakistan as was confessed by Narendra Modi himself on June 7, 2015 at Dhaka University, Bangladesh.

Senator A. Rehman Malik said that India has been using Afghanistan as a "second front" against Pakistan. "India has over the years financed problems for Pakistan" in Afghanistan,” he said.
