This week that year: Bringing Shahid Azmi alive on screen

Shahid Azmi

Hansal Mehta

biographical drama

Rajkummar Rao

Rajkummar Rao as Shahid; Shahid Azmi

On February 11, 2010, four gunmen stormed into’s office in Mumbai and shot him dead. The next morning the news caught filmmaker’s eye, more so the slant of the headlines that pronounced that the 32-year-old lawyer who had been defending Faheem Ansari in the 26/11 attacks case had been killed. “There was an attempt to colour perception by underlining the fact that a Muslim defending another Muslim, one accused of being a terrorist, had been killed. The marginalisation of a minority community, an issue relevant even more today, had begun to bother me and I met my writer Sameer (Gautam Singh) in March and told him to script aon Shahid. But since the wound was still fresh, I suggested he start his research with neighbours, friends and other lawyers, giving the family a few more months before approaching them,” the filmmaker reminisces.When they finally interacted with Shahid’s mother, Hansal remembers how concerned she was, asking him several questions on who he was and why he wanted to document her son’s life, wondering if he would be able to represent it correctly. Nine years have passed since and six years since the release of the film, but she has yet to watch it. “It’s too painful for her to relive that chapter,” says the filmmaker, recalling how on the first day of the shoot at Shahid’s office she came, looked long and hard at, then hurried home to return with a pen because “Shahid always carried one”.They shot the film over 10 months, in fits and starts, as and when the money came in. Some days Hansal would go out praying that the little money they had didn’t run out before packup. They filmed in actual locations, in Pydhonie which otherwise is a difficult place to shoot, but thanks to the goodwill Shahid had earned, doors of homes were thrown open to them without any talk of remuneration. Memories were shared generously, some from as far back as the Valley from when Shahid had spent time at a military training camp in PoK and local boys even provided unsolicited security for the unit. “There were times when I despaired, wondering if I’d be able to wrap up the film, but then, the money would come through and difficulties would melt away making me believe that Shahid was watching over us,” Hansal says emotionally.His home in the film is in the same residential colony where he had lived and the office where they shot was his own, its décor unchanged from when Shahid had occupied it except for the original tiles on the wall behind which had been splattered with his blood and subsequently replaced. However, the quotation of New York-based civil and criminal defence lawyer, Roy Black, still hangs in his office and Hansal quotes it from memory, “By showing me injustice, he taught me to love justice. By teaching me what pain and humiliation were all about, he awakened my heart to mercy. Through these hardships, I learned hard lessons. Fight against prejudice, battle the oppressors, support the underdog.” The plaque outlined the principles of justice which had guided Shahid who was often called a ‘terrorist lawyer’ because he was once a terror accused and had spent time in jail for a crime he didn’t commit.In fact, it was during his seven-year term at Tihar Jail that Shahid started his college education, and once he was out, went on to study law. After getting his degree, he started taking cases of Muslims charged under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (POTA), fighting for many of them pro bono in consultation with NGOs. “In his brief career of seven years, he secured the acquittal of 17 men charged with terrorism, with several more coming through after his murder,” informs Hansal, who having gone through the transcripts of his cases, learnt that unlike many senior lawyers, Shahid used simple, easy-to-understand English to put his point across lucidly, without the baggage of legal jargon.Prod him on the first reactions of family, friends and neighbours to the film and Hansal recounts they were all very moved, marvelling over how Rajummar had played their Shahid bhai with such accuracy, and wanting to take pictures with him though he was still very new at the time. Later at the party hosted after Rajkumar and Hansal bagged the National Awards for Best Actor and Best Director, Shahid’s younger brother Khalid broke down. “He told us that we had not only brought his brother alive again but imprinted his name in history by shining the light on all that he had achieved in his short life,” says Hansal, asserting that even today, many young men are inspired by him to take up the cause he fought for.
