Mumbai: Rail tracks blocked at Nalasopara in protest against Pulwama attack

Video: Police lathicharge protesters to clear railway tracks in #Nalasopara #PulwamaTerroristAttack https://t.co/hlzQSkkQoE — TOI Mumbai (@TOIMumbai) 1550299498000

Mumbai: Several protesters block tracks at Nalasopara to protest against Pulwama terrorist attack. Railway police t… https://t.co/5OFek1qInv — TOI Mumbai (@TOIMumbai) 1550289423000

Several protesters have blocked the tracks at Nallasopara due to which train movement has been affected at Nallasop… https://t.co/EzizkbSkK9 — Western Railway (@WesternRly) 1550288729000

Railways has appealed citizens not to stop trains

MUMBAI: A group of protesters blocked the railway tracks at Nalasopara on Saturday morning to protest against the terrorist attack in Kashmir’s Pulwama that killed over 40 CRPF men.The protesters, including office goers blocked the tracks at around 8 am. Government Railway Police (GRP) and Railway Protection Force (RPF) personnel are in the process of evacuating the protesters from the tracks. Train services have been affected on the route.Protesters also raised slogans against the terrorists. Most of the shops in the town remained shut in view of the protest against the Pulwama attack.Several suburban trains have been cancelled while long distance trains have been delayed by over two hours due to the ongoing protest, officials said."Due to protesters on track at Nalasopara, WR suburban trains are running between Churchgate and Vasai Road. RPF and railway officials are trying their best to convince protesters to clear the tracks," said a railway spokesperson.Western Railway chief spokesperson Ravinder Kumar appealed to citizens not to stop trains as it badly affects the transport 'lifeline' of Mumbai. "This is not the way to protest by putting scores of commuters to inconvenience. We have been convincing the protesters but they refuse to move from the tracks. A lot of trains arriving in Mumbai from other districts and states are held up and suburban services badly hit. We will have to resort to force to evacuate people blocking tracks," he stated.Due to public agitation at Nalasopara station, all services between Virar and Nalasopara have been temporarily terminated. Passengers are requested not to gather at these stations. Services between Churchgate and Vasai Road stations are running normally, Western Railway DRM office said.After almost three hours of struggle, police and railway authorities have managed to clear the rail tracksat Nalasopara station and trains' movement has been resumes. As per reports, police had to lathicharge the protesters to disperse them from the rail tracks.At Vasai, state transport buses and auto rickshaw were prevented from plying in the morning.Political parties like Shiv Sena has called for a bandh in Vasai-Virar region.
