Pulwama terror attack: Political parties back govt, call for consultations on future course of action

All the parties unanimously condemned the terror attack, which claimed the life of 40 CRPF jawans, in a resolution passed after the all-party meeting.

Political parties across the country on Saturday (February 16) said they will stand by the central government in its future course of action to retaliate against the dastardly terror attack on Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

At the all-party meeting chaired by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, several ministers from opposition parties requested Prime Minister Narendra Modi to convene a meeting of all national and regional parties and consult the future course of action with them.

Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad initially floated the request, following which representatives of other parties also supported the demand.

All the parties unanimously condemned the terror attack, which claimed the life of 40 CRPF jawans, in a resolution passed after the all-party meeting. "We, along with all our countrymen, stand with the families in this hour of grief," said the resolution accessed by India Today TV.

Congress, the main opposition, along with other parties extended support to the government in its effort to end terrorism.

Meanwhile, National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah appealed to the government to ensure safety of Kashmiris across the country, especially because the Muslim population in the Valley can become victims of curfew in Jammu.

While no future course of action to retaliate against the attack was decided in the meeting, the issue of cross-border terrorism was discussed in detail.

On Thursday, at least 40 CRPF soldiers were killed in the deadliest terror attack in the Valley in the last three decades of Kashmir's insurgency. Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the dastardly attack and released a video of the suicide bomber, Adil Ahmed Dar.

India has already moved an application to revoke "Most Favoured Nation" status to Pakistan and is exploring further avenues to take action against Thursday's terror strike.
