India all-party meeting held over Pulwama terror attack

12.14pm (UAE time)

Thousands of mourners across India attended funerals on Saturday for some of the 41 soldiers killed in a suicide bombing in Indian-administered Kashmir as a round-the-clock curfew remained in force in part of the restive region.

The paramilitary troops were killed on Thursday as explosives packed in a van ripped through a convoy transporting 2,500 soldiers in the disputed Himalayan region, the deadliest attack in a three-decade-old armed conflict.

TV stations showed coffins wrapped in Indian flags being carried by thousands of people across their hometowns, such as Gaya in the east and Unnao in the north, after the bodies were flown to New Delhi late Friday where Prime Minister Narendra Modi laid a wreath.

India has accused Pakistan of harbouring the militants behind the attack, which has sparked nationwide outrage and some public calls for war against the nuclear-armed arch rival to avenge the killings.

"I feel proud of the martyrdom of my son. I expect the government of India to avenge the killings," Brish Soreng, father of one of the soldiers, told reporters.

US National Security Advisor John Bolton called his Indian counterpart Ajit Doval, promising to work with India to "ensure that Pakistan cease to be a safe haven for JeM and terrorist groups that target India, the US and others in the region," according to a readout released by India's foreign ministry on Saturday.

Angry street protests were held across many Indian cities on Friday and residents held candlelight vigils to pay tribute to the dead.

Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat shoulders the coffin of a slain CRPF Jawan Mohan Lal for the last rites after the wreath-laying ceremony, in Dehradun, Saturday, Feb. 16, 2019. Lal lost his life in Pulwama terror attack. Image Credit: PTI

A round-the-clock curfew was imposed in Kashmir's Jammu city, in the Hindu-majority part of the region, after mobs attacked Muslim properties and set fire to vehicles during a protest against the attack.

At least 12 people were injured, local media reported, and internet access in the area was suspended.

Many angry social media users elsewhere furiously demanded retribution, and several hawkish TV channels called for all-out war with Pakistan.

"Please attack and annihilate Pakistan for a safe future for Indians. Now or never," wrote Twitter user Shantanue Munde.

The attack has put Modi's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on the back foot ahead of national elections due by May.

Modi's government in recent years has adopted a muscular policy in Kashmir and shelved dialogue with Pakistan to boost its popularity after accusing the previous government of being soft on militancy.

"Revenge is the only word that comes to my Mind," tweeted Babul Supriyo, a minister in Modi's government.

A meeting of political parties in New Delhi Saturday extended full support to the government in "fighting terrorism, defending India's unity and integrity".

The all-party meeting chaired by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh in Parliament on Saturday passed a resolution condemning the February 14 Pulwama attack that has till now claimed the lives of 49 CRPF troopers.

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Narendra Singh Tomar during an all-party meeting on the Pulwama terror attack at Parliament House, in New Delhi, Saturday, Feb. 16, 2019. Image Credit: PTI

"We strongly condemn the dastardly terror act in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir in which lives of 40 (Thursday's immediate figure) brave jawans of CRPF were lost. We, along with all our countrymen, stand with their families in this hour of grief," the resolution passed at the meet called by the Centre, stated.

"We strongly condemn terrorism in all forms and the support being given to it across the border," it read.

The resolution also said that in the past three decades, the country has faced the menace of cross-border terrorism and India has displaced both firmness and resilience in dealing with these challenges.

"The entire nation speaks in one voice to express its determination to fight these challenges. Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of the nation," it added.

The meeting convened by Home Minister Rajnath Singh, who was in Kashmir on Friday to take stock of the situation, is being attended by Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma and Jyotiraditya Scindia of the Congress, Sudip Bandyopadhyay and Derek O'Brien of the TMC, Sanjay Raut of the Shiv Sena, Jithendra Reddy of the TRS, D Raja of the CPI, Farooq Abdullah of the National Conference, Ram Vilas Paswan of the LJP among others.

The parties were briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far, a home ministry official said.

Naresh Gujral of the Akali Dal, Upendra Kushwaha of the RLSP and Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav are among others who are attending the meeting.

As many as 40 CRPF jawans (Indian soldiers) were killed in one of the biggest terror attacks on security forces in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan-based terror organisation Jaish-e-Mohammad has claimed responsibility for it.

Political parties have closed ranks following the attack and have offered their support to the NDA government on its response on the matter.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has asserted that those behind the killings will be punished, and his government has launched a diplomatic offensive to isolate Pakistan within the international community.

Meanwhile, police across the country were faced with protests against the recent happenings. Police baton charged protesters to disperse them at Nallasopara railway station in Mumbai.

Several shops and business establishments in Uttar Pradesh's Agra city downed their shutters on Saturday morning to protest the terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. Groups of people went around markets and localities, shouting slogans against Pakistani leaders and torching their effigies and the Pakistani flag.

Meanwhile, the last journey of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) trooper Kaushal Kumar Rawat, a resident of Kahrai village, was attened by thousands of people who were joined by Cabinet Minister S.P. Singh Baghel and several leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party and senior district officials. His body arrived here in the wee hours.

Rawat's family told the media that they only hope his martyrdom does not go waste and a fitting reply be given to the enemy.

His daughter Apoorva, who works for a private airlines in New Delhi, said only two days ago she had a telephonic conversation with her father.

Rawat leaves behind his wife, daughter and a son. He had been recently transferred and was on his way to Srinagar from Siliguri when the tragic explosion took his life.

Family members have offered to give land for a memorial in the village.
