Karnataka govt to offer job to CRPF trooper's widow

Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy said he spoke to H Guru's family members over the telephone and consoled them.

Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy on Friday said that a government job will be offered to the widow of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) trooper H Guru, who was among those killed in a terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday(February 14).

Forty CRPF personnel were killed in Pulwama attack, one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir, claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group.

"It is a heart-wrenching incident. The state government will provide a job to the widow (Kalavathi) of Guru who is from Mandya district in the state," Kumaraswamy told reporters.

In a tweet earlier, the Chief Minister said he spoke to Guru's family members over the telephone and consoled them. Kumaraswamy tweeted, "Their grief is heart-wrenching. We are with them. I have instructed officials to speed up the compensation process."

Guru, 33, from Gudigere village in Mandya district, about 100 km from here, belonged to the 82nd Battalion of the CRPF and was posted in Srinagar. According to his relatives, Guru was at home on leave last week and left for Jammu and Kashmir on February 11.

Guru joined the CRPF in 2011 and was deployed in Jharkhand as part of the 94th Battalion before being posted in Jammu and Kashmir.

Guru's family members were inconsolable over his sudden death in the terror attack.

A family member told the local media in Kannada, "Though Guru's mother feared for his life and asked him to quit the job and settle down in the native village, he told her that he was committed to serving the country and not to worry about his welfare."

Former Karnataka CM and BJP's state unit president B.S. Yeddyurappa, who also hails from Mandya district, said Guru's tragic death was painful.

"Guru, who dedicated his life to the nation at a young age, was a role model for the youth of the country. I pray for his soul to rest in peace and give strength to his bereaved family," Yeddyurappa tweeted in Kannada.

Former External Affairs Minister and senior BJP leader SM Krishna, who too hails from Mandya, in a statement, condemned the dastardly terror attack on the CRPF convoy and condoled Guru's death.

"The imprint of Pakistan's ISI is visible in the cowardly attack, going by the target chosen and the modus operandi of the terrorists," said Krishna.

Krishna added that India's policy must be more muscular and lethal while dealing with the hostile neighboring country.

Noting that Pakistan did not learn any lesson in spite of losing four wars against India in 1948, 1965, 1971 and 1999 (Kargil), Krishna said it would be naive to believe that one surgical strike will discipline Pakistan.
