Sidhu to be Sacked From Kapil Sharma Show Owing to Controversy

Navjot Singh Sidhu

Chandigarh: 16th Feb: At a time when the nation is reeling from the deadliest attack on its security forces, which killed over 40 soldiers, controversy is already rearing its ugly head. This time, it’s the favourite child of controversy, Punjab cabinet minister, Navjot Singh Sidhu. Sidhu, yesterday talked about the attack, affected family, and the neighbouring country blamed for it. It is a known fact, that the Pakistan PM Imran Khan is his friend, and as he has done in the past, Sidhu jumped in with all his might to defend his friend.

Sidhu said, “For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It (the attack) is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemnable and those who did it must be punished.” Where ever wars are fought and such things (Pulwama-type attack) happen, dialogue also continues simultaneously. There is a need to find a permanent solution to (issues between India and Pakistan). Such people (terrorists) have no religion, no country and no caste.

Advertisement

Pulwama Attack

When a snake bites, its antidote is also snake poison," Sidhu said. There was a huge out outcry against his attempted defence of Imran Khan, who had by that time not even condemned the deadly attack. Pakistan has vehemently denied any link with the attack. It has officially rejected India’s blame about supposed Islamabad links with the terror attack. Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack, and Masood Azhar is the man at the helm of its affairs and decisions.

He lives in Pakistan and enjoys freedom, despite him being named as one of the most wanted terrorists by India. The Kapil Sharma Show has sacked Sidhu over his said comments over the most sensate issue of the day, according to media reports. Though Sidhu has talked about peace, the rising passions have turned him a villain. Maybe his timing was not right.
