India Pakistan war: Latest news, photos, videos and top stories on India Pakistan war

Since Independence in 1947, India and Pakistan have been in four wars, including one undeclared war, and many border skirmishes and military stand-offs. The Kashmir issue has been the main cause, whether direct or indirect, of all major conflicts between the two countries with the exception of the India-Pakistani War of 1971 where conflict originated due to turmoil in erstwhile East Pakistan which resulted in formation of Bangladesh. India-Pakistan War of 1947-1948 It was the first Kashmir war between the two countries. Following partition, Indian states were left to choose whether to join India or Pakistan or to remain independent. An attack by Muslim tribesmen in October 1947 prompted Maharaja Hari Singh to seek assistance from India and later to sign an Instrument of Accession, ceding Kashmir to India. After UN Security Council passed the Resolution 47, India gained control of about two-third of the state including (Kashmir valley, Jammu and Ladakh) whereas Pakistan gained roughly a third of Kashmir (Azad Kashmir and Gilgit–Baltistan). India-Pakistan War of 1965 This war started following Pakistan's Operation Gibraltar, which was designed to infiltrate forces into Jammu and Kashmir to precipitate an insurgency against rule by India. India retaliated by launching a full-scale military attack on West Pakistan. The seventeen-day war caused thousands of casualties on both sides and witnessed the largest engagement of armored vehicles and the largest tank battle since World War II. A ceasefire was declared following diplomatic intervention by the Soviet Union and USA and the subsequent issuance of the Tashkent Declaration. Both India and Pakistan claimed victory. The war of 1971 did not involve Kashmir issue, rather it occurred due to political battle between East Pakistan and leaders of West Pakistan. While India gave full support to East Pakistan’s cause, it formally entered into war with Pakistan after it carried out strikes on forward airbases and radar installations of the Indian Air Force. Occurring over a course of 13 days the war saw the largest number of prisoners of war since World War II. The war resulted in the independence of East Pakistan and the creation of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. India-Pakistan War of 1999 The 1999 Kargil War was a retaliation by Indian Army following the Pakistani army’s infiltration and occupation of Indian territory mostly in the Kargil district in Kashmir. Two months into the conflict, Indian troops had slowly retaken most of the ridges that were encroached by the infiltrators. The war ended following the international community, led by the United States, increased diplomatic pressure on Pakistan to withdraw forces from remaining Indian territory.



On February 14, 2019, JeM's men carried out the deadly attack in Pulwama which left 40 CRPF jawans dead.



In retaliation of Pulwana attack, a group of Mirage 2000 Indian Fighter jets destroyed the major terrorist camps across the LoC on February 26, 2019.



In August 2019, Indian Army killed at least five Pakistani militants who were trying to attack the country.




