Pakistan strongly condemns continuing attacks on Kashmiris in aftermath of Pulwama

Indian army soldiers patrol during a curfew in occupied Kashmir on February 16, 2019. Photo AFP

ISLAMABAD: Pakistan strongly condemns the continuing attacks on Kashmiris in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack in Indian occupied Kashmir, Foreign Office spokesman Dr Muhammad Faisal tweeted on Saturday.



. .

The spokesman further said Indian must not use the Pulwama attack as a carte blanche to intensify its atrocities against innocent Kashmiris in Indian occupied Kashmir.

At least 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed on Thursday in Srinagar-Jammu Highway in Awantipora area of Pulwama district. The soldiers were killed when an improvised explosive device (IED) went off as a convoy of military vehicles drove by, some 20 kilometres from the main city of Srinagar.

Following the Pulwama attack, Kashmiris have been targeted in IoK by Indian security forces and Hindu extremists.

Foreign secretary briefs Ambassadors

Foreign Secretary Tehmina Janjua shared Pakistan’s perspective with Ambassadors from non-permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) on the unfounded allegations by the Indian government following the Pulwama attack.

In her briefing, the foreign secretary pointed towards known tactics of India to divert global attention from gross human rights violations in Indian occupied Kashmir. She emphasized continued importance of implementing the UNSC resolution on Kashmir.

“India claims based on contradictory and unverified social media content have no grounds,” Dr Faisal said.

.

'Pakistan desires peace'

Speaking to Geo News, Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said India "should have acted more responsibly", and asked if New Delhi "desired peace and stability in the region or political point-scoring with attention on the upcoming elections?"

"Pakistan has been very clear, our viewpoint is clear, and, specifically, the stance of this government has been plain and simple: we desire peace," he said, adding: "We desire good relations with our neighbours, we neither wish to opt for the path of violence nor has this ever been part of our intentions.
