Pulwama Terror Attack: TV stars hailing from Kashmir express their angst over the cowardly attack

The Pulwama terror attack has shook the entire world. The attack that took place in Kashmir on the fateful night of 14th February, 2019, has angered and left a scar on the minds of everyone.

India lost 40 soldiers in the cowardly attack. A lot of public figures have come out in condemning the ill happening and have expressed their angst. We got in touch with a few TV stars who hail from Kashmir to know their thoughts.Mohit Raina: It’s been almost 30 years I have been witnessing this bloodshed. Have heard stories from my grandfather in the 80s, then from my father in the 90s, and now I explain the scenario to my nephew. Generations have passed but this hasn’t stopped. When will sense prevail and it will be peaceful? I just pray and hope that the authorities look for a long term solution once and forever. Losing a loved one is the biggest tragedy anyone could go through. This is saddening.Shaheer Sheikh: I strongly condemn this brutal terror attack. My deepest condolences to the families of those who laid down their lives for our nation and our safety. And those responsible for this should be brought to justice and duly punished.Aly Goni: I am deeply saddened by this. I am from Kashmir and it breaks me to see this happening in my hometown. I am completely against violence but this attack has angered me so much. I don't know why a few people in Kashmir have so much of angst. I have grown up there and spent a great childhood. I never faced any issues. This has been a prime example of a cowardly attack. I am usually against bloodshed and violence but now I feel it's high time we give it back to them in the same manner. It's not the time to sit back but to take a stern action that is remembered for lifetime.Reportedly, 40 soldiers of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were martyred and over five got injured on Thursday in one of the most cowardly terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir. Terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed has taken responsibility for the attack. A Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying 350 kg of explosives into a bus with over 70 CRPF Jawans in Pulwama district of South Kashmir.(By Vijayalaxmi Tiwari and Rasika Deshpande)
