Pulwama terror attack: Protesters block rail tracks, shops shut in Mumbai

Protesters raised anti- Pakistan slogans for the Pulwama terror attack and demanded action against the neighbouring country for sponsoring and sheltering terrorists and terror groups. (Photo: Reuters)

A group of agitators Saturday blocked the railway tracks at Nalasopara station in Maharashtra's Palghar district to protest against the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that killed at least 40 CRPF personnel, officials said.

In several parts of the metropolis, shops were shut in protest and schools held prayer meets as a mark of respect to the CRPF personnel who were killed in Thursday terror attack.

According to the officials, protesters got onto the tracks around 8.20 am and started raising slogans against Pakistan, adding that train services on the route were affected due to the agitation.

In a tweet, the Western Railway (WR) said, "Several protesters have blocked the tracks at Nallasopara due to which train movement has been affected at Nallasopara & beyond. GRP, RPF are making efforts to convince the people and evacuate the tracks and normalize the train movement."

Several protesters have blocked the tracks at Nallasopara due to which train movement has been affected at Nallasopara & beyond. GRP, RPF are making efforts to convince the people & evacuate the tracks & normalize the train movement. @drmbct Western Railway (@WesternRly) February 16, 2019

Chief spokesperson of the WR, Ravinder Bhakar, said the protest started at 8.20 am when people came on the railway tracks and stopped the movement of trains. The protesters raised slogans against Pakistan for the Pulwama terror attack and demanded action against the neighbouring country for sponsoring and sheltering terrorists and terror groups, another official said.

According to railway officials, train operations on the section were suspended for almost three hours. The textile hub in the Kalbadevi area of south Mumbai was the venue of a protest by cloth traders who kept their establishments closed for the day.

Rajiv Singal, trustee of the Bharat Merchant Chambers said, "We strongly condemn the horrendous terrorist attack in Pulwama. It is an act of cowardice. We have decided to keep our business shut for the day as a mark of respect for the 40 brave martyrs,"

Shops in Tardeo, Grant Road, Haji Ali were also shut. The Bombay Yarn Merchants' Association and Exchange Limited also issued a press statement Saturday stating that shops of their members were shut across the city.

Similar protests were also witnessed on Friday with Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Raj Purohit burning Pakistan's flag while Shiv Sena MP Gajanan Kirtikar and BJP MLA Bharti Lavekar paid floral tributes in suburban Andheri to the slain CRPF troopers.

On Friday, Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) had organised a candlelight protest march at the civic-run Sion Hospital.

At least forty CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.




