South Asia Daily: Some observations about the grotesque Pulwama attack

It is does not take any significant insight to say that the staggering Pulwama attack had to have been a result of meticulous and detailed planning at least weeks in the making. It brought together so many varied pieces that the grotesquely emblematic presence of the 22-year-old suicide bomber Adil Ahmad Dar alias Adil Ahmad Gaadi Takranewala alias Waqas Commando is just a small aspect of it. Sure, he was crucial in so much as it came to the last mile execution of ramming his improvised explosives-filled vehicle. However, it was what it must have taken in the run-up to the ghastly attack that ought to worry the Indian authorities.

On January 14, 78 military vehicles formed a convoy transporting 2500 personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) along the Jammu Srinagar National Highway. Over the past three decades since a violent separatist insurgency gained momentum in the Kashmir Valley in 1989, the CRPF has become a well-oiled machine specializing in the first line of defense against a relentless adversary that has operated with the unabashed support of the various arms of the Pakistani intelligence-jihadi complex.

The Pulwama attack that killed 42 CRPF personnel, the worst in the last three decades, was claimed by the Pakistan-based terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JEM). Hence, the clear assertion that some elements of the Pakistani intelligence-jihadi complex had to have played a decisive role in the planning of the operation. After all, it could not be that Dar was just out driving for fun along the highway that afternoon in his SUV packed with improvised explosive device (IED) in the off chance that he might run into a massive paramilitary convoy.

Everything about his presence was calibrated on the basis of very sophisticated intelligence gathering as well as very efficient IED making. No one should be surprised if right up until the time his vehicle rammed into two paramilitary vehicles and the IED exploded he was being monitored by a group of his handlers. I feel ridiculous stating the obvious but an operation like this cannot be a spur-of-the-moment affair. Like I said, it brought so many disparate pieces together, right from the very specific intelligence about the vehicle movement on the most guarded highway in Kashmir, the time of its passage, the number of vehicles in the convoy, the point from where to strike and, of course, a brainwashed misanthrope in the form of Dar.

Having reported the Kashmir insurgency for nearly a decade since its inception, I have had many opportunities to interact with young men of Dar’s persuasion. Of course, since my years of reporting from there, there has been discernible mutation in the kind of insurgents and their brazenness. However, the fundamental political and cultural disaffections, which are often cited as the cause behind this deeply unnerving campaign, have not changed. Dar’s video saying he was on his way to heaven is a testament to how this macabre lunacy is sold to impressionable but utterly complicit young men like him. Analyzing the root causes of the misanthropic disgust among young Kashmiris is a very detailed and, I am afraid, eventually futile exercise that I am deliberately avoiding in this post.

It is clear that the attack is a direct result of a mortifying intelligence failure in a state which has generally perfected intelligence gathering to a remarkable degree. So many attacks have been thwarted because the security establishment in the valley has become so efficient at gathering intelligence and acting upon it. It is for that reason that I am concerned about this particular failure. There are reports in the Indian media that possibilities of an attack like this one along the national highway were clearly expressed by intelligence agencies. It will be a matter of investigation why, if it true, the intelligence was not acted upon. It is conceivable that in a region which has been in a state of bloody ferment for so long that it has caused a measure of fatigue even among the security forces. I am not sure if we will ever know clearly what series of failures led to this massacre.

On a separate but related note, I must bring to your notice a nearly decade-old action by the US Department of Treasury. On November 4, 2010, the Treasury targeted the financial and support networks of Pakistan-based terrorist organizations Lashkar-e Tayyiba (LET) and Jaish-e Mohammed (JEM). An official release then said, “Treasury took action against Azam Cheema, who helped train operatives for the November 2008 Mumbai attacks and was the "mastermind" behind the July 2006 Mumbai train bombings carried out by LET, for acting for or on behalf of LET. Treasury also acted against Hafiz Abdul Rahman Makki, head of LET's political affairs department, for acting for or on behalf of LET. Al Rehmat Trust, an operational front for JEM was designated for providing support to and for acting for or on behalf of JEM, and Mohammed Masood Azhar Alvi, JEM's founder and leader, was also designated today for acting for on behalf of JEM.”

The press announcement also quoted Stuart Levey, Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, as saying, "LET and JEM have proven both their willingness and ability to execute attacks against innocent civilians. Today's action – including the designation of Azam Cheema, one of LET's leading commanders who was involved in the 2008 and 2006 Mumbai attacks – is an important step in incapacitating the operational and financial networks of these deadly organizations.”

Nearly a decade later, the very JEM appears to be far from incapacitated. Masood Azhar operates from Pakistan unencumbered despite his organization having been designated a terrorist group by the United Nations. Azhar has a long history of very violent entanglement with Kashmir. He was arrested by the Indian authorities in Kashmir in 1994. Nearly five years later, in 1999, an Indian Airlines flight was hijacked while on its way from Kathmandu to New Delhi and forcibly taken to Kandahar, Afghanistan. The hijackers demanded the release of three men, one of which was Azhar, in exchange for freeing the passengers.

Since that release, Azhar has continued with his violent ways under a suspected patronage of the Pakistani intelligence.

A decade is a long time out of one’s career to have spent on a conflict as I have on Kashmir. I was not optimistic about its peaceful resolution then. I am even less so now. I am not even sure that there is a resolution. At best, there could be containment and that is depressing thought.

On a personal note, I avoid expressing sorrowful sentiments in the aftermath of a staggering attack like this one for one simple reason. I feel selfish in that I feel as if I am merely assuaging my disgust and anger and not in any way helping the families of those who died. However, I did feel prompted to make a painting accompanied with this post. It was almost instantaneous on first hearing the news of the attack. That is my way to express solidarity.

It is not my station to prescribe what the Indian government should do in response. I am sure there will be a retaliation that is both powerful and politically expedient in light of the upcoming parliamentary elections in India.
