Pulwama attack: Martyrs families pay tribute, perform last rites amid anger against Pakistan

Pulwama attack: Martyrs families pay tribute, perform last rites amid anger against Pakistan

Massive anger has erupted across the nation over the ghastly attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans.

Amid slogans of "Pakistan Murdabaad" and "Bharat Mata Ki Jai", mortal remains of slain Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel draped in the Indian flag were brought to their respective homes and their last rites of the martyrs were performed on Saturday.

Massive anger has erupted across the nation over the ghastly attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans. While people paid tributes to the martyrs by holding candlelight vigils, demonstrations were held at many places against Pakistan with demands being put forth to take action against the neighbouring country for its "continuous support to terror groups."

As families await the mortal remains of their bravehearts who sacrificed their lives in the interest of the nation, the last rites of CRPF constable Tilak Raj at Dhewa in Kangra district were performed on Saturday. Union Minister JP Nadda and Chief Minister Jairam Thakur were present during the last rites ceremony.

Himachal Pradesh: Last rites ceremony of #CRPF Constable Tilak Raj at Dhewa in Kangra district. Union Minister JP Nadda and Chief Minister Jairam Thakur present. #PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/QKEgza3tNy — ANI (@ANI) February 16, 2019

Similarly in West Bengal, the mortal remains of CRPF head constable Bablu Santra and constable Sudip Biswas were brought to their families.

West Bengal: Mortal remains of CRPF Head Constable Bablu Santra and Constable Sudip Biswas brought to Kolkata airport pic.twitter.com/XgzEDFQbiZ — ANI (@ANI) February 16, 2019

Whereas in Jammu also, tributes were paid to Pulwama attack martyr Naseer Ahmed in Rajouri area. Union Minister Dr Jitender Singh was also present at the last rites ceremony.

Jammu & Kashmir: Tributes being paid to #CRPF's Naseer Ahmed at Rajouri; Union Minister Dr Jitendra Singh also present. pic.twitter.com/ujZRzgL9QH — ANI (@ANI) February 16, 2019

In the deadliest attack on security forces in Jammu and Kashmir, 40 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday when their convoy was targeted by a suicide bomber of Pakistan-backed Jaish-e-Mohammad in Pulwama district.

Prime Minister Modi, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, other political leaders and Chiefs of Indian security forces paid their tributes to all 40 brave hearts at the Palam Airport on Friday.

(With ANI inputs)
