KA-BLAST-STUDENT ARRESTED

Kashmiri student held for hailing Jaish terrorist

Bengaluru, Feb 16 (PTI) A Kashmiri student studying in

a college here was Saturday arrested for allegedly hailing the

Jaish terrorist who carried out the suicide attack at Pulawama

killing 40 CRPF Jawans, police said.

They said 23-year-old Tahir Latif from Baramula

district is a student of Rewa University.

He had allegedly put up a screen-shot of the

Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist Adil Ahmed and the bodies of

the slain soldiers as his display picture on WhatsApp, police

said.

He had also allegedly put up a status message saying,

"A big salute to this brave man!!! May Allah accept your

Shahadat and give you highest place in Jannah #Shaheed Adil

Bhai," they said.

Based on a student's complaint, a case was registered

under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and

various IPC sections, including 120(B) (criminal conspiracy),

police said.

Earlier, following a complaint by Vishwa Hindu

Parishad office bearer Girish Bharadwaj, a case was registered

here against Kashmiri youth Abid Malik for allegedly posting

derogatory remarks on a social networking site.

The case was registered under relevant sections of

the IPC and the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967,

for a post he wrote on Facebook.

The youth allegedly shared some images posted by a

news channel after the attack and captioned it 'The real

surgical attack' on his FB page, police said.

During the investigation, it came to light that he had

studied at a college here and worked at an event management

firm, but had gone back to his home state.

The case was registered here as he had mentioned in

his profile that he resided in Bengaluru, police said.

Following the complaint, Facebook deleted his account.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed Thursday in one of

the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a

Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over

100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district. PTI

GMS

BN BN
