All-Party Meet on Pulwama Attack: Pakistan Condemned for Supporting Terrorism in India

New Delhi: The all-party meeting chaired by Union home minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday morning reached an agreement to cooperate with the government in tackling militancy in the Kashmir valley.

The meeting, convened to discuss the future course of action in the light of the militant attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama on February 14, began shortly after 11 in the morning at the Parliament library.

Among those who attended were Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma and Jyotiraditya Scindia, Trinamool Congress’s Sudip Bandyopadhyay and Derek O’Brien, Sanjay Raut of the Shiv Sena, Jithender Reddy of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi, D. Raja of the Communist Party of India, National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah and Ram Vilas Paswan of the LJP.

Naresh Gujral of the Shiromani Akali Dal (Badal), Upendra Kushwaha of the Bihar-based Rashtriya Lok Samta Party, Rashtriya Janata Dal’s Jai Prakash Yadav, and All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam’s N.Krishnan also attended the meeting.

The home minister briefed the party leaders about the attack and the steps taken by the Narendra Modi government so far to address the security crisis. The party leaders urged the government to take measures to support the families of those who were killed in the attack.

The resolution passed at the meeting condemned Pakistan’s support to terrorism in Kashmir. Holding Pakistan directly responsible for the act, the party leaders said they stood “united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of India.”

The resolution said:

1. We strongly condemn the dastardly terror act of 14th February 2019 at Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir in which lives of 40 brave jawans of CRPF were lost. We, along with all our countrymen, stand with their families in this hour of grief. 2. We condemn terrorism in all forms and the support being given to it from across the border. 3. India has during the past three decades faced the menace of cross border terrorism. Of late, terrorism in India is being actively encouraged by the forces across the border. India has displayed both firmness and resilience in dealing with these challenges. The entire nation speaks in one voice to express its determination to fight these challenges. Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of India.

Soon after the meeting ended, Congress’s Ghulam Nabi Azad told ANI, “We stand with the government for unity and security of the nation and security forces. Be it Kashmir or any other part of the nation, Congress party gives its full support to the govt in the fight against terrorism.”

In parallel developments, Tamil Nadu chief minister K. Palaniswami announced that government jobs will be given to one member of the families of the two jawans from the state who were killed in the attack.

Also Read: India Says Pak’s Demand for Probe Into Pulwama Attack Is ‘Preposterous’

Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh announced jobs and Rs 12 lakh compensation to the members of the four CRPF men who lost their lives in the Pulwama attack.

The Congress-led Rajasthan government also increased its ex gratia to the families of those who were killed from the state from Rs 25 lakh to Rs 50 lakh.

More such announcements are expected from the state governments.

Earlier, a team of National Investigation Agency officials visited the site of the attack for further probe.

News 18 reported that the last time an all-party meeting was held in the context of a terror attack was in September 2016, when the government briefed the parties on the surgical strike it carried out after the attack on Uri’s military camp.
