Hundreds gather to pay respect as bodies of CRPF martyrs reach home

Hundreds gather to pay respect as bodies of CRPF martyrs reach home

NEW DELHI, Feb 16 (Agencies): The all-party meeting on Saturday decided on several resolutions in response to Thursday's deadliest suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir in which 40 troopers were killed and several others critically injured.

"We condemn terrorism in all forms and the support being given to it from across the border. Terrorism being actively encouraged by forces from across the border, India has displayed firmness, resilience in tackling it. We stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism, defending India's unity and integrity," said the resolution passed at the all-party meeting.

The meeting was convened by Home Minister Rajnath Singh and invitations were extended to all major political parties. The decision to convene the all-party meeting was taken at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Meanwhile, a high alert has been sounded in J&K and the security forces have been directed to remain vigilant. Curfew has also been imposed in several sensitive areas across the state.

The NIA and NSG investigators have collected forensic samples for credible leads regarding the Pulwama attack. At least seven people have been apprehended by the police and are being examined in connection with the attack.

The mortal remains of CRPF constable Ashwani Kachhi brought to his native village in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh.

"We condemn terrorism in all forms and the support being given to it from across the border. Terrorism being actively encouraged by forces from across the border, India has displayed firmness, resilience in tackling it. We stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism, defending India's unity and integrity," said the resolution passed at the all-party meeting.

After all-party meeting, Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad said, "We stand with the govt for unity & security of the nation and security forces. Be it Kashmir or any other part of the nation, Congress party gives its full support to the govt in the fight against terrorism.

We had requested the Home Minister to request the PM on our behalf to ask Presidents of all national & regional parties for a meeting. This was supported by other parties too. The entire nation is in mourning today, is angry. I had also said that barring war, for the first time since 1947 such large number of security personnel have been killed in an attack. We stand with our security forces - Army, CRPF, local police. The entire nation is standing with them."

DG CRPF RR Bhatnagar said, "I have come to the see the spot, as you have seen the teams -- forensic and NIA teams -- are already working here. The investigation is going on. Once the investigation is concluded then only more details can be given." Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami has announced government jobs to one family member each of the two CRPF personnel from the state who lost their lives in the attack. PM Narendra Modi targets Pakistan over Pulwama terror attack, says a nation on verge of bankruptcy has now become second name for terror. "Sacrifice of Pulwama martyrs will not go in vain, security forces given free hand to punish perpetrators of the attack. All of us can feel the pain of martyrs' families, we understand your anger over what happened in Pulwama," PM Modi.

The international community has extended support to India and as many as 48 countries condemned the terror attack. US, Russia, Canada, Germany, Saudi Arabia, UAE, UK, Australia, Bangladesh, Mauritius, UAE, KSA, Oman, Iran, Bahrain, Iran, Japan, Israel, Maldives, South Korea, Bhutan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Romania, Czech Republic, Estonia, Andorra, The Netherlands, Tajikistan, Croatia, Greece, Seychelles, Mexico, Dominican Republic, South Africa, Finland, Belgium, Lebanon, Turkey, Portugal, China, Pakistan and several countries codemned the attack and extended support.

Jammu DC, Ramesh Kumar, said, "Curfew was imposed on Friday. No casualties were reported. The situation is under control but as a precautionary measure, we have continued with the curfew. We will decide whether to continue it or not by evening, after assessing the situation."

All party meeting begins in Parliament. The meeting convened by Home Minister Rajnath Singh is being attended by Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma and Jyotiraditya Scindia of the Congress, Sudip Bandyopadhyay and Derek O'Brien of the TMC, Sanjay Raut of the Shiv Sena, Jithendra Reddy of the TRS, D Raja of the CPI, Farooq Abdullah of the National Conference, Ram Vilas Paswan of the LJP among others. Naresh Gujral of the Akali Dal, Upendra Kushwaha of the RLSP and Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav are among others who are attending the meeting. Narendra Singh Tomar, and Sharad Pawar are also present.

The parties will be briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far, a home ministry official said.

Indian National Lok Dal leader Abhay Singh Chautala cancels his visit to Lahore, Pakistan in the light of the attack. Delhi's Patiala House Court had on Friday allowed him to travel to Lahore for a personal visit. He is an accused in a disproportionate assets case.

A team of National Investigation Agency (NIA) reaches the site for further investigation.

Protesters stage a demonstration on the railway tracks at Nallasopara railway station in Maharashtra against Pulwama attack. The train movement has affected Nallasopara and beyond.

Leaders arrive at the Parliament, for the all-party meeting called by the central government.

Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba arrives at the residence of Home Minister Rajnath Singh.

Bihar CM Nitish Kumar and RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav pay tribute to Constable Ratan Kumar Thakur and Head Constable Sanjay Kumar Sinha of CRPF who lost their lives in the attack.

US National Security Adviser John Bolton told his Indian counterpart Ajit Doval that America supports India's right to self-defence. Bolton telephoned Doval on Friday to express his condolences for the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir and offered the US' full support to India in confronting terrorism. "I told Ajit Doval today that we support India's right to self-defence. I have spoken to him twice, including this morning... And expressed US' condolences over the terrorist attack,'' he told agencies. Bolton said the US has been very clear to Pakistan on ending support to terrorist safe havens. ''We have been very clear on that score... And, we are continuing to be in discussions we are going to have with the Pakistanis,'' he said.

JeM had declared that February is the month of Jaish, hence the strike. Out of roughly 70 recruits, Dar was Category C terrorist and remained under the radar.

A month before the attack, the intelligence agencies were getting an input that JeM was planning a strike. But the input was of generic nature but said target was security forces and vital installation. However, the agencies failed to foil the terror plot.

The location of the main conspirater of the attack, Abdul Rashid Gazi, has been traced. He is possibly in Pulwama or Tral region operating from the forest. His role is under scanner. Gazi is the top commander sent by Masood Azhar.

The daughter of CRPF ASI Mohan Lal pays last tribute to her father.

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman`s visit to Pakistan has been delayed by a day. He is now scheduled to arrive in the country for a two-day visit starting from February 17 (Sunday), Pakistan`s Foreign Ministry said on Friday. The Pakistan foreign ministry did not divulge the reason behind the change in schedule, adding that the bilateral engagements "remains unchanged," The Dawn reported. The sudden change in the schedule comes after Saudi Arabia strongly condemned the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir`s Pulwama district that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF personnel.

Investigation agencies suspect that the explosives were possible smuggled from across the border in small quantities to store them and use altogether for such a huge attack. They have also learnt that the suicide bomber identified as Adil was missing over the last three months. They suspect that during this time, he was in constant touch with Jaish e Mohammed handlers and possible also visited one of their training camps.

Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan Ajay Bisaria, who was called back for consultations in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack on CRPF troopers on Thursday, arrived in national capital on Saturday morning. Bisaria will later hold discussions with top leaders and government officials over the emerging political situation in the wake of the deadly attack.

The mortal remains of CRPF jawan Ramesh Yadav have been brought to his native village Tofapur in Varanasi.

Mortal remains of CRPF jawan Rohitash Lamba have been brought to his native place in Govindpura, Jaipur, reports ANI.

Ladakh Buddhist Association (LBA) took out a candlelight march in Leh to pay tribute to CRPF personnel who lost their lives in Pulwama attack.

Villagers & family of CRPF personnel Awadhesh Kumar Yadav who lost his life in Pulwama attack on Thursday, mourn his death in UP's Chandauli.

The meeting will be attended by PM Narendra Modi, Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, FM Arun Jaitley and top leaders of other political parties.

The parties will be briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far.

The meeting has been convened by Home Minister Rajnath Singh and invitations have been extended to all major political parties.

The meeting is scheduled to begin at 11 AM at Parliament library.

In the wake of the attack on the CRPF troopers in J&K's Pulwama on Thursday, the govt has convened an all-party meeting on Saturday to discuss what could be the country's possible response to Pakistan in the wake of the incident which left 40 troopers dead and several others critically injured.
