All-party meet reach consensus on military option in Kashmir

New Delhi: Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said his country will avenge the killing of 44 soldiers in a militant attack in Kashmir soon.

He made the statement while addressing a public meeting held at Maharashtra on Saturday.

Meanwhile, all parties of India at a meeting reached a consensus on retribution for the terrorist attack that killed a large number of soldiers.

The meeting was called by Home Minister Rajnath Singh and was attended, among others, by Ghulam Nabi Azad, Anand Sharma and Jyotiraditya Scindia of the Congress, Sudip Bandyopadhyay and Derek O’ Brien of Trinamool, Sanjay Raut of Shiv Sena, D Raja of the Left, Farooq Abdullah of the National Conference, Ram Vilas Paswan of Lok Janshakti Party.

The parties were briefed about the attack in Pulwama and the steps being taken by the government so far, a Home Ministry official said.

Rajnath Singh also spoke strongly about the violence that broke out in Jammu after the attack, saying that no communal attacks will be tolerated, sources said.

Political parties in the opposition and the government expressed India’s determination to fight terrorism in a resolution adopted at the end of an all-party meeting in New Delhi.

The resolution did not name Pakistan but asserted that India has been facing the menace of the cross-border terrorism, which of late, it added, is being actively encouraged by forces from the neighbouring country.

“India has displayed both firmness and resilience in dealing with these challenges. The entire nation speaks in one voice to express its determination to fight these challenges. Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of India,” the resolution said.

Last night, Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhle briefed the heads of the mission in New Delhi including all P-5 countries. Before that, he summoned Pakistan High Commissioner and served him a strong demarche, asking credible and visible action against the terrorist group operating from their soil.

Narendra Modi has warned Pakistan to expect a strong response to the suicide attack as the government said it had “incontrovertible evidence” of the country’s involvement, a statement rejected by Islamabad.

The car bomb attack, claimed by the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed, on a security convoy on Thursday was the worst strike on forces in Jammu and Kashmir.
