Pulwama terror attack: Mourning the martyrs

While many chief ministers have announced ex-gratia and jobs to martyrs' kin, the scars from Pulwama's afternoon of terror that killed 40 CRPF jawans are too deep to be healed. As the country stands united in protests against 'Pakistan's dastardly act' and candle-light marches in memory of martyrs, the bereaved families are left with a huge void after the bodies of the slain soldiers were sent to their respective families for the last rites.

Thousands bid farewell to martyred jawan H Guru who was killed in the Pulwamaterrorist attack on Thursday. His family and the guard of honour paid their last tributes to the slain jawan and cremated his body on Saturday. Guru, who was in his home town Gudigere in Mandya, Karnataka, a week ago, is survived by his ailing mother, father, wife and two siblings. His colleague Mahadeva remembered Guru as a soft-spoken and kind person. The Karnataka government offered a job to Guru's wife and announced an ex-gratia of `25 lakh to his family. Dignitaries visited Mandya to pay tributes to the martyred soldier. Union minister and Karnataka chief minister Sadananda Gowda also met Guru's family.

Thousands of people along with school children gathered in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh, to pay their tributes to CRPF Jawan Ajit Kumar who sacrificed his life in the Pulwama attack. The mortal remains of the jawan were received by the bereaved family.

Kumar's brother Ranjeet said, "Ajit always wanted to serve the nation, since his childhood. After joining the CRPF he also motivated our younger brother Manjeet to join the Army." In Shamli, Uttar Pradesh people mourned the death of jawan Amit Kori, 22, and Pradeep Kumar, 38. They were killed in the Pulwama terror attack. Speaking to INDIA TODAY TV, Amit's father Sohanpal Singh said, "We are shattered. He had just started to live his dream of serving the country. We demand a fitting reply to Pakistan and Pakistansponsored terror groups by our government and security forces." Another slain jawan from the district, Pradeep, had joined the CRPF in 2005. He is survived by his wife and two sons. His elder brother Amit was also serving in the Army. His father Jagdish Kumar said, "It's very important for the government to teach Pakistan a lesson. Another surgical strike is required to eliminate such terror activities."

Union minister and former Indian Army Chief, General VK Singh told INDIA TODAY TV, "Every Indian is expressing anger over this terrible attack. The PM has assured the nation that those responsible for this attack will not be spared. We request everyone to have patience and trust." The last rites of head constable Sanjay Kumar Sinha, who was killed in the Pulwama attack, took place at the Triveni Ghat in Fatuwa near Patna. Slain jawan Sanjay and another jawan Ratan Thakur's bodies arrived at the Patna Airport, where Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar, deputy chief minister SushilKumar Modi, Union ministers Ravi Shankar Prasad and Ramkripal Yadav, and Opposition leader Tejashwi Yadav paid tributes to the bravehearts.

Tributes were also paid to braveheart from Rajasthan's Shahpura, Rohitash Lamba. A gun salute was given to the 27-year-old slain jawan from Govindpura Basdi in the district. Hundreds of people shouted 'Rohitash Lamba amar rahe' and 'Pakistan murdabad' slogans during his funeral procession.

Rohitash is survived by his mother, wife, two-month-old son and brother. His brother said that he is 'extremely proud of the sacrifice his brother has made for the country', and now the government should act against Pakistan and teach it a lesson.

(With inputs from Nelanshu Shukla, Rohit Kumar Singh, Dev Ankur Wadhawan)
