All political parties unite to pass resolution condemning Pulwama attack

Rising above partisanship in the wake of the Pulwama suicide attack that left 40 security personnel dead, political parties put up a united front on Saturday. An all-party meeting, chaired by Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh and attended by senior leaders of 21 political parties, passed a unanimous resolution condemning the terror attack and the support being given to it from across the border. There were reports that top intelligence officers held a meeting with the home minister to prepare a dossier on Pakistan's involvement in the Pulwama attack.



Without naming Pakistan, the resolution said, "India has during the past three decades faced the menace of cross border terrorism. Of late, terrorism in India is being actively encouraged by the forces across the border."



It noted, "India has displayed both firmness and resilience in dealing with these challenges".

The resolution further noted, "The entire nation speaks in one voice to express its determination to fight these challenges."



"Today, we stand united in solidarity with our security forces in fighting terrorism and in defending the unity and integrity of India," it said.



Sources from the Opposition said there were differences in paraphrasing the final resolution. The resolution drafted by the government spoke of parties standing with security forces and "efforts of the Central and State government" but the mention of central and state government was dropped from the final copy at the insistence of opposition.



"We insisted on rephrasing because neither we want to blame the government for the situation nor do we want it to take undue advantage of the situation," said sources.



BJP ally, the Shiv Sena questioned the efficacy of surgical strikes and asked the government to draw inspiration from former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi who launched a direct attack on Pakistan breaking into two countries.



"Pulwama terror attack would not have taken place if surgical strikes, which the Army had carried out across the Line of Control, had made an impact," said Sena MP Sanjay Raut.



All political parties who attended the meeting were on the same page that the response should be unanimous and guarded to keep passions under control. The home minister assured that nobody will be allowed to vitiate communal harmony, and the central government is issuing an advisory to this effect to state governments. Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to convene a meeting of the presidents of all major national and regional parties.
