LATEST: Swine flu death count climbs to 127 in Rajasthan, 3,508 tested positive

New Delhi:

The Balochistan National Congress (BNC), a US-based Baloch body, strongly condemned the Pulwama terror attack, carried out by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) outfit, in which around 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives. On the other hand, the curfew in Jammu continued for the second day and the Army's presence was stepped up on Saturday, a day after violent protests rocked the city over a suicide attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans in Kashmir. According to the sources, the forces are expected to continue their operations more aggressively. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will visit Bihar today. He will inaugurate and lay foundation stone of various development projects worth 33,000 crore rupees at Barauni in Begusarai district. PM Modi will also address a public meeting at Ulao airport premises in Barauni.

21:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Total 127 people died from swine flu and 3,508 were tested positive for it in Rajasthan in the year 2019.

19:59 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Piyush Goyal on Rahul Gandhi's tweet that 'Make in India needs a serious rethink': It's very unfortunate that he has attacked a flagship programme that doesn't belong to a political party but to the people of India. Make In India is all about Indian self-reliance.

It's all about Indian technical knowledge, the efforts that our workers do to produce goods in India. I feel sorry that Rahul Gandhi hasn't recognised that for the 1st time India has indigenously developed a trainset which barely a few countries in the world made.



Union Minister Piyush Goyal on Rahul Gandhi's tweet that 'Make in India needs a serious rethink': It's very unfortunate that he has attacked a flagship programme that doesn't belong to a political party but to the ppl of India. Make In India is all about Indian self-reliance. pic.twitter.com/g27aUuewSJ

— ANI (@ANI) February 17, 2019



16:33 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The date for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting has been changed from February 26 to February 28.

11:21 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In General Officer Commanding, Fire and Fury Corps, Lt Gen Y K Joshi Saturday reviewed the operational preparedness of the Army at the Siachen Glacier, a defence spokesman said. The corps commanding officer visited forward posts at the Siachen Glacier and reviewed the operational preparedness in the sector, the spokesman said. He said Lt Gen Joshi conveyed his appreciation to the troops for their perseverance and fighting spirit even in extreme altitudes of over 20,000 feet and harsh temperatures of up to minus 50 degrees Celsius. Joshi also paid homage to martyrs of Operation MEGHDOOT at the Siachen War Memorial, the spokesman said.

10:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

Puducherry: CM V Narayanasamy hoists black flag at his residence as a mark of protest against Lt Governor Kiran Bedi. He is sitting on a dharna demanding Central govt to recall the Lt Governor & that the helmet enforcement rule by DGP be taken up in a phased manner in the state pic.twitter.com/TsUljsJInY

— ANI (@ANI) February 17, 2019



09:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi will on Sunday lay foundation stone for hospitals in Hazaribagh, Dumka and Palamau and inaugurate a host of development schemes during his visit to the state, an official statement said.

07:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Balochistan National Congress (BNC), a US-based Baloch body, strongly condemned the Pulwama terror attack, carried out by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) outfit, in which around 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
