Strategy talks and a message of unity

CRPF jawans

Sanjay Singh’s funeral procession in Patna

Bereaved family members of Manoj Kumar Behera in Bhubaneswar

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

A protest in New Delhi

Officer killed in IED blast

I

AF’s mega exercise

Sidhu dropped from show

Navjot Singh Sidhu

Home Minister Rajnath Singh meets top intelligence officials, chairs all-party meet.As the mortal remains of 44, killed in the dastardly terror attack in Kashmir’s Pulwama, reached their bereaved family members and thousands attended their funerals, all political parties came together in the national capital on Saturday to take a united stand against terrorism even as India mounted efforts to decide on its next course of action.Amid denials from Pakistan of having no role in the attack, which was carried out by terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad based in the neighbouring country, Union Home Minster Rajnath Singh met top intelligence officials throughout the day to strategise about India’s response. RAW chief AK Dhasmana, Additional Director of Intelligence Bureau Arvind Kumar, Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba and National Security Adviser (NSA) Ajit Doval were cooped up with Singh at a high-level meeting at his residence.The officials briefed the home minister about the prevailing situation in the country, including Indo-Pak border. The meeting also took stock of security measures in place to foil any design of Pakistan-based terrorist groups to disturb peace in Jammu and Kashmir as well as in hinterlands, a home ministry official said. Singh directed the officials to ensure that all possible steps are taken to hunt down terrorists currently operating in the Valley.On Friday evening, Doval spoke to his counterpart in the US, Ambassador John Bolton, after the latter reached out to him via telephone. According to officials in the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Bolton offered all assistance to bring the perpetrators and backers of the attack to justice. MEA officials said that at least 48 heads of states have condemned the attack.Earlier in the day, Singh chaired an all-party meeting attended by leaders from Congress, AIADMK, NCP, TDP, SP, Trinamool Congress, Aam Aadmi Party, BSP, BJD, LJP, RLSP, INLD, CPI (M), CPI, RJD, Shiromani Akali Dal, IUML, RPI(A), JKNC, NPF and TRS. Union Minister Narendra Singh Tomar was also present.Singh, who opened the meeting by briefing the leaders about the attack, told them that during his visit to Srinagar on Friday, he found the morale of the security forces to be ‘high’ and that they “expressed resolve to continue the fight against terrorism till its logical conclusion”.Singh reiterated that the government has given a “free hand” to the security forces to deal with terrorists and their perpetrators. “The government is determined to root out terrorism from our soil. This meeting has sent a message to the global community that the country, from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, speaks in one voice on matters of national interest. While the Centre will provide all possible assistance to the families of martyrs, we appeal to the states to provide maximum possible assistance,” he added.Former J&K Chief Minister and National Conference leader Farooq Abdullah pointed out that innocent civilians were being targeted in the wake of the attack and sought the Centre’s intervention in. Hours later, the Home Ministry issued an advisory to all states and Union Territories to ensure that Kashmiri students and residents are given adequate security.At a rally in Maharashtra,again asserted that each drop of tear shed in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack would be avenged.Pakistan continued to deny the country’s hand in the attack. “We are sorry about the lives that were lost. Even now we feel that the response from India is a knee-jerk reaction without any investigation. If they have any evidence, they must share it with us…We will help them with the investigation,” said Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------An Army officer was killed and a soldier suffered injuries in an IED explosion along the LoC in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday. The IED, planted by terrorists inside LoC in Naushera sector, set off when the officer, along with his men, was patrolling the area. The officer is from the Corps of Engineers.----------------------------------The IAF carried out a mega exercise, Vayu Shakti, involving around 140 fighter jets and attack helicopters in Pokhran close to the border with Pakistan. Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa said the IAF was prepared to deliver “appropriate response” as assigned by India’s political leadership. He, did not mention the Pulwama attack.----------------------------------Congress leaderhas been sacked from “The Kapil Sharma Show” after his controversial comments on the Pulwama attack. A cabinet minister in the Punjab government, Sidhu had said, “This (attack) should be condemned by all. For a handful people, you cannot blame an entire nation.”
