Pulwama Terror Attack: Key Points

Follow us on Army personnel stand guard at Gujjar Nagar area during a curfew, imposed on the third day after the clash between two communities over the protest against the Pulwama terror attack, in Jammu

A day after the nation bid a tearful adieu to 40 CRPF bravehearts who lost their lives in the heinious terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on Thursday, a furious nation is demanding action.

In one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir, at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed and many injured on Thursday when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

As thousands including Union ministers attended the funerals of the CRPF jawans at their respective homes, protests were held across the country against the Pulwama Terror Attack.

People took out candle-light marches in Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra and other parts of the country, while several others held protest rallies. A crowd chanting 'Vande Matram' took over the railway tracks in Mumbai, blocking the local train movement for several hours on Saturday morning. Several cities, including Mumbai's neibhouring Mumbra, Thane and Gujarat's hmedabad, Surat, Vadodara, Rajkot and Bhavnagar observed a self-imposed bandh to express grief over the attack.

As the nation took to streets to express grief, anger and outrage, over 40 countries and at least three multi-nation organisations condemned the attack.

IN PICS: India bids tearful adieu to 40 CRPF martyrs who wore patriotism on sleeve

Latest Updates:

09:34 pm: Gaya: Visuals from candle light march held by Central Reserve Police Force personnel, their families & other civilians to pay tribute to the CRPF soldiers who lost their lives in Pulwama Terrorist Attack on February 14.

09:11 pm: Delhi: Candle light march being held at Connaught Place to pay tribute to the the CRPF jawans who lost their lives in Pulwama Terrorist Attacks on February 14.

9:01 pm:

8:25 pm:

7:50 pm:

5:45 pm: Jammu And Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik has announced an ex-gratia relief of Rs 20 lakh to the next of the kin of CRPF Head Constable, Naseer Ahmed of district Rajouri.

04:46 pm: Maharajganj: Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath meets family of CRPF Constable Pankaj Kumar Tripathi who lost his life in Pulwama Terrorist Attack

4:18 pm: Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh: Apart from ex-gratia worth Rs 12 lakh, special monthly pension of Rs 10,000 per month will be given to his parents for life, as the deceased soldier had no children whom we could provide job.

02:30 pm: India raises Pulwama terrorist attack issue during bilaterals at Munich Conference: India raised the issue of the Pulwama terror attack, which left 40 CRPF men dead, during bilateral meetings with several countries, including the US, Germany and Russia, at the three-day Munich Security Conference that concluded Sunday, officials said. The 55th Munich Security Conference, which brings together global leaders and security experts from across the word, was attended by India's Deputy National Security Advisor Pankaj Saran.

02:15 pm: CRPF Advisory: It has been noticed that on social media some miscreants are trying to circulate fake pictures of body parts of our martyrs to invoke hatred while we stand united. Please don't circulate/share/like such photos or posts. Report such content at webpro@crpf.gov.in

02:00 pm: Normal life affected after bandh call against attacks on Kashmiris: Normal life was affected in Kashmir on Sunday due to a valley-wide bandh called by trade bodies here against the alleged harassment and attacks on Kashmiris in Jammu and outside the state, officials said.The Kashmir bandh call was supported by major trade bodies like the Kashmir Economic Alliance and Kashmir Traders and Manufacturers Federation as well as transporters' associations.

01:30 pm: Kashmiri students in Delhi fear for life: Several Kashmiri students in New Delhi said they were in a state of fear after reports of alleged harassment of Kashmiris following the Pulwama terror attack, even as police asserted that security had been enhanced in the national capital and they would ensure the safety of all citizens.

01:00 pm: Security of 5 separatist leaders withdrawn: The Jammu and Kashmir administration on Sunday issued orders to withdraw security of five separatist leaders, officials said. According to the order, all security and vehicles provided to the separatists will stand withdrawn by Sunday evening. No security forces or cover will be provided, under any pretext, to them or any other separatists. If they have any other facilities provided by the government, they are to be withdrawn forthwith. The five separatist leaders will also include Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, officials said adding security cover for Abdul Gani Bhat, Bilal Lone, Hashim Qureshi and Shabir Shah has been withdrawn.

12:05 pm: Omar Abdullah appeals for safety of Kashmiris: In a series of tweets, former J&K CM Omar Abdullah appealed for the safety of Kashmiri students living outside the Valley. "Young Kashmiri students studying outside J&K should have been feted as examples of people who have stayed away from the politics & conflict in Kashmir, choosing instead to make a future for themselves. By attacking them, terrorising them & forcing them to find shelter they are being told there is no place for them outside the valley & no future in the mainland. Those hotheads that make up the mobs doing this damage need to ask themselves (if they have the mental bandwidth) whose purpose is served by ostracising Kashmiris. Our enemies & those who back terrorism in J&K have been trying to drive this wedge so please please let’s not do their job for them. Kashmir isn’t just a piece of land it’s the people that inhabit it.""

11:00 pm; 'We will protect you', CRPF promises the safety of Kashmiris in the Valley: The Central Reserve Police Forces on Saturday assured local Kashmiris that they will safeguard them from any harassment in reaction to the Pulwama terror attack, carried out by a local Kashmiri. Several reports suggested that Kashmiris were facing threats following the Pulwama terror attack. To ensure the safety of the Kashmiris based out of Jammu and Kashmir, the CRPF helpline on Saturday asked them to approach it in case they face any harassment. The helpline is based in Srinagar.

10:00 am: A delegation of Indian doctors has cancelled a visit to Pakistan for the 13th SAARC-Association of Anaesthesiologists Congress in Lahore on March 7 in wake of the Pulwama attack. The conference is being organised by the Pakistan Society of Anaesthesiologist and Scientific Committee.

09:30 am: Curfew continues in Jammu: A curfew in Jammu continued for a third consecutive day on Sunday with the authorities saying that it will remain in force until the law and order situation improves in the city. "The situation was normal and under control during the night except for some stray incidents," a police official said.

08:00 am: Bharat Ke Veer gets 'unprecedented' Rs 7cr funds post Pulwama attack: The 'Bharat Ke Veer' contribution platform, that collects public funds for CAPF personnel killed in action, has got "unprecedented" donations of over Rs 7 crore following the Pulwama terror attack, officials said Saturday. Officials manning the online portal of the Union Home Ministry have also asked citizens to "desist" from donating money for the slain men in uniform at any other platform except the 'Bharat Ke Veer'. "We have received unprecedented donations at the online portal in the last 36 hours and the amount is over Rs 7 crore," BSF Inspector General (IG) Amit Lodha told PTI.

07:00 am: Over 40 countries condemn Pulwama terror attack: Over 40 countries and at least three multi-nation organisations condemned the Pulwama attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, and expressed condolences over the loss of lives. The UN, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and the European Union issued statements condemning the terror strike. Countries such as the US, France, Canada, Israel, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Germany, and Australia were among the countries that expressed solidarity with India. India's neighbours such as Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Nepal, Maldives, Mauritius, Bangladesh and Afghanistan also condemned the terror strike.

Also read | How CRPF troopers got trapped in deadly tragedy

06:00 am; CRPF assures help to any Kashmiri in distress: The Central Reserve Police Forces on Saturday assured local Kashmiris that they will safeguard them from any harassment in reaction to the Pulwama terror attack, carried out by a local Kashmiri. Several reports suggested that Kashmiris were facing threats following the Pulwama terror attack. To ensure the safety of the Kashmiris based out of Jammu and Kashmir, the CRPF helpline on Saturday asked them to approach it in case they face any harassment. The helpline is based in Srinagar. They can call on 24x7 toll-free number 14411 or send an SMS at mobile no: 7082814411 "for speedy assistance in case they face any difficulties or harassment".

Latest India News
