Kashmiri students across India face wrath from varsities for ‘anti-national’ posts on social media

Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14. | File

New Delhi: In just three days since the dastardly Pulwama terror attack that shook the entire nation, several Kashmiri students across the country have been arrested for posting "anti-national" messages on social media. The law enforcement authorities have initiated strict action against the students belonging to institutions across India.

The NIMS University in Jaipur suspended four of its students for posting "anti-national" messages related to the terror attack on social networking platform WhatsApp. Elsewhere, in Bengaluru, a student from Reva University, 22-year-old Tahir Latief, was detained by the police on Saturday for uploading a video of the terrorist behind the attack on Facebook and praising him. The police have booked Latief under Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code and the IT Act, Indian Express reported.

Meanwhile, another Kashmiri from Dehradun, a 19-year-old student at Alpine Institute of Management and Technology was suspended on Saturday for allegedly uploading a photograph of a Hizbul Mujahideen militant who was killed in an encounter in the Valley. Four people were arrested in Uttar Pradesh for shouting slogans praising Pakistan and writing comments on social media supporting the Pulwama attack.

On February 15, a day after the deadly attack, the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) rusticated a Kashmiri student for praising a terrorist outfit on social media.

AMU spokesperson Omar Peerzada said the student the varsity suspended an undergraduate student of Kashmiri origin for lauding a terrorist organisation on social media. He said the matter is being further probed and "strong deterrent action" once the probe is completed.

“AMU has zero tolerance for any such pernicious activity and anyone indulging in such an act will not be spared,” Peerzada said.

Banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14 in Awantipora area of Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. The attack took place around 3:30 pm after a suicide bomber, identified as local boy Adil Ahmad Dar, in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying over 2500 CRPF personnel on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.
