State INSO chief injured in attack; NSUI’s role alleged

editorial@tribune.com

Sunit Dhawan

Tribune News Service

Rohtak, January 4

State Indian National Students Organisation (INSO) president Pradeep Deswal, a close confidant of Jannayak Janata Party (JJP) leader Dushyant Chautala, was injured in an attack by a group of youths in Maharshi Dayanand University (MDU) here today.

The attack is said to be the fallout of a recent clash between members of the INSO and the National Students Union of India, the student wing of the Congress.

The INSO-JJP group alleged Deswal was hit in the head with a lathi or sharp-edged weapon. He was also shot at.

Inspector Garima, the SHO of the PGIMS police station, said Deswal had suffered injuries in the head and other parts of the body. Any gunshot wound was yet to be confirmed, she said.

“The incident is fallout of a rivalry between student groups. The police are getting Deswal’s statement recorded. A case will be registered on his complaint,” she said.

Deputy Superintendent of Police Mohammed Jamal said the police had put the two students groups under observation so as to avert any further clash.

Deswal was allegedly attacked with lathis near the Department of Law on the MDU campus. The assailants allegedly snatched a revolver of Deswal’s brother during the brawl. His car was damaged in the attack.

Deswal was rushed to the PGIMS, and admitted at the trauma centre.

The JJP patron, Ajay Singh Chautala, visited Deswal in the PGIMS and demanded strict action against the attackers. Addressing a workers’ meeting here, Ajay said the incident had exposed the “goonda raj” in the state. He blamed BJP and Congress leaders for the attack.

INSO president Digvijay Chautala, in a statement, alleged a political conspiracy against the JJP. He claimed attackers were linked to a former Chief Minister and demanded an investigation into the matter.

Balram Makrauli, JJP spokesperson, said the MDU gates remained opened even after the attack and university security officials did not make any effort to nab the attackers, who, he alleged, were members of the NSUI.
