ED: War of words – Afghanistan Times

President Dr. Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Dr. Abdullah Abdullah have shown resentment over the terrible suicide attack in Kashmir, which causes lives to over three dozen personnel of Indian paramilitary police forces and injuries to several others. The incident now leads to intensifying of war of words between New Delhi and Islamabad. Pakistan-based hard line Islamist and alleged terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the attack, considered the deadliest militant attack on Indian forces in Kashmir since the insurgency against Indian rule began in 1989. President Ashraf Ghani said in a statement that he strongly condemns the terrorist attack that targeted CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir. “The government of Afghanistan expresses its sympathy and deep condolences to the Indian government and people, and the families of the soldiers who fell victim to the incident.” Terrorism is a cancer in the region, and it requires collective efforts to root it out. Similarly Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah while addressing a ceremony on 30th anniversary of Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan has also condemned the attack in India as well as the attack in Iran and called them terror acts. “We stand in solidarity with India and condemn the cowardly attack on CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir,” Abdullah said. “Terrorists and their sponsors appropriating religious names to commit heinous crimes are but a disgrace to religion and humanity.” The terrible violent acts in both the neighbouring countries of Pakistan occurred little before arrival of Saudi Prince Salman Bin Muhammad. The prince is scheduled to land at Islamabad on a two days visit on Sunday. Pakistan attaching great hopes with the Saudi Prince visit in the wake of its internal financial hardships and growing isolation in the international community on certain issues especially terror sanctuaries on its soil along with Pak Afghan crossing points. The militant group Jaish Muhammad is not a new group but notorious for its subversive acts since a long. The group chief was imprisoned in India in 90’s and had got release in return of a passenger plane hijacking first to Lahore and later to Kandahar when Afghanistan was governed by Taliban in 1999. Maulana Masud Azhar had got release through a mysterious ways in return of Indian nationals including women and children as hostages. Since that day Maulana Masud Azhar like of Lashkar Tayyaba Commander Hafiz Muhammad Saeed enjoying VVIP status in Pakistan. From last several days, war of words between India and Pakistan is getting momentum with each passing minute. Both the countries through foreign offices have lodged protest against each others at the time when the International Court of Justice has fixed hearing into infamous spy arrest case. Whatever might be its outcomes but hostilities between India and Pakistan is harmful to future peace of the whole region. Apart from claiming its ownership on Kashmir, Pakistan is also making its best to get control of Afghanistan’s internal and external policies which is intolerable. Pakistan has already facing worst kind of economic crises and pressure from rest of the world countries on issues pertained to religious extremism. It is the time for Pakistan to revisit its policies as its ruler’s adventure based intentions regarding neighbouring and regional countries also multiplying its internal politico-economic hardships of its own people.
