Will there be war?

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

It might sound far-fetched right now, but a lesser crime in May of 2001 almost triggered a war between India and Pakistan. Three suicidal terrorists from Pakistan attacked an Indian army camp in Kaluchak near Jammu killing 34 people, mostly wives and children of army soldiers.

The then-army chief, S. Padmanabhan, a man of few words, in a rare utterance from an Indian army chief, said that time for action has come. These words prodded the then prime minister, the normally placid Atal Behari Vaypayee to say that Hamein pratikar karna hoga (We will have to counter it).

India and Pakistan were at the brink of war.

Thirty-four people killed then, over forty soldiers martyred today. The man at India’s helm today is anything but placid. His first tweet about the recent massacre was relatively stoic, that the sacrifices of our soldiers will not go in vain. He has been much sterner since.

Pretenders to his throne like Rahul Gandhi, Manmohan Singh, Mamata Banerjee and even Arvind Kejriwal have fallen in line, all counselling the prime minister to take action and all saying that they are right behind him.

But what action can the PM take? Pakistan today is ruled by an Islamic theologue propped up by a ghazi army (warriors of the faith). Imran Khan has no independent mind to speak of or any leeway whatsoever to smoke the peace pipe with India. His country is bankrupt, with he himself having to humiliatingly take a begging bowl to Muslim countries all over the world.

What, apart from a few bombs and missiles, does Pakistan make? What can it hope to make? All the money that Imran is collecting will go to the benefit of his generals, and then Pakistan will be in the doldrums all over again.

India has withdrawn the most favoured nation status accorded to Pakistan, but this was a one-sided olive branch that had long ago withered on the vine. The Pakistani generals just won’t allow substantive trade between the two countries.

China has blocked, once again, the declaration of Masood Azhar, the founder of the Jaish-e-Mohammed responsible for the recent blast, as a global terrorist. Imagine if a Tibetan inspired and protected by India had taken out 40 Chinese soldiers. China would have been raring to wage war against India. And don’t forget that India has as much strategic deterrence against China as Pakistan has against India.

Actually, this strategic deterrence is just a bogey. India needs to hit Pakistan hard, and not covertly but overtly. When things happen covertly, no one really gets to know. The so-called surgical strikes against Pakistan were reduced to a laughing stock, not just in Pakistan, but also in India.

The Pakistani establishment believes that India is in hock with the Pakistani Taliban and has therefore been causing enough mayhem in Pakistan anyway. But does it make sense for India to collaborate with the Pakistani Taliban. The latter’s clearly-stated goal is taking over the Pakistani state, after which it wants to install the crescent on India’s Red Fort.

The truth of the matter is that India has few means to do mischief in Pakistan. The Pakistani generals have been emboldened by the money that Imran Khan has raised to strike against India. A few mysterious surgical strikes against Pakistan will not do. India will have to take out a prominent terrorist in Pakistan as reprisal for the recent blast or launch a furious attack on the Pakistani security establishment.

Pakistan promises war then. But what good are the promises of a nation that is living hand to mouth on promissory notes. Be fearless, India. Do what you have to do.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
