Despite JeM claiming responsibility, Pak minister says 'seriously doubt they are behind Pulwama attack'

Pakistan minister Fawad Chaudhry on Saturday said he doubts whether the terror attack in Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14, in which 40 CRPF jawans were killed, was the handiwork of the Jaish-e-Mohammed group.

It is worth noting that the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack.

“These organisations are dead, I seriously doubt their ability to do something like this. They are well under control,” Chaudhry, Minister for Information and Broadcasting in the Imran Khan government, told The Indian Express in a telephonic interview.

He said even Pakistan has nothing to do with the terror attack.

“Even as an observer, not as a minister, I think this (that Pakistan government is involved) is unlikely. Pakistan has nothing to do with it,” he said.

Chaudhry said that his country would take action against anyone if India shared evidence.

India had on Friday summoned Pakistani High Commissioner to India, Sohail Mahmood, and issued a very strong demarche over the killing of the CRPF men.

The JeM has claimed responsibility for the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday that left 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel dead and five critically wounded.

Pakistan must take "immediate and verifiable action" against JeM and it must immediately stop any groups or individuals associated with terrorism operating from its territories, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale told the envoy.

India has slammed Pakistan on Friday for stating that it had no role in the Pulwama attack carried out by Pakistan-based terror group JeM.

In a statement, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said Islamabad can not claim that it was unaware of the presence of terror groups on its soil as the links of such outfits to the country were there for everyone to see. "JeM has claimed responsibility for the attack. The organisation and its leadership are located in Pakistan."

The Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and other terror groups had welcomed the news of the attack and those groups were also based in Pakistan, he asserted.
