Indian Insanity on full display......Again

Pakistan and India, two neighbours, two rivals, two nuclear powers. Until 1947, all was just one country, while democracy is now taking roots in Pakistan, India always claimed to be the biggest democracy in the world and a secular state.

Fast forward to the Millennium, Pakistan for almost two decades has been a victim of terrorism from various sides with some of the bloody attacks carried out by both Afghan Nationals and Afghan based elements. Apart from capturing Indian terrorist Kulbhushan Yadav, several attacks directly pointed to Indian involvement. The dastardly attack on APS was a watershed day in Pakistan's history which was carried out by Afghan Nationals. Pakistani public was smelling blood and seeking bloody revenge but as before, no one took matters in their own hands and left it to security forces to deal with the situations which they aptly did. And this is how matters are dealt with in most civil societies.

Now it seems the Indians have a different approach to deal with such situations, for whatever reasons, Indians prefer to take law and revenge in their own hands. Something that is usually associated with lawless countries and primitive mindset.

Some of these high profile revenge attacks by Indian public have been termed as genocides.

And all because just a few from a minority of Indian society were involved in the crime, the majority Hindu population decided to take charge and punish the whole community.

In mid-80s, thousands of innocent Sikhs were slaughtered by rampaging Hindus only because two of the Sikh guards were involved in the assassination of Indra Gandhi, later we again witnessed the Gujarat genocide where again thousands of Muslims were murdered by Hindu mobs only because a few Muslims were involved in a dubious train incident.

Lately a Kashmiri youth, abused and tortured by Indian army allegedly carried out an attack on Indian security forces and the Hindu mentality comes into play again by terrorising innocent Kashmiris across the country, their property and livelihood looted and destroyed and even threatening them to leave India. On top silencing any sane voices and pointing fingers and start blaming Pakistan even before the dust as settled. Revenge taken, justice served, welcome to India, the biggest democracy in the world and a secular state.
