J&K separatists’ security revoked: Saifuddin Soz opposes move, says ‘Hurriyat never promoted violence’

File Image of Congress leader Saifuddin Soz | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Expressing resentment over the withdrawal of security of five separatist leaders in Jammu and Kashmir, Congress leader Saifuddin Soz, on Sunday, said that Hurriyat never advocated violence.

“It will be counter productive too and will not be an advantage for the government of India at all. This is narrow vision of Kashmir. I have also said that Hurriyat never promoted violence. Mainstream and Hurriyat are on the same page,” he said, according to news agency ANI

The Congress leader further called for a dialogue to resolve the Kashmir issue.

The Jammu and Kashmir administration on Sunday issued orders to withdraw security covers of five separatist leaders, news agency PTI reported. "No security cover will be provided under any pretext to these five leaders and other separatists," officials said.

Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Shabir Shah, Hashim Qureshi, Bilal Lone and Abdul Ghani Bhat are the five separatist leaders whose security has been withdrawn. However, the name of pro-Pakistan separatist Syed Ali Shah Geelani does not feature in the list.

All security and any vehicle provided to them will stand withdrawn by today evening, the order read, adding that no security forces or cover should be provided, under any pretext, to them or any other separatists.

“If they have any other facilities provided by the government, they are to be withdrawn forthwith. The police headquarters will review if there are any other separatists who have government security or facilities and will withdraw these immediately,” the order stated.

Reacting to the order, Qureshi said the withdrawal of security will make him the target of ISI, Pakistan's military intelligence wing. The separatist leader also said that he is with the idea of independent Kashmir and not with Pakistan and that the government's move is an act of "revenge" on separatists.

Earlier this week, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh had said that the security of “some elements” having links with the ISI (in Pakistan) and terrorist organisations will be reviewed. He made the statement during his visit to the Valley after a dastardly terror attack by Pakistani terrorists killed Indian security forces on February 14.

Pakistani-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14 claiming lives of 40 CRPF personnel.
