Nobody else is responsible for Pulwama attack except forces own negligence: Congress leader – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR: Congress leader and former MP Noor Bano blamed the Indian Army for the militant attack which were happen in Pulwama area of South Kashmir in which 49 CRPF men were killed.

Speaking to a TV channel Now Bano said, “Whatever happened was bad and this will affect us but we don’t know how BJP will exploit this and how they will use this attack.” She also said that the Army had an indication that they might be attacked but even then no precaution was taken.

Nobody else is responsible for this, except their own negligence, she said and pinned the responsibility of the attack on the forces, the home ministry and the current government.

Earlier, senior lawyer Prashant Bhushan defended the militants behind the Pulwama attack that killed 49 CRPF men and said that the bomber was harassed and beaten by the troops after which he embraced the path of violence. Bhushan’s tweet was endorsed by Spandana and she retweeted it.

“It is important to understand why so many young men in Kashmir are becoming militants and willing to die. Even US forces couldn’t hold Afghanistan and Iraq after large-scale suicide attacks,” Bhushan had tweeted. (PTK)

No all-party meet called, when 55 innocents were roasted live in Sopore: APHC

SRINAGAR: Strongly condemning the rampage and brutalities against Kashmiries and Muslims in Jammu, All Parties Hurriyat Conference chairman said that nobody on earth particularly we Kashmiries rejoice and celebrate the human loss of any race, region or religion—as our oppressor distributes sweets when dozens of our youth are gunned down by their “brave soldiers”.

Hurriyat chairman said that muscular and revengeful response to the Pulwama incident against Muslims of Jammu and Kashmiri employees of darbar move looks a well planned conspiracy to tear away every fiber of communal harmony, social bonding and collective brotherhood.

He said that horrifying scenes of ruthlessly beating to pulp of Kashmiri drivers, students, employees, others and burning their vehicles, stoning their residences under the nose of biased police with their encouragement and go ahead signal has once again proved the two nation theory right and timely as majority class of India finds it hard to accept the minority particularly Muslims—as the independence from British rule was only for Hindus—Muslims continue to be subjugated, threatened and harassed on one or other pretext—negating the tall and much hyped slogans of secularism.

Hurriyat chairman said that in chaining Kashmiries, every Indian, particularly its political class echoes in one voice and all support and endorse the venomous statement of its PM to give his armed forces free hand to deal in Kashmir whatever way they want. It is an open threat and license to crush and kill every Kashmiri– & those men in uniform to be rewarded.

Pro-freedom leader said that non Kashmiris working here for their bread and butter, students or Darbar move employees enjoy the hospitality to the maximum and nobody ever has been harmed even the slightest. Army massacring dozens of our youth on daily bases, no person belonging to their region and religion feels unsafe here. Commenting on the social media posts of some outside Medico working in SKIMS, Hurriyat chairman said that hatred and venomous mindset has pouted out even from the white apron—an indication and identification of a life saver. He said that one is surprised that our ailing and stressed people are forced to seek the remedy of their ills from such a beast in white uniform—who is not only an ugly blot on himself, but is tarnishing the pious and noble profession.

Pro-freedom leader said the incident in Pulwama has put all the so-called secular and Hindutwa faces in the same basket—but when 55 innocents were roasted live in Sopore or when our dozens of youth are massacred daily, no eye in India gets moist, no all party meet is called. This dual attitude is bound to have repercussions.

He said who else than us feels the pain of losing dear ones—but threatening with might and free hand statements only fuel the already charged situation. Statesmanship and good sense should have prevailed on the Indian leadership to address the root cause of this unabated bloodshed. (PTK)
