India detains 23 suspects in suicide attack, denies reprisals being taken against Kashmir Muslims

Indian demonstrators shout slogans against Pakistan during a protest in New Delhi on Sunday.SAJJAD HUSSAIN/AFP/Getty Images

Indian forces have detained 23 men suspected of links to the Pakistan-based militant group that masterminded the bombing of an Indian security convoy that killed 44 paramilitary police, a top police official said on Sunday.

The 23 men include members and sympathizers of Jaish-e-Mohammad, the militant group which has claimed responsibility for Thursday’s attack in support of its bid to remove Indian forces from Kashmir. It was the deadliest attack on Indian security forces in decades.

India has demanded Pakistan close down the Jaish and other Islamist militant groups that operate from its soil, while Islamabad has rejected suggestions it was linked to the attack.

Kashmir, a Muslim-majority region at the heart of decades of hostility, is claimed in its entirety by India and Pakistan, but is ruled in part by both countries.

The attack has fueled tensions between India and Pakistan. As well, Kashmiris living outside their state are facing property evictions, job suspensions and attacks on social media.

Representatives of India’s National Investigating Agency (NIA) questioned the suspects about the bombing on Sunday, two security officials said.

“They are trying to reach out to the top commanders of Jaish-e-Mohammad, including its Kashmir chief,” one of the sources said.

Mohammed Umair, the commander of the Jaish in Kashmir who is believed to have plotted the attack, is believed to be hiding in the region where the attacks took place, the officials said.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has promised a strong response to the attack and says he has given the military a free hand to tackle cross-border militancy.

Separately, India has warned against rising communal tensions across the country as Kashmiris living outside their state faced property evictions, job suspensions and attacks on social media after the suicide bombing.

As the bodies of the paramilitary policemen who died in the attack were returned to families across India this weekend, passionate crowds waving the Indian flag gathered in the streets to honour them and shouted demands for revenge. Pakistan has denied any role in the killings.

Kashmiri Muslims, meanwhile, say they are facing a backlash in Hindu-majority India, mainly in the northern states of Haryana and Uttarakhand, forcing the federal Interior Ministry to issue an advisory to all states.

“The ministry has taken a stringent view and has issued an advisory to all states and union territories to ensure safety and security of Kashmiris, and to maintain communal harmony,” A. Bharat Bhushan Babu, a spokesman for the ministry, told Reuters on Sunday.

Local media reported that some Kashmiri students were assaulted by members of Hindu right-wing groups in Uttarakhand, while a Kashmiri man had been booked by the police in the southern city of Bengaluru under a colonial-era sedition law for a post allegedly backing the militants. Reuters was not able to independently verify the reports.

Uttarakhand Chief Minister Trivendra Singh Rawat said late on Sunday that “no incident of beating or harassment of Kashmiri students has been reported anywhere in the state.”

“I’m making it clear that lawbreakers, including rumour mongers, will not be spared either,” Mr. Rawat said in a tweet.

The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), to which all the dead officers belonged, said “fake news about harassment of students from Kashmir is being propagated by various miscreants on social media.”

“CRPF helpline has enquired about complaints about harassment and found them incorrect,” it said on Twitter.
