US lawmakers strongly condemn terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district

Bipartisan members of Congress stand shoulder-to-shoulder with “ally and friend, India” in the wake of Pulwama terror attacks.

Follow @ambazaarmag

WASHINGTON, DC: US lawmakers from both major parties have minced no words in harshly condemning the dastardly terrorist attack on Indian security forces in the Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir, while expressing solidarity with “ally and friend, India.”

In what is being called the worst terror attack in the state since the start of the century, 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed, Thursday, when a large convoy was hit by a vehicle explosion carried out by a suicide bomber. The Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack.

American lawmakers from both sides of the aisle took to Twitter condemning the heinous attack, pledging their staunch support for India, and vowing to defeat terror wherever it rears its ugly head.

“I strongly condemn the terror attack in Kashmir,” said Chuck Schumer, the senior senator from New York. “The United States stands with our friends in India and I send heartfelt condolences to the families that lost loved ones,” the top Democrat tweeted.

Senator Bob Menendez, Ranking Member of the powerful Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said he is “infuriated to hear about the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir, India,” noting it is “one of the deadliest in the region since 1989. I unequivocally condemn this brutal terrorist attack and am keeping the victims and their families in my prayers,” stated the New Jersey Democrat.

Senator Chris Coons avowed, “The United States stands with India following the brutal terror attack” in Jammu & Kashmir. “We must stand united in condemning and defeating terror around the globe,” said the Delaware Democrat adding, “My prayers are with the victims, families, and all affected by this heinous act.”

Offering “sincere condolences to the Indian people after the horrific terrorist attack” in Kashmir, Republican senator Marco Rubio of Florida stated, “The United States stands strong with India in the face of terrorism. We must work together to fight this evil.”

Making it abundantly clear that “terrorism has no place in our society,” Republican senator Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma called the Kashmir terror attack “devastating and deeply saddening. To the families and victims, we are praying for you,” he said.

Noting that “an act of terror in India killed at least 40 people,” Congressman Ted Deutch, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Middle East, North Africa and International Terrorism, said he strongly condemns “this hateful attack” and sends prayers to the victims and families.

Tulsi Gabbard (Democrat-Hawaii), the first Hindu elected to Congress, tweeted, “My thoughts and prayers are with the loved ones of the victims of the terrorist attack in Kashmir today. We must stand together to defeat these jihadists and their ideology.”

US lawmakers have, for long, realized there is no good or bad terrorism; what affects one, affects all in the civilized world.

Congressman George Holding of North Carolina underscored, “The United States stands with the good people of India and the Indian government in our collective effort to end violent extremism and terrorism.” The lawmaker who serves as the Republican co-chair of the House India Caucus said he strongly condemns “the heinous terror attacks in India” and sends “heartfelt prayers to all those impacted.”

Michael McCaul, the top Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, affirmed that the US is with India “and stands committed to eradicating terrorism wherever it exists.” The Texas lawmaker said, “I condemn this despicable attack in the strongest possible terms” and offered his “deepest condolences to people of India affected by this tragedy.”

Congressman Joe Kennedy made it clear, “Terror cannot be given cover in any corner of our world. As we pray for the families who lost loved ones in the Kashmir terror attack, we stand with India and condemn those responsible,” the Massachusetts Democrat said.

Congressman Brian Fitzpatrick stated, “We must all stand against terrorism in all of its forms, by all of its actors, all across the globe.” The Republican lawmaker who represents the 1st District in Pennsylvania said he strongly condemns the “terrorist attack in India” and sends “condolences to the victims and their families.”

Decrying “the senseless act of terror” in Pulwama, Republican Joe Wilson of South Carolina affirmed, “The United States will always stand alongside the people of India in the face of those that seek to destroy our way of life.” Democrat Joe Morelle of New York stated, “We must continue working to confront and defeat terror in every corner of the world.”

Denouncing the “terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir,” Republican Ted Yoho of Florida who serves on the House Foreign Affairs Committee avowed, “America stands with India in opposing all terror and defeating it. My condolences to the families of the victims,” he said.

Freshman lawmaker Abigail Spanberger who represents the 7th District in Virginia stated, “The attack against Indian security forces in Kashmir was a terrible act of violence. Our nation stands with the Indian people as they defend their communities against terror, and we fight terrorism worldwide,” the Democratic congresswoman said.

Expressing sadness for the “massive terrorist attack,” Congressman Al Green stated, “My prayers are with India and all Americans of Indian ancestry.” The Texas Democrat added, “I extend my deepest condolences to the families of the many victims senselessly murdered as a result of this tragedy and condemn all acts of terrorism.”

“Heartbreaking,” said Pramila Jayapal, the first Indian American woman elected to the House of Representatives, about the “heinous terrorist attacks in Jammu and Kashmir.” The Washington Democrat asserted, “We must confront terror and defeat it, wherever it occurs.”

Heartbreaking. My thoughts are with the families of the victims of heinous terrorist attacks in Jammu and Kashmir today. We must confront terror and defeat it, wherever it occurs. #KashmirTerrorAttackhttps://t.co/F80BDCRXId — Rep. Pramila Jayapal (@RepJayapal) February 14, 2019

Democrat Ami Bera of California, the longest-serving Indian American lawmaker in the House, tweeted, “My thoughts are with the victims and their families today. America stands with the Indian people and strongly condemns this senseless violence.”

Denouncing “the terrorist attack in Pulwama in the strongest terms,” Indian American legislator Raja Krishnamoorthi (Democrat-Illinois) said, “I send my heartfelt condolences to the victims of this attack and all those touched by it. We must all stand united against terrorism.”

I condemn the terrorist attack in Pulwama in the strongest terms, and I send my heartfelt condolences to the victims of this attack and all those touched by it. We must all stand united against terrorism. — Raja Krishnamoorthi (@CongressmanRaja) February 14, 2019

Congresswoman Grace Meng said she is “devastated by the terrorist attack on the CRPF convoy in India’s Jammu & Kashmir state.” The New York Democrat asserted, “I strongly condemn this brutal act of terrorism. My thoughts and prayers are with the families affected by this tragedy.”

Democratic congresswoman Brenda Lawrence, former Mayor of Southfield, Michigan, bemoaned, “This heinous terrorist attack on the Indian Central Reserve Police Force convoy in Jammu and Kashmir is a devastating tragedy and must be vehemently condemned. I extend my sincere condolences to the victims and their families and loved ones,” she said.

Strongly condemning “the cowardly terrorist attack in Pulwama,” Democrat Jan Schakowsky of Illinois pledged, “The United States stands shoulder to shoulder with our friends in India.”

Congressman Dan Crenshaw, retired Lieutenant Commander and former Navy SEAL, lamented, “Awful news coming out of India” about the Pulwama terrorist attack. “I pray for the families and loved ones of those who lost their lives,” said the Texas Republican underscoring, “We stand with them against all evil acts of terrorism.”

Congressman Don Bacon, a retired Air Force Brigadier General, tweeted, “Terrible news regarding the terror attack in India. As the oldest democracy in the world, we stand with our friends in the largest democracy in the world during this devastating time. We will keep the victims and their families in our prayers,” said the Nebraska Republican.

Democratic congressman Tom Suozzi who represents parts of Queens, Nassau and Suffolk counties in New York said he strongly condemns the terrorist attack in Jammu-Kashmir which he noted is “the deadliest strike on Indian soldiers in 30 years. The United States stands strongly with India and I send my condolences to the families of the victims,” said the lawmaker.

Congressman Paul Gosar lamented, “Our ally and friend, India, suffered a serious terrorist attack.” The Arizona Republican said, “All peace loving peoples condemn this violence and we give our prayers to the families of the victims. The US stands with you,” he vowed.
