World War 3 fears: Modi urged to ‘TAKE REVENGE’ on Pakistan for terror attack

INDIAN Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been urged to take “revenge” on Pakistan after a terror attack by militants in the disputed Kashmir region which claimed the lives of 44 paramilitary police, further ramping up tensions between the two nuclear-armed nations.

By CIARAN MCGRATH

Express.co.uk

Sun, Feb 17, 2019

And Mr Modi has given soldiers free rein to tackle cross-border insurgency, with Indian authorities detaining 23 people so far in connection with the killings, which occurred when a suicide bomber crashed a car laden with explosives into a convoy of lorries on Thursday. Indian television station NDTV said Mr Modi had spoken about the deaths of the officers, also known as japans, at an event in the Indian state of Bihar in the India’s north-east. Ram Vilas Paswan, whose Lok Janshakti Party (LJP) is allied with Mr Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party, said: “We will take revenge for each and every drop of blood shed in Pulwama.”

Bihar’s chief minister Nitish Kumar added: “After the killing of jawans, the entire nation is angry. Please don’t forgive them.

“The entire country is thinking the targeting of the jawans was an act of cowardice.”

Mr Modi himself said: “To the people who have gathered here, I would like to say the fire that is raging in your bosoms is in my heart too.”

Indian forces have detained 23 men suspected of links to the Pakistan-based militant group that masterminded the bombing of an Indian security convoy that killed 44 paramilitary police, a top police official said on Sunday.

The 23 men included members and sympathisers of Jaish-e-Mohammad, the militant group which has claimed responsibility for Thursday’s attack, the deadliest on Indian security forces in decades.

The attack has fuelled tensions between India and Pakistan – the two countries have twice come close to all-out war over Kashmir.

India has demanded Pakistan close down the Jaish and other Islamist militant groups that operate from its soil, while Islamabad has rejected suggestions it was linked to the attack.

Kashmir, a Muslim-majority region at the heart of decades of hostility, is claimed in its entirety by India and Pakistan, but is ruled in part by both south Asian countries.

The Rest…HERE
