In brief

PPCC pays tribute to the martyrs of Pulwama

Chandigarh: The state unit of Congress paid a rich tribute to four brave soldiers of Punjab who were martyred in the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir at Pulwama on February 14. The Punjab Pradesh Congress Committee President, Sunil Jakhar presented floral tributes to the martyrs at Punjab Congress Bhawan, here and said that the entire nation is bowing down to the martyrdom of such soldiers who were sacrificed their lives for the security of the country. He said that the sacrifice of these soldiers would not be in vain. Four soldiers of Punjab had martyred in the terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir, including Jaimal Singh of Moga district, Kulwinder Singh of Rupnagar district, Sukhjinder Singh of Tarntaran district and Maninder Singh of Gurdaspur district.

HP to constitute committee

Shimla: A committee would be constituted for better coordination between different departments of Himachal to ensure effective framing and implementation of various Skill development programmes. This was decided in the meeting 5th meeting of the Board of Directors of the Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam under Chief Minister Jai Ram Thakur. He said, as many as 65000 youth were to the skilled under the HP Skill Development Project between 2018-2023 while 2880 youth were to be trained by providing Training in Vocational Streams.

16 proposals approved

Shimla: As many as 16 proposals for setting up new industrial units and for expansion of existing units involving a total proposed investment of around Rs 309.45 crore and employment potential of about 1000 persons has been approved in Himachal. The projects were approved during the 6th meeting of the State Single Window Clearance & Monitoring Authority (SSWC&MA) held under Chief Minister Jai Ram Thakur.

Mission Green India unveiled

Chandigarh: With an aim to protect, enhance and reinstate India’s green cover by planting 10 crore trees across the nation, a Haryana based environmental organisation- Swachh Parayavran Trust has unveiled an initiative - 'Mission Green India'. Manjeet Singh,

Managing Trustee, Swachh Parayavran Trust also made an announcement of Vishwa Yagya Mahotsav, world’s first and largest 1,08,000 (one lakh eight thousand) Kundi Yagya to be organized in February 2020 after completing the green yatra(Mission Green India) movement. We will plant more than 10 crore saplings throughout this year by travelling across 108 cities of our country spanning from Kashmir to Kanyakumari and Kutch to Kohima, he said.

ICCC kicks off its India Mission 2019

Chandigarh: Indo-Canada Chamber of Commerce (ICCC) under the leadership of its President Pramod Goyal, launched its six-state ‘India Mission 2019’ from Chandigarh Delegation met Chief Ministers of Punjab and Haryana with the commencement of their ten days business engagements in focus on multiple sectors that imperative to bilateral trade between two nations. Pramod Goyal, President, ICCC said, “Business Mission will be visiting New Delhi, Chennai, Panaji and Hyderabad with a focus on key sectors.”

Paras Bliss Hosp celebrates third anniv

Panchkula: Paras Bliss Hospital celebrates its third anniversary amidst much fanfare with mothers and their kids at the hospital campus at MDC here. The remarkable feature of three-hour long event was the ramp walk by grandmothers which was applauded by all.

Dr. Yogesh Sharma, Civil Surgeon, Panchkula was the Chief guest on the occasion who appreciate the role of hospital in society.

The hospital is offering Rs 21,000 and Rs 5,000 discount on delivery and vacation package respectively as part of anniversary offer.
