Widespread condemnation of Fidayeen attack on CRPF jawans continues - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

People take out peace marches, candle light processions across Jammu

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Feb 17: Showing anger against the horrific terror attack on CRPF Jawans in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday, the wide spread protests and condemnation of this barbaric act continued on third consecutive day today with people from all walks of life taking out protest marches and candle light processions across Jammu region.

Showing anger against the horrific attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama, BJP Rajouri leaders staged a massive anti-Pakistan demonstration and protest in Rajouri town.

During the demonstration people expressed their anguish and pain over terrorist attack. There was also outrage for IED blast in Nowshera in which one young Major sacrificed his life.

While addressing the gathering senior BJP leader and MLC, Vibodh Gupta lodged his protest against Pakistan and said that soon the “terrorist’s nation” will be wiped out from the map of the world as it has been already isolated from other countries. He said that in support of India many powerful nations such as US, Saudi crown, Iran and many others also lodged protest against Pakistan.”

He further said that military be given full freedom and “Bure din” for Pakistan has ushered in as army has vowed to avenge their brother’s sacrifices. “During the hours of pain the entire nation stands by Indian Army”, he added.

MLC strongly asserted that the sacrifice of Indian soldiers will not go in vain and befitting response will be delivered to Pakistan and their friends in Kashmir. MLC also appreciated Prime Minister, Narendra Modi Government’s crackdown on Hurriyat leaders and its decision to withdraw security from them. He further said that the scrapping of Pakistan’s most favoured nation status will impact its economy at large.

BJP activists led by MLC, Pardeep Sharma today paid floral tributes to 44 CRPF martyrs of Pulwama terror attack at Poonch.

A ‘Shradanjali Samaroh’ was organised by the district unit of the BJP at Shaheed DySP Manjit Singh Park near Bus Stand, Poonch. A large number of BJP functionaries and women activists paid their rich tributes to the martyrs and prayed for the peace to the departed souls.

Pardeep Sharma, while speaking on the occasion appealed to the Prime Minister, Narendra Modi to take stern action against Pakistan including direct war, if it is necessary for permanent peace in the region and take back the entire occupied area of the Jammu and Kashmir.

A candle light procession was also taken out in Sainik Colony by the ex-servicemen and their families. Many people irrespective of their party affiliations paid tributes to the 44 martyred CRPF personnel of Pulwama terror attack, at Babbar Chowk Sector 69 and then took out candle light march in sector 69 and 70. Both the Corporators were leading besides noted social activists, Ravi Bakshi and Sanjeev Manmotra.

Team Jammu led by Zorawar Singh Jamwal took out a protest march against the Fidayeen attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama on Thursday and demanded stern action against the terrorists and separatists. Jamwal, while paying rich tributes to martyrs said their sacrifice will not go to waste and it will serve as last nail in the coffin of terrorism.

He also welcomed the withdrawal of security to separatists and demanded that they be also put behind the bars and taught a lesson.

Protest demonstrations against Pakistan and terrorism continued for third consecutive day in Kathua with people from all walks of life taking protest rallies and peace marches. A protest march against the Pakistan was taken out by local youth in Mukherjee Chowk, Kathua who also burnt the effigy of Pakistan -the mother of world terrorism. They, while raising slogans against the Pakistan and terrorism strongly condemned the Fidayeen attack on CRPF convoy in which 44 soldiers attained martyrdom. The protest was led by Ajay Kumar a local youth.

The BJP Kathua Unit led by district president, Prem Nath Dogra organized a peace Sabha at Main Chowk Kathua and paid rich tributes to CRPF martyrs and observed two minutes silence in their memory. A large number of mourners attended the peace Sabha including women and youth. Former Minister, Rajeev Jasrotia, while paying tributes to martyrs said such acts will not be tolerated as people of entire nation are united against the terrorism.

President and general secretary, Akhil Bharatiya Gujjar Maha Sabha Sardar Khan and Anam Choudhary have strongly condemned the Fidayeen attack on CRPF convoy in which 44 brave hearts attained the martyrdom in Pulwama district of Kashmir Valley on Thursday.

Hundreds of people drawn from Poonch and Rajouri districts participated in the condolence meeting held at Gujjar Desh Charitable Trust here and paid rich tributes to martyrs.

Khan and Choudhary, while paying tributes to martyrs and condemning this dastardly act said one of their relatives from Rajouri also attained supreme sacrifice in the attack. They, while appealing people to get united to wage a war against terrorism said terrorists have no religion and they are enemies of entire humanity. They said their heart bleeds for the martyrs who belonged to different parts of the country and expressed their deepest sympathies with the family members of martyrs saying entire nation is solidly behind them.

Welfare Committee K B Nagar, Bantalab, Jammu president, Girdhari Lal Bhat has strongly condemned the terrorist attack on CRPF convoy and demanded decisive action against the culprits involved in such a heinous act.

Jammu Welfare Society, Guru Nanak Nagar, Jammu held a candle march to pay homage to the CRPF martyrs who laid down their lives during a Fidayeen attack on Thursday at Pulwama and strongly condemned the terrorist act.

The Society, while cautioning the people of anti social elements asked them to maintain age old peace and brotherhood.

Non Gazetted Police Pensioners Welfare Forum in its meeting here, today has strongly condemned the brutal attack by Fidayeen on CRPF personnel in Pulwama on February 14. The Forum expressed its deepest solidarity with the families of martyrs in this difficult hour of shock and grief. Chairman of the Forum Ajit Singh said the sacrifices of the jawans will not go waste and their martyrdom will make the nation more stronger.

A candle march was taken out by the members of Dogra community here, today under the leadership of MLC Ramesh Arora which culminated at Dogra Samrak near Ved Mandir.

On the occasion, the participants took a solemn pledge to continue mass awakening till Government of India responds in an effective manner over Pulwama incident in which 44 CRPF personnel attained martyrdom.

All J&K Ex-Central Para Military Force Welfare and Rehabilitation Association held meeting at Bawa Palace, here under the presidentship of R L Dogra in which the terrorist attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama was strongly condemned. The meeting demanded immediate action against the terrorists responsible for the attack.

All J&K Shri Guru Ravi Dass Sabha held a condolence meeting under the presidentship of Piranditta in which brutal attack on CRPF personnel was strongly condemned. The meeting said that 44 CRPF personnel attained martyrdom in the attack which is an irreparable loss to the nation.

Shiv Sena Hindustan (SSH) took out a candle light procession to pay homage to CRPF martyrs and strongly condemned the terrorists’ savagy act under the leadership of its president Vipan Hindu. The Sena also welcomed the withdrawal of security to separatist leaders.

Residents of Northern Height Apartments and Lower Thathar area took out a candle light march for expressing solidarity with the security forces and peace to the CRPF martyrs. A number of Muslim families from Kashmir Valley, temporarily staying in the quarters here, also joined the candle light march, which took off from the Lower Thathar and concluded at the Ban Talab Main road amidst raising of patriotic slogans.

A similar candle light march was taken out by the residents of Chatha, under the banner of Jammu Adhikar Morcha, led by social activist Shashi Kant Khajuria. The march passed through different areas of the locality and concluded with paying tributes to the CRPF martyrs. A two-minute silence was also observed for peace to the CRPF martyrs.

Sangram Sena has strongly condemned the Pulwama terror attack and expressed its grief over the martyrdom of CRPF men. A meeting of the Sangram Sena was held under the chairmanship of its president R K Raina who said that the entire nation was with the security forces and Government of India for giving Pakistan a befitting reply to avenge the terror attack.

Akhil Bhartiya Bharash-tachar Nirmulan Sangharsh Samiti (ABBNSS) has strongly condemned the terror attack on the CRPF convoy in which 44 cops were martyred and dozens injured. In a statement, R.C Sharma, State president ABBNSS has condemned the Pakistan sponsored terrorist attack and urged the Government to give a befitting reply to Pakistan.

Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP) and Rashtriya Bajrang Dal (RBD) J&K has strongly condemned the cowardly act of terrorists in which dozens of CRPF personnel attained martyrdom and several of them were critically injured. The AHP and RBD held heartfelt condolences and paid rich tributes to the martyrs. The leaders of the two organizations demanded stern action against the terrorists and separatists.

Devinder Seth president Vishal Khatri Sabha has strongly condemned the brutal act of terrorists on CRPF convoy and demanded stern action be taken against the terrorism and Pakistan so that they will not dare to raise the ugly head again.
