Jaipur: Unidentified men open fire at house on Tonk Road area

Unidentified men opened fire at the house of a financer from Tonk Road area of Sanganer late on Saturday night. The miscreants fired thrice at the house and fled from the spot. The incident was caught in the CCTV installed outside the house and the information was provided to the police after which teams including senior officials rushed to the spot and recovered two spent bullets. A case in the matter has been registered and cops suspect the firing could have been done due to some financial issue between the man and his partner.

The case in the matter has been registered by one Chandramohan Badaya, a resident of Surya Nagar under Taaro Ki Koot at Tonk Road under Sanganer police station area. “In the matter, the man has said that on Saturday night, Chandramohan and his family members were sleeping in the house and around 10.30 PM, two men on a bike reached the spot. They surveyed the area and then came to a halt outside Badaya’s house. After halting, the unidentified man, seated as pillion on the bike, pulled out a gun and fired thrice at the house and immediately after firing, the men fled the spot,” officials said.

The firing woke up the family members and locals who came out of the house to find out the reason for the loud noises. “Not able to find anything, Badaya looked into the CCTV and then it was found that the men had opened fire. The cops were then contacted and the footage was shown to them. It came to light that Chandramohan was in a financial spat with one Pradeep who has registered cases against Chandramohan in Vidhyadhar Nagar and Kotwali police stations of the city. Allegedly, the man has been getting threats by men who regularly come at his office. It has also been alleged that a sitting MLA had called upon the complainant’s father’s phone and asked them to meet, failing which a threat was allegedly given and late at night the incident occurred. A case has been registered and the matter is being investigated,” officials said.

LOCALS RUSH AFTER INCIDENT
