Iran, India Boost Cooperation on fighting terrorism

SHAFAQNA– Iran and India pledged to forge close cooperation to combat terrorism in the region. Indian Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj had a short stopover in Tehran on Saturday, days after both countries lost soldiers in terror attack.

During the short visit, the Indian foreign minister sat for talks with Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs, Seyyed Abbas Araqchi, as the Iranian top diplomat Mohammad Javad Zarif was in Germany to attend the Munich Security Conference.

The Indian top diplomat also reaffirmed her government’s non-abidance by the unilateral sanctions against Iran, Mehr News Agency reported.

The two officials condemned the recent terrorist attacks in Iran’s Sistan and Baluchestan and India’s Srinagar, and offered sympathy to each other.

They also underlined the necessity of establishing peace and calm in the region through dialogue.

Iran & India suffered from two heinous terrorist attacks in the past few days resulted in big casualties. Today in my meeting with Sushma Swaraj the Indian FM, when she had a stopover in Tehran, we agreed on close cooperation to combat terrorism in the region. Enough is enough! pic.twitter.com/uvwlx45pZ6 — Seyed Abbas Araghchi (@araghchi) February 16, 2019

Both India and Iran have warned of strong responses to the attacks, which they blame on militant networks based in Pakistan.

Forty-four members of India’s paramilitary police were killed in a suicide car bomb attack in the disputed region of Kashmir on Thursday.

The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) claimed responsibility for the attack, which was carried out by a 22-year-old man who was born in Indian Kashmir.

India has long accused Pakistan of sponsoring terrorist attacks by Jaish-e-Mohammed and other militant groups, with Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) suspected with helping create the group.

On Saturday, Iran echoed India’s complaints, blaming Pakistan-based militants for the deaths of 27 IRGC border guards in a suicide bombing near the Iranian-Pakistani border earlier this week.

The Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish al-Adl claimed responsibility for the attack.

The perpetrators of the recent deadly terrorist attack in Iran had been trained in neighboring Pakistan, said Major General Yahya Rahim Safavi on Saturday, adding that Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) should be held accountable for the deadly attack.

“Our neighbouring country (Afghanistan) and the ISI should be answerable to the Iranian government and nation as well as the IRGC regarding how they (the terrorists) crossed the country’s border, and why this neighboring country has turned into a safe haven and a place for training and dispatching these unfaithful terrorist groups,” said the top general, ifpnews reported.
