Morning Digest: Arrests across country for 'pro-Pak.' social media posts, threatened Kashmiri students return to Valley, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

Apprehending physical and verbal attacks from frenzied groups in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, around 100 Jammu and Kashmir students from various colleges across north India, mostly from Dehradun in Uttarakhand, have returned to the Valley.

The police control room in J&K received 50 distress calls in the past two days.

Samajwadi Party president and former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav talks about the State’s politics, his party’s tie-up with the BSP, and the wider Opposition unity in the run-up to the Lok Sabha election.

The teacher from Kadabi Shivapur village near Saundatti was arrested on Saturday after someone noticed her posts on WhatsApp and informed the police. Three hours later, as news spread, some miscreants tried to set fire to her house. “We came to know about the posts around five in the evening. Within an hour the woman was traced and arrested. The accused has been booked under Sections 124 and 124A of the IPC,” Sudheer Kumar Reddy, Superintendent of Police, said.

On the foggy winter afternoon of February 3, a phone call from a local resident, saying “..an injured blackbuck, apparently attacked by stray dogs, is lying on a farm in Sardarpur village...” was enough to send a team of forest and wildlife personnel into rescue mode. They quickly rushed to the spot in the Abohar Wildlife Sanctuary (AWS) in a bid to save the blackbuck.

Minerva Punjab’s refusal to travel to Srinagar for Monday’s I-League match against Real Kashmir has triggered a row, leaving the AIFF in a quandary. Minerva’s decision means Kashmir is set to be awarded a 3-0 victory — a result with huge consequences in a title race that is going to the wire.

The Rajasthan police booked four women paramedical students of Kashmiri origin under sedition charges for allegedly posting on social media pictures of their purported celebration of the Pulwama terror attack. An FIR was registered at Jaipur district’s Chandwaji police station based on a complaint lodged by authorities of the National Institute of Medical Sciences, a private university where the students are studying.

The 15th Finance Commission will not alter its approach on solely using the 2011 Census for population figures in its calculations for allocations to States, Chairman N.K. Singh said in an interview. However, he added that other measures would be included that would ensure that States that have performed well by controlling population growth would not be penalised.

The Uttar Pradesh police have arrested at least four persons in different districts for posting allegedly objectionable remarks on social media on the Pulwama suicide attack. A youth identified as Mohammad Osama was arrested in Mau for allegedly justifying the Pulwama attack, the police said.

Scientists have discovered massive mountains in the Earth’s mantle, an advance that may change our understanding of how the planet was formed. Most school children learn that the Earth has three layers: a crust, mantle and core, which is subdivided into an inner and outer core.

India cannot achieve its strategic objectives if Kashmiris remain targets of harassment, and minorities are vilified.
