Pulwama attack: UK Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn rakes up Kashmir in condolence tweet, gets schooled

Leader of the Labour Party in the UK Jeremy Corbyn is having a tough time on Twitter after he posted a controversial tweet on the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14.

In a tweet, Jeremy Corbyn said: "I'm alarmed by the violence that killed 44 people in Kashmir. @UKLabour sends condolences to families who lost loved ones. We stand with the people of Kashmir and in government we will work towards negotiations and a political resolution."

The second part of his tweet has made Twitterati furious. Soon after he tweeted on the Pulwama attack, netizens slammed him for saying "the people of Kashmir" instead of people of India.

People, not just from India, schooled Jeremy Corbyn that Kashmir has been an integral part of India.

Arsen Ostrovsky, an international lawyer and analyst hit out at Corbyn and said: "The people that were killed were Indian. The perpetrators were terrorists from Pakistan. You just can't get anything right, you toothless, morally deprived, Islamist sympathizer!"

A Twitter user who goes by the name TrueNorth blamed the UK for the crisis in Kashmir. He said:

"UK is directly responsible for any bloodshed in Kashmir. You should have been ashamed of UK's role in leaving a permanently bleeding wound in the [Indian] Subcontinent."

Another Twitter user, Hypocrisy_Exposer, asked Corbyn: "Do you even know that the first step in resolution is the vacation of PoK by Pakistan? Do that and then talk."

A Twitter user who identifies herself as Lavanya said: "It wasn't the people of Kashmir that were killed, Corbyn, you anti-Semite. It was a Kashmiri suicide bomber that blew into smithereens 44 people of India, from all over India, you addlepated clod poll."

ALSO READ | J&K: Army Major among 4 soldiers killed in Pulwama encounter today

ALSO READ | Pulwama Attack 2019, everything about J&K terror attack on CRPF by terrorist Adil Ahmed Dar, Jaish-e-Mohammad

ALSO READ | Pulwama suicide bomber's father says not rejoicing CRPF deaths even as visitors congratulate him

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: In last 5 years, J&K saw 93% rise in death of security personnel in terror attacks

ALSO WATCH | 4 soldiers killed in Pulwama encounter
