CBI eyes charges against Akhilesh Yadav in illegal mining scam

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has indicated that it will investigate the role of former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, Akhilesh Yadav in the illegal mining scam.

Former Mines Minister in the Samajwadi Party government, Gayatri Prajapati’s role is already under the CBI scanner.

A CBI official said, “Akhilesh Yadav held the post of Uttar Pradesh Mines Minister for almost a year from 2012 to 2013 before handing over charge to Prajapati. His role in the illegal mining case too comes under the scope of investigation.”

The CBI is currently investigating instances of illegal mining of minor minerals from 2012 to 2016 in Uttar Pradesh at the directives of the Allahabad High Court.

“The scope of investigation includes giving permits of excavate minor minerals, theft of minor minerals, extorting money from mining lease holders and extorting money from truck drivers of vehicles transporting minor minerals,” the CBI official said.

In line with the ongoing investigation, the CBI registered a First Information Report (FIR) against 11 individuals, including public servants on January 2 for their role in facilitating illegal mining of minor minerals in Hamirpur District of Uttar Pradesh. The investigative agency had conducted search and seizure operations in 14 locations in connection with the same.

UP cadre Indian Administrative Services officer of the 2008 batch, B Chandrakala has been named in the FIR lodged by the CBI. A CBI official said that they have seized property documents, one locker, jewellery and two bank accounts during raids at her Lucknow and Noida residences. Chandrakala was the District Magistrate of Hamirpur between 2012 and 2016. She is directly accused of not following the e-tendering process for award of mining leases.

The CBI said that it has also conducted raids at the residences of Samajwadi Party leader Ramesh Kumar Mishra and his brother Dinesh Kumar Mishra in Kanpur. Ramesh Kumar Mishra is a Member of the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Council.

Raids were also conducted on Bahujan Samaj Party leader Sanjay Dikshit’s house. Dikshit contested the 2017 UP assembly elections but lost. His father, Satyadev Dikshit has also been named in the FIR.
