Pulwama encounter: CRPF convoy attack mastermind Ghazi Rasheed killed

The mastermind of the horrific terror attack in Pulwama has finally been eliminated by the security forces in a fresh encounter.

Kamran alias Ghazi Rasheed was the mastermind of the Pulwama terror attack which took place on February 14. He was cornered by security forces along with two more terrorists in an encounter that started in the wee hours of Monday.

A joint team of Indian Army's 55 Rashtriya Rifles, CRPF and Special Operation Group launched a cordon in the wee hours on Monday.

A police officer told India Today TV that the cordon was laid in the area following credible inputs about the presence of some militants.

Pulwama encounter LIVE: Two JeM terrorists killed, 4 Army men martyred

India turned on the heat on Pakistan soon after the Pulwama terror attack on February 14. Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the attack.

India has already begun efforts to isolate Pakistan on the international level. India will urge the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) an international monetary watchdog, to blacklist Pakistan. The FATF has already included Pakistan in its 'grey list'. Blacklisting may spell fresh trouble for Pakistan's dwindling economy.

Pakistan on Sunday denied its role in the Pulwama terror attack, saying that accusations were India's tactics to put the blame on the neighbours for its security and intelligence failures. Pakistan also said that the accusations were consistent with "well-rehearsed tactics from Indian playbook after such previous incidents".

"These knee-jerk and pre-conceived accusations were rejected also because they were made within a short time after the attack and without any investigations," Mohammad Faisal, spokesperson of Ministry of Foreign Affairs Pakistan, tweeted on Sunday.

40 CRPF jawans lost their lives in Pulwama terror attack on February 14. Adil Ahmad Dar, a militant belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammad, rammed his explosive-filled car on a bus in CRPF convoy.

(The earlier version of the story had a picture of Ghazi Abdul Rasheed which was found to be photo-shopped. We have removed that picture.)
