Pulwama terror attack Highlights | DIG wounded in abdomen during gunbattle; 3rd terrorist killed

‘An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth’: Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Monday called for coercive action against Pakistan, which, he suggested, could be military, diplomatic or economic, or a combination of all the three.

“We should get 82 of them since 41 of our men have been killed,” the chief minister asserted, demanding an “eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth”.

According to an official release, He said it was for the Centre to decide what action should be taken, but it was clear that some measures have to be taken urgently.

Third terrorist killed

A third Jaish terrorist was killed in the Pulwama encounter.

Operation ends in Pulwama

Operation in Pulwama has ended. A total of four army personnel including a Major, one policeman and a civilian were killed and five others were injured in the gun battle.

Lieutenant colonel, Captain injured in Pulwama encounter

Lieutenant colonel, Captain, injured in the Pulwama encounter, are being provided medical care, reports ANI.

MNS asks private FM channels not to play songs of Pakistani artists

The Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) Monday asked private FM channels in Mumbai not to play songs of Pakistani artists in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack.

A leader of the Raj Thackeray-led party also asked international apparel brands not to sell clothes made in Pakistan

Just one slap from army man rattled Maulana Masood Azhar, says his interrogator

Former police officer who interrogated Maulana Masood Azhar after his arrest in 1994 says he was an “easy man” to handle in custody and he got shaken up on the first “slap” from an army jawan prompting him to blurt out details of his movements.

“He was an easy man to handle and a slap from an army officer had shaken him completely,” former Director General of Sikkim Police Avinash Mohananey, who interrogated Azhar many a times during his two-decade tenure in the Intelligence Bureau, told PTI.

DIG receives gunshot wound in abdomen during the encounter

DIG (south Kashmir) Amit Kumar, received a gunshot wound in the abdomen, and a brigade commander was hurt in the leg, reports PTI.

Why did govt not act on inputs from intelligence agencies: Mamata Banerjee

Mamata Banerjee on #PulwamaAttack:The Govt had inputs from intelligence agencies on Feb 8 that such attacks might happen before elections. Why no action was taken? Why 78 convoys were still allowed?...I also have intelligence reports that my phone is always taped, as you all know pic.twitter.com/KulUn9oUNe — ANI (@ANI) February 18, 2019

Pakistan isolated globally after Pulwama terror attack: VK Singh

Union Minister of State for External Affairs General VK Singh Monday said Pakistan has been isolated internationally after the Pulwama terror attack. Speaking to mediapersons here, the minister said more than 40 countries have issued strong statements against Pakistan.

This is a big success of our external and diplomatic policy as the number of countries supporting India’s stand is higher than the number of countries which had supported India after 26/11 attack in Mumbai, he added.

Another senior officer injured

During the ongoing encounter in Pulwama, another senior officer has been injured. Early today four army men and a civilian were killed in the encounter.

Will not play with Pakistan unless government gives nod: IPL chairman

Our position and policy are very clear. Unless the government gives a nod we will not play with Pakistan, said IPL chairman Rajiv Shukla, according to news agency ANI.

CIL subsidiaries to donate Rs 1.75 cr to CRPF jawan’s family

Two subsidiaries of Coal India Limited - Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) and Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL) - have decided to donate Rs 1.75 crore to martyred CRPF jawan Vijay Soreng’s family, an official release said Monday.

Vijay Soreng was a resident of Pharsma village in Jharkhand’s Gumla district and he was among the 40 CRPF personnel killed in Pulwama terror attack on February 14.

Who released those involved in 1999 Kandahar incident, asks Sidhu

“I am firm on my stand. Terrorism shouldn’t be tolerated. I want to ask who released those involved in 1999 Kandahar incident? Who’s responsibility is it? Our fight is against them.Why should a soldier die? Why can’t there be a permanent solution?” said Navjot Singh Sidhu.

#WATCH Navjot Singh Sidhu says,"I am firm on my stand. Terrorism shouldn't be tolerated. I want to ask who released those involved in 1999 Kandahar incident? Who's responsibility is it? Our fight is against them.Why should a soldier die? Why can't there be a permanent solution?" pic.twitter.com/7Oe73dVqP5 — ANI (@ANI) February 18, 2019

‘Total Dhamaal’ team donates Rs 50 lakh for Pulwama martyrs’ kin

The team of “Total Dhamaal” has donated Rs 50 lakh to the families of the CRPF personnel who were killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

“In the light of the recent attacks, the makers and the actors got together to help out the families of the Pulwama martyrs. It is a sad thing to see the Indian soldiers suffer through this event and the team was keen on doing their bit to support them,” a spokesperson of the film unit said in a statement.

Time for talks over, need to act now: PM Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said Monday the Pulwama terrorist attack has showed that the time to talk about tackling terror is over and the world is now required to unitedly take concrete action against terrorism and those behind its spread.

After talks with Argentine President Mauricio Macri, Modi said dithering to take action against terrorists and their supporters will be like encouraging terrorism.

In his comments, Macri called for united action to deal with terrorism.

Curfew relaxed in some areas of Jammu

Curfew has been relaxed in Jammu between 2 pm to 5 pm at locations in South Jammu, however, there is no relaxation has been given in Digiana, Balicharana and a few other areas, said deputy commissioner Jammu Ramesh Kumar, according to news agency ANI.

Pakistan on high operational alert: ANI quoting army sources

Pakistan Army positions across the border on the LoC are seeing heightened activities as they are on high operational alert, reported news agency ANI quoting army sources.

Jaish terrorist have moved from hideouts to populated areas: ANI

Army is constantly briefing the defence minister and other senior government functionaries on the developments in Kashmir. Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists have moved from their hideouts to locations near populated areas fearing retaliation from security forces reported news agency ANI, quoting army sources.

Punjab Budget session heats up as Akalis protest against Sidhu

Angry scenes were witnessed in the Punjab Assembly in a war of words between state cabinet Minister Navjot Singh Sidhu and opposition Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLAs, especially Bikram Singh Majithia, which forced adjournment before the budget could be presented in the House here on Monday.

Sidhu and Majithia could be seen gesturing angrily at each other and calling each other names like “chor” (thief), “daku” (dacoit), “deshdrohi”, “badmash” (miscreant) and “chitta” (white powder drug) trader, forcing Speaker Rana K.P. Singh to adjourn the session amid Finance Minister Manpreet Singh Badal’s speech.

Personal attacks flew across the benches between Sidhu and Majithia. The SAD MLAs also wore black ribbons on their arms.

All India Cine Workers Association bans Pakistani actors

All India Cine Workers Association has announced a total ban on Pakistani actors and artists working in the Indian film industry.

All India Cine Workers Association announce a total ban on Pakistani actors and artists working in the film industry. #PulwamaAttack pic.twitter.com/QpSMUg9r8b — ANI (@ANI) February 18, 2019

Jaish commander killed

Jaish commander Kamran, suspected to be the bomb maker and mastermind of Thursday’s attack in Pulwama, has been killed in encounter with security forces, says police.

Till when will mourning period keep getting extended: Akhilesh Yadav

“Till when will the 3 day period of mourning keep getting extended?

Everyday we get news of the brave martyrdom of our jawans while smiling BJP politicians accompany their funeral processions. Why is the govt waiting and watching?” tweeted SP chief Akhilsh Yadav.

Akali leaders burn photos of Sidhu’s Pak visit

The Opposition Shiromani Akali Dal Monday sought dismissal of Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu for his “utterances” in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack even as Akali leader Bikram Singh Majithia and the cricketer-turned-politician exchanged barbs in the House.

Before the start of the Punjab Budget session, Akali leaders led by Majithia burnt the photographs of Sidhu including those in which he is seen hugging the Pakistan Army chief, outside the House.

Congress condoles death of 4 soldiers

“We condole the death of the four soldiers who lost their lives earlier today in a terrorist encounter and Major Chitresh Singh Bisht who lost his life yesterday while defusing an IED. We pray for the strength of their families & stand with them in this difficult time,” tweeted Congress.

Pakistan calls back High Commissioner in India for ‘consultations’

Pakistan has called back its High Commissioner from India for “consultations” amid heightened bilateral tensions after the Pulwama terror attack, officials here said Monday.

Pakistan High Commissioner to India Sohail Mahmood was on Friday summoned in New Delhi by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale who lodged strong protest over the killing of 40 CRPF soldiers in Pulwama.

“We have called back our High Commissioner in India for consultations. He left New Delhi this morning,” tweeted Dr Mohammad Faisal, Spokesperson Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

We have called back our HIgh Commissioner in India for consultations.

He left New Delhi this morning . — Dr Mohammad Faisal (@ForeignOfficePk) February 18, 2019

Search operation begins in Krawora village of Shopian

A cordon and search operation by security forces has started in the village Krawora of Jammu and Kashmir’s Shopian Monday, reported news agency ANI.

AK-47, pistol recovered

An AK-47 and a pistol have been recovered as the search operation continues in Pulwama, reported news agency ANI.

Leave site of Pulwama encounter: Police to locals

Police in Pulwama has appealed to locals to leave the site of the encounter underway in Pingilana village, reported news agency ANI.

#WATCH Police in #Pulwama appeals to locals to leave the site of Pulwama encounter. Four 55 Rashtriya Rifles personnel have lost their lives & one injured and two terrorists neutralised in the ongoing operation. (Visuals deferred by unspecified time) #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/q2X13OitXX — ANI (@ANI) February 18, 2019

2 suspected Jaish operatives killed

Two suspected Jaish operatives have been killed in the ongoing gunfight between militants and security forces in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, said Army spokesman Rajesh Kalia. The police is yet to ascertain the identity of the militants killed.

Navjot Singh Sidhu ‘reminds’ BJP of Kandahar

Getting flak for his comments in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack, Punjab minister for local bodies and tourism Navjot Singh Sidhu on Sunday hit out at the BJP by reminding it of the release of Jaish-eMohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar 20 years ago during the Kandahar standoff in 1999. The minister also sought exemplary action against those behind terrorist activities.

“Those who are branding me as anti-national should tell the people as to who had handed him (Massod) over to Pakistan. What they (BJP) had been doing all these years to get at him”, he asked.

He said his statement had been distorted by people with vested interests. “Nationalism is the highest religion and I stand by my nation”, he said. “I echo the sentiments of my country. India’s voice is my voice and I strongly stand by my party’s stand”, he added.

Cross-LoC bus service from Poonch to Rawalkot suspended

The cross-LoC bus service from Poonch in Jammu and Kashmir to Rawalakot in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir has been suspended for today, reported news agency ANI.

Blast in house where 3 trapped in Pulwama encounter were hiding

The house where three including a Jaish commander were hiding blasted during the ongoing encounter in Pulwama.

Civilian killed

Along with four army personnel, a civilian was killed on Monday in the ongoing encounter between militants and security forces in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama

Jaish commander among 3 trapped

Three militants, including Jaish commander is trapped in the ongoing encounter with security forces in Pulwama.

Was asked to leave city: Kashmiri doctor in West Bengal

A Kashmiri doctor, who has been living in Kolkata for 22 years, has claimed that he has been asked to leave the city or face “dire consequences” following the Pulwama terror strike that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF men.

The doctor, however, has decided to stay put after the West Bengal government came to his rescue.

The doctor, who did not wish to be named, said he was heckled but he had not paid much heed to the threats he had received initially. However, his concern grew when some men gathered outside his residence and threatened to harm his daughter unless he “returned to Pakistan”.

On February 15, a day after the Pulwama attack, five men aged between 20 and 25 years came to his house after he returned home from his chamber, the doctor said, adding that they asked him to leave the city immediately and “go back to Pakistan as Kashmiris have no place in this country”.

Heavy firing in Pulwama’s Pinglina village

Heavy firing between militants and security forces is going on in Pulwama’s Pinglina village. Announcements have been made advising locals to stay indoors.

Jaish-e-Mohammed commander linked to Pulwama attack trapped in encounter: ANI

A top Jaish-e-Mohammed commander linked to Pulwama attack is believed to be trapped in the ongoing encounter with security forces in Pulwama, reported news agency ANI quoting sources.

BJP ally LJP shoots off letter to PM

Moved by the Pulwama terror attack, the Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), an ally of the ruling BJP at the Centre, has urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to strike at the roots of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism.

In a letter written to Modi, LJP parliamentary board chairman Chirag Paswan pleaded that the drive against terrorism “must not be halted this time, until a single terrorist was alive”.

“Under your able leadership, the country has made all-round progress in the last five years. This has unsettled Pakistan. The neighbouring country has sponsored many cowardly acts so far, but the latest incident has left the nation, especially the youth, enraged,” Paswan said in the letter, copies of which were shared with the media here late Sunday night.

Major among 4 army men of 55 Rashtriya Rifles killed in encounter

4 Indian Army personnel of 55 Rashtriya Rifles, who lost their lives in encounter with terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on Monday have been identified as Major VS Dhoundiyal, Havaldar Sheo Ram, Sepoy Ajay Kumar and Sepoy Hari Singh, reported news agency ANI.

Curfew in Jammu enters day 4

The curfew in Jammu continued on Monday for the fourth consecutive day with authorities likely to take a decision on its relaxation later.

“The curfew that was imposed on February 15 in Jammu city will continue today,” the police said.

“A decision on its relaxation will be taken later in the day.”

The police said that no untoward incident occurred anywhere in the city on Sunday night.

The curfew was imposed after miscreants torched vehicles and damaged several others carrying number plates of the Kashmir Valley in protest against the February 14 terror attack in Pulwama that killed 49 CRPF troopers.

4 army men killed in encounter in J-K

Four soldiers, including an officer, were killed in an encounter with militants in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on Monday, defence sources said.

Security forces launched a cordon and search operation in Pinglan area of Pulwama district of south Kashmir during the night after receiving inputs about the presence of militants in the area, a police official said.
