2019 Hyundai Grand i10 spotted again, Could launch in Q4 2019

Update 2: New spy shots of the 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 have surfaced online, courtesy Overdrive. Clicked in Chennai, one of the new spy shots give a look at the interior too. Image gallery at the end of the story updated with the new spy shots.

18 February 2019 -

Update 1: RushLane reader Vishwas Prabhu has shared a 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 spy shot. Like the other spy shots, this image also shows the car equipped with dual-tone alloy wheels, indicating that it is in the range-topping configuration.

17 November 2018 -

The 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 has been spotted testing in Pune by AutoSpy & RavenAvi of TeamBHP forum. The next-gen Grand i10 will reportedly go on sale in October 2019. The renewed Maruti Swift rival will be the third model in the company's new car onslaught next year.

The 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 will follow the Maruti Vitara Brezza-rivalling Styx (QXi) and the Kona EV. The new model will be in line with the company's latest design theme. While it has new features like an upswept Day Light Opening, the silhouette is similar. The front-end will be characterised by the signature cascading grille. The bumper is expected to look a tad sportier and feature angular foglamp housings similar to those on the 2019 Elantra. As is the case with the present generation, the incoming car will have a longer wheelbase over the Euro-spec counterpart.

A larger footprint will translate into a more spacious interior. The equipment on offer should include a floating-type touchscreen infotainment unit, multifunction steering wheel, automatic climate control, rear AC vents and cooled glove compartment. These features will also be available on the 2020 Hyundai Xcent sedan derivative. That said, reportedly, the Maruti Dzire-rival will not mirror the design of its hatchback sibling.

Also See- For-India Hyundai QXi appears to be the same car from South Korea & Death Valley

Underpinning the 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 will be a reinforced version of the company's BA platform. The new model will feature a BSVI-compliant version of the current 1.2-litre Kappa petrol motor. The fast decreasing demand for small diesel-powered vehicles and the high investment required to gain BSVI-compliance has put question marks over the continuation of the 1.2-litre U2 CRDi. While the petrol engine will continue working with a 5-speed manual transmission, the current 4-speed torque-converter automatic unit will make way for the Smart Auto automated manual transmission that debuted on the 2019 Hyundai Santro.

[Image Source 1: team-bhp.com]

[Image Source 2: rushlane.com]

[Image Source 3: overdrive.in]
