Pulwama attack: UK Labour chief Corbyn faces heat over condolence tweet

After Labour Party leader in the UK, Jeremy Corbyn posted a controversial tweet on Twitter about the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14, he is being mercilessly trolled.

In his tweet, Corbyn wrote, "I'm alarmed by the violence that killed 44 people in Kashmir. @UKLabour sends condolences to families who lost loved ones. We stand with the people of Kashmir and in government, we will work towards negotiations and a political resolution."

I'm alarmed by the violence that killed 44 people in Kashmir. @UKLabour sends condolences to families who lost loved ones.



We stand with the people of Kashmir and in government we will work towards negotiations and a political resolution. — Jeremy Corbyn (@jeremycorbyn) February 15, 2019

The leader who has used the word 'violence' instead of 'terror attack', in his tweet has said that the government will work towards negotiations and a 'political resolution'.

The second part of his tweet, in particular, has received flak and has made Twitterati furious.

Soon after Corbyn tweeted, netizens slammed him for saying "the people of Kashmir" instead of people of India.

People, not just from India, schooled Jeremy Corbyn that Kashmir has been an integral part of India.

International lawyer and analyst, Arsen Ostrovsky, called out Corbyn and said, "The people that were killed were Indian. The perpetrators were terrorists from Pakistan. You just can't get anything right, you toothless, morally deprived, Islamist sympathizer!"

The people that were killed were #Indian.



The perpetrators were terrorists from #Pakistan.



You just can’t get anything right, you toothless, morally deprived, Islamist sympathizer!#KashmirTerrorAttack #Pulwama — Arsen Ostrovsky (@Ostrov_A) February 16, 2019

On the other hand, while blaming the UK for the crisis in Kashmir, a Twitter user wrote, "The UK is directly responsible for any bloodshed in Kashmir. You should have been ashamed of the UK's role in leaving a permanently bleeding wound in the [Indian] Subcontinent."

Another Twitter user asked Corbyn if he knew that the first step in resolution is the 'vacation of PoK by Pakistan?'

Another Twitter user lashed out at the leader and said, "It wasn't the people of Kashmir that were killed, Corbyn, you anti-Semite. It was a Kashmiri suicide bomber that blew into smithereens 44 people of India, from all over India, you addlepated clodpoll."

In a dastardly attack of terror, 40 CRPF jawans were killed in the Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday.

The responsibility of the attack has been claimed by the terrorist group backed by Pakistan, Jaish-e-Mohammed.
