Protests, candle light marches over Pulwama terror attack continue for third day in a row in Lucknow

Forty CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday (Photo: Reuters)

Hundreds of people from all walks of life came out on the streets of Lucknow city on Sunday morning for a third consecutive day in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack demanding strict action against Pakistan and terror outfits.

Candle marches were also organised at multiple places across the city including prominent locations like Hazratganj and Indira Nagar.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying explosives into their bus.

Speaking to India Today, Abdul Jameel, the grandson of Army jawan Abdul Hamid who posthumously received the Param Vir Chakra said, "My grandfather had fought Pakistan soldiers bravely in the 1965 war. The entire country is agitated after 40 CRPF jawans attained martyrdom. It's time for the government to teach Pakistan a lesson so that it acts as a deterrent. A massive crackdown is also required against the terror outfits."

Meanwhile, the BJP party workers also organised a dharna at the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel statue in Hazratganj raising anti-Pakistan slogans.

Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, BJP general secretary Ram Lal, state cabinet ministers Rita Bahuguna Joshi and Ashutosh Tandon were also present at the event, where two minutes of silence was observed for the martyrs.

Speaking to the media, Union Minister Naqvi said, "Prime Minister Narendra Modi has assured that the sacrifice made by our jawans will not go in vain. Our armed forces have been given a free hand and very soon we will see a strict action against terror outfits responsible for such cowardly incident. We are also exposing Pakistan and its activities on a global level. Many countries have come out in our support."

Earlier, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visited martyred CRPF jawan Pankaj Tripathi's family in Harpur village of Maharajganj district and offered his condolences.




