DPS Bus Tragedy: Smiling through the tears, a year on with baby steps, Khushi shows the way

Khushi took her first step four months after accident

INDORE: The first word that Khushi Bajaj had spoken as a baby in 2011 was ‘Maa’. Seven years later, she struggled with the same word — the horrific DPS bus accident that killed four of her schoolmates, left her with such physical and mental trauma that she literally has to take baby steps to pick up the pieces.Through unimaginable agony, little Khushi has shown unbelievable courage.On the first anniversary of the tragedy, TOI spoke to some of the survivors and their parents, who are still waiting for closure and helping their kids fight the challenges that every new day brings.“I can remember every minute detail of the bus that met with the accident. I had gone to drop my children at the stop. I remember all the kids. Even today, when I go to the bus stop to drop my elder daughter, I can see those four children waving at me, saying ‘Bye Aunty’. Sometimes, I cannot stop myself from crying while standing at the bus stop,” said Khushi’s mother, Bharti Bajaj, tears streaming down her eyes.Bharti accompanies Khushi to school every day. The little one had to go back to nursery from Class II to battle the effects of her brain injury. But she is a fighter, this one, and has covered three years’ worth of education in a year and could join her classmates within the next year.The DPS bus accident on January 5, 2018, had killed four children and injured eight. The horror erased Khushi’s memory almost entirely, and then there were the multiple debilitating injuries on her body. It took her three months to recognize her mother and father, and six months to identify her best friend with whom she shared a bench.While school and government agencies battled accusations of carelessness and courts were abuzz with litigation, Khushi lay in bed for three months, shuttling between hospital and home, with her parents unsure if she would survive. Khushi was on Ryle’s tube for two months because she had forgotten how to swallow. It came off by accident once. “After two days, she was very hungry and I don’t know how, but she swallowed her first bite of food in two months. I remember we were so happy that day,” said Bharti.Khushi took her first step after four months of the accident. “It was like we were recording her movements the way we did when she was a baby,” said her mother. But the worst part was amnesia . It was in June that she recognized her best friend.After six hours of speech and physiotherapy a day, she started going to school with her mother despite having difficulty in moving her right limbs. “The improvement in her speech and proper physical movements came because of her urge to speak to her best friend… to be able to do what her friends did,” said Bharti said. At school, her best friend is her buddy — she takes out her copies and books from her bag, helps her understand what the teacher says, has lunch with her. Khushi is happy to share her favourite bhindi dish. TNN
