Pulwama terror attack: PM Modi says time for talks with Pakistan is over

Follow us on Image

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday came out all guns blazing at Pakistan and said the time for talks with the neighbour is over. His comments came after recent attacks on the Army in Jammu and Kashmir.

"Time for talks with Pakistan is over and now the country will act," said PM Modi while addressing a conference at Hyderabad House here in the national capital.

After talks with Argentine President Mauricio Macri, Modi said dithering to take action against terrorists and their supporters will be like encouraging terrorism.

In his comments, Macri called for united action to deal with terrorism.

The two sides finalised 10 MoUs providing for deeper cooperation in a range of areas including in information and communications technology, nuclear energy and agriculture.

While commenting on Pulwama terror attack, former Army chief VP Malik in an exclusive conversation with India TV said, "We need a long term strategy. These incidents can't be treated in isolation."

"We must work towards the capacity building of our Army. Our Army is strong and we can take on any challenge," he added.

Meanwhile, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Monday met the family members of martyred Major Chitresh Singh Bisht and assured that the Centre will act tough.

“The government will act tough and those who are responsible will not be spared,” said the UP CM.

"I appeal to the people of the country to stand with the government in this challenging time,” he added.

On Monday mortal remains of Major Chitresh Singh Bisht was taken for last rites from his residence in Dehradun. He lost his life on 16 February while defusing IED planted by terrorists across LoC in Rajouri, Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, four Indian Army personnel of 55 Rashtriya Rifles have lost their lives in an encounter with terrorists in Pulwama district, on Monday. They are identified as Major VS Dhaundiyal, Havaldar Sheo Ram, Sepoy Ajay Kumar and Sepoy Hari Singh.

As many as 40 personnel were killed on February 14, when a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a CRPF convoy on the Jammu-Srinagar highway in Pulwama.

WATCH VIDEO:
