4 Indian soldiers among 7 killed in Kashmir gunfight

A supporter of pro-India Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) shouts slogan during a protest march against the attacks on Kashmiri Muslims in different parts of India, in Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, Feb. 17, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/FAROOQ KHAN

An Indian paramilitary soldier stands guard during a shutdown in Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir, Feb. 17, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/FAROOQ KHAN

Indian army soldiers stand guard during curfew continues for the third day in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, India, Feb. 17, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/JAIPAL SINGH

Four Indian Army soldiers, two militants and a civilian were killed Monday during a gunfight in Indian-administered Kashmir, the police said.

The gun battle in a south Kashmir village took place as Indian security forces launched a widespread manhunt for suspected militants behind a suicide bombing last week that killed 42 paramilitary troopers on a highway barely 10 km from away Monday's shootout site.

A police official said the clash began as security forces laid a cordon for a search operation in Pinglena area of south Kashmir's Pulwama district, some 40 km (25 miles) from the summer capital of the disputed Himalayan region.

"As the search operation was going on, forces had an encounter with militants and the two sides exchanged fierce firing resulting in the killing of an army major and three other soldiers. One soldier was injured and evacuated to the army hospital," a police official at the police control room told EFE.

Army spokesman Colonel Rajesh Kalia told EFE that two militants were also killed in the gunfight.

The police official added that a civilian, Mushtaq Ahmad, was injured after he was hit by a bullet and was rushed to a hospital where he died from his injuries.

"The gunfight is going on and we will give you the details only when it is over," SP Pani, Inspector General of Police (IGP), Kashmir range, told EFE.

It came four days after a suicide bomber had rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a paramilitary convoy killing at least 42 personnel on Feb. 14.

The attack was claimed by terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad, whose leader Masood Azhar is believed to be hiding in Pakistan, and has further strained relations between the neighbors, who have already waged two major wars and several minor conflicts over the disputed region.

New Delhi claims it has evidence of Islamabad's involvement in the Pulwama attack and on Friday withdrew the most Favored Nation trade status it had accorded to Pakistan in 1996 under World Trade Organization rules.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also warned of a "crushing response" to the attack.

Pakistan had rejected India's accusations and said it has always condemned violence in Kashmir.

The attack, the deadliest in the history of Kashmir insurgency, prompted backlash against Kashmiri Muslims living in various parts of Hindu-majority India, mainly in its northern states.

Following the reported threats against Kashmiris, the federal interior ministry issued an advisory to all states asking them to "ensure their safety and security and maintain communal harmony".

The idyllic Kashmir Valley in north India has been battling three decades of an armed rebellion that has left tens of thousands dead and many more injured.

The volatile region is divided into India-administered and Pakistan-administered Kashmir, although both India and Pakistan claim complete sovereignty over the region.

India has repeatedly accused Pakistan of supporting "cross-border terrorism" in Indian Kashmir and of sheltering terrorist groups to operate on its territory and plan attacks against Indian targets.
