Coal, conservatives, and craziness

Millions of people in developing countries jumped straight from having no phone to having a mobile phone and so too will thousands of villages in developing countries jump from having no grid electricity to their own renewable energy. Leapfrogging old technologies can save billions.

But here in Australia, where we try to use a copper network to deliver broadband internet, obvious solutions seem a world away. It's as if we think that because we had to go through the dirty and expensive stages of industrial development, everyone else should, too.

Back in 1971, when TVs were black and white and coffee came only in tins, the NSW government built the Liddell power station. Its inland location meant millions of tonnes of coal could come straight from nearby mines on a conveyor belt, significantly reducing the cost of electricity. But 48 years later, Liddell's now private owners think that even though they own land on top of one of the world's biggest coal seams, it makes more economic sense to replace their ageing steam engine with new sources of renewable energy and battery storage.

While coal will play a significant role in the generation of electricity for decades to come, that role will continue to decline as the cost of competing sources of energy keeps falling. Nick Moir

Privately owned electricity generators in Australia don't want to invest billions of dollars in new coal-fired power plants for the simple reason that renewable power with storage is cheaper and quicker to build. The idea that it doesn't make sense to place a 50-year bet on coal-fired generation in Australia, but it does in developing countries, is simply bizarre.

If AGL, the largest consumer of coal in Australia, can't make coal-fired powered stations stack up financially — even with near zero coal transport costs — how can anyone believe that coal will make sense in developing countries that have to cover all of the costs of getting their coal from Australia to Asia?
