Guv pays maiden visit to Garo Hills

TURA: Meghalaya Governor Tathagata Roy on Monday paid his maiden visit to the town of Tura and halted at the Tura Circuit House where he interacted with district officials, senior citizens, members of the Mothers’ Union and local leaders and heard grievances voiced by them.

During the brief programme at the Tura Circuit House, the Governor informed that the visit was part of the desire of the Prime minister of India Narendra Modi to see places especially the district headquarters of the state of Meghalaya and listen to the grievances of the people and provide due facilities to the people of the area. The Governor during his interaction with the citizens discussed the need to preserved catchment areas and water bodies to prevent water scarcity and drought like situations in the future.

Further he said that the Mother’s Union had appraised him about the increasing crime against women in the region. After brief discussion, he informed that he would appraised the Chief Minister Conrad Sangma about the issues mostly faced by the people including domestic violence, drinking water problem, practice of Jhum Cultivation degrading the environment, and catchment area and conditions of the roads in the region.

The brief programme at the Tura Circuit House was attended by West Garo Hills Deputy Commissioner, Ram Singh, Superintendent of Police, Dr M G R Kumar, President of the Nokma Council, S G Momin, President of Mother’s Union Balsa Sangma, Additional Deputy Commissioner, District officials amongst others.

During the visit the Governor also launched the Start up India- North East Yatra at the Don Bosco College in Tura.

Speaking at the launching, the Governor expressed his gratitude to the Catholic Missionaries for spreading education in the region and added that his family including his wife and children were students of schools run by Catholic missionaries. He pointed out that India is a unique country with great variety of castes, cultures, languages, yet she is an integral whole. He stated that the vast country of India with all its multiplicity also accommodates the identity of each individual and urged those present to be proud of being Indians. Reminiscing about his education in St. Lawrence’s School and later in Catholic university, the Governor spoke fondly and appreciatively of the Catholic institutions in general. The dignitaries and the college also observed two minutes silence to pray for the CRPF jawans who were killed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Later in the day, the Governor also visited the Nokrek Biosphere Reserve and interacted with the people of Daribok. The Governor also made a brief halt at the Chandigre Rural Resort.

Earlier on Sunday, the Governor had also visited Resubelpara where he interacted with district heads of various line departments and also heard the demands and grievances voiced by the local leaders of the area at The Resubelpara Circuit House.
