Pakistani provocations and Indian response

The retaliation for the Pulwama terror attack will come at a time and place of India's choosing, said Prime Minister Narendra Modi, to assuage the feelings of the country seething with anger after the killing of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel in a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir.

The reference to the place and time of revenge immediately after a major terrorist strike has gradually replaced the much-maligned and often-repeated government response of "strong condemnation".

IANS has carried out a quick check on the provocations from Pakistan in recent years and the Indian reaction.

Beheading of Indian soldier in 2013:

Lance Naik Hemraj was beheaded on the Line of Control (LoC) on January 8, 2013 resulting in massive anger over the mutilation of his body by Pakistan Army regulars. Then Army chief Gen Bikram Singh talked about retaliation at the time and place of India's choosing.

Response:

Though never publicized, Gen Bikram Singh, while retiring in July 2014, claimed that India had given a befitting response to the beheading. He did not share details of the response.

Attack on Pathankot air base 2016:

A group of terrorists entered the Indian Air Force (IAF) base in Pathankot in Janaury 2016. Seven security personnel and a civilian died in the attack. Though the high-value assets at the base were protected and the attack was foiled, it exposed serious chinks in the security of military installations. New Delhi promised to give a befitting reply.

Response:

India allowed an ISI team to visit the Pathankot air base in March 2016 to investigate the attack, in a first of the kind move. Islamabad refused to allow an Indian probe team to visit Pakistan.

Attack on Army camp in Uri in 2016:

Nineteen Indian soldiers were killed by terrorists in an attack on the Uri Army camp on the LoC in September 2016. It was one of the most daring attacks till then. The Army promised to retaliate.

Response:

India announced on September 29, 2016 that the Indian army carried out surgical strikes at terrorist launch pads across the LoC inflicting heavy casualties. The attacks took place simultaneously across several locations on LoC.

--IANS

gd/vsc/mr

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
