XAVION ’19: A congress of entrepreneurs

Bhubaneswar: X-SEED, the Entrepreneurship Cell of XIMB, recently concluded its flagship event, XAVION ‘19, the Global Entrepreneurship Summit.

The three-day event, with a plethora of keynote sessions, workshops, panel discussion, webinars and competitions, saw participants from all over the state and also from several renowned MBA students from across the country.

A number of notable speakers such as Aakarsh Naidu, Founder, The Startupreneur, Prasanta Biswal, Evangelist, Startup Odisha, SubratKar, Co-Founder, Vidooly Media Tech., Sukriti Patnaik, Founder, Indulge, Annada Prasad Padhy, Owner and MD, AuroIN, Sumona Karjee, Founder, Prantae Solutions, Satish Kataria, Founder and MD, Catapooolt and Siddhartha Sthitapragyan, Founder of Max Solutions and many more graced the summit. The speakers shared the experiences of their respective entrepreneurial journeys, discussed the opportunities in the present start-up world, discussed the oft feared topic of funding and how to secure it and motivated the students to chase their dreams.

Various workshops were conducted by TiE Bhubaneswar and Startup Odisha which saw enthusiastic participation from the huge turnout of attendees. The summit catered not just to college students but also to several working professionals and start-ups, recognising the young generation’s inclination towards entrepreneurship.

Blurring the international boundaries, X-SEED also conducted a webinar session on “How good are your Ideas” by Alberto Levy, Associate Professor, International MBA, IE Business School, Spain and Co-Founder of Plentie Inc.

The final day of XAVION’19 saw the most awaited event of the E-Summit, I-Pitch, The National Level Pitching Competition. In a bid to showcase their next big idea, several teams from the premier institutes across the length and breadth of the country battled it out in the pitching competition. Students from IMI Delhi bagged the coveted prize with their innovative Pill Smart idea.

The Summit endeavored towards the theme of ‘Triangle of Possibility’ encompassing the three sides of entrepreneurship, the first being the successes, and the second being the failures and lastly the most crucial side, of the never dying spirit to persevere until the dream becomes a reality.
