Masood aide among 3 Jaish men killed, 5 soldiers die in Pulwama gunbattle

Srinagar, Feb 18 (UNI): Five security force personnel and three top Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) militants, including the outfit chief Masood Azhar's aide Kamran, were killed in encounters in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Monday.

Among the security personnel killed in the first encounter that lasted 18 hours was an Indian Army major.

According to Deputy Inspector General (DIG), South Kashmir Range Amit Kumar, a Lt Col and two Army personnel were injured in fresh firing by a militant, who was also later killed on Monday evening.

Mobile internet service, which was resumed last night in the valley after remaining suspended during the day, has been blocked in Pulwama, where clashes have erupted.

This comes days after a suicide bomber killed 40 CRPF personnel at Awantipora on Srinagar-Jammu national highway in Pulwama district, on Thursday.

People take part in a peace march to offer tributes to the fallen CRPF personnel in the Pulwama terror attack, in Lucknow on Monday. UNI Photo

Sources said that on a tip-off about the presence of militants in Pinglena village, about 3km from main town in Pulwama on Srinagar-Shopian road, troops of 55 Rashtriya Rifles (RR), Special Operation Group (SOG) of Jammu and Kashmir police and CRPF launched a joint search operation.

When the security forces were sealing a particular area in the village at 1am, militants hiding there fired at them. Four soldiers, including a major, were critically injured.

The injured were shifted to 92 Base hospital, where they reportedly succumbed. The deceased were identified as Major D.S. Dondial, soldiers Seva Ram, Ajay Kumar and Hari Singh.

Two militants of JeM, including a commander involved in recent fidayeen attack on CRPF convoy in Pulwama on Thursday, were also killed. The operation was going on, when the reports last came in.

The slain militants were identified as Kamran and Hilal Ahmed. While Pakistan national Kamran was responsible for recruiting, radicalising and training militants in Kashmir Valley, Hilal was a local Kashmiri bomb specialist.

Sources said as the security forces were conducting searches in the area, there was fresh firing by a third militant hiding in the damaged house, in which DIG Amit was hit by a bullet in the foot. A Lt Colonel and two other soldiers were injured.

A head constable of Jammu and Kashmir police Abdul Rashid, bodyguard of Mr Kumar, who was also hit by a bullet, later died in the hospital. The third militant was killed, they said.

Though firing has stopped, security forces are searching the area. Police has appealed to people not to enter the encounter site, which could prove dangerous.

Meanwhile, a civilian Mushtaq Ahmad, who was also hit by a bullet near the encounter site, has also succumbed. Meanwhile, residents in the nearby houses have been shifted to safer places.

Local residents said they heard loud explosions and heavy exchange of firing, when the search operation was launched by the security forces. At least two houses were blown up by the security forces, during the encounter.

Security forces had been deployed in sensitive places, including the main town, to prevent demonstrations. However, demonstrators clashed with the security forces at several places.
