Supreme Court sets aside Green Tribunal’s order to reopen Sterlite unit

NEW DELHI|CHENNAI: Vedanta’scopper plant in Thoothukudi will remain shut for now, with the Supreme Court on Monday setting aside a National Green Tribunal ( NGT ) order allowing the plant to reopen, on the ground that it’s outside the tribunal’s jurisdiction.Vedanta can now go to the high court against the April 9, 2018, closure order of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board amid local unrest over alleged pollution caused by the unit.“It is definitely a setback for us,” P Ramnath, chief executive, Sterlite Copper, told ET. “But on merits, they (Supreme Court) have not said anything. It is only on maintainability.” He said the company will, most likely, move Madras High Court soon.NGT had on December 15 stayed the pollution board’s closure order and allowed the plant to operate with the caveat that it undertook certain ameliorative measures. The board and the state government challenged the NGT order in the top court.A bench led by Justice RF Nariman ruled that NGT lacked the jurisdiction to deal with the issue, adding that it can request the high court for an early hearing.The AIADMK government in Tamil Nadu, which took severe flak after at least 11 anti-Sterlite protesters were killed in police firing in May last year, was quick to claim credit for the Supreme Court order. “We had vowed to undertake a legal battle and the favourable verdict today is a reflection of the commitment of our lawyers. This is a victory for Tamil Nadu,” said state fisheries minister D Jayakumar in Chennai.The top court bench, which also included Justice Navin Sinha, said no appeal has been provided for against orders passed under Section 18 of the Water Act. Hence, “…the attempt to bring the NGT in by the backdoor… would-…have to be rejected... An appeal being a creature of statute, an order passed under Section 18 of the Water Act is either appealable or it is not. If it is not, no general argument as to the NGT being an expert body set up to hear environmental matters can be of any help.”“If an appellate authority is not yet constituted, or not properly constituted, a leapfrog appeal to NGT cannot be countenanced. NGT is only conferred appellate jurisdiction from an order passed in exercise of first appeal. Where there is no such order, NGT has no jurisdiction.”
