Nudge the US, but have a Pakistan plan

Seema Sirohi is a senior journalist, who writes on foreign policy and India's place in the world. She has covered India-US relations for nearly three decades and watched their upwardly mobile graph. She takes sides whenever necessary. LESS ... MORE

Pakistan’s security establishment, which thrives on tactical victories, may have overplayed its hand and reduced its manoeuvring space vis-àvis the US further. The ghastly attack by the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) on an Indian paramilitary convoy that killed at least 42 jawans in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir has triggered deliberations in Washington on extra measures to pressure Pakistan.

The ‘blacklisting’ of Pakistan by the Financial Action Task Force is a real possibility. The US considers Pakistan’s explanations about the JeM and the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) being ‘minor threats’ laughable. Washington could also bar certain Pakistanis from travelling to the US and withdraw Pakistan’s ‘Major Non-Nato Ally’ status.

On Capitol Hill, more than 50 members of the US Congress, including 17 senators, condemned the Pulwama terrorist attack and expressed support. But that’s symbolism and nothing more. Can Indian Americans be rallied to get something more than verbal support for their dollars? There is always more US money to Pakistan that can be cut. This is a test for the BJP government’s supercharged diaspora politics.

The statements from both US National Security Adviser John Bolton and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo were hard-edged. Bolton openly supported India’s right to self-defence without any caveat about restraint in a break from the past. But the need for restraint is understood. Americans don’t want India to shoot from the hip first and think later. But they will support a well-considered response. Any ‘reasonable’ Indian retaliation will find widespread sympathy.

But what about sharing intelligence? Given their huge assets in the region, the US is bound to have good intel on the JeM and its Rawalpindi mentors. Will it share this in a timely fashion, instead of just warning Pakistan privately as in the past because of the high-stakes Afghan peace process?

Conventional wisdom says that Pakistan’s star is up. But the picture is more complicated. The Afghan peace process is at a nascent stage and US Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad is far from delivering the goods, his large ambition, flamboyance and deep desire to ‘be the one’ notwithstanding.

Institutional resistance from the Pentagon to any half-baked, hurriedly crafted pullout is the first obstacle, to say nothing of other traps waiting along the way.

Khalilzad can’t bring home a deal that makes US President Donald Trump look weak or foolish as 2020 approaches. Trump is wary after the pushback he got on his Syria announcement.

The pushback from Nato allies, India and other partners with stakes in Afghanistan is even more. For the time being, US pressure on Pakistan remains, giving India strategic space. The US was the only major partner to name Pakistan and demand it “crack down on JeM and all terrorists operating from its territory”. Contrast that with the wishy-washy bromide from our old friend Russia — it played dumb on Pakistan’s lavish hospitality for the JeM.

The US may or may not go up the escalatory ladder with regard to Pakistan. But there is enough understanding of steps India might take within reason. The question is whether the time between Pathankot, Uri, Nagrota, and Pulwama was utilised for anything besides election rallies and bombast.

Also, it’s time to bury Wuhan and not praise it. India should have demanded action on JeM chief Masood Azhar in the UN Security Council as the necessary minimum in return for giving China cover from Trump. It didn’t. India or the US can always bring in a fresh application on Azhar. But the technical dossier must be foolproof, complete with the latest audio or video evidence to swat China’s inevitable objections. (Cf. ‘Terrorist Issue Could Be Better Addressed by India’, Global Times, goo.gl/NPGH8Q)

Time is of the essence. There is global resonance right now and China may find harder to deflect pressure. If China blocks again, India should target another terrorist mastermind — Azhar’s brother Abdul Rauf, for example — something it should have been doing since 2016. There’s no dearth of jihadists on Pakistan’s pay and the pressure must be constant.

Pakistan has blood on its hand and so does China as a full partner in crime. Both deserve international condemnation. But Indian policy swings between belligerence and over-caution on both patron and protégé. That’s because Indian leaders expect to solve all problems with an instant dose of heavy diplomacy without doing the hard work of constant vigil and developing capacity, either overt or covert.

Loquacious ministers with nothing to show should stop infructuous talk of ‘isolating’ Pakistan. Even the US with all its might hasn’t been able to isolate Iran or Russia. But then talk is cheap, especially at election time.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
