Anti Narcotics Cell still lacks testing kits for mephedrone

Equipment would allow on-the-spot checks of substance seized by the police

Four years after mephedrone was declared a controlled substance under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act, the Mumbai Anti Narcotics Cell (ANC) still does not have testing kits that enable the police to determine on the spot whether a substance seized in a raid is mephedrone.

Increasing use

Also known as M-cat or Meow Meow, mephedrone became the rage among drug addicts in the early 2010s, after it started becoming easily available at a low cost, coming to be known as the poor man’s cocaine. After cases of people from across age groups and social strata falling prey to the drug reached worrying numbers, the government in February 2015 finally brought it under the NDPS Act, empowering anti-drug enforcement agencies to crack down on its use and sale.

Officers with the ANC told The Hindu that since the development, repeated requests have been made to the relevant authorities to provide them with testing kits, but to no avail. “Having testing kits makes our jobs easier as it lets us confirm immediately after a seizure whether the substance we have seized is indeed mephedrone. In the absence of testing kits, we have to send samples to the Forensic Sciences Laboratory in Kalina, and have to wait for the results. The downside is that if the test results are negative, the entire case falls apart,” an ANC officer said.

In 2018 alone, the ANC has made several seizures of mephedrone in the city. In September last year, the cell arrested Sabir Khan (32), a major mephedrone supplier. who was found to be in possession of 1.005 kg of the drug. In 2017, two alleged illegal factories manufacturing the narcotic were busted by the ANC, one in Hubli in Karnataka and the other in Kurkumbh MIDC in Pune.

Requests in vain

ANC officials said repeated requests have been made to the Narcotics Control Bureau, which has in turn passed on the matter to Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd, a Pune-based company which supplies drug testing kits to law enforcement agencies, according to officers.

When contacted, Deputy Commissioner of Police (ANC) Shivdeep Lande confirmed that the cell still does not have testing kits for mephedrone. “Since 2015, we have made at least three written requests and several follow-up reminders for the kits. We have testing kits for all other narcotic substances except mephedrone,” the officer said.

The Hindu tried contacting K.V. Varkey, chief executive officer at HAL, on a contact number listed on the company’s website, but did not receive any response.

The lack of drug testing kits has already resulted in an embarrassment for the police once. In 2015, 114 kg of a substance suspected to be mephedrone was seized from the Satara residence of former police constable Dharmaraj Kalokhe, who was then posted with the Marine Drive police. Another 13 kg was seized from his locker at the police station, leading to his dismissal.

The Mumbai Crime Branch went on to arrest five ANC officers, as well as Shashikala Patankar, a drug peddler of record, in the case. However, the same year, the Forensic Sciences Laboratory sent a report certifying the substances as monosodium glutamate, commonly known as Ajinomoto, a food additive.
