MBS in India: New Delhi-Riyadh security cooperation should be enhanced to counter terror

Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s (MBS) visit to India starting today comes at a crucial juncture. True, MBS will be flying to India after Pakistan where he has already inked deals worth $20 billion. Coming against the backdrop of the recent Pulwama terror attack where a suicide bomber affiliated to the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed terror group hit a CRPF convoy killing 40 jawans, the Saudi-Pakistani relationship may be uncomfortable for New Delhi at this point. However, it is important to remember that the India-Saudi Arabia relationship too has grown in recent years to the advantage of both nations. Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Riyadh in 2016 gave a fillip to security and economic ties with the Islamic kingdom.

Thus, MBS’s visit should be seen as an opportunity by New Delhi to get Riyadh to put pressure on Islamabad to turn off the terror tap. In fact, MBS himself has previously taken a clear position against terrorism and vowed to destroy extremist thoughts. Hence, for him to put pressure on Pakistan for harbouring terrorist groups would be consistent. It’s understandable that Saudi-Pakistani ties have a historical context. But Pakistan is a crumbling state in dire financial circumstances. Saudi investments in Pakistan will essentially go towards somehow propping up that country. In contrast, Saudi investments in India will pay dividends for Riyadh. Besides, at a time when MBS wants to diversify the Saudi economy away from oil, it’s skilled workers from India that can help.

Moreover, at a time when MBS is looking for an image makeover after the Jamal Khashoggi murder, being seen as bolstering Pakistan won’t help. Boosting ties with India will. Towards this end, it is welcome that New Delhi and Riyadh will be inking an agreement to establish the Saudi-Indian Supreme Coordination Council during MBS’s trip that will provide a new structure for the bilateral partnership. Additionally, an MoU is on the anvil for Saudi investment in India’s National Investment and Infrastructure Fund which will provide a significant boost to infrastructure development here. In the same vein, India would do well to secure concessions on oil supplies from the Saudis.

On Pakistan, Modi should leverage the high degree of Saudi influence in that country and get MBS to dissuade it from the path of nurturing terror, which destabilises the whole south Asian region and serves nobody’s interest. Enhancing the security partnership with Saudi Arabia should be the common goal.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
