TOM CLANCY'S RAINBOW SIX: SIEGE Will Get Only One Brand New Map And Eight Operators In 2019

Ubisoft has officially unveiled what's coming next to Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Siege after Operation Burnt Horizon , and it looks like we will get only one new map and eight playable characters in 2019...

Did you miss the Year 4 roadmap? We've got you covered: Operator balancing, map reworks, Pick and Ban in ranked and much more!



Check out what's coming after Operation Burnt Horizon! pic.twitter.com/hTTZO14mi3 — Rainbow Six Siege (@Rainbow6Game) 17 lutego 2019

During last week's Six Invitational, Ubisoft has revealed not only first details on Operation Burnt Horizon, but also what is coming next to Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Siege after that event. According to the French publisher, eight new Operators will join the highly popular multiplayer shooter's roster in 2019, including soldiers from Australia, the US, Denmark, Peru, Mexico, Kenya, and finally India.Ubisoft is planning to release only one new map this year (featured in Burnt Horizon Outback, Siege's 21st map and an ""), with three old ones being reimagined (Kafe, Kanal and Theme Park). There are also plenty of operator reworks to look forward to.Considering that Siege is usually the fourth most-played game on Steam, it comes as no surprise that the Tom Clancy's title has almost reached a massive 45 million players worldwide, and that number will be even bigger after the inclusion of the upcoming updates. Check out the Year 4 roadmap below:

The Siege is a brand-new style of gameplay embracing the reality of counter-terrorist operatives across the world: intense and asymmetrical close-quarters combat between attackers and defenders. As a defender, you will have the means to transform your environment into strongholds to prevent the attackers from breaching. As an attacker, you will have many planning options to face this challenge and defuse these situations.



Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six: Siege is available for PC, Xbox One, and PlayStation 4 NOW!
