Congress, NCP reach deal on Maharashtra seats

Consensus on 40 LS constituencies

The Congress and the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) are likely to conclude the seat-sharing talks for the Lok Sabha election on Sunday.

Senior leaders said a consensus had been reached on 40 seats and a final meeting would take place at the residence of Congress leader Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil later in the evening.

“We are hoping to resolve the issue by tomorrow or at the earliest and are also talking with other splinter groups to join the grand alliance,” said former Maharashtra Finance Minister and senior NCP leader Jayant Patil.

Sources said NCP chief Sharad Pawar and Congress president Rahul Gandhi had asked their State units to resolve disagreements over the remaining seats of Ahmednagar, Pune, Ratnagiri Sindhudurg, Nandurbar, Yavatmal, Aurangabad, Raver and Kolhapur.

The NCP on Saturday held a party meeting to resolve issues regarding seat-sharing and candidate list.

The party discussed demands from the Congress for the Ahmednagar seat, where Mr. Vikhe Patil’s son is keen to contest. The Congress has additionally expressed interest in the Pune and the Raver seats while the NCP is keen on the remaining eight seats, party leaders said.

The NCP likely to field prominent public prosecutor Ujjwal Nikam, who had helped State prosecute suspects in the 1993 Bombay bombings, and most notably 2008 Mumbai attacks, party sources said. “He is a bright lawyer and is capable to work in politics and so if he joins it will be good,” NCP leader Chhagan Bhujbal said reacting to the development.

The two parties had parted ways in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls but have decided to join hands against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Several rounds of talks have already taken place but no official announcement on the alliance has been made. Sources said the two are likely to contest an equal number of seats out of the 48 in the State. A grand alliance will be formed by including other splinter groups, said party leaders.
