None can match PM Narendra Modi's will to tackle terrorism: BJP chief Amit Shah

"Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the only leader in the world who has the will to end terrorism," proclaimed BJP national president Amit Shah in Jaipur on Monday.

"The leaders across the world are against terrorism, but only PM Modi has the political will to end it and BJP is the only political party, which works on zero-tolerance policy against terrorism," he said.

Shah, who was on a one-day visit to Jaipur, addressed the Cluster Shakti Kendra Sammelan at Suraj Maidan in Adarsh Nagar on Monday. During the 40-minute speech, Shah mentioned the CRPF soldiers killed in Pulwama attack. At the same time, he targeted the Congress and the opposition parties.

Shah motivated BJP workers for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, claiming that the BJP will once again form a government with absolute majority under the leadership of PM Modi.

Shah said that the 45 soldiers were attacked by the cowardly in Pulwama. "I assure you that the martyrdom of our braveheart soldiers will not go waste. Modi government will definitely give a befitting reply to the terrorists. Army will respond strongly to Pulwama attack at the right time," Shah said.

He said that after the formation of Modi government at the Centre, armed forces have been strengthened. "For the first time since Independence, the highest defence budget was allocated thanks to Modi government."

Making a case against terrorism, he said that this election is a about making resolutions and there is the chance to make a resolution against terrorism. Addressing around 4,000 party workers from three LS constituencies, including Jaipur City, Jaipur Rural and Sikar, Shah said, "We do not contest elections to win or lose. We contest for the service of the country. In the upcoming polls, BJP will once again win with record seats. In Rajasthan, we will win by a greater margin than the 2014 elections."

The conference was also addressed by former CM Vasundhara Raje and BJP state president Madan Lal Saini. At the beginning of the conference, two-minute silence was observed as a tribute to the soldiers killed in Pulwama. Shah also inaugurated party's 15 district offices.

‘STRONGER DEFENCE’

Amit Shah said that after the formation of Modi government at the Centre, armed forces have been strengthened. “For the first time since Independence, the highest defence budget was allocated thanks to Modi government,” he said
