Kamal Haasan's remarks on plebiscite in Kashmir sparks controversy

Actor-politician Kamal Haasan has landed himself in a new controversy over his comments supporting plebiscite in Kashmir but clarified that plebiscite is no longer relevant and Kashmir is an integral part of India.

"Why wasn't plebiscite held in Kashmir, making people talk about it? What are they scared of? Nothing can be done now. Didn't they somehow divide the nation, that's all. Why don't you ask them again? They won't do it," Kamal Haasan had said to a large gathering of students on Sunday.

Makkal Needhi Maiam founder president made this remark while replying to a query on the Pulwama terror attack on a CRPF convoy in which 40 personnel were killed on February 14.

He said that he has written about the Kashmir issue in the Maiam magazine he was running decades ago. "I mourn this day because I forecasted that this is exactly what will happen. I could have predicted something better but unfortunately, I thought plebiscite should be held and make people talk... Why have they not held it? What are they scared of? Anyway, the country was divided once. Why don't you ask them (Kashmiris) again? They won't do it? Now it (Kashmir) belongs to India, the same situation prevails across the border," he said.

Haasan pointed out that Azad Kashmir jihadi's pictures were being displayed on trains in Pakistan. "It is a foolish thing to do. India also behaves with an equal amount of foolishness, it's not fair. If we want to prove that India is a far better country, then we should not behave like that. There begins the politics, there begins the neo-political culture," he said.

On the Kashmir issue, he said that if the politicians in both the countries behaved well, the Line of Control would be under control. "I don't believe that army personnel join (force) to die. I think the army itself is an old-fashioned thing. I think we should one day decide not to kill each other (in war) like we decided not to kill and eat each other during the early days of civilisation," the actor said philosophically.
