Unidentified man found killed with beer bottle

drunken brawl

Anekal police found the body of an unidentified man of about 30, after passers-by chanced upon the corpse on Monday morning. He had been stabbed with beer bottles and he was hit on his head with a stone. The police have found a scooter next to the body, retrieved from the side of the road at Thimmarayaswamy Layout in Anekal. The beer bottles indicate the possibility of agone wrong. The police are trying to trace the owner of the scooter, based on the vehicle’s registration number. Anekal police have registered a case of murder and are investigating into the incident.*****The Ist Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (ACMM) court rejected the bail application of V Shashidhar, the president of Akhila Karnataka Police Sangha who was arrested last week and booked under sedition charges for his posts on social media. Shashidhar had reportedly posted some comments on Facebook accusing the state government of not fulfilling the promises made to the police constabulary in the state for their welfare and also overlooking their priorities in the state budget.The police had earlier claimed that Shashidhar was trying to create unrest among the police department, especially among the constable and Assistant Sub Inspector ranks. Akhila Karnataka Police Sangha and Shashidhar were accused of trying to motivate the police constables of the state to revolt against the government in 2016.“The bail was rejected by the Magistrate Court claiming that sedition charges are tried in the Sessions Court and so it will have to decide whether bail should be granted or not. We will be filing a fresh bail application at the Sessions Court on Tuesday,” said Narayanaswamy, Shashidhar’s legal counsel.The Central Crime Branch (CCB) had arrested Shashidhar after Yelahanka New Town police registered an FIR against him under various charges including Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act and Sections 120 B and 124 A of the Indian Penal Code for sedition. Shashidhar was earlier booked in June 2016 for sedition when he allegedly provoked police constables across the state to go on mass leave in a show of strength to demand for better pay and working wages. However, Karnataka high court issued a stay order on the 2016 sedition FIR.*******A 33-year-old auto rickshaw driver, Chethan, was stabbed outside SLV Bar near Begur on February 15. He had been to the bar with his friends Raju, Pradeep and two others, to celebrate the naming ceremony of his nephew. They stood at the counter, jostling for space with a group of three men, who picked an argument with Chethan’s friends when they asked for space to keep their beer bottles on the counter.One of the accused, Tousif, picked a fight with them and was taken away by his friends. After some time, Tousif tried to pick a fight again, claiming that Chethan and his friends were constantly staring at him.Around 11.30pm, when Chetan and friends stepped out, Taousif reportedly blocked their way and asked them to apologise. When Chethan refused, Tousif started fighting and ended up stabbing Chethan with a switch knife.Chethan was bleeding badly and was taken to a hospital. He later registered a complaint against Tousif and gang at Bommanahalli police station. “I have never seen those boys before. I don’t know why they became so angry for such a silly reason. Let alone staring, we didn’t even bother talking to them. They picked a fight with us twice, one inside the bar and then later when we stepped out. He stabbed me three times,” said Chethan.“Three men have been arrested. They are unemployed and not from the area. They picked a fight while drunk. A probe is on,” said an official from Bommannahalli police station.
