Narendra Modi: Time for talks on tackling terror over: Narendra Modi

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on Monday briefed envoys of close partners in Central Asia and Africa, which also includes members of OIC, to seek support against Pakistan-sponsored terror as PM Narendra Modi asserted that “dithering to take action against terrorists and their supporters will be like encouraging terrorism”.The Prime Minister said that the Pulwama terrorist attack has proved that time for talks on tackling terror is over and the world should unite to take action against terrorists and those backing them. Argentine President Mauricio Macri , after talks with Modi, endorsed his views and called for united action to deal with terrorism India and Argentina on Monday issued a Special declaration to Fight Terrorism and Buenos Aires condemned in the strongest terms the brutal terrorist attack that took place in Pulwama. The two leaders gave a call that no country must allow their territory to be used to launch terrorist attacks on other countries. They stressed that there could be no justification for acts of terror on any grounds whatsoever particularly emphasizing the scourge of cross border terrorism. Modi and Macri asserted that strong measures should be taken against terrorists, terror organizations, their networks and all those who encourage, support, finance and provide safe haven to terrorists and terror groups Continuing with its diplomatic offensive, MEA on Monday sought closer cooperation with OIC member states in Central Asia and Africa on the Kashmir issue, according to persons familiar with the case. Central Asian majors Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan have lent their support for India’s efforts to combat terror. Similarly, a number of African countries have backed Delhi.The envoys were briefed on Jaish-e-Mohammed ’s (JeM) presence in Pakistan and Islamabad’s support for Jaish besides the need to choke Islamabad’s funding pattern and source for terror groups.External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, who is in Morocco, is expected to sign an agreement on Joint Working Group on counter-terrorism with the North African country which is emerging as a key security partner.Meanwhile, Pakistan has recalled its high commissioner to India Sohail Mehmood for consultations, said Mohammad Faisal, spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, on Monday.India is also seeking robust counter-terror partnership with Iran amid common challenge of cross-border terrorism originating from Pakistan. “Both India and Iran need to quickly examine and share the modus operandi of the respective attacks and the kind of explosives used. Linkage between the two terrorist organisations also needs to be examined. These would provide a lot of clues, and possibly, the similarities. Thereafter, the positions can be coordinated,” Tilak Devasher, formerly with the Cabinet Secretariat and author of two books on Pakistan, told ET.“It would be useful to rope in Afghanistan as well that has also been a victim of terrorism from Pakistan. In fact, a trilateral meeting of the three countries on the issue of terrorism and a joint statement condemning terrorism could be very useful,” said Devasher.
