Guv to apprise Garo Hills woes to Conrad

TURA: Governor Tathagata Roy on Monday paid his maiden visit to the town of Tura and halted at the Tura Circuit House where he interacted with district officials, senior citizens, members of the Mothers’ Union and local leaders and heard grievances voiced by them and assured to discuss their issues with the Chief Minister.

The Mother’s Union apprised the governor of the increasing crime against women in the region. After brief discussion, he informed that he would apprise Chief Minister Conrad Sangma about the issues mostly faced by the people including domestic violence, drinking water problem, practice of Jhum Cultivation degrading the environment, and catchment area and conditions of the roads in the region.

During a brief programme at the Circuit House, he informed that the visit was part of the desire of the Prime Minister Narendra Modi to see places especially the district headquarters of Meghalaya and listen to the grievances of the people and provide due facilities to the people of the area. The governor during his interaction with the citizens discussed the need to preserve catchment areas and water bodies to prevent water scarcity and draught like situations in the future.

The programme was also attended by West Garo Hills Deputy Commissioner, Ram Singh, SP M G R Kumar, president of the Nokma Council, S G Momin, president of Mother’s Union Balsa Sangma, Additional Deputy Commissioner and District officials amongst others.

During the visit the governor also launched the Start up India- North East Yatra at the Don Bosco College in Tura.

Speaking at the launch, Roy expressed his gratitude to the Catholic Missionaries for spreading education in the region and added that his family including his wife and children were students of schools run by Catholic missionaries.

He pointed out that India is a unique country with great variety of castes, cultures, languages, yet she is an integral whole. He stated that the vast country of India with all its multiplicity also accommodates the identity of each individual and urged those present to be proud of being Indians.

Reminiscing about his education in St. Lawrence’s School and later in Catholic university, the governor spoke fondly and appreciatively of the Catholic institutions in general.

The dignitaries and the college also observed two-minute silence to pray for the CRPF jawans who were killed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Later in the day, he also visited the Nokrek Biosphere Reserve and interacted with the people of Daribok. The governor also made a brief halt at the Chandigre Rural Resort.

Earlier on Sunday, the Governor had also visited Resubelpara where he interacted with district heads of various line departments and also heard the demands and grievances voiced by the local leaders of the area at Resubelpara Circuit House.
