Pulwama encounter: Late Major Vibhuti Shankar Dhoundiyal's wife salutes the brave martyr for one last time

Major Vibhuti Dhoundiyal's wife Nikita Kaul | Photo Credit: ANI

Dehradun: India on Tuesday bid a teary-eyed adieu to Major Vibhuti Shankar Dhoundiyal, the Army officer who was martyred in Pulwama encounter with Jaish e Mohammed (JeM) terrorists on Monday, along with three jawans- Havaldar Sheo Ram and Sepoys Hari Singh and Ajay Kumar.

The mortal remains of Major Dhoundiyal reached Dehradun on Tuesday morning, where a sea of people flocked to pay tributes to the late soldier who lost his life during a fierce gunbattle with terrorists in Pulwama on Monday. The final journey of Major Dhoundiyal began among chants of Bharat Mata ki jay, Major Dhoundiyal amar rahein and Pakistan murdabaad. Major Dhoundiyal, who is survived by wife Nikita Kaul, is the second officer from Uttarakhand to be killed in the past three days.

In Meerut, Sepoy Ajay Kumar's mother said that she was proud that her son sacrificed his life for the nation. "Pakistan has killed so many sons; Pakistan isn’t that big that India can’t destroy it. India can destroy it in one day. I'm proud of my son, he sacrificed his life for the country," she told news agency ANI. Sepoy Hari Singh's mortal remains will be brought to his home in Rewari, shortly.

#WATCH Wife of Major VS Dhoundiyal (who lost his life in an encounter in Pulwama yesterday) by his mortal remains. #Dehradun #Uttarakhand pic.twitter.com/5HWD6RXwnO — ANI (@ANI) February 19, 2019

The forces gunned down two Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists- Kamran, a Pakistani national and top commander of the Jaish and Hilal Ahmad, a local recruit. On Saturday, Major Chitresh Bisht, an officer from Indian Army's Corps of Engineers, was killed when he was diffusing an IED in Naushera in Rajouri district. Major Bisht was slated to get married within a month's time.

The Monday operation which came at a high price due to the loss of four precious lives, was successful as it eliminated three JeM terrorists linked to the dastardly attack on CRPF convoy on February 14. 40 CRPF jawans were killed when a suicide bomber targetted a 78-vehicle CRPF convoy on the Jammu-Srinagar highway.
