Village food is going viral

Millions are logging on to videos of rustic food slow-cooked on a chulha, with granny and grandpa wielding the ladle

After years of struggling as an assistant director in the Tamil film industry, A Gopinath decided to take a shot at YouTube stardom. On a visit to his village in Tirupur in July 2016, the 27-year-old filmed his 62-year-old father Arumugam cleaning and cooking a freshly caught crab next to a scenic waterfall. Arumugam used to cook for the family as his wife worked in a tailoring unit all day. Ever since that first video, Village Food Factory has amassed more than 2.3 million subscribers, making it one of the most popular food channels on YouTube India.Village Food Factory is a pioneer in village cooking videos, a genre that has gained a large following in the last two years. With their slow cooking style, long shots and amateur feel, these channels are the antithesis of the slick food porn served up on social media. Verbal instructions are nil or minimal. Instead, the rural cooks rely on the outdoor setting, traditional firewood, homely earthen stoves and local ingredients to do the talking.Yet this rustic style has struck a chord with viewers. Marc Lefkowitz of YouTube (Asia-Pacific) says these channels started gaining momentum from early 2017 onwards. By the end of 2018, three out of the top 10 food channels on YouTube focused on village cooking – Grandpa Kitchen, Village Food Factory and Country Foods.Recently, the death of Karre Mastanamma, dubbed the oldest YouTuber in the world at 107, was covered in the international press with obits praising the Andhra grandma’s emu egg curry and chicken with watermelon.Many others from modest, small-town backgrounds are scripting their own rags-to-masterchef story. Tirupur-based N Ramakrishnan, who started the channel Food Money Food with his wife R Kavita, says ad revenues of up to Rs 1 lakh have helped them shift to a bigger flat and send their son to a better school. “People in the city seem to like our natural settings and traditional methods,” says Ramakrishnan, who works in the textile industry and initially used a basic Samsung phone before buying a DSLR camera to shoot the videos in his village Pollachi , 60km away.In Andhra Pradesh, cousins Deva Chandra Raju and Chakradhar started Myna Street Food, starring Savitri, their grandmother’s octogenarian sister in her village Machilipatnam. “Many viewers treat her as their own family member, and ask her to cook different dishes from their states,” the founders say. Fans often visit Savitri’s village to attend shoots, call up to talk to her or send gifts.In neighbouring Pakistan too, the channel Village Food Secrets has over 700,000 subscribers and stars 33-year-old Mubashir Saddique providing instructions in Punjabi.YouTube’s Lefkowitz says village cooking is part of a wider emerging global trend known as “primitive technology, in which creators fashion tools, objects, and structures using only materials found in the wild”.Up north, Punjabi Village Food Factory dishes out recipes for kadhi, sarsaon ka saag and langar wali dal. Started by 36-year-old Parvinder Singh and his wife Sarabjit Kaur from Bahadurgarh, Haryana, its viewership spans the Punjabi diaspora . “People like the food, and the fact that it is cooked on a chulha. They also like the way we talk – Sarabjit speaks very good Punjabi and it helps promote the language,” he says. “Today, families are small and nuclear. People want to see the their dadi-nani’s cooking.”Two months ago, Singh left his job as a computer enginner to focus entirely on the channel. “I used to earn Rs 40,000, while the YouTube channel generates around Rs 1.5-2 lakh a month,” says Singh. The couple conceptualised their channel after they found many cooking videos too short and confusing. “How can someone understand how to make a complex dish like urad ka halwa in three minutes?” he says. “Our videos are usually between 15-20 minutes and show the entire process.”There are even subgenres like The Tiny Foods. Started by husband-wife duo Ram Kumar and Valarmati in Tiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu in November 2017, it marries village cooking with a global trend – tiny food. The couple recreate a rural setting, complete with a miniature hut, and use tiny utensils to cook petite versions of dishes such as quail fry, idiyappam and mutton curry with ghee dosa. Kumar, who runs a jewellery business, says they adapted the tiny food trend to stand out. “We are both from a village and thought that choosing a rural setup would be unique,” says Kumar.Meanwhile, Arumugam of The Village Factory has become a celebrity. “When a foreigner recognised him on a flight to Chennai, my father couldn’t believe that a white man knew who he was,” son Gopinath says. Today, the entire family is involved with the channel: Gopinath’s wife and mother pitch in with the pre-cooking prep, Gopinath does the shooting and editing, while his father and brother star in the videos. Arumugam says he’s just getting started. “I’ve only covered 25% of Tamil recipes,” he says. “Eventually, we want to show dishes from other states, after learning them from YouTube.”
