Zee Media urges all to pay homage to CRPF jawans, observe 2-minute silence at 3 pm today

After the dastardly attack in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir that shook the country and took lives of 40 CRPF (Central Reserve Police Force) jawans, wide-spread rage can be felt across India.

Denizens are demanding strict action against the terrorists and their supporters who orchestrated the cruel and coward attack which led to the martyrdom of so many personnel.

And while strict actions may be taken against the perpetrators, let us express solidarity with the families of the martyrs.

People from across the country are requested to observe two-minute silence at 3 pm on February 19.

Zee Media Corporation Limited appeals to all the citizens to observe silence to pay homage to the fallen Bravehearts.

While paying tribute to the martyrs, India will show the world that the country is united even in adverse circumstances.

This will also help the citizens of the country to convey their support to the government and urge it to take strict action against terrorists.

On February 14, 40 security personnel had lost their lives after a Pakistan backed terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed operative rammed his explosive-laden vehicle into the CRPF convoy.

The 78-bus convoy which came under the attack was carrying 2547 CRPF personnel.

Within a few hours of the suicide bombing, Major Chitresh Singh Bisht lost his life on Friday while trying to diffuse an IED planted by terrorists near the LoC in Naushera district.

On Monday, an encounter broke between the security forces and terrorists in which at least two terrorists including top Jaish-e-Mohammed operatives Kamraan and Ghazi, who are said to be the masterminds of the Pulwama suicide bombing, are believed to have been killed.

India too has sustained casualties.

Four soldiers, including Major VS Dhoundiyal, were killed in the encounter in Pulwama on Monday.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has assured that not a drop of tear would go in vain and that Indian security forces have full freedom to retaliate.

India has also revoked the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status given to Pakistan which could further hit its already crumbling economy.
