National Geographic Traveller reveals the finalists of its prestigious photo contest

Advertisement

These photographs underscore the mesmerising power of travel photography.

They are the shortlisted images in National Geographic Traveller (UK)'s Photography Competition 2019.

Launched in 2011, the prestigious annual competition seeks the UK's best new travel photography talent across five categories: Cities, Nature, People, Food, and Portfolio.

The overall winner will be sent on a photographic commission for National Geographic Traveller — with this year's grand prize a wildlife photography adventure in Slovakia's Tatra Mountains, courtesy of Tatra Photography.

Pat Riddell, editor of National Geographic Traveller (UK), said: 'At a time when we're surrounded by travel photography, this year's shortlist reminds us there's so much more to using a camera than 'point and shoot'. From documenting local customs and traditions to awe-inspiring landscapes and incredible wildlife, this year's entrants prove once again how powerful a medium travel photography can be.'

The winners will be announced on 26 February at an evening event at Carousel, in London's Marylebone. The winning photos can also be seen in a photography feature in the April 2019 issue of National Geographic Traveller (UK), on sale 7 March 2019, priced £4.60. Scroll down to see the cream of the competition's crop...

Julia Wainwright took this stunning action shot of bald eagles in Alaska. Recounting the moment she took the shot, she said: 'Heavy snow fell one night during my visit to the city of Homer. As I lay in the snow to capture shots of bald eagles, two began squabbling, sending the fresh white powder flying.' This image is a finalist in the 'nature' category

Simon Urwin took this photo of a shoe salesman taking a break and soaking his feet while travelling around Pengzhen town in the Sichuan province of China. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Claire Waring took this atmospheric image of a polar bear while travelling around Wrangel Island in Russia. Describing the area she said: 'The buildings at Doubtful Harbour are decaying slowly. The rangers who work here are tasked with protecting the wildlife in this federally protected nature sanctuary.' This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

This close-up shot of a gorilla was taken by Daniel Burton on the slopes of Mount Mikeno in the Democratic Republic of Congo. He explained: 'Some of the world's last mountain gorillas live on the slopes of Mount Mikeno. This is a female from the Humba family, a habituated group that lives near Virunga's Bukima station.' This image is a finalist in the 'nature' category

Photographer Tse Yuk Wai said of this shot: 'Tropical storm Barijat was just passing over Hong Kong, bringing with it this crepuscular ray that brightened up a part of Kowloon.' This image is a finalist in the 'cities' category

This close up shot of a polar bear navigating the ice was taken by Claire Waring on the frozen shores around Wrangel Island in Russia. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Sharon Kynaston said of this photo taken in Kyoto, Japan: 'This 17-year-old girl has been training to become a geisha for the past two years. Until she qualifies, she wears half-painted lips, signalling to her clientele that she's still learning.' This image is a finalist in the 'people' category

Viewers get a peek inside one of the ranger cottages on Wrangel Island in the Arctic Ocean, courtesy of this image by Claire Waring. The room appears to be simply furnished, with a map of the island on the wall and a pair of binoculars for spotting wildlife. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Claire Waring took this close-up shot of a wooden door with rusting latches while travelling around Wrangel Island in Russia. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Mick Ryan photographed a local man in the streets of Marrakech (left), while Claire Waring captured some rusting window art while wandering around Wrangel Island in Russia (right). Both images are finalists in the 'portfolio' category

Two diners sit side-by-side at a former Communist canteen serving free food to workers in the town of Pengzhen in China. The image (left) was taken by Simon Urwin and is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category. Meanwhile, Justin Cliffe's image of locals dyeing wool in a Marrakesh souk has been nominated in the 'people' category (right)

A team of rangers stroll across a gravel beach on the shores of Wrangel Island in Russia's far east. The image was taken by Clare Waring. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Simon Urwin said of this photo taken in the Sichuan province of China: 'Local's come to the teahouse to smoke, gossip, have their fortunes told, and watch war movies on the TV.' This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Simon Urwin took a shot of original communist propaganda hanging on the wall of a building in the town of Pengzhen, China (left). He says the artwork 'features Chairman Mao's trademark beneficent smile'. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category. Meanwhile, Daviud Fargher's photo of octopus drying in Skiathos, Greece (right), is a finalist in the 'food' category

Pablo Borrego took this colourful image while perusing the stalls around Kandy Central Market in Sri Lanka. Describing the scene the photographer said: 'Everything in a busy market feels magnified - all your senses are pushed to the limit - presenting an abundance of photographic opportunities.' This image is a finalist in the 'food' category

Mick Ryan has been nominated in the 'portfolio' category for his fascinating shots showing life inside a Moroccan medina

Alex Palmer said of this shot showing the daunting face of El Capitan in Yosemite, California: 'I took this image on a day off from climbing in Yosemite Valley. I spotted two climbers approaching El Cap Tower - it looked like they were lost in a sea of granite.' This image is a finalist in the 'nature' category

A lanky-looking donkey stands waiting in the dusty streets of Marrakech, Morocco, in this shot by Mick Ryan. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Annapurna Mellor took this colourful photo of a taxi driver leaning against his yellow cab reading a newspaper before starting work while in Kolkata, India. This image is a finalist in the 'cities' category

Mick Ryan took this photo of a donkey while exploring the narrow streets around Marrakesh in Morocco with his camera. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Mick Ryan took an image of a man and a performing bird while touring Marrakesh, Morocco (left), while Simon Urwin took a snap showing artefacts adorning a former opium den (right). Both images are finalists in the 'portfolio' category

Claire Waring photographed the kitchen inside a ranger's hut on Wrangle Island in Russia. Kitchen supplies can be seen along with a simple kettle boiling. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Robert Huberman scaled the luxury Marina Bay Sands hotel in Singapore to take this image of its famed infinity pool. The photographer said of the sky-high bathing spot: 'It's an amazing place, offering breathtaking views of downtown, with people frolicking in the infinity pool in the foreground.' This image is a finalist in the 'cities' category

Photographer Claire Waring took this shot of a puffin sitting on a striking rock formation on the shores of Wrangle Island in Russia (left), while Simon Urwin snapped pedestrians in the deep western suburbs of Chengdu in China (right). Both of these images are finalists in the 'portfolio' category

A local man turns away from the camera in this portrait taken by Simon Urwin in the streets of Marrakech, Morocco (left), while another image Urwin took in the city shows a server in a local teahouse pouring water from a height to 'extract maximum flavour' (right). Both of these images are finalists in the 'portfolio' category

Simon Urwin took this photo of Qingyuan Xu, a traditional medicine practitioner in his 'doctor's surgery', in the town of Pengzhen. Urwin explains: 'Qingyuan, 78, began studying traditional medicine at the age of eight under the tutelage of Master Liu, one of the physicians to Chiang Kai-shek, the former Chinese leader who was ousted by the Communists and forced to flee to Taiwan.' This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Marco Anfossi took this photo while walking around the town of Leh in the Ladakh region of India. He said of the shot: 'I was walking through the streets of Leh - a town in the Indian region of Ladakh - when I saw two workers at this bakery, churning out bread from an oven. It felt like an authentic moment in the life of the town.' This image is a finalist in the 'food' category

Claire Waring took this photo while she journeyed across Wrangel Island in Russia. She says the buildings in some parts are decaying slowly, with the wooden structures succumbing to the harsh Arctic weather. This image is a finalist in the 'portfolio' category

Mikael Molander took this striking shot while in Kampala, Uganda. Explaining how he captured the image, he said: 'During summer, I visited a village in the Kampala District. I don't know the name of the boy who curiously looked through a hole in the door at me, but suddenly he was there, his eye perfectly framed by the wooden structure'. This image is a finalist in the 'people' category
