India Army: 'Eliminated JeM leadership within 100 hours of Pulwama attack'

Srinagar: Update: In his address to the world, Imran Khan asked how the Pulwama incident would benefit his country. He added that Pakistan would retaliate if India launches any attacks in wake of Kashmir attack.

He called for resolution through dialogue instead of a war.

Earlier report

The Indian Army on Tuesday said within 100 hours of the February 14 Pulwama attack on a CRPF convoy that left 40 troopers dead, it eliminated the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) leadership that planned and executed the deadly carnage.

This was stated by Lt Gen K.S. Dhillon of the 15 Corps Commander, at a joint press briefing in Jammu and Kashmir.

He added the Pulwama attack was carried out by the JeM, which is based in Pakistan, with active support of the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and the Pakistan Army.

"Within 100 hours of the Pulwama terror attack, we hit the JeM in the Kashmir Valley which was being handled by the Pakistan-based JeM," Dhillon said.

Giving a stern warning to sympathisers of the terror movement in the state, he said: "Anyone who picks up a gun in Kashmir will be eliminated, unless the person surrenders."

Dhillon did not provide any proof for his accusation.

He said he could not be more specific about the investigation into the blast and the suspected role of the Pakistan military intelligence agency, except to note its close links with the Jaish.

"The JeM is a child of the Pakistan army, and the ISI. The attack was masterminded by Pakistan, ISI and JeM," he said in Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir state.

Meanwhile, Pakistan demanded India conduct an open and credible investigation into the attack to back up its claims.

"Attributing it to Pakistan even before investigations is absurd," Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said in a letter to the U.N. Secretary General Antonio Guterres seeking UN involvement to lower tension.

"It is with a sense of urgency that I draw your attention to the deteriorating security situation in our region resulting from the threat of use of force against Pakistan by India," he said.
