Imran Khan plays victim card, asks how does Pakistan benefit from Pulwama attack?

Follow us on Imran Khan

Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan on Tuesday denied any link of his country with Pulwama attack.

“Pakistan is moving towards stability. Why at this time we will act in this way? This is a new Pakistan. We do not support terrorism,” said Khan.

However, he cautioned that if India attacks Pakistan, his country will retaliate.

"We have no intentions of war but if India will attack, we will definitely retaliate," said the Pak PM.

Meanwhile, defence forces in a joint press conference on Tuesday said, Indian Army will always stand with the family of those who martyred for the nation, said.

"Army will always stand with the family of those who martyred for the country. In Pulwama attack, Pakistan Army and ISI also played their part. Will teach a lesson to those who committed this heinous crime," said the forces in the joint press conference and added, "We are hunting Jaish-e-Mohammed's top operative."

"We request every mother in the valley to make their children understand that terrorism is not a good path," said the defence forces.

"We would like to inform that in less than 100 hours of Pulwama terrorist attack, we have eliminated JeM leadership in the valley which was being handled by JeM from Pakistan. Our focus is clear on counter-terrorism operations. We are very clear that anyone who enters Kashmir Valley will not go back alive," said the Army.

"Anyone who has picked up a gun will be killed and eliminated. The type of car bomb attack that took place in Pulwama on 14th Feb, happened after a long time in Kashmir. We will keep all options open to deal with these kinds of attacks," said Kanwal Jeet Singh Dhillon, Corps Commander of Chinar Corps.

"There is a significant dip in recruitment, we have not see any recruitment in the last three months. The families are playing a huge role in this. We would like to urge the families and the community in curtailing recruitment," said IGP Kashmir SP Pani.

"The incident happened because of an IED laden civilian car. The ROP had secured the highway. Now, SOP on civilian cars will be changed," said Zulfiquar Hasan of CRPF.

On Monday, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath met the family members of martyred Major Chitresh Singh Bisht and assured that the Centre will act tough.

“The government will act tough and those who are responsible will not be spared,” said the UP CM.

"I appeal to the people of the country to stand with the government in this challenging time,” he added.

On Monday mortal remains of Major Chitresh Singh Bisht was taken for last rites from his residence in Dehradun. He lost his life on 16 February while defusing IED planted by terrorists across LoC in Rajouri, Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, four Indian Army personnel of 55 Rashtriya Rifles have lost their lives in an encounter with terrorists in Pulwama district, on Monday. They are identified as Major VS Dhoundiyal, Havaldar Sheo Ram, Sepoy Ajay Kumar and Sepoy Hari Singh.

As many as 40 personnel were killed on February 14, when a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a CRPF convoy on the Jammu-Srinagar highway in Pulwama.

WATCH VIDEO:

Latest India News
