Easy to start a war, difficult to end it: Top quotes from Imran Khan's speech

Easy to start a war, difficult to end it: Top quotes from Imran Khan's speech

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday said that they will not think to retaliate but will retaliate if India attacks after the Pulwama incident. Imran Khan, however, mentioned that war is no solution since no one knows where it will lead us and said there is a need to have a dialogue to solve issues with the neighbour.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan in a televised address on the state-run channel PTV said that his country will retaliate if India resorts to any action against Pakistan after the Pulwama attack. Imran Khan said that he is hearing Indian leaders blaming Pakistan for the Pulwama attack and talking about action needed to be taken against us. Mentioning that Pakistan will not gain anything by carrying such an attack on India at a time when it wants stable relations with its neighbour, Imran Khan said he expects that dialogue will resolve issues with India.

Imran Khan continued and said that it was in the interest of Pakistan that terrorism does not breathe on its soil. However, if India takes any action against us, we will not think but will retaliate.

Imran Khan did mention that they were ready to discuss terrorism and said if India has any actionable evidence that Pakistan was behind Pulwama attack, it should surface it, we will act. He added that India is blaming Pakistan when there is no evidence.

The Pakistan Prime Minister also said that he understands that it is an election season in India, therefore, a pitch against Pakistan will help political parties to win.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in wake of Pulwama attack has said that India will avenge those who were behind the attack and mentioned that the Army has been given full freedom to act.

On February 14, India witnessed one of the worst terror attacks on its security forces when an Army convoy of 78 buses was targeted in Kashmir killing at least 40 CRPF personnel.

Imran Khan's remarks on the Pulwama attack has come after Pakistan based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) had already claimed responsibility for the attack.

The world community has condemned the terror attack and shared their condolences to the martyred families. Supporting India in its fight against terrorism, the United States and other world nations have asked Pakistan to act against safe terror havens on its soil.

Key quotes from Imran Khan's speech after Pulwama attack:
