Will not campaign against BJP: Narayan Rane

Narayan Rane has launched a massive attack on Shiv Sena | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: As soon as the Shiv Sena and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) announced their alliance for the coming Lok Sabha and Assembly elections, the Opposition parties have pounced upon the former for going back on claims of not forging an alliance with any party in future. After the Congress took potshots at the Sena, even former Maharashtra CM Narayan Rane has launched an attack on Uddhav Thackeray.

Addressing the media in the state capital on Tuesday, Rane claimed that the alliance won't help either Shiv Sena or BJP because it was an alliance of selfishness. "It was obvious that the alliance would have happened. But the cadres of both the parties are not happy with the decision taken by their respective leadership. This alliance is not for the Shiv Sainiks, but to protect the interests of (those residing in) 'Matoshri'," Rane alleged, hinting at Uddhav Thackeray, the Shiv Sena chief whose residence is named thus.

Rane said that in the entire turn of events over the last four and a half years, Sanjay Raut has become a laughing stock in the state. Shiv Sena is only interested in protecting the interests of leadership and has nothing to do with the common man, Rane alleged.

'BJP betrayed the voters': Rane

Rane raised questions on various assurances given by BJP before the last election. "Where are the Rs 15 lakh promised to every citizen? Where are the jobs? Who gets the contracts in a municipal corporation? They have failed to keep any promise made to the people. BMC is the hub of corruption. Shiv Sena leaders are only interested in their personal gains. Shiv Sena is responsible for reducing the Marathi population in the city.

'Will not resign from Rajya Sabha'

Rane claimed that his Maharashtra Swabhiman Paksha will contest few Lok Sabha seats in the state. His son, the former member of Parliament -- Nilesh Rane will contest from Ratnagiri-Sindhudurg constituency as Swabhiman Party candidate, Rane provided. Incidentally, Rane is a Rajya Sabha MP and has been sent forth to the Upper Hosue of Parliament on the saffron party's ticket. But Rane swears that he is not a party to the NDA alliance.

"I will not join the NDA. However, I will accept if it chooses to support my party. Though I have got the Rajya Sabha seat from the BJP quota, I am not even the primary member of BJP, hence there is no question of resigning from the Rajya Sabha," Rane said.

BJP, &Shiv Sena seal alliance for 2019 Lok Sabha elections

Alliance of selfishness

Narayan Rane has clarified that he will not campaign against BJP since he has been sent to the Rajya Sabha from the BJP quota. "I must respect the help BJP extended in sending me to the Rajya Sabha. That is why I will not campaign against it," he said.

Rane also claimed that the Shiv Sena will not win more than 10 Lok Sabha seats and will likely wind up below 25-30 in Assembly. It will not get the post of CM for two and a half years. This alliance is not for the people. It is for the selfish Shiv Sena leaders. They want the power to earn money," Rane said.

'Will contest at the right time'

Rane refused to answer whether he will contest the Lok Sabha or Assembly polls himself. "I will definitely contest the elections but at the right time. Will take the decision at right time," Rane said.
