A China size problem: Countering terrorism critically depends on being able to tackle the China fact

A China size problem: Countering terrorism critically depends on being able to tackle the China factor

February 19, 2019, 2:00 AM IST Abanti Bhattacharya World | TOIThe Pulwama terrorist attack not just indicates the menace of terrorism and India’s security vulnerability but more significantly draws attention to the failure of India’s China policy, in general, and the Wuhan spirit, in particular. With Pakistan based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) having claimed responsibility for the terror attack, attention is immediately drawn on India’s repeated failure to designate JeM chief Maulana Masood Azhar as a global terrorist and China’s constant use of veto power to throttle India’s proposal at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC).Arguably, India’s failure stems from its myopic understanding of the border threat that caused it to segregate threats emanating from China and Pakistan. Due to this blinkered understanding, India’s counterterrorism efforts have failed and its China policy has remained essentially truncated.In the post-war era, India confronted a two-front border threat – the Chinese occupation of Tibet and Pakistan’s occupation of Jammu & Kashmir. This twofold development immediately exposed India’s entire north, north-eastern and north-western border, to the threat from China and Pakistan. But unlike China, India did not adopt a holistic view of the border threat.With China, Nehru’s government sought to secure the border by signing the 1954 agreement and forfeiting all special privileges it had from the British in Tibet. However, the Hindi-Chini bhai bhai spirit quickly floundered in the 1962 border war.In the case of Pakistan, India retaliated against the 1947-48 tribal raids but lost 33,000 sq km of Kashmir to Pakistan. The border threat significantly transformed with the signing of the Border Agreement of 1963, whereby Pakistan gifted 5,180 sq km of land (Shaksgam valley) in the Pakistan occupied Kashmir (Azad Kashmir) to China. This facilitated Beijing to legitimise Pakistan’s claim on Kashmir. But most importantly, it led to the formation of the China-Pakistan nexus.From then on, China adopted the Pakistan card to tie India down in the South Asian region. It helped Pakistan become a nuclear power, thereby establishing nuclear parity between India and Pakistan. In present times, the China-Pakistan nexus has gravely impinged on India’s security by eroding New Delhi’s capacity to tackle Pakistan sponsored terrorism.Each time India attempted to list Pakistan based terror outfits in the UNSC, China blocked it. The last such effort was in 2017, when China blocked India’s proposal to designate Azhar as a terrorist under the aegis of the UNSC 1267 committee. Further, China has often challenged India’s sovereignty on Kashmir by issuing stapled visas to Indian citizens hailing from J&K, thus, validating Pakistan’s claim on Kashmir.And currently, the China built China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) that passes through Azad Kashmir has not only challenged India’s sovereignty on Kashmir but also contested its maritime dominance in the Indian Ocean. More than an economic corridor, CPEC in fact is a geopolitical corridor enabling China to dominate the Strait of Hormuz, the world’s primary oil chokepoint. CPEC would also allow it to fortify its position in the Indian Ocean, much to the chagrin of India, which is considered as the net security provider in the region. In the event of Gwadar being transformed into a Chinese naval base, it would pose a direct military threat to India.The issue of terrorism, therefore, cannot be handled without first factoring in the China-Pakistan all-weather friendship in the wider India-China matrix. Notably, China is confronted with Uighur terrorism in Xinjiang. But it has been able to curb it both institutionally and bilaterally.Institutionally, China has effectively employed the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation to combat terrorism in Xinjiang. Bilaterally, it has successfully urged Pakistan to adopt strict counterterrorism policy vis-a-vis the Uighurs. Moreover, it has also enlisted US support in branding the East Turkestan Islamic Movement as a terrorist group. But ironically, China does not support India’s counterterrorism efforts.This double standard in Chinese counterterrorism policy has rendered the April 2018 Wuhan spirit, arrived at between the two Asian giants in the post-Doklam phase, a complete farce. The tenth point of the India-China informal Wuhan document states that both sides “recognised the common threat posed by terrorism, and reiterated their strong condemnation of and resolute opposition to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. They committed themselves to cooperate on counterterrorism.”But any cooperation on terrorism would involve the Kashmir issue and also the fate of Shaksgam valley. Not only would China avoid ruffling feathers of its all-weather friend, it would also not allow its CPEC, a part of its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), to fall through. The success of BRI, which is Chinese President Xi Jinping’s dream project, is critically contingent on its Pakistan card.Arguably, even if the Tibet issue – an equally formidable irritant entangled with India-China border dispute – is resolved, Chinese threat on India’s northern periphery will remain. In other words, the Pakistan card against India would remain China’s most important leverage not only in dealing with India but also in dominating the Indian Ocean region.Given the immensity of China-Pakistan nexus in India’s foreign policy as well as in India-China relations, it is pertinent for India to factor in the combined nature of threat emanating from its northern periphery. In fact, India’s successful counterterrorism policy is critically dependent on the success of its China policy. Without bringing the issue of Pakistan sponsored terrorism upfront with the Chinese, India-China relations underscored in the Wuhan spirit would remain a diplomatic facade.
