Pulwama attack: 'Sarhado par tanaav hai, zara pata karo kahi chunav hai' - SP's Abu Azmi hints at conspiracy

File picture: Samajwadi Party leader Abu Azmi | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Samajwadi Party leader Abu Azmi on Tuesday made a controversial statement, alleging political conspiracy behind the attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14 in which at least 40 CRPF jawans were killed.

Azmi insinuated that the Narendra Modi-led NDA government deliberately ignored the intelligence input regarding the attack, probably to win the upcoming Lok Sabha Elections.

Talking to the media, Azmi said since yesterday, he has been receiving a WhatsApp message, which reads "Sarhadon par bahut tanaav hai, zara pata karo kahi chunaav hai". "What does this mean," asks Azmi.

He further said that an inquiry should take place, adding that though it is not the time to talk about it.

Later, talking to Times Now, the SP neta said that he did not make any controversial statement but just recited the line uttered by a shayar on Facebook. "I had just mentioned that see, what are people thinking in the country these days," said Azmi.

These political parties can go to any extent to win the elections, added Azmi in a bid to defend himself.

When asked if he meant the NDA ignored the intelligence input, Azmi said he is not saying anything but reciting what the shayar said.

He added that all the angles should be discussed. No bulletproof jackets are provided to the jawans stationed in Kashmir, while heavy security is provided to the leaders visiting the area, mentioned Azmi.

The suicide attack by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group had left 40 CRPF personnel dead in Pulwama last week.

Meanwhile, earlier today, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan broke his silence on the attack and assured India that he would take the action against the perpetrators if New Delhi shares "actionable intelligence". He, however, threatened any retaliatory action.

In a video message to the nation, Khan added: "I have been hearing and seeing on the Indian media that politicians there are calling for revenge from Pakistan. If India thinks it will attack Pakistan, then we will not just think but retaliate."
