Holiday Inn owner InterContinental Hotels sees profits drop as it adds 56,000 new rooms

Holiday Inn and Crowne Plaza owner InterContinental Hotels Group revealed its profits dropped by a quarter last year as it splashed out on a company shake-up and expanded at the quickest rate for a decade.

The Denham-based hotel firm - one of the biggest in the world - added 56,000 new rooms to its global portfolio in 2018. The rapid rate of expansion helped sales grow 6 per cent in the year and took the group's total footprint to 837,000 rooms.

As well as growing its budget Holiday Inn business, InterContinental has been revamping many of its luxury UK hotels with hopes of wooing Chinese and American visitors.

InterContinental counts Holiday Inn, Crowne Plaza and Holiday Indigo among its brands

It is making a big push into the UK luxury market, responding to high demand from tourists

But one-off costs relating to a company restructure and ongoing expansion meant profits sunk 26 per cent to £375million. InterContinental is on a mission to find $125million dollars of annual savings by 2020.

The group cheered investors with a 10 per cent boost to the full-year dividend, which follows a $500million special dividend paid in January. Shares lifted 1.5 per cent to £46.89.

Group boss Keith Barr said: 'We have made excellent progress in 2018 executing against the strategic initiatives I set out a year ago to accelerate our growth, whilst delivering a strong financial performance.

'Our strategic focus on accelerating our net rooms growth helped drive [...] our best performance for both openings and signings in a decade, leaving us well positioned for future growth.'

However, he flagged uncertainty in some of the firm's markets.

'The fundamentals of our business remain strong, and while there are macro-economic and geopolitical uncertainties in some markets, we are confident in the year ahead,' he said.

The results come just days after the company swooped on Bangkok-based resort and spa firm Six Senses for £232million as it continues its push into the luxury market.
