Why Isn't Twitter Blocking Trolls Abusing Barkha Dutt For Pulwama Reportage?

Journalist Barkha Dutt, who first shot to fame for her fearless reportage of the Kargil war, has always been an expert in the field of Kashmir’s politics--and is perhaps one of the most known and respected voices in that arena. It seems, however, that trolls on Twitter disagree with her though, because the veteran commentator has been at the receiving end of vile threats from trolls, both on Twitter and on WhatsApp.

Deluged with what's app messages since yesterday that are abusive and threatening. Seems an organized hate campaign against some of us. One sender confirms my mobile number being circulated in groups. @DelhiPolice bringing this to your attention. pic.twitter.com/7FAfPoYmm4 — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 18, 2019

Despite several balanced and pro-India reports since the Pulwama attack (in case anyone needed proof she isn’t a “traitor”), including one in the Washington Post, she was sent thousands of disturbing messages.

I had close to 1000 abusive messages and calls in a Cordinated and violent mob attack. These included a message to shoot me, a nude photo, many sexually abusive messages. I outed the men who did this. Twitter locked me till many of the details were taken down. I wroe this to them pic.twitter.com/XRyx9xbjcV — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 19, 2019

It all began when she offered her home to innocent Kashmiris feeling unsafe after the Pulwama attack

Those attacking or abusing #Kashmiris citizens in heartland are NOT being patriotic. They are in fact the ones being anti national. Because they are playing into what terrorists want - to polarize, communalize and divide . Focus on the adversary. STOP THIS #KashmirTerrorAttack — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 16, 2019

Anyone who knows anything about Kashmir knows that the region and its people are trapped in a vicious cycle of being treated as outsiders by Indians, but also being coveted by India which wants to call Kashmir its own. So by that logic, isolating all Kashmiris and being violent towards them is counterproductive--which is why a lot of journalists like Barkha Dutt and Rajdeep Sardesai tweeted out their numbers and addresses, asking Kashmiri people feeling unsafe to come to their homes for shelter. Recently, some Kashmiri schoolgirls were nearly attacked by a mob in Uttarakhand, and riots about to break out against Kashmiris who don’t even live in Kashmir or have anything to do with this.

My number is online and my DMs & doors are open to any #Kashmiris who need help or feel vulnerable. Those abusing and vilifying innocent citizens are sympathisers of terrorists in the garb of nationalists. They are reading from a script of hate which is totally what Jaish wants — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 17, 2019

But Barkha’s helping hand to them did not sit well with those who felt that all Kashmiris are in fact responsible for this attack, and should be targeted. Hence, the right wing was enraged with her and began abusing her.

She then publicly called out the men sending her pictures of their genitalia

In order to name and shame the perpetrators, Dutt publicly announced the numbers which were sending her hate messages, and released the content of those messages on Twitter--including the dick pictures they sent. Tagging Delhi Police and Twitter’s CEO as well, she requested them to take action, saying that these men who boldly threaten women and subject them to such disgusting behaviour should be called out in front of the whole world.

While journalists and Twitteratti are rallying behind her, Twitter has removed her tweets in which she called the men out

Apparently @Twitter wants to punish me for sharing the numbers of the men who are giving me death threats, sending me dick pictures and harassing me. Talk about being tone deaf on gender equality. Well done @jack @amritat — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 18, 2019

Stand in solidarity with @abhisar_sharma @BDUTT @ravishndtv @bainjal who have been at the receiving end of mindless, abusive trolling. Really this menace needs to be called out and dealt with.

I have been at the receiving end of vicious trolling, all I can say is be strong! — Priyanka Chaturvedi (@priyankac19) February 18, 2019

Strongly condemn vile and obscene attacks and harassment of Barkha Dutt. Twitter and police should take prompt and firm action. — Shekhar Gupta (@ShekharGupta) February 18, 2019

Unacceptable that @Twitter can’t discern b/w violation of stds & public complaints of threats/ vile sexual harassment as @BDUTT did by outing ghastly men. May be time for #socialmedia to implode& reset. The potential for good seems long gone. @jack @ericschmidt #digitaldisruption https://t.co/g2CFniwqhQ — Maya Mirchandani (@maya206) February 19, 2019

Why take it off line? Because the world is squeamish about the kind of images and messages women receive? Not going public would be giving in to intimidation. And other men should know what some of their brethren are capable of. — Maya Mirchandani (@maya206) February 19, 2019

Instead of addressing the problem by tracking those responsible, suspending the troll accounts, and blocking abusers--what Twitter actually did was delete her tweets complaining of the hate. Recently, Rose McGowan, who was among the first to start Hollywood’s #MeToo movement was also blocked from Twitter for complaining about trolls, so what’s happening to Barkha is actually something even the most famous women with blue ticks cannot seem to escape. Considering the fact that journalist Gauri Lankesh was murdered in cold blood, isn’t the threat to Barkha more inappropriate than the fact that she was driven to post it?

I got a mail from them saying u had violated twitter rules and they would have to remove the tweets and take me off if I continued. Where is this alacrity when women are abused with rape and death threats. Sickening response — barkha dutt (@BDUTT) February 18, 2019

This isn’t an isolated incident. A recent report proved that female journalists, especially women of colour, are the most abused and trolled demographic online

According to a recent Amnesty International report, Barkha is not alone. Twitter is a toxic place for women of colour. Not only are the threats they receive of a sexual nature, but they are also worse for black women.

Dear Barkha, the fullest solidarity and support. My experience with Twitter has been the same - they simply do not care to recognise gendered and communal harassment and other forms of bigotry. Shame on them. — Kavita Krishnan (@kavita_krishnan) February 19, 2019

In India, women like Swara Bhasker, Swati Chaturvedi, Barkha Dutt, Kavita Krishnan among others, get the worst kind of hate. Forget freedom of the press, here women do not even have to have a controversial opinion to get trolled.
