Punjab CM Jabs Imran Khan, says “Will find Masood Azhar for you”

NEW DELHI: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s comment on Pulwama attack that he will take action if evidence is found against anyone from Pakistan has not gone down well with Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh.

Mr Singh said that the mastermind of the attack, Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar was in Pakistan, and if the country was unable to nab the terrorist, “we will do it for you”.

He took on Twitter and said “Dear Imran Khan, you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur and masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can’t let us know, we’ll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk.”

Dear @ImranKhanPTI you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur & masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can’t let us know, we’ll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk. pic.twitter.com/Zct6I7QieY — Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) February 19, 2019

Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad was behind the deadliest terror attack on security forces in Kashmir in which 49 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday when their convoy was targeted in Pulwama district on the Srinagar-Jammu National Highway.

Earlier today, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan while addressing the media for the first time after the Pulwama attack today said that Pakistan will retaliate if India attacks. He denied any role of Pakistan in the Pulwama terror attack in which over 40 soldiers were killed by a suicide bomber from Jaish-e-Mohammad

Mr Singh asked Imran Khan that despite the evidence what has been done about the 26th November 2009 incident in which Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorists came to Mumbai via sea route from Pakistan and carried out a series of coordinated shooting and bombing attacks across the city over a span of four days, killing 166 people and injuring over 300.
