Major Dhoundiyal's Wife Pays Final Tribute, Says, 'I Am Not Helpless, My Husband Was A Brave Heart'

India on Tuesday bid a teary-eyed adieu to Major Vibhuti Shankar Dhoundiyal, the Army officer who was martyred in Pulwama encounter with Jaish e Mohammed (JeM) terrorists on Monday, along with three jawans- Havaldar Sheo Ram and Sepoys Hari Singh and Ajay Kumar.

In a video, Kaul wife of Major Dhoundiyal is seen standing beside the Tricolour-draped coffin of her husband as she is surrounded by people mourning his death.

She is seen looking at the coffin with the smiling photo of her 34-year-old husband, blowing a kiss and bending over to say “I love you.”

Earlier in the day, Kaul paid her tributes to Major Dhoundiyal, who belonged to the 55 Rashtriya Rifles, with a salute.

Kaul, who works in a multinational company in New Delhi, said, “I am not helpless. My husband was a brave heart.”

Kaul, who had left Dehradun on Monday morning, was the first to be informed about the major’s death by army officials.

They were married in April last year and Major Dhoundiyal had made his plans to celebrate their first wedding anniversary at home.

“Since the wedding, we had been thinking of putting up pictures of their marriage in this room. We even had them ready but were not able to put them up,” his sister Vaishnavi said sitting in the major’s room.

“The thought scares us now that instead of the couple, a photograph of our brother will hang on this wall,” she added.

Thousands of people, including chief minister Trivendra Singh Rawat, came to the major's home in Uttarakhand’s capital Dehradun on Tuesday to pay their last respects.

Kaul was seen near the coffin as slogans of “Shaheed Dhoundiyal Amar Rahein” and “Vande Mataram” were heard in the background.

Three other army personnel, a policeman, and a civilian were also killed while a group of senior security officials, including south Kashmir’s deputy inspector general of police and an Indian Army brigadier, was wounded during the nearly 18-hour operation.

ALSO READ: Home Minister Rajnath Singh Pays Tribute To The Brave Martyrs Of Pulwama Terror Attack

The gun battle took place about 15km away from the spot where 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers died in a suicide attack on a convoy by JeM militant Adil Ahmed Dar last Thursday.

In Meerut, Sepoy Ajay Kumar's mother said that she was proud that her son sacrificed his life for the nation.

"Pakistan has killed so many sons; Pakistan isn’t that big that India can’t destroy it. India can destroy it in one day. I'm proud of my son, he sacrificed his life for the country," she told news agency ANI.
