Amarinder singh: 'What proof do you want? 'Amarinder Singh slams Imran Khan

Dear @ImranKhanPTI you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur & masterminding the attacks with ISI hel… https://t.co/SDTEU9jhfx — Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) 1550568486000

PATIALA: Punjab chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Tuesday slammed Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan and asked him "if bodies of terrorists killed by security forces should be sent to him as proof?"“What proof is he (Imran) talking about? Should we send the bodies of the terrorists killed by our security forces to him? Will he identify them?” an angry Amarinder said on the sidelines of a function in Patiala.“Masood Azhar is in Pakistan and doing things from there, and everyone knows it. Every day our soldiers are being killed at the Line of Control — so who’s killing them?” he asked, declaring that the entire world knew what Pakistan was doing in Kashmir and other parts of India.“They (Pakistan) were behind 26/11 and India gave all the proof to them, but they did nothing,” Captain Amarinder said and pointed out that even in the Rajasansi blast at the Nirankari Bhawan a Pakistani grenade was used, clearly exposing the neighbouring country’s involvement.He also reacted angrily on Twitter and said: “Dear @ImranKhanPTI, you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur & masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go, pick him up from there. If you can't let us know, we'll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai's 26/11 attack? Time to walk the talk.”The chief minister, who was in Patiala on Tuesday to inaugurate two mega development projects, said Imran is a “courtesy-ISI” prime minister, so how else can one expect him to react, when asked by reporters for his reaction Imran’s statement on the Pulwama attack He said the Pakistani Prime Minister, along with Pakistan army chief Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa, were killing Indian soldiers and innocent people. India cannot and should not tolerate this, he said, reiterating that “if they kill one of ours, we should kill two.”Addressing the gathering at the foundation stone-laying ceremony, the chief minister earlier underlined the importance of peace for development but said India needed to avenge the killings of its soldiers. Surgical strikes could be one way, but it was up to the Centre to decide what course of action it should take, he said, making it clear that he was not in favour of war.In response to another question, the chief minister lashed out at the Akalis for sacrilege cases and said nobody found guilty of these incidents would be spared. At the same time, he appealed to the people to respect all religions.“The Akalis, during their decade-long regime, exploited farmers and put them to extreme hardship through tardy procurement and other anti-farmer policies,” Amarinder said, adding that his government had successfully ensured three seamless back-to-back procurements since taking over in March 2017.
