''Pakistan nerve centre of terrorism'': India rebuts Imran''s claims on Pulwama

pardeepdhull@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 19

India on Tuesday took on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s disavowal of culpability in the Pulwama terror attack by accusing him of insincerity and misleading the international community.

Khan has neither chosen to condemn this heinous act nor condoled with the bereaved families, said the Indian Foreign Office. Khan had kept his counsel for nearly a week after the Pulwama attack when most heads of government in the neighbourhood had expressed their commiserations.

“Disclaiming any link with a terrorist attack is an oft-repeated excuse by Pakistan. The Pakistani PM has ignored claims made by the Jaish-e-Mohammad, as well as by the terrorist, who perpetrated this heinous crime. It is a well-known fact that JeM and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action,’’ the Foreign Office pointed out.

Reacting to Khan’s call for de-escalation of tensions with talks that was also reiterated in a Pakistani missive to the United Nations, India said it had repeatedly stated that it is ready to engage in a comprehensive bilateral dialogue in an atmosphere free from terror and violence.

But there was scant evidence of sincerity after Khan reiterated the lame excuse offered after the Mumbai attacks of offering to investigate if India provided proof. Proof was provided in 26/11, yet the case has not progressed for over 10 years. There has no progress either on the Pathankot airbase despite similar promises. “Promises of guaranteed action‘’ ring hollow given the track record of Pakistan,’’ reminded the Foreign Office.

Khan’s several tacks to disavow Pakistani culpability in the Pulwama attack were also countered by the Army and politicians including Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh and GOC 15 Corps Lt. Gen K.J.S. Dhillon.

India also questioned Khan’s claim of building a “Naya Pakistan’’ when his Cabinet colleagues share platforms with UN-proscribed terrorists like Hafeez Saeed and dismissed Pakistan claims to be the greatest victim of terrorism as “far from truth’’ because the reality is that Pakistan is the “nerve centre’’ of terrorism.

India, however, chose not to react to Khan throwing the gauntlet by threatening it with dire consequences if a war was inflicted on Pakistan.

Meanwhile, a Saudi Arabian Minister said Riyadh would try to “de-escalate’’ tensions following the Pulwama terror attack, even as Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman is due to arrive here late tonight.
