Ministers share dias with terrorists in 'Naya Pakistan': MEA hits back at Imran Khan for playing victim card

Follow us on Image Source : PTI India hits back at Imran Khan for playing victim card

After Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan offered India to provide evidence of Pakistan's involvement in Pulwama terror attack, spokesperson of the Ministry of External Affairs Raveesh Kumar on Tuesday said we are not surprised that the prime minister of Pakistan refuses to acknowledge the attack on our security forces in Pulwama as an act of terrorism. Khan has neither chosen to condemn this heinous act nor condoled with the bereaved families, he said.

Slamming the Pakistani prime minister over his claims, the MEA said Khan has ignored claims made by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), as well as by terrorists, who perpetrated this heinous crime.

Kumar further said it's a well-known fact that JeM and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action, he said.

On Khan's claims of India accusing Pakistan for Pulwama terror attack without an evidence, the MEA said prime minister of Pakistan has offered to investigate the matter if India provides proof, this is a lame excuse.

In the horrific attack in Mumbai on 26/11, proof was provided to Pakistan; despite this, case has not progressed for more than 10 years, MEA Raveesh Kumar said.

Commenting on Khan's remark of 'Naya Pakistan', the MEA said in this “Naya Pakistan”, ministers publicly share platforms with terrorists like Hafiz Saeed who have been proscribed by UN. Likewise, on the terror attack in Pathankot, there has been no progress, he said, adding promises of “guaranteed action” ring hollow given the track record of Pakistan.

Kumar further said Pakistan’s prime minister has called for dialogue and expressed his readiness to talk about terrorism. India has repeatedly stated that it is ready to engage in a comprehensive bilateral dialogue in an atmosphere free from terror and violence, he said.

"Pakistan claims to be the greatest victim of terrorism. This is far from the truth," Kumar said.

"The international community is well acquainted with the reality that Pakistan is the nerve center of terrorism," he added.

The Pakistan prime minister's radio message evoked sharp reactions from several leaders and ministers as well.

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Tuesday slammed Khan by informing that the former Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, the mastermind behind the attack, was residing in Pakistan's Bahawalpur and was aided by ISI.

The chief minister took to social media and asked Pakistan prime minister to 'go pick him up from there.'

"Dear Imran Khan you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur and masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can’t let us know, we’ll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk," Singh tweeted.

On Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan's assurance that action would be taken against the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack if New Delhi shared "actionable intelligence", Union minister Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore on Tuesday said security agencies have "strong evidence" against Pakistan and this has clearly been conveyed to the neighbouring country.

Speaking to reporters on the sidelines of an event in Delhi, Rathore said, "The security and investigative agencies have strong evidence regarding this (Pakistan's involvement in the attack) and it has been clearly conveyed to them."

"Now, as the prime minister has said, the security forces have been given full freedom, they will work further in a planned manner," the Union minister said.

Asked about Khan's warning, he said India and its government knew how to keep the country safe and would do so.

"India is a responsible country and it knows how to protect its people and will do so," Rathore said.

"India has made it clear that unless Pakistan shuns terrorism, no talks will take place. If talks take place, it will be for eliminating terrorism," the information and broadcasting minister said.

The Ministry of External Affairs would look into the offer of talks by the Pakistani prime minister, he added.

Rathore said Pakistan was given evidence related to terror attacks several times in the past, but no action was taken by the neighbouring country.

"We are still waiting for action on the (26/11) Mumbai terror attack, for which evidence was given to it (Pakistan)," he told reporters.

Meanwhile, PDP president and former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti on Tuesday said Pakistan was not being blamed for the Pulawama terror attack without any evidence and asked its Prime Minister Imran Khan to walk the talk.

Mufti, however, said Khan deserves a chance since he has recently taken over the reigns of the country.

"Disagree. Pathankot dossier was given to them (Pakistan) but no actin was taken to punish the perpetrators. Time to walk the talk," Mehbooba said in a tweet.

"But Pak PM deserves a chance since he has recently taken over. Of course the war rhetoric (in India) has more to do with the impending elections that anything else (sic)," she added.

Forty Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14.

In a video message, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan responded to India's assertion of Pakistan's involvement in the attack and warned against any retaliatory action targeting his country.

Khan assured India that he would act against the perpetrators of the Pulwama terror attack if New Delhi shares "actionable intelligence". Pakistan wants "stability in the region," he said.

Latest India News
