Pulwama attack: Mata Amritanandamayi to donate Rs 5 lakh each to families of martyred CRPF personnel

In order to extend a helping hand to the families of Pulwama attack martyrs, the Mata Amritanandamayi Math will be donating Rs 5 lakh each to the kin of more than 40 CRPF personnel who sacrificed their lives in the dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's (J&K) Pulwama district last week.

Mata Amritanandamayi Devi also known as Amma, in wake of Pulwama attack said, "It is our dharma to support the families of these brave men who died while doing their dharma of protecting the nation. My heart goes out to their families and loved ones. May we all pray for their peace and wellbeing.”

The Mata Amritanandamayi Math announced the donation as Amma was travelling to Mysore, the first stop on the northern leg of her 2019 Bharata Yatra.

Mata Amritanandamayi or Amma has delivered speeches at the United Nations several times and has spoken twice at the Parliament of the World’s Religions. Among other accolades, she has received the Gandhi-King Award for Non-violence in Geneva, the James Parks Morton Interfaith Award in New York, and an honorary doctorate from the State University of New York.

In 2014, at the invitation of His Holiness Pope Francis, Amma was one of 12 religious and spiritual leaders to travel to the Vatican to sign a joint declaration against modern slavery. Throughout her life, Amma has embraced and comforted more than 3.8 crore people. When asked where she gets the energy to help so many people while also building and running a massive humanitarian organization, Amma said, “Where there is true love, everything is effortless. Love transforms.”

India witnessed one of the worst terror attack targeting its armed forces on February 14 when a suicide bomber blew off an explosive-laden SUV near an Army convoy having 78 buses, taking lives of at least 40 CRPF personnel. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said that the Army has been given free hand to plan and avenge the Pulwama attack. The world community has shown solidarity with India by condemning the Pulwama incident, asking Pakistan to act against safe havens for terrorists breathing on its soil.

Responding to India, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday said that Pakistan will not think to retaliate if takes any step to attack after the Pulwama incident. Imran Khan in a televised address on a Pakistani channel said that there is no evidence to prove that Pakistan is behind the attack. "If there is any evidence then we will act," Imran Khan added.
