We should go to war with Pakistan, it’s better than suffering daily: Baba Ramdev over Pulwama attack

Yoga guru Baba Ramdev | File image | Photo Credit: ANI

Raipur: Yoga guru Baba Ramdev on Tuesday made a startling remark in the wake of the recent Pulwama attack and said that it is “better to fight a war with Pakistan than suffer daily”, voicing his concerns for the loss of lives due to terrorism originating on Pakistani soil.

“India has lost over 50,000 soldiers and civilians so far due to the nefarious activities of Pakistan... Now, we have to teach them a lesson. We must fight a war. Instead of suffering every day, it is better to fight a war and teach Pakistan such a lesson that it can not dare to stand for the next fifty years,” Ramdev said, according to a PTI report.

The founder of Patanjali Ayurved Limited, an ayurvedic consumer goods company, called for a befitting response to Pakistan and the terrorists who try to destabilise peace in India. “We should break Pakistan into three pieces,” he said.

Speaking to reporters at the launch of a Patanjali store in Chhattisgarh, Ramdev said that India should also extend all possible support to the activists in Balochistan, the southwestern region in Pakistan that has been witnessing a severe civil war, the freedom fighters of which want to separate from Pakistan.

Also read: Pulwama attack: 'Mandiron mein ghantiyan nahi bajengi' - Watch Pakistan minister threatening India of war

“India should financially and politically support those fighting for freedom in Balochistan and help them with weapons…help them in every way to liberate Balochistan,” PTI quoted him as saying.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday denied his country’s hand in orchestrating the February 14 Pulwama attack that resulted in the death of 40 CRPF jawans, arguing that it was 'not in Pakistan's interest'. Delivering an address on Radio Pakistan — his first comment on the matter since the attack — Khan promised that his government will extend full support if India provides ‘actionable intelligence’ on the Pulwama terror attack.

“My statement is for the Indian government. You (Indian govt) have blamed the Pakistan government without any evidence. If Pakistan was planning the visit of Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, what does it stand to gain out of this? Pakistan ko isse kya faayda hai? Kyu Pakistan karega iss stage ke upar jab Pakistan stability ki taraf ja raha hai?,” he said, adding, "It is in our interest that nobody from our soil spreads violence. I want to tell the Indian government that we will take action if evidence is found against anyone from Pakistan.”

Banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14 in Awantipora area of Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. The attack took place around 3:30 pm after a suicide bomber, identified as local boy Adil Ahmad Dar, in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying over 2500 CRPF personnel on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.
