'Always the best', Surya Kiran not stranger to tragedies

BENGALURU: The first Aerobatic team of Indian Air Force (IAF), Surya Kiran (Sun Rays), is not new to tragedies. The team has notched more than 500 performances but mishaps have often punctuated their progress.The team was first formed in 1982 on the occasion of IAF’s golden jubilee. The team was first named as 'Thunderbolts' and has seen several transitions.With their breath taking manoeuvres, Surya Kiran has been a major attraction at Aero India shows.Tuesday’s is the third accident involving Surya Kiran aircraft. On March 18, 2006, Surya Kiran witnessed its first ever crash during the a practice flight in a three-ship formation at Bidar air base when a plane crashed, killing two pilots on the spot. On January 21, 2009 Surya Kiran trainer wing commander Rajpal Singh Dhaliwal died after his jet crashed near Bidar a few minutes after taking off from the station.After performing at Aero India in 2011, the team was disbanded and the 13 pilots of the team were deployed to various other IAF squadrons. The Surya Kiran team was reformed in 2015 and this time it flew BAe Hawk Mk 132s. Their first public display with new aircraft was during Air Force Day celebrations at Hindon in October 2015 in a flew flypasts in different formations. In 2017, the team made a sensational come back after six years at Aero India with two more aircraft joining their formations.In 2017, the team completed its 500th performance and enthralled the crowds like never before. The Hawks fly at an average speed of 550-700 kmph. The team displayed turns such as wingovers, loops and barrel rolls, and manoeuvres like splits, rolling crosses and inverted runs. However, they did not perform their signature manoeuvre - piercing the heart.During April to September, the team pilots work on building new manoeuvres and perfecting the display profiles for the upcoming season. During September to March, the team carries out at least 35 to 40 displays.While the Aero India 2019 was waiting for their much advanced skills, Tuesday's tragedy shook the team's morale. Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi, who was killed in the crash, was also part of the previous edition Aero India. He had told this reporter that their motto, 'Always the best', motivates them to come up with breath taking manoeuvres.The team till date haven't displayed with all of its nine flights performing. This time they did have the plans but with losing its two of jets and a pilot, they would not be go for a full fledged display this edition too.
