If you can't pick up Masood Azhar, we'll do it for you: Amarinder Singh to Imran Khan

"BTW (by the way) what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai's 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk," he said. Dear @ImranKhanPTI you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur & masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can’t let us know, we’ll do it for you. BTW what has been done about the proofs of Mumbai’s 26/11 attack. Time to walk the talk. pic.twitter.com/Zct6I7QieY February 19, 2019 Singh wondered if the Pakistan prime minister wanted New Delhi to send the bodies of the slain CRPF soldiers to Pakistan as "actionable intelligence". "What proof is he talking about, should we take the bodies (of soldiers) there?," said Singh in a statement. "Masood Azhar (founder of terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed which claimed responsibility for the attack) is in Pakistan and doing things from there, and everyone knows it," he added. "Every day our soldiers are being killed at the Line of Control so who's killing them?," asked the chief minister, stressing that the world knew what Pakistan was doing in Kashmir and other parts of India. "They (Pakistan) were behind 26/11 (Mumbai terror attack) and India gave all the proof to them, but they did nothing," Singh said in the statement, adding that even in the Rajasansi blast at Nirankari Bhawan, Amritsar, a Pakistani grenade was used. (With inputs from PTI)

NEW DELHI: Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Tuesday slammed Pakistan Prime Minister for demanding proof of his country's involvement in the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed. The Congress leader said it was Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar who masterminded the attack while "sitting in Bahawalpur". "Dear Imran Khan, you have Jaish chief Masood Azhar sitting in Bahawalpur and masterminding the attacks with ISI help. Go pick him up from there. If you can't let us know we'll do it for you," Singh tweeted. Singh also asked Khan what action Pakistan had taken against the perpetrators of the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack despite being presented with proof.
