'Pakistan nerve centre of terrorism:' India responds to Imran Khan's statement on Pulwama attack

"It is a well-known fact that Jaish-e-Mohammad and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action," it said. ALSO READ: Imran seeks actionable intelligence over Pulwama attack, warns against retaliatory action In a video message, Khan Tuesday assured India that he would act against the perpetrators of the Pulwama terror attack if New Delhi shares "actionable intelligence", but warned against any "revenge" retaliatory action. Khan responded to the Indian allegations on Pakistan's involvement in the attack in Kashmir last Thursday that left 40 CRPF personnel dead. Read full statement of the Ministry of External Affairs on Imran Khan's response to Pulwama attack 1: We are not surprised that the Prime Minister of Pakistan refuses to acknowledge the attack on our security forces in Pulwama as an act of terrorism. Prime Minister of Pakistan has neither chosen to condemn this heinous act nor condoled with the bereaved families. 2. Disclaiming any link between the terrorist attack and Pakistan is an oft-repeated excuse by Pakistan. The Pakistani Prime Minister has ignored claims made by the Jaish-e-Mohammad, as well as by the terrorist, who perpetrated this heinous crime. It is a well-known fact that Jaish-e-Mohammad and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action. 3. The Prime Minister of Pakistan has offered to investigate the matter if India provides proof. This is a lame excuse. In the horrific attack in Mumbai on 26/11, proof was provided to Pakistan. Despite this, the case has not progressed for the last more than 10 years. Likewise, on the terror attack on Pathankot airbase, there has been no progress. Promises of “guaranteed action” ring hollow given the track record of Pakistan. 4. The Prime Minister has referred to a “Naya Pakistan” with a new thinking. In this “Naya Pakistan”, Ministers of the current Government publicly share platforms with terrorists like Hafeez Saeed who have been proscribed by the United Nations. 5. Pakistan’s Prime Minister has called for dialogue and expressed his readiness to talk about terrorism. India has repeatedly stated that it is ready to engage in a comprehensive bilateral dialogue in an atmosphere free from terror and violence. 6. Pakistan claims to be the greatest victim of terrorism. This is far from truth. The international community is well acquainted with the reality that Pakistan is the nerve center of terrorism. 7. It is regrettable that the Pakistani Prime Minister has insinuated that India’s response to the terrorist attack is determined by the forthcoming General Election. India rejects this false allegation. India’s democracy is a model for the world which Pakistan would never understand. We demand Pakistan to stop misleading the international community and take credible and visible action against the perpetrators of Pulwama terrorist attack and other terrorists and terror groups operating from areas under their control.

NEW DELHI: India on Tuesday strongly rejected Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan's statement on the deadly Pulwama attack saying disclaiming Pakistan's link with terrorist attacks is an oft-repeated excuse by the "nerve centre" of terrorism. The External Affairs Ministry, in a statement, also termed as "lame excuse" Khan's demand for "actionable intelligence" concerning the attack on a CRPF convoy in which 40 security personnel were killed. In a hard-hitting statement, the MEA said India was not surprised that Khan refused to acknowledge the attack on India's security forces in Pulwama as an act of terrorism. It said the Prime Minister of Pakistan has neither chosen to condemn the heinous act nor condoled with the bereaved families. "Disclaiming any link between the terrorist attack and Pakistan is an oft-repeated excuse by Pakistan. The Pakistani Prime Minister has ignored claims made by the Jaish-e-Mohammad, as well as by the terrorist, who perpetrated this heinous crime," the MEA said.
