GENEVA / KASHMIR HUMAN RIGHTS REAX

Description

STORY: GENEVA / KASHMIR HUMAN RIGHTS REAX

TRT: 1:33

SOURCE: UNTV CH

RESTRICTIONS: NONE

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH / NATS



DATELINE: 19 FEBRUARY 2019 GENEVA, SWITZERLAND



SHOTLIST:



RECENT



1. Wide shot, exterior, Palais des nations



19 FEBRUARY 2019 GENEVA, SWITZERLAND



2. Wide shot, press room

3. Med shot, reporters

4. Wide shot, press room

5. SOUNDBITE (English) Rupert Colville, spokesperson, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR):

“Just a brief comment on the situation in Kashmir in the last few days. The High Commissioner strongly condemns the suicide bomb attack against the Indian security forces in the Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on the 14th of Feb and calls on the authorities to bring those responsible to justice. We are also saddened by the further loss of life reported in subsequent gun battles in Pulwama yesterday, which is reported to have claimed a further nine lives. We hope the escalating tensions between the two nuclear armed neighbours India and Pakistan will not add further to the insecurity in the region. The High Commissioner is also concerned by reports from India that some elements are using the Pulwama attack as justification for threats and potential acts of violence targeting Kashmiri and other Muslim communities living in different parts of India. We acknowledge there have been actions taken by the Indian authorities to tackle these incidents and we hope the government will continue to take steps to protect people from all forms of harm that may be directed at them on account of their ethnicity or their identity.”

6. Various shots, press room



STORYLINE:



The High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet “strongly condemns the suicide bomb attack against the Indian security forces” in Kashmir on 14 February. She is also “concerned by reports from India that some elements are using the Pulwama attack as justification for threats and potential acts of violence” targeting Muslims across India, the OHCHR spokesperson said on Tuesday.



Pakistan-based group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed the responsibility for the suicide attack that has killed 42 Indian security personnel in the India-administered Kashmir.



Speaking to reporters in Geneva today(19 Feb), Rupert Colville, spokesperson, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) said “the High Commissioner strongly condemns the suicide bomb attack against the Indian security forces in the Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on the 14th of Feb and calls on the authorities to bring those responsible to justice.”



“We are also saddened by the further loss of life reported in subsequent gun battles in Pulwama yesterday, which is reported to have claimed a further nine lives,” Colville said and added “we hope the escalating tensions between the two nuclear armed neighbours India and Pakistan will not add further to the insecurity in the region.”



The spokesperson reported that “the High Commissioner is also concerned by reports from India that some elements are using the Pulwama attack as justification for threats and potential acts of violence targeting Kashmiri and other Muslim communities living in different parts of India.”



He underlined “we acknowledge there have been actions taken by the Indian authorities to tackle these incidents and we hope the government will continue to take steps to protect people from all forms of harm that may be directed at them on account of their ethnicity or their identity.”
