Khaki support for the rainbow

Mumbai Police has slowly, but steadily warmed up to the queer community, thanks to the annual Pride march

On September 6 last year, the queer community in India embarked on a fresh chapter. The shackles of Section 377 — which was partially struck down by the Supreme Court — no longer governs the lives, advocacy and struggles of LGBTQ+ people. The queer narrative and activism since then has travelled in numerous directions. From campaigning for the rights of transgender people, queer Dalits, religious and regional minorities to taking the movement to smaller pockets of India and breaking through class barriers — the clarion call for acceptance and visibility has been both collective and personal. The judicial support certainly brought the discussion to our living rooms, with ‘What is Section 377’ being one of the top Google queries of 2018 in India, but social acceptance and securing of rights has yet to transcend tokenism and socio-political barriers. The new chapter has only begun. Our latest series, ‘Queer Space’, aims to contribute to the ongoing discourse by highlighting the initiatives, intersectionalities, identities, politics, culture, art, hardships, joys, quirks, history, rebellion, conflicts, disappointments, angst, robustness and ebullience of LGBTQ+ lives in Mumbai, and beyond. While this dedicated ‘space’ hopes to foster integration of sexual minorities into the mainstream and day-to-day experiences, it also celebrates the differences and nonconformity, which make the community truly ‘queer’.

Mumbai

It’s pretty common to spot the familiar khaki uniform at Mumbai’s Pride parade, amidst the vibrant gamut of colours. This year’s edition, on February 2, an unprecedented number of people — over 18,500 (according to Humsafar Trust) — congregated for the first Pride march in the city after Section 377 was partially struck down by the Supreme Court. A gathering of that scale required not just a tonne of permissions but the strong support of the Mumbai Police. Over 60 cops from Gamdevi and D.B. Marg police stations directed the crowds, ensured safety and diverted traffic, as the excitement among the community was palpable.

No more cop-outs

The journey of getting the Mumbai Police involved in the Pride march has not been an easy one. Vivek Patil, advocacy officer at Humsafar Trust, the indispensable ‘permissions man’, responsible for acquiring the 18 civic clearances required to hold such a public event, recalls his experience in 2005, when the Trust first approached the city’s law enforcement for the pride. After they filed an application, the Police Commissioner denied permission at the last minute. “Back then, the police knew little or nothing about the LGBTQ+ community, and only associated ‘criminal sexual activity’ with us,” recalls Mr. Patil. As dejected as Mr. Patil was, he took the rejection letter and went to the commissioner’s office, waited for over eight hours to meet him and finally managed to convince him to grant permission after explaining why this cause needed attention. “It was a moment of jubilation, and since then, the Mumbai city and traffic police have been very cooperative with us,” shares Mr. Patil.

Fostering respect

“But attitudes are changing,” says Mr. Patil. “In fact, I’ve had some cops tell me that we should have the Pride walk not once a year but every few months, because it is so colourful!” he adds, chuckling. Mr. Patil’s ease and camaraderie around the cops were visible during the march this year. According to Mr. Patil, several police officials have been forthcoming and helpful, sometimes even speeding up official paperwork. For instance, in 2011, the permission for the Pride march was mistakenly obtained from four to six in the morning, instead of evening. The Trust only realised this error at the last minute but the commissioner’s office was cooperative and allowed the change in timings.

The understanding and cooperation of the police had to be earned. Over the years, Humsafar Trust has ensured that there are no run-ins with the law at the march. They maintain strict protocols such as no smoking and walking quietly while passing silence zones on the routes. The Trust also routinely conducts gender and queer sensitisation workshops for the police personnel. “We’ve covered 200 out of 255 police stations,” informs Mr. Patil.

Exposure and continued education have surely changed the perception of the police with regards to the LGBTQ+ community. But Mr. Patil gently reminds us, “Only when you respect the law, the law respects you.”
