PMK in fold, AIADMK and BJP forge alliance in Tamil Nadu

CHENNAI: Not waiting for the Election Commission to sound the poll bugle, the two main fronts in Tamil Nadu have moved to battle readiness, firming up alliances and finalising seat allocation for the constituents.The AIADMK-led front gained a head-start on Tuesday, roping in PMK with seven Lok Sabha seats (and a Rajya Sabha seat), leaving five seats for BJP . On the other side, DMK has virtually formalised its ties with Congress, which is likely to get 11 seats, including Puducherry.The highlight of the day was PMK leaders S Ramadoss and his son Anbumani signing the pact with chief minister Edappadi K Palaniswami and his deputy O Panneerselvam after an hour-long meeting in a city hotel. A beaming Panneerselvam said, “AIADMK and PMK have forged a mega, victorious alliance.” AIADMK leader and deputy CM O Panneerselvam said PMK will support his party in 21 byelections that are due in the state. PMK leader Ramadoss's son Anbumani, who has been criticising the AIADMK government till recently, did not speak to the media; the party circulated a four-page press release signed by the senior Ramadoss that sought to explain the reasons behind the party’s decision. The DMDK, the leaders said, will be part of the alliance, but the number of seats for the Vijayakant-led party is yet to be finalised.Union minister and BJP leader in charge of TN Piyush Goyal arrived in Chennai around 1pm, accompanied by party colleagues Pon Radhakrishnan and state BJP president Tamilisai Soundararajan. EPS and OPS are said to have done some tough bargaining with their chief ally BJP to restrict its share of seats to five. “Presenting strong data and statistics on BJP’s strengths and weaknesses, the AIADMK leaders asked Goyal to be pragmatic in their demand. The CM persuaded Goyal to come down from eight to five seats, saying he would ensure not just the victory of the NDA but also that of all the five BJP candidates,” said a BJP functionary privy to the talks.In the DMK-Congress camp, too, alliance talks picked up momentum. “A formal announcement about the alliance will be made at the DMK headquarters on Wednesday evening. We have received the number as well as the constituencies we wanted,” TNCC chief K S Alagiri told TOI from New Delhi after a three-hour meeting with AICC president Rahul Gandhi. DMK’s Rajya Sabha MP Kanimozhi met Rahul and finalised the seat-sharing.Later, Goyal met DMDK chief Vijayakant. “Everything in life is not about alliances and politics. There are some personal human relationships also. My visit today is to inquire about Captain’s (Vijayakant) health as a family member. Today’s visit is to wish him good health and a long life,” the Union minister said.Anbumani Ramadoss, who insiders say was keener on a DMK alliance, kept silent, but joined leaders at the CM’s Greenways Road residence for a tea party. PMK has laid down some demands in exchange for being a part of the AIADMK-led alliance. They include a caste Census; declaring Cauvery delta a protected zone; interlinking Godavari and Cauvery rivers and implementing 20 irrigation schemes. Other demands include release of the seven life convicts in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case and implementation of total prohibition in a phased manner.
