Enough: no more blame game

Not long in the past, there has been unlawful insurgency in Indian administered Kashmir and the miasma of violence has aggrandized. So far, violence in occupied Kashmir has killed tens of thousands. In contrast, India has about 500,000 soldiers in occupied Kashmir, where armed groups despairingly and irremediably are fighting for independence.

UN High Commissioner for Human Rights ZeidRa’ad Al Hussein stated thatthis conflict has robbed millions of their fundamental human rights, and still continues to this day to inflict untold suffering of the people.

Reports also pointed out serious concerns that since 1980, Indian military has committed massive human rights violations from dramatic unlawful sexual assaults to extrajudicial killings. In 2016, Indian military illegitimately killed the young dynamic hero in Kashmir ‘Burhan Wani’. Whereas, more than 500 people were targeted and unlawfully killed. Moreover, in 2016, one of the heinous weapons used against minors were the pellet firing shotguns, which can be considered as one of the horrific examples of the degree of violence used by the Indian military against unarmed civilians.

Isaac Newton said; “to every action there is always opposed an equal reaction”.

Even though, with a bitter history since 1989, there have been 10 suicidal attacks in India. Whereas, the recent bombing on the Indian armed forces in Pulwama has been written off as a barbarous act not rooted in history. In the Pulwama attack, the young suicide bomber was an inveterate of IHK. Unfortunately, as a result of extreme violence Young Kashmiris are taking up guns and openly targeting the Indian establishment.However, New Delhi must back down from taking a militarized approach and consider to resolve the issue through dialogue or the violence will never end.

History has proven that force used by Indian military has not only caused unrest and increased atrocities but also can never deter young blood from claiming their fundamental human rights.

Reports also pointed out serious concerns that since 1980, Indian military has committed massive human rights violations from dramatic sexual assaults to extrajudicial killings

Pakistan has strongly condemned the Pulwama terror attack. And, Pakistan also denied any involvement in the ferocious and remorseless attack and firmly rejected the presence of the militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad on their terrain. India’s claim does not have valid evidence against its neighbor and thus has not been yet produced. Therefore, Criticizing Islamabad for dewing and harboring terrorist is not justified. In reality, Jaish-e-Mohammad is banned in Pakistan and blaming us for its existence on their soil is inexcusable. In 2014, Pakistan flushed out international and local militants during the successful operation of ‘Zarb_E_ Azab’. Later in 2017, Zarb-e-Azb was followed by another prosperous operation called Radd_ul_Fasaad. As compared to the rest of the region looking at realistic facts Pakistan has paid the highest price in the eradication of terrorism. Anyhow, as always India loves to play the blame game.

India has sabotaged Pakistan at various occasions. In 2016, Pakistan was blamed for a deadly terrorist attack on India’s Pathankot air base. Islamabad strongly condemned the attack and offered new Delhi to conduct a proper investigation. Sharif picked up the phone and talked to Modi, and Pakistan’s national security adviser, Lieutenant General Nasir Khan Janjua, spoke with his Indian counterpart, AjitDoval. India dramatically failed to produce any evidence against Pakistan at any forum. In contrast, Pakistan has proved at an international level that India has send their intelligence agency spy Kulbhushan Yadav to create a proxy war, plan and execute terrorist attacks, and that he tried to destabilize the country. Pakistan has always believed in bilateral comprehensive dialogues between the two countries. Importantly, during Modi’s era, risk and reward doctrine does not initiate gargantuan hope in negotiations with Pakistan.

With exceeding disappointment, we can see that the Indian media has clogged the peace process between the two governments and turned it into a contest of the gladiators. In spite of that, Pakistan still believes inharmonyand peaceful interlocution.

Indian senior BJP leader ArunJaitley said that India will take all necessary steps to isolate Pakistan from international community. Why and how does India think Pakistan can be isolated?We experienceand enjoy a close strategic relationship with our neighbor, China. The relations between Pakistan and China have been described by Pakistan’s ambassador to China as “higher than the mountains, deeper than the oceans, stronger than steel, dearer than eyesight, sweeter than honey, and so on “. In addition, relations with Iran areconvoluted but not antagonistic and can be collaborative. Distinctively, relations with Turkey, Saudi Arabia, have always remained pleasant with a consideration towards cooperation. Within the wider international community Pakistan enjoys great relations because the influence of size, strategic location, military strength and economic potential

Unfortunately, in history India’s relation with Pakistan has always remained hostile. Rather than blaming Pakistan, India should take the responsibility of a security lapse of Pulwama incident. Pakistan’s Prime Minister and his administration has shown a big heart by laying the foundation of ” Kartarpur corridor” . Whereas, the Indian Army chief BipinRawat declared a unilateral decision and also explicitly said that it should be viewed in isolation.

Both India and Pakistan have nuclear capabilities. India’s threat to Pakistan for nuclear holocaust to end modern civilization would greatly increase devastation in the region and the damage would be incalculable with irreparable humanitarian consequences for the entire South Asia region, including neighboring countries like Bangladesh, Nepal, China, Iran, Afghanistan. Pakistan’s silence is not its weakness and is primed to combat any threat with all contemporary capabilities.

The climate of Dialogue between India and Pakistan is the last resort to resolve the pivotal issue of Kashmir. India has to leave its rigid attitude behind bars and should start peace dialogues with Pakistan.

It is enough now and itwould be better for India to terminate this weak blame game.

The author is a UK based practicing Barrister

Published in Daily Times, February 20th 2019.
