21 killed in different road mishaps

As many as 21 persons were killed while several were reported injured in different incidents of road mishap in Uttar Pradesh on Monday and Tuesday.

In Mathura, seven people were killed and three injured in an accident on Yamuna expressway early Tuesday morning. Police said that the accident occurred near Burj Sukhdev village when an ambulance, coming from Noida side, overturned, broke the divider and hit two cars coming on the opposite lane of the expressway before coming to rest.

Most of the deceased were the occupants in the car. The injured were rushed to a hospital in critical condition. The deceased were yet to be identified. The ambulance was carrying a body and was going to Bihar from Delhi.

In Kanpur, four members of a family of an Indian Police Services (IPS) officer posted in West Bengal, along with their driver, were killed in a road accident in Ghatampur area of the district late Monday night.

Police said the accident occurred on the Kanpur-Sagar highway in which family members of 2015 batch IPS officer Arvind Kumar Anand, presently posted as ACP, Howrah, were killed. Among the deceased were Anand’s father and mother besides his sister, uncle and the driver of the car.

The incident occurred when the car was hit by a truck and in the impact, the car rammed into another truck near Veerpur village. The deceased were identified as Dinesh Rajak (55), his wife Rajni, 20-year-old daughter and his brother-in-law. They were returning from Bareilly after attending a marriage ceremony. Car driver Devendra (30) was also killed in the accident. The IPS officer is the native of Chattarpur in Madhya Pradesh.

In Hardoi, three people were killed in separate road accidents on Monday night. Reports said an unidentified vehicle rammed into a motorbike at Baghauni-Pratapnagar road in Baghauni area killing three people on the spot. The deceased were identified as Rajendra Prasad and Mansharam, natives of Mardankheda village.

In another incident reported in Hardoi, a vehicle crushed two people to death and injured another in Shahabad town. The deceased were identified as Awadhesh Prajapati and Shivam.

Injured Sumit Gupta was rushed to the district hospital where his condition was stated to be critical.

In Bulandshahr, five members of a family, including a woman and a child, were killed while three others were injured, when their car fell into a canal under Anupshahr police station area on Tuesday. Police said that the family was going to Vrindavan from Moradabad, when their car fell into Makhaina canal after hitting some people standing nearby. None of the deceased could be identified so far. The injured were admitted to a private hospital in Bulandshahr, the police added.
