Don’t politicise terror attack: Shiv Sena tells BJP

Shiv Sena targets Congress’ Sidhu in the editorial.

After the Sena- BJP alliance, expectations were that the Sena would justify its decision in the editorial of ‘Saamana’ since it has always used the editorial to explain its stand.

Mumbai: A day after announcing an alliance with the BJP, the Shiv Sena chose not to comment on the issue in ‘Saamana’, the party’s mouthpiece but instead warned the NDA government not to use the Pulwama terror attacks for political gains.

As Sena and the BJP sealed a seat-sharing pact on Monday, it was expected that the former would justify its decision in the editorial in its party mouthpiece ‘Saamana’ since the Sena has always used the editorial to explain its stand on various political and social issues.

However, there was no mention of Sena-BJP alliance in the Saamana editorial on Tuesday. “Riots and terror attacks should not be used for ‘political gains.’ Targeting students from Kashmir over such incidents could spell more trouble for the government,” said the editorial.

The party said, “Sometime back there were political allegations that Prime Minister Narendra Modi could wage a small-scale war to win elections. The rulers should not behave in a way that these allegations gather strength.”

It also targeted Congress leader Navjot Singh Sidhu for his controversial statements in the wake of February 14 Pulwama bombing in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed. “Sidhu indulges in a loose talk, but he is originally a ‘product’ of the BJP,” said the party.

The editorial pointed out that Mr Sidhu was ousted from a television show after he called for dialogue with Pakistan even after the Pulwama attack as he was under pressure and a campaign against his remarks was launched. On the other hand, the comments of BJP legislator Nepal Singh, who recently stirred a controversy with his statement that Army jawans “ought to die,” were selectively ignored and he did not face any action, the editorial said.
