Trump describes Pulwama attack as horrible, asks India-Pak to get along

Thousands of terrorists might have been airlifted out of Kabul: Trump slams Biden

Never in history has withdrawal from war been handled so badly: Trump

Trump describes Pulwama attack as horrible, asks India-Pak to get along

International

oi-Oneindia Staff

By Anuj Cariappa

Washington, Feb 20: US President Donald Trump has described as a "horrible situation" the Pulwama terrorist attack by the Jaish-e-Mohammed, in which 44 CRPF personnel were martyred, and said he was getting reports on it and would issue a statement.

Separately, State Department deputy spokesperson Robert Palladino expressed "strong support" for India and asked Pakistan to "punish anyone responsible" for the February 14 attack.

US: Sixteen states sue Pres Trump over border wall emergency

The suicide attack has led to escalation of tension between India and Pakistan and Trump told reporters at the Oval Office of White House that it would be "wonderful" if the two South Asia neighbours get along.

"I have watched. I have got a lot of reports on it. We will have comment (on it) at an appropriate time. It would be wonderful if they (India and Pakistan) get along," Trump said in response to a question.

"That (the terrorist attack) was a horrible situation. We are getting reports. We will have a statement to put out," Trump said.

At a separate news conference, the State Department deputy spokesperson said the US has been in close communication with the Indian government "to express not only our condolences but our strong support".

"We urge Pakistan to fully cooperate with the investigation into the attack and to punish anyone responsible," Palladino said. In the aftermath of the Pulwama attack, the US has also been in contact with Pakistan, he said.

On North Korea's nuclear power, Trump said he only trusted Putin, reveals ex-FBI acting chief

Following the terrorist attack, Trump's National Security Advisor, John Bolton, has supported India's right to self-defence.

Secretary of state Mike Pompeo, Bolton, and the White House press secretary Sarah Sanders in separate statements have asked Pakistan to immediately take action against the JeM and its leaders and end support to terrorist safe havens.

The CRPF personnel were killed when a JeM terrorist rammed an explosive-laden car into a vehicle carrying them in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Wednesday, February 20, 2019, 5:41 [IST]
