India asks Pakistani nationals in Rajasthan to leave within 48 hours

News Desk |

In the wake of souring diplomatic relationship between two countries post-Pulwama Attack, India has ordered Pakistani nationals in Rajasthan to leave the country within 48 hours, Times of India reported.

A suicide attack on Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Pulwama Area of Indian Occupied Kashmir (IoK) on February 14 left 40 Indian soldiers killed. A series of violent protest erupted afterward in IoK and India, targeting Muslims-especially Kashmiris as India blamed Pakistan for the attack.

The business community of the district is told not to do any kind of business with Pakistanis directly, or indirectly; nor should any kind of employment be given to any Pakistani.

From looting the shops of Muslims to expelling university students, Indian Muslims have been facing atrocities at the hand of extremist Indian Hindus that reflect that even after 72 years of partition, hostile attitude of Hindus towards Muslims haven’t changed a bit.

In the recent act of fanaticism, the district administration of Bikaner Rajasthan has given a deadline of 48 hours to Pakistani nationals to leave the place. Not just that, the rest houses, hotels, and even hospitals have been strictly prohibited to entertain any Pakistani. The business community of the district is told not to do any kind of business with Pakistanis directly, or indirectly; nor should any kind of employment be given to any Pakistani.

The administration order further says, “In the matter of receiving spoof calls from Pakistan, no citizen through any medium of telecommunication will exchange any kind of army or sensitive information to an unknown person. “

Read more: Kashmiris all over India fear for their lives after Pulwama attack

The order is applicable for two months; however, Pakistani citizens who have registered with foreigner’s registration office will be exempted from the order. According to Indian officials, the order has been released as a result of resentment and protest of Indians and to avoid any unfortunate incidents in the area.
