Chief minister Ashok Gehlot writes to Centre for MNREGA fund release

Chief minister Ashok Gehlot has urged the Modi government to release Rs 1000 crore fund due under MNREGA (Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act) scheme for Rajasthan.

In a letter shot to the Union minister for rural development and panchayati raj, Narendra Singh Tomar, the CM has drawn his attention towards the dues pending in current financial year (2018-19) that sets to end by March 31.

“An allocation of Rs 543 crores in material head and Rs 260 crores under labour head is due from the government of India. Hence, the government should release Rs 600 crores in material head and Rs 400 crores in labour head immediately,” said Gehlot in the letter.

It is not for the first time that the state government has asked the Centre to release its due share under MNREGA, a scheme launched by the UPA government. Almost three weeks ago deputy chief minister Sachin Pilot, who holds the portfolio of panchayati raj minister, shot a letter to Tomar. Chief secretary DB Gupta and ACS (rural development) have already reminded the Centre.

“Rajasthan is a pioneer among the states in the implementation of the scheme. In the current financial year nearly 42.33 lakh people in the state got employment under the scheme. They got jobs for 1972.23 lakh days. In the current financial years Rajasthan has utilised all the funds released under the scheme, so far, from Centre. So far Rs 4555 crore fund has been spent under the scheme,” Gehlot asserted in the letter.

Meanwhile, Gehlot has wished people on Beneshwar Dham fair being organised in Dungerpur, a tribal area. “My best wishes to all the devotees participating in Baneshwar Dham fair this year on the occasion of ‘Magh Purnima’.

This Kumbh mela of tribals, sees congregation of tribals from various states who also pay their respects at Baneshwar Temple. On this occasion, I am also pleased to inform that we have announced to constitute Baneshwar Dham Development Board for overall development of tribal region,” tweeted Gehlot.

Pilot Wrote Letter

It is not for the first time that state government has asked Centre to release its due share under MNREGA. Almost three weeks ago deputy CM Sachin Pilot, who holds the portfolio of panchayati raj minister, shot a letter to Tomar.
