Gas station attendant killed in Wayne crash was set to leave job in 2 weeks

WAYNE — Lovedeep Fatra was ready to move on from pumping gas to a career as a professional truck driver.

The 23-year-old Pequannock man, one of three people killed in a morning rush-hour car accident on Route 23 on Tuesday, aimed to leave his job in just two weeks to get his commercial driver's license, said Tito Krishnamurthy, who was friendly with Fatra.

"He was the nicest guy you could ever meet," said Krishnamurthy, 57, who owns Silverstar Motors Corp., an auto-repair shop attached to a Delta gas station. "He was very polite to all of the customers."

Arrest:Jason Vanderee of Sussex County charged in fatal Wayne crash

What we know:Wayne crash on Route 23 leaves three people dead

Krishnamurthy said Fatra was the only attendant on duty at the gas station, at 1220 Route 23 north, when an SUV careened off of the highway, slamming into two cars whose drivers stopped there to buy fuel.

Lincoln Park residents Jon Warbeck and his son, Luke Warbeck, 17, a junior at Boonton High School, also were killed in the crash, Lincoln Park Mayor Dave Runfeldt confirmed on Tuesday evening.

Story continues below gallery.

Jason Vanderee, 29, of Glenwood in Vernon Township, was arrested Tuesday night and charged with three counts of first-degree aggravated manslaughter; three counts of first-degree death by auto while driving intoxicated within 1,000 feet of school property; three counts of second-degree death by auto; possession of a controlled dangerous substance; possession of hypodermic needles; and possession of drug paraphernalia.

Vanderee was given naxolone at the scene, according to WNBC New York. He survived and was rushed to St. Joseph's Regional Medical Center in Paterson for treatment. Naxolone is a drug that reverses effects of opiate overdoses.

Krishnamurthy, who has owned the repair shop for 10 years, said he never saw an accident as bad as Tuesday's crash on that stretch of the highway.

"We've never had anything like this happen before — not even close," Krishnamurthy said.

Fatra, who emigrated from India, worked at the gas station for about a year and was popular with customers loyal to the business, some of whom called there after they heard the news.

"I'm kind of getting dizzy, talking about it," Krishnamurthy said, as he was handed a bottle of water from a relative who went to the gas station to keep him company that afternoon.

Krishnamurthy remembered his last conversation with Fatra. He said he asked him whether he wanted a cup of coffee from a nearby convenience store.

"It happened in a flash," Krishnamurthy said. "I knew right away there was nothing I could do to help them."

Email: devencentis@northjersey.com
