DNA Edit: MBS in New Delhi - India will raise terrorism issue with Pakistan’s key ally

Mohammed bin Salman, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, is coming to India at a time, which is not exactly auspicious. Not that he is to be blamed. After all, the supreme leader of the highly influential West Asian kingdom could scarcely have divined that his twin visit to Pakistan and India, could have come in such circumstances.

Arriving in New Delhi, Mohammed bin Salman, also known by acronym MBS, is caught in the worst possible Indo-Pakistan logjam. His visit comes days after the Pulwama outrage that has vitiated the atmosphere between the two South Asian neighbours.

New Delhi is likely to strongly raise the issue of Pakistan’s cross-border terrorism with the Crown Prince. That this agenda is likely to dominate the visit is more than clear. Ahead of the royal visit, Saudi Arabia’s Minister of State for Foreign Affairs said in Islamabad that Riyadh will try to “de-escalate” tensions between India and Pakistan in the wake of the deadly terror attack in Pulwama by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Indian officials insist that Saudi Arabia is no longer willing to accept Pakistan’s narrative on Kashmir and cross border terrorism and that New Delhi will forcefully raise the issue of Pakistan’s support to terror groups during delegation-level talks between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the Crown Prince on Wednesday.

The prevailing sentiment in India can be gauged from the fact that MSB, who arrived in Islamabad, had returned to Saudi Arabia on Monday after New Delhi expressed reservations over his coming to India from Pakistan directly.

New Delhi takes strong exception to this hyphenated relationship. A top Indian Foreign Ministry official quoted Riyadh as strongly condemning Pulwama. The reality is that during Narendra Modi’s tenure, New Delhi and Riyadh have developed closer ties in the areas of security and counter-terrorism.

Saudi Arabia has provided India information and intelligence about terror networks. The two countries had inked a pact on exchange of intelligence related to money laundering and terrorism during Modi’s visit to Riyadh in 2016 and it has paid rich dividends.

A sign of this evolving relationship is that India has been identified as one of the eight strategic partners with whom Saudi Arabia intends to deepen partnership in areas of security, trade, investment and culture. Besides, holding talks on cross border terrorism, the two countries will also look at further enhancing defence ties, including concluding a joint naval exercise, during the two-day visit of the Saudi Crown Prince.

A sign of it is the joint statement, to be issued after talks between the two sides, which is likely to have a strong reference about terrorism and ways to deal with it. At $27.48 billion, Saudi is India’s fourth largest trading trading partner.

It is also a key pillar of India’s energy security, being a source of 17 per cent or more of crude oil and 32 per cent of this country’s LPG requirements. Recently, Saudi ARAMCO in partnership with ADNOC of UAE has agreed to partner in the Ratnagiri Refinery and Petro-Chemical project Ltd which is a joint venture of $ 44 billion.
