Bells will not chime in your temples: Pakistan’s railway minister provoked India

Islamabad: Hardly an hour after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan absolved his country of any involvement in the barbarous terror attack that killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force jawans in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district, a senior minister in his government targeted India with a communal rant. In a video posted on social media platform Twitter, Pakistan’s railway minister said that Pakistan is prepared for peace and for war and India should not live with the misconception that Pakistan will keep quiet if provoked.

Important video message pic.twitter.com/GAudYdXG6g — Sheikh Rashid Ahmad (@ShkhRasheed) February 19, 2019

Sheikh Rashid Ahmad said in his address “If you talk peace, there will be peace. If you talk war, there will be war. As PM Imran Khan said, Pakistan is absolutely against terrorism. Imran Khan has categorically said that the reason why Muslims are being hounded in India today is because of Kashmir. We have not worn bangles. For us, Pakistan is life and Pakistan is death. If anyone looks at Pakistan with malice, those eyes will be gouged out. Then neither will you have prosperity nor will bells chime in your temples. Pakistan is that fort for Muslims that Muslims all over the world look out for, and in Imran Khan's governance, over 20 crores of people are ready for peace and for war,”.

also read By breaking protocol, PM Modi Welcomed Saudi Crown Prince at Delhi Airport, a wide range of issues will be discuss

Pakistan PM Imran Khan on Tuesday denied his country’s hand in orchestrating the February 14 Pulwama attack that resulted in the death of 40 CRPF jawans, arguing that it was 'not in Pakistan's interest'. Delivering an address on Radio Pakistan — his first comment on the matter since the attack — Khan promised that his government will extend full support if India provides ‘actionable intelligence’ on the Pulwama terror attack.

He said “My statement is for the Indian government. You (Indian govt) have blamed the Pakistan government without any evidence. If Pakistan was planning the visit of Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, what does it stand to gain out of this? Pakistan ko isse kya faayda hai? Kyu Pakistan karega iss stage ke upar jab Pakistan stability ki taraf ja raha hai?,”, adding, "It is in our interest that nobody from our soil spreads violence. I want to tell the Indian government that we will take action if evidence is found against anyone from Pakistan.”

also read Mehbooba Mufti thinks Imran Khan deserves a chance to talk

However, to be noted that banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14 in Awantipora area of Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. The attack took place around 3:30 pm after a suicide bomber, identified as local boy Adil Ahmad Dar, in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying over 2500 CRPF personnel on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.
