Driver on Drugs Crashes Into New Jersey Gas Station, Killing 3: Sources

What to Know A driver on drugs hit a guardrail and crashed into a gas station, ripping the roof off another car, law enforcement sources said

The crash happened in Wayne, New Jersey Tuesday morning, the sources said

A father, his 17-year-old son, and a gas station attendant died, the sources said. The driver survived after being administered Narcan

UPDATE: Alleged High Driver in NJ Crash That Killed 3 Is Identified



Three people, including a father and his teenage son, died when a driver allegedly high on drugs hit a guardrail and crashed into a gas station in New Jersey Tuesday, law enforcement sources with knowledge of the investigation tell News 4.



The crash on Route 23 in Wayne was so violent it tore the roof off the vehicle of the father and his 17-year-old son, the sources said. They were both pronounced dead at the scene. A gas station attendant also died.

Three cars are seen smashed to pieces after a crash in Wayne, New Jersey, Tuesday morning.

The father has been identified as Jon Warbeck, and his son Luke Warbeck. The employee who was killed was identified by relatives as Lovedeep Fatra.

Gas station worker Tito Krishnamurthy had just stepped away from the gas pumps when the car barreled into the station.

"We've never had anything like this before," he said, stunned.

Fatra was in his early 20s and had moved to the U.S. from India a year ago to pursue a better life, according to relatives.

"His parents are devastated overseas," said cousin Novdeep Singh. "He speaks to them every day. Day and night. I don't know what to make of it."

The driver survived after being administered Narcan at the scene, the sources said. The driver's identity has not been released.

The investigation remains active and ongoing. The Passaic County Prosecutor's Office said more information would be released as it becomes available.

The crash happened around 8:45 a.m., prosecutors said.

[NATL] Top News Photos: Pope Visits Japan, and More
