Engineering student who comforted injured pilot says he was calm after Surya Kirans crashed

Chethan Kumar

Surya Kirans

Hawk Mk-132 aircraft

Bangalore

Aero India

Watch: Pilot was calm after Surya Kirans crashed, says engineering student who comforted him 01:01

Chethan Kumar BM, the engineering student who comforted the pilot by holding his hand

1 & 2: The Surya Kirans flying in mirror image formation 3 & 4: The tail of one collides with nose of the other 5 & 6: The aircraft start hurtling towards the ground 7: Two pilots eject; Wg Cdr Sahil Gandhi, who was flying solo in the inverted position, doesn’t 8: The aircraft explode

Bengaluru

Wing commander Sahil Gandhi

Past incidents



In January 2009, Wing Commander RS Dhaliwal died in a crash near Surya Kiran’s home base Bidar. Another aircraft had crashed in December 2007. In March 2006, two pilots were killed in a crash in Bidar.

Five days before the inauguration of the Aero India 2007, on February 2, at the Yelahanka base an ALH helicopter belonging to Sarang display team crashed leavening one pilot dead.

BM loves aircraft, especially the. He studies Aeronautical Engineering at Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology (he’s in the final semester) but could have never imagined that he would end up getting so close to a pilot of theknown for performing stunts that bring your heart to the mouth.On Tuesday, Chethan’s video went viral after two Surya Kirans collided while flying in the mirror image formation (also called Calypso pass manoeuvre). In the video, Chethan is heard comforting the pilot (‘Sir, stay calm sir. Nothing has happened. Stay calm sir. They are coming,’ he keeps telling the pilot and then holds his hand to reassure him. Chethan later toldMirror in detail about what happened earlier in the day (although at 8 pm he said he was still shaking after seeing the crash and helping the pilot.)Chethan’s college is near Air Force Station Yelahanka so it is shut tillconcludes. On Tuesday, he was watching aircraft perform manoeuvres and stunts from his home, which is behind the air base.“I could clearly see Surya Kirans taking off and dispersing in the air and this was when two more aircraft (not Surya Kirans) took off for their sorties. Later, when all the nine Surya Kirans re-assembled, I was at the edge of my seat,” he said.But at around 11.50 am, Chethan notic­ed something had gone horribly wrong.“I could see both the aircraft getting closer. Initially, I thought it was one more trick as Surya Kirans were known for the precision and timing while doing such acts. However, when the aircraft touched each other and started losing balance, I started shivering,” he added.(Video footage later revealed that the tail of one of the aircraft clipped the nose of the other while they were flying in mirror image formation – one flying upside down on top of the other).“Then I heard a loud sound and saw thick black smoke -- something that I had never seen in my life. While I was still trying to make sense of what had happened, I saw two pilots with parachutes trying to emerge out of the fire,” he said. (He was perhaps referring to the two pilots who bailed out safely – the third one, Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi, was not so lucky. He sustained fatal injuries in the accident.)Chethan then ran towards the pilots and some others joined him too. While Chethan attended to one of the pilots, the others rushed towards the other one. “When I reached the spot, I could see one of the pilots lying on the ground with a parachute next to him. He looked like he was in great pain although he tried to maintain his composure. I offered him water but the pilot refused it. The only thing that flashed through my mind at that time was to hold his hand and comfort him saying that we were with him and he need not worry. As soon as I held out my right hand, the pilot grabbed it firmly. So I decided to keep talking to the pilot so that he would remain conscious.“I tried to reassure him saying nothing would happen and rescue teams would arrive soon. The pilot didn’t talk but nodded his head. I asked him if he was feeling too much pain; the pilot then asked me to help remove the parachute. As I didn’t know how to remove those knots, the pilot gave me tips through gestures.“Suddenly, there was another blast; probably the some part of the aircraft had caught fire. The fire had engulfed the region and we narrowly escaped it. I told the pilot that he needed to be taken to a safe place. We shifted him to a nearby tree. By then, we had removed his parachute and people had started gathering. A few policemen who were cordoning off the area tried to chase away bystanders. They asked me to leave as well. However, when they saw that the pilot was holding my hand firmly and letting go, they let me stay.”By then, Chethan could hear the sirens of ambulances and fire engines that were rushing to the spot. “The pilot indicated that the siren was irritating him and it should be turned off. So I shouted out the request to the firemen who understood. By then, I could see around 100 armed guards surrounding the whole area. One of the officers took possession of the area and tried to shift the injured pilot in an ambulance. The officer thanked me for being there and I noticed that he tried to smile even while being in deep pain. Even after the pilot left the ambulance, I kept on praying to God that all the pilots should be safe. Then, I went back to check the news and was shocked that one of the pilots had died. I remember that the pilot’s badge said VT Shelke (Wing Commander Vijay T Shelke). When I heard that he was recuperating, I heaved a sigh of relief,” said Chethan.The Indian Air Force gave out details of the crash and said that a Court of Inquiry will investigate it.“Today around 11.50 am, two Hawk aircraft of Surya Kiran Aerobatic Team crashed close to Yelahanka Air Force base. These aircraft were carrying out practice for the forthcoming Aero India 2019 air show. Out of the three aircrew of the aircraft, Wing Commander VT Shelke and Squadron Leader TJ Singh ejected. However, Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi sustained fatal injuries. The two air crew have been airlifted to Air Force Command Hospital,,” the IAF statement said.The two aircraft were performing a manoeuvre in which one the aircraft flies one on top of the other with the one on top being in inverted position.Following the collision, the pilots attempted to eject from their aircraft. While VT Shelke and TJ Singh who were in one aircraft ejected, Gandhi who was in the inverted aircraft could not and is said to have gone down with the aircraft.The aircraft crashed at Gantiganahalli near Yelahanka and both were fully gutted due to the impact.The Hawk aircraft used by the team are two-seater trainer aircraft and normally one pilot flies while performing during air shows. However, during the practice sortie, there were two pilots in one of the aircraft.The Surya Kiran team had on Monday put up a flawless display during the full flight rehearsal. They were scheduled to perform during the inauguration on Wednesday and on all five days of the air show. However, after the accident, Chief of IAF Training Command, Air Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauria said Surya Kirans will not perform on Wednesday. All other display will go as planned, he added.“We are one of the few air forces to operate a nine-aircraft display team. When you operate a nine-aircraft display team, the aircraft are about 4 to 5 meters apart. Some manoeuvres involve heavy risks. Today, they were doing a mirror image manoeuver. An investigation has been ordered we have to find out whether there was execution error or a bird hit or any other error,” Bhadauria said.Karnataka Director General of Police and chief of Fire and Emergency Services MN Reddi said there were no injuries to any civilian on the ground. “No major damage to any house in ISRO colony. Fire force has completely suppressed the fire,” Reddi tweeted. One of the houses suffered minor damage as the wing of one of the planes landed on it. Thankfully, no one was inside the house.Raised in 1996 as a six-aircraft aerobatic team, Surya Kiran quickly graduated to a nine-aircraft formation in 1998. It is stationed in Air Force Station Bidar and only fighter aircraft pilots get posted in the squadron for a three-year term.The Surya Kiran team’s aircraft are painted with orange and white colours and are one of the few nine-aircraft aerobatics teams in the world. The team has wowed audience across the length and breadth of India and abroad with their signature manoeuvres like delta loops, barrel rolls and bomb burst.After a hiatus of eight years, Surya Kirans were supposed to return with its nine-aircraft formation for this edition of Aero India. Surya Kiran used to perform stunts in Kiran MK-II aircraft, a basic trainer for IAF’s budding fighter pilots. It had been the mainstay at the biennial Aero India since 1996.However, the team was disbanded after the 2011 edition of the air show as the IAF decided to reroute the Kiran Mk-IIs solely for training purposes due to a shortage of trainer aircraft. The Surya Kiran team later made a conversion to the Hawk Mk-132 Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) in 2015. Though the Surya Kiran team performed at 2017 edition of the airshow, it was with a six-aircraft formation and not the nine-aircraft one which was supposed to be held on Wednesday.The British-origin Hawks are made in India by Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd (HAL). These are used to train pilots in advanced fighter flying skills.who died in the mid-air collision in Bengaluru on Tuesday, was commissioned into the fighter stream in June 2004. He belonged to Hisar and had joined the Indian Air Force after graduating for the National Defence Academy, Khadakvasla. He is survived by his wife and a young son, Riaan.
