The Ministry of External Affairs demolished Imran Khan's counteroffer on certain points

Bengaluru: On Tuesday The Ministry of External Affairs demolished Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan's counter offered earlier today with seven points. The MEA exposed Pakistan's terror hypocrisy, condemning PM Imran Khan's propaganda. In his first statement after the horrific terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district in which at least 40 CRPF jawans were killed, the Pakistan PM today rejected any role in the attack. He had further said that he understood that elections are impending in India and the narrative of blaming Pakistan would make it easier to get votes from the masses.

While, assuring India that he would act against the perpetrators of the Pulwama terror attack if India shares "actionable intelligence", Khan said Pakistan wants "stability in the region". The February 14 suicide attack was carried out by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) terror group.

Here are the seven points raised by the MEA:

1. The Prime Minister of Pakistan has offered to investigate the matter if India provides proof. This is a lame excuse. In the horrific attack in Mumbai on 26/11, the proof was provided to Pakistan. Despite this, the case has not progressed for the last more than 10 years. Likewise, on the terror attack on Pathankot airbase, there has been no progress. Promises of “guaranteed action” ring hollow given the track record of Pakistan.

2. Pakistan’s Prime Minister has called for dialogue and expressed his readiness to talk about terrorism. India has repeatedly stated that it is ready to engage in a comprehensive bilateral dialogue in an atmosphere free from terror and violence.

3. It is regrettable that the Pakistani Prime Minister has insinuated that India’s response to the terrorist attack is determined by the forthcoming General Election. India rejects this false allegation. India’s democracy is a model for the world which Pakistan would never understand. We demand Pakistan to stop misleading the international community and take credible and visible action against the perpetrators of Pulwama terrorist attack and other terrorists and terror groups operating from areas under their control.

also read Bells will not chime in your temples: Pakistan’s railway minister provoked India

4. We are not surprised that the Prime Minister of Pakistan refuses to acknowledge the attack on our security forces in Pulwama as an act of terrorism. Prime Minister of Pakistan has neither chosen to condemn this heinous act nor condoled with the bereaved families.

5. Disclaiming any link between the terrorist attack and Pakistan is an oft-repeated excuse by Pakistan. The Pakistani Prime Minister has ignored claims made by the Jaish-e-Muhammed, as well as by the terrorist, who perpetrated this heinous crime. It is a well-known fact that Jaish-e-Muhammed and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan. These should be sufficient proof for Pakistan to take action.

6. The Prime Minister has referred to a “Naya Pakistan” with new thinking. In this “Naya Pakistan”, Ministers of the current Government publicly share platforms with terrorists like Hafiz Saeed, who have been proscribed by the United Nations.

7. Pakistan claims to be the greatest victim of terrorism. This is far from the truth. The international community is well acquainted with the reality that Pakistan is the nerve centre of terrorism.

also read By breaking protocol, PM Modi Welcomed Saudi Crown Prince at Delhi Airport, a wide range of issues will be discuss
