Sharman Joshi brings Graham Staines' story to the screen

Stephen Baldwin

Sharman Joshi

Bajrang Dal

Dara Singh

leprosy

Alice Patten

Rang De Basanti

Sharman Joshi in a still from the film; Graham Staines (inset)

The actor plays a journalist in the film which also features Hollywood actorsand Shari Rigby.is playing a reporter in his next, The Least of These: The Graham Staines Story, which dates back to 1999 when an Australian missionary known for his charitable work with lepers in Odisha was burnt alive allegedly byfundamentalists. According to locals, it was because they believed he was luring his Hindu patients into Christianity. Along with Staines, his two sons, Philip (10) and Timothy (6), were also charred to death while they were asleep in their station wagon at Manoharpur village on the night of January 23.Talking about the film in which he is asked to launch an undercover investigation into the missionary’s activities, Sharman says that Staines’ story is relevant today, when tolerance is the need of the hour. “What happened was tragic,” he adds.In 2003, Bajrang Dal activistwas convicted of the murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. However, Staines’ widow, Gladys, forgave him, hoping he would repent and reform. She had continued to live in India, caring forpatients until 2004 when she returned to Australia. The following year, she was awarded the Padma Shri.Sharman admits that he didn’t have a reference point for his character. “But human emotions are the same all over the world and depicting them on screen is always a challenge. I was very young when the incident took place but I r emember I was moved by it and wondered why it happened. While working on the film, the mystery unravelled for me, like it did for my character,” he explains.The film has been shot in Hyderabad, Odisha and a small valley in Andhra Pradesh. The American-Indian production, directed by Aneesh Daniel, also features Hollywood actors Stephen Baldwin and Shari Rigby. “I had’t worked with mainstream American actors apart fromin, before this. It was a delight to work with Stephen and Shari. We were not sure what to expect as actors from both ends, but Stephen and I exchanged notes, because it was a different world for him shooting in India,” admits Sharman.His next project is also an Indo-American venture. “We’ll shoot the film in Pondicherry,” he shares, adding, “We’ve also bought the rights of this West End production, The Play That Goes Wrong, and it’s currently showing all over.”
