Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan turns into meme fest, actress shares funny posts

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan turns into meme fest

Ananya Panday, daughter of popular Bollywood actor Chunky Panday, is all set to make her mark in the industry with Dharma Productions’ Student Of The Year 2 which will hit the screens in May. Even before her debut, the actress has earned a huge fan base for herself and also appeared on Karan Johar’s entertaining chat show Koffee With Karan season 6 along with her co-stars Tara Sutaria and Tiger Shroff. The moment this new batch of Student graced the couch, KJo addressed the question of nepotism and Ananya maturely handled and accepted that she is a product of nepotism and hasn’t done anything to deserve the place she has got.

While many people on social media have been applauding her for having the courage to accept that, Ananya’s various moods and expressions, while she was interacting in the show, have turned into viral memes. The actress herself shared a couple of them on her Instagram and remarked, “I had no idea I was making all these expressions but loving the memes.” Ananya shared a picture in which she was deep in though and the meme says, “When there is many stylish new clothes in the wardrobe but still confused an don’t know what to wear.” Check out the post here-

Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan turns into meme fest

Here are some more memes on Ananya Panday-

Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan turns into meme fest

Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan turns into meme fest

Ananya Panday’s appearance on Koffee With Karan became the talk of the town for her oozing confidence and charm. The actress was hitting back at all the questions host Karan Johar was throwing at her and even won the Koffee hamper with her candidness. The thing that won many hearts was when KJo asked her about nepotism and why she was on Koffee with Karan as some felt that she hasn't achieved anything, Ananya said: “I agree with this section because I haven’t done anything. I don’t deserve to be here. There are so many people out there who are talented...I am just lucky that my dad was an actor and this is what I had wanted to do."

Other than Student Of The Year, Annaya Panday has begun shooting for her next Bollywood film with Kartik Aaryan called Pati, Patni Aur Woh which is a remake of the classic 1978 film also starring Bhumi Pednekar.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
