Masood Azhar, Hafiz Saeed asked to maintain low profile by Pakistan Army: Reports

highlights Hand over the evidences and we will take action: Imram Khan tells India.

Pak PM's remarks on Pulwama attack shallow, diversionary: Arun Jaitley.

US President Donald Trump describes Pulwama attack as 'horrible'.

New Delhi:

Masood Azhar, the founder of UN-designated terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed and Mumbai terror attack mastermind, Hafiz Saeed have been asked to maintain low profile and curb their public appearances by Pakistani Amry, according to Intelligence Agency. The report further adds that the RDX used during the dastardly Pulwama attack was handed over by the Pakistani Army to the terrorists in Rawalpindi.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday assured India that action would be taken against the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack if New Delhi shares "actionable intelligence", but warned against any retaliatory action on his country.

In a video message to the nation, Khan responded to the Indian allegations on Pakistan's involvement in the attack in Kashmir on last on Thursday. The suicide attack by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group left 40 CRPF personnel dead.

Stating that Pakistan wants "stability in the region", Khan said, "If India has evidence or actionable intelligence, they should give it to us and we will take action." He said that he has come across calls for attack on Pakistan through the Indian media and warned, "If India retaliates, we will not think and retaliate back." "It is easy to start a war but difficult to end it," Khan said.

The premier said, "I want to ask India if they want to live in the past?" "Its not in our interests that somebody from here goes out to do terrorism, nor that somebody comes here and does terrorism," he added.

Earlier, Prime Minister Narendra Modi slammed Pakistan over the Pulwama terror strike that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF personnel, and urged people to have patience and faith in the security forces who have been given a free hand to punish the perpetrators of the attack.

At a public function in Pandharkawada in Yavatmal district, where he launched a number of projects, PM Modi said Pakistan has become a synonym for terrorism.

"A nation which came into existence after Partition and encourages terror activities, and which is on the verge of bankruptcy, has now become the second name for terror," PM Modi said. Asserting the country was in deep pain over what had happened in Pulwama, the prime minister said, "The sacrifice of the CRPF personnel martyred in Pulwama will not go in vain. Perpetrators of the crime will be punished."

"Security forces have been given a free hand to punish the perpetrators of the crime. I appeal to the country to have patience and faith in the security forces. Our forces will decide the place, time and manner in which the perpetrators of this crime will be punished," he said.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday, when a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

"All of us can feel the pain of families of the Pulwama martyrs. We understand your anger," PM Modi said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
