Did Sanjay Dutt and Kapil Sharma break down at an anti-drug campaign?

Sanjay Dutt and Kapil Sharma | Photo Credit: Instagram

2019 saw the rise of drug-free India campaign. The campaign brought together many celebs and other big names including Sanjay Dutt, Badshah, Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, Amir Khan, Varun Dhawan, and many others for the cause. Recently, an event for the same was organised and veteran actor Sanjay Dutt and comedian Kapil Sharma were a part of it.

According to a DNA report, Sanjay Dutt was shooting for his upcoming film Panipat in Jaipur when he flew in for the event in Punjab. The actor reportedly shared his experience with drugs and its consequences on his life. "I appeal to everybody to join this important movement and save the future of our youth," Sanjay Dutt said at the event.

The publication also quoted a source who revealed the following: "Sanjay flew in from Jaipur where he was shooting for Panipat. He wanted to be part of the campaign and share his story with the youth present. He shared his tryst with drugs and how it completely broke him. He said his dad Sunil Dutt helped him overcome this trying phase.”

The report also mentioned Kapil Sharma, who broke down while talking about his experience with alcohol and how it sabotaged his relationship with people around him. Kapil talked about getting consumed by the bottle and how his mother's concern made him kick off the habit. But that's all in the past for the comedian who is now walking on the path of healing and has joined hands with many others to make India drug-free.

On the work front, Sanjay Dutt will be seen in upcoming period drama film Panipat which is being helmed by Ashutosh Gowariker and will feature actors including Arjun Kapoor, Kriti Sanon, Padmini Kolhapure and others. The film is slated to release on December 6.

Kapil Sharma, on the other hand, is currently hosting the second season of The Kapil Sharma Show. His show has lately been facing criticism from fans who are raising their voice towards getting Navjot Singh Sidhu removed from the show.
