Pakistan PM Imran Khan provokes again, says 'don't mess with my country' to India

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan I File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Shortly after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday sought “actionable evidence” to prove India's charge that Islamabad was behind the Pulwama suicide bombing that killed 40 braves from the CRPF in Pulwama on 14 February, an image of his official Facebook account was posted with the caption “Don’t mess with my country”. In an address to the nation, Pakistan PM also said that Pakistan wants peace but will retaliate in case of “revenge” action by India.

The image was posted with his image and a message in Urdu read: “If India thinks it can attack Pakistan, we will just not think, we shall retaliate. We all know it is easy to start a war but very difficult to end. I hope better sense will prevail”.

During his address, five days after the dastardly suicide attack in Lethpora village of Awantipora region in Jammu & Kashmir’s Pulwama, Khan said he couldn’t respond earlier as he was busy with the preparations to receive the Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman. The Saudi Prince visited India after a two-day visit to Pakistan earlier. On his India-leg of the tour, Mohammed Bin Salman was greeted by Prime Minister Modi at the airport on Tuesday.

On February 14, a terrorist Adil Ahmad Dar, from the banned Pakistan-based outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), rammed an explosive-laden Scorpio SUV into a bus that was a part of the 78-vehicle Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy, snuffing out 40 lives on board in the goriest of fashion ever imaginable.

It is to be noted that Pakistan did not act on the dossier sent to it by India after 26/11 massacre that had been engineered and orchestrated by Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorists under handlers in Pakistan, including the notorious JuD and LeT chief Hafiz Saeed who is hosted by the Rawalpindi men in uniform.

New Delhi has in the past urged Islamabad to take action against JeM chief Maulana Masood Azhar in the 2001 Parliament attack and the 2016 Pathankot attack but Pakistan has continued to ignore the diplomatic protocol. Pakistan has frequently shielded Azhar, who was released under duress by India in exchange for the safety of the 150 plus passengers of the IC-814 of the hijacked Air India. Pakistan shelters the terrorists freed in the IC 814 hijack trade-off -- Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh, and Maulana Masood Azhar -- who have since been implicated in other terrorist actions such as the 2002 kidnapping and murder of American journalist Daniel Pearl, the horrific 2008 Mumbai terror attacks and more recently the 2019 Pulwama attacks. China has blocked every move that India made repeatedly to get the United Nations to ban the dreaded terrorist.
