The Sub-Continent Smolders!

Since independence India and Pakistan have been at each other’s throat…it all began in 1947….https://indianexpress.com/article/research/here-is-a-history-of-india-pakistan-conflict/

We are now in the 21st century and not much has changed on the sub-continent…..the latest incident around the region known as Kashmir is igniting more hostilities…..

The militant attack in India-ruled Kashmir has once again put New Delhi and Islamabad on a war footing. Analysts at the Munich Security Conference say it is a setback to those who wish to see lasting peace in the region.

41 Indian paramilitary troops were killed on Thursday in a suicide bombing in the Pulwama district of India-administered Kashmir. The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed, which translates as “The Army of Mohammed,” claimed responsibility for the deadly attack, according to local media.

It was not the first time that the Islamist group allegedly perpetrated an attack in the Indian part of Kashmir, although the Thursday assault was the deadliest in the disputed region.

Read more: Fresh violence in Kashmir exposes the need for diplomacy

https://www.dw.com/en/why-kashmir-attack-could-spark-a-military-confrontation-in-south-asia/a-47541203

The Kashmir thing is a spillover from the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan……https://original.antiwar.com/Nauman_Sadiq/2019/02/11/kashmir-insurgency-the-spillover-of-the-soviet-afghan-jihad/

The fact that India is in control of the mountainous region known as Kashmir just keeps the rhetoric between the two countries escalated…..back and forth the accusations fly and the newest incident is NO different……https://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-india-kashmir-attacks-pakistan/pakistan-rejects-links-to-attack-in-indian-controlled-kashmir-idUKKCN1Q32RS

Each time there is an incident the closer these two, India and Pakistan, come to another armed conflict…..you did know that these two have fought a couple of “wars”, right?

It is hard to imagine that Kashmir, one of the most beautiful places on earth and inhabited by a peaceful populace, could be the bone of contention between India and Pakistan. Unlike similar disputed territories around the world, the main reason that Kashmir is at the center of strife has more to do with political reasons than with religious ideology, despite the fact that has been a melting pot of different religious faiths.

https://www.thoughtco.com/history-of-the-kashmir-conflict-1770394

Why do the hate each other so much?

Then there is Kashmir……why do they fight?

Those videos did more in a few minutes than I could do in 1000 words…..

I watch this region because it is one of those that could ignite into a shooting war and the US would be drawn into……we DO NOT need another war…regardless of what the neocons and the M-IC want…..why is this important? They are both nuclear powers.

Watch and Learn!

Turn The Page!
