Bengaluru techie found dead at home, father suspects murder

Bengaluru techie found dead at home, father suspects murder

When his flatmate returned from work, Shantanu was found hanging from the ceiling, but with his hands bound with a rope.

news Crime

A 24-year-old software engineer from Bengaluru’s neighbourhood of Madiwala was found dead in suspicious circumstances at his home on Thursday. The deceased has been identified as Shantanu Singh, who was a native of Darjeeling.

On Thursday night, Shantanu’s flatmate, Apratim Medhi, returned from work around 9 pm and found him hanging from the ceiling, but with his hands bound with a rope, according to reports. The Madiwala police said that Apratim had tried to cut the rope in an effort to save Shantanu, but to no avail as he had already lost his life.

He then alerted Shantanu’s family in Darjeeling before calling the police. The police reached the spot immediately and eventually shifted his body to hospital to conduct an autopsy.

Apratim told the police that the door was locked from the inside and that he had gotten in using a spare key.

After the police revealed that his hands had been bound, the deceased’s father, Kanwar Raghavendra Kumar Singh, a 55-year-old teacher, filed a complaint with the police alleging that Shantanu had been murdered.

The police have questioned Apratim and have also taken Shantanu’s laptop and phone for further investigation. They are also going through his call records to determine what might have resulted in the tragedy.

Shantanu had reportedly been working at an IT firm in the city for the last four years. He was a resident of BTM layout stage I in Madiwala. A case of murder has been registered with the Madiwala police, who are investigating the same, further.

In September, in a similar incident, a techie from Electronics City in Bengaluru, had taken his own life following an argument with his live-in partner. The two had argued, during which he physically assaulted and harmed the woman, for which she was taken to the hospital. During that time, he took the drastic step.

If you are aware of anyone facing mental health issues or feeling suicidal, please provide help.

Sahai : 24-hour helpline numbers: 080-25497777
