Will Cooperate With India On All Fronts To Combat Terrorism, Says Saudi Crown Prince MBS

Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman arrived in New Delhi for a day's visit on Tuesday evening. Identifying terrorism as a common concern for Saudi Arabia and India, Saudi Crown Prince promised cooperation on all fronts, including intelligence-sharing, to combat terror.

Prince Salman called for common planning between India and Saudi Arabia to tackle various issues. “PM Modi visited Saudi Arabia in 2016 and we have achieved success in these years. We have invested around $44 billion in India. There are opportunities to invest over $100 billion in India,” said the Saudi Prince.

He said that relation between India and the Arabian peninsula has been in their DNA. "We want to be sure that this relationship is maintained and improved for the sake of both countries. With the leadership of the President and the PM, I am sure we can create good things for Saudi Arabia and India," he added.

The two nations are expected to set up a ''Strategic Partnership Council'' at a ministerial level, planning joint naval exercises and overall upping of defense cooperation during this visit.

In the joint statement, PM Modi delivered a veiled warning to Pakistan over the Pulwama attack, saying both Saudi Arabia and India had agreed to ramp up pressure on countries that continue to harbor terrorist organizations. The Congress remains miffed at the warm treatment being accorded to the Prince by Modi government.

PM Modi said, "We discussed all aspects of our bilateral ties today and have decided to take our relations to new heights."

"Saudi and India are on the same page when it comes to maintaining regional peace and stability. We are also sure that it will be beneficial for both nations to strengthen our cooperation on maritime security, cyber security, and counter-terrorism," he further added.

Saudi Crown Prince got a ceremonial welcome at the Rashtrapati Bhawan by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Ram Nath Kovind.

ALSO READ: Pulwama Terror Attack: Israel Offers Unconditional Help To India Especially Against Terrorism

Referring to the joint statement brought out by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia after MBS' trip to Islamabad, Congress tweeted saying, "Adding insult to injury, the Joint Statement between @ImranKhanPTI & Mohammad Bin Salman failed to condemn the violence & instead praised Pakistan's 'anti-terror' efforts, thus undermining our demand for naming Masood Azhar a global terrorist".
