Yogi Adityanath: Terrorism a result of Congress’ appeasement politics: Yogi Adityanath

Bhubaneswar: BJP leader and Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath on Wednesday blamed what the Congress party’s appeasement politics for the scourge of terrorism that India is grappling with now.“Recall when the Congress-led government was in power; then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh had talked about who had rights to the country’s resources. He had, taking the name of a religion, planted the seed of appeasement politics in the country. The result of Congress’ appeasement policy is terrorism. As long as the appeasement policy is carried on, this country will not grow,” Adityanath said, addressing a BJP meeting in Odisha.Comparing this with Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’s “progress-for-all” agenda, the UP chief minister said: “When Modi became the PM, he said one thing — he didn’t say any person, any party, any caste or religion — he said our government will work for India’s poor, India’s villages, India’s farmers and women without bias.”Addressing party workers at Bhawanipatna in Kalahandi district, Adityanath paid his respects to the CRPF personnel martyred in the Pulwama terror attack, and said the country had faith in the army’s determination to eliminate Pakistan-sponsored terrorists. “You have heard the army’s statement warning all terrorists. That if any Kashmiri is holding a gun that’s pointed at India, that person will only meet his death,” he said.Until the BJP had come to power at the Centre, he said, the policy had been to wait for the terrorist to shoot before retaliating. “No terrorist bullet waits for ours … The fight against terrorism isn’t a fight of one individual, one party, but that of the country … every citizen of the whole country, under the leadership of PM Modi, must work together,” he said.Addressing another rally in Khordha district, Adityanath accused his Odisha counterpart, Naveen Patnaik , of being disrespectful to freedom fighters by failing to identify land for a memorial to ‘Paika Bidroha’ — the 1817 rebellion against the British East India Company's rule. Accusing the state government of usurping all credit for central government schemes, he accused Patnaik of hurting the poor by blocking the Ayushman Bharat health protection scheme and farm intervention programmes.Adityanath asked the cadres to work towards a “double-engine” mandate in 2019, and get a BJP government in the state and a BJP government at the Centre.The BJP won only one of Odisha 21 Lok Sabha seats in the simultaneous elections held in 2014, which also saw Naveen Patnaik return to power for a fourth consecutive term in the Odisha. BJP leaders, while calling for a change in the state government, have also been stressing on the need for a greater number of MPs from Odisha to help Modi retain power in 2019.
