Rahul, Priyanka visit slain CRPF jawan’s family in Shamli

Mr. Gandhi and Ms. Vadra referred to the assassination of their father Rajiv Gandhi while expressing their grief and vowed to stand with the bereaved family.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and his sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Wednesday paid tributes to the slain CRPF men killed in the Pulwama attack as they visited the homes of two jawans in Shamli district of Uttar Pradesh.

Accompanied by Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee president Raj Babbar and general secretary in-charge of West UP, Jyotiraditya Scindia, the Gandhi siblings also attended a prayer meeting.

Travelling by road, the Congress leaders visited the family of constable Amit Kumar Kori in Mohalla Road and constable Pradip Kumar in Banat village.

Addressing a gathering after a prayer meeting in Shamli, Mr. Gandhi offered support to the family of the jawans in their "hour of tragedy" and said he understood the pain reflecting on his own loss.

"My sister said, that in a way, the same happened to our father (Rajiv Gandhi). So, we understand the pain and sadness in your hearts," Mr. Gandhi said.

The Congress president also thanked the family of the two jawans, and also the rest of those killed, for their valour. "There is no force in the world that can push back this country," he said.

This is a country of the brave, he said, adding that the CRPF jawans had set an example of it. In his address, Mr. Gandhi also stressed that India belonged to all and was a "country of love and brotherhood."

In Shamli, the Gandhis met the families of the slain jawans and offered floral tributes to their photos.

Ms. Vadra met the mother of jawan Kori inside her house, while Mr. Gandhi offered all support to the father of Pradip Kumar, who has two grandchildren to educate, one in intermediate while another in class nine.

On their way to Shamli, Ms. Vadra and Mr. Gandhi had a stopover at a dhaba in Kairana where they had tea and snacks. Ms. Vadra interacted with locals there, especially children.
