Combo Against Terror: India and Morocco elevate their partnership to fight the common menace

In a quiet but significant visit last week, India’s foreign minister Sushma Swaraj landed in the north African nation of Morocco and inked four key agreements. These included a memorandum of understanding on fighting terrorism that sets up a joint working group on counter-terrorism. The stated aim here is to develop a comprehensive approach to combating terrorism, including cross-border terrorism, misuse of internet including social media by terror entities, terrorist financing, and recruitment of members of terrorist groups. Coming against the backdrop of the recent Pulwama terror attack in Jammu & Kashmir, such anti-terror cooperation is particularly vital.

This is because terrorism emanating from Pakistan has showed that only international cooperation is the antidote. For, Pakistan is a weak state that is simply unable to rein in terrorists operating from its soil. Pakistani institutions have failed to mature, allowing different state actors to operate beyond their remit. This in turn has created a conducive environment for a multitude of terror groups to thrive by playing different state actors. And with Pakistani terrorists carrying out attacks in India’s Kashmir, the menace has achieved a trans-national dimension.

Morocco has been at the forefront of fighting precisely this kind of terrorism in the last few years. In fact, it has dismantled scores of Islamic State terror cells and actively cooperated with other nations on counter-terrorism intelligence. The Moroccan anti-terror strategy is based on a multidimensional, comprehensive approach. First, it seeks to combat the ideological basis of radical Islamist terrorism by protecting and spreading genuine moderate tenets of Islam. In this regard, Morocco has been training foreign imams from African and European nations so that they can go back to their home countries and ideological counter manipulation of Islamic doctrines.

Second, Morocco has been championing South-South cooperation to promote development and deny radical groups fertile ground to recruit footsoldiers to their deviant cause. This is in recognition of the fact that economic deprivation leads to grievances that can easily be seized up extremists. Hence, economic development has to be part of any successful counter-terror strategy. And third, as mentioned before, Morocco has been cooperating with other nations, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to combat trans-national terrorism through intelligence sharing and active, real-time security cooperation.

Hence, given the security challenges India faces due to terrorism, there’s much that it can learn from Morocco’s experience. It is welcome that the new India-Morocco joint working group on counter-terrorism will also consult on issues related to counter-terrorism at the UN. The other point of complementarity is Kashmir. Morocco fully supports India’s position on Kashmir as it is analogous to the Moroccan Sahara issue. It will be recalled that Morocco since the 1970s has faced the scourge of the armed Polisario Front separatist movement in the Moroccan Sahara. The Polisario is fully supported by Morocco’s neighbour Algeria. Thus, Morocco’s situation here is just like India’s situation with Pakistan over Kashmir.

But even as India continues to suffer due to its Kashmir situation, Morocco has obtained the advantage over Moroccan Sahara. This it has managed through tight security, smart diplomacy at the UN, massive development in the Sahara and a political process that has seen devolution of powers to local units and the promise of eventual autonomy within the framework of Moroccan sovereignty. Today, the Moroccan Sahara is truly transforming with the Moroccan state looking to harness the potential of the region in tourism, fisheries and even agriculture. India hopes to do the same in Kashmir. Thus, it is time the two countries started cooperating more closely.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
