Canada news: Is Justin Trudeau set to be TOPPLED? Crisis breaks out for Canadian PM

Justin Trudeau praises Gerald Butts following his resignation

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Opposition leader Andrew Scheer, of the Conservative Party, is launching a bid to get Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to reveal what he knows about the SNC-Lavalin affair. Mr Trudeau’s government has been tainted by allegations first made on February 7 in the Globe and Mail that his officials possibly prevented a criminal prosecution being launched against the Canadian construction company. The allegations concern former Justice Minister Jody Wilson-Raybould who was reportedly pressurised to drop trial charges against SNC-Lavalin for bribery and corruption in Libya and to levy a fine instead. Mr Trudeau has denied any involvement or knowledge of the claims.

Mr Scheer is proposing an opposition motion asking MPs to “order the Prime Minister to appear, testify and answer questions at the Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights, under oath, for a televised two-hour meeting, before Friday, March 15, 2019”, as reported by Global News. The publication stated Mr Scheer told reporters on Monday morning: “We are a country of the rule of law and nobody, no matter their status, their wealth or their connections, should be entitled to special treatment under it. “What we’ve seen unfold over the last few weeks is a textbook case of government corruption.” Ms Jody Wilson-Raybould, who has remained silent until now, will appear in front of a House of Commons justice committee on Tuesday.

Canada news: Justin Trudeau faces critics at Question Time in the House of Commons

Is Justin Trudeau set to be TOPPLED? Mr Trudeau is coming under increasing pressure and this morning's statement by Mr Scheer will have only further damaged his reputation. Meanwhile, another politician has also piled on the pressure for the Canadian Prime Minister after calling for a public inquiry into the SNC-Lavalin affair. Pagemeet Singh, the leader of the left-wing NDP who is standing for a by-election in Burnaby South in the Vancouver, said he was not afraid to criticise the Liberal party. He said: "I think people are very disappointed with what's going on with the Liberal government.”

Canada news: Justin Trudeau with Jody Wilson-Raybould in January

Ms Wilson-Raybould resigned last week following her demotion from her ministerial role in January. What is revealed from her meeting on Tuesday could have serious implications for Mr Trudeau’s future as Canada’s Prime Minister. The public image of the handsome, feminist, tolerant leader appears to have already taken a battering, polling suggests. An Ipsos-Reid poll for Global News taken after Mrs Wilson-Raybould's resignation showed the Liberals had dropped four percentage points since December to 34 percent. Their rivals, the Conservatives, were up two points at 36 percent, eight months ahead of the Canadian federal elections. Mr Trudeau has dodged more recent questioning about his officials’ interference, saying only there was no “directive”.

Canada news: Jody Wilson-Raybould at her swearing-in ceremony as justice minister
