John Allen Chau killing: US will not prosecute isolated tribe that killed American missionary

The North Sentinelese tribe in India that shot dead a Christian missionary in a bow and arrow attack will not be prosecuted by the US.

Alabama resident John Allen Chau reportedly intended to convert the inhabitants of a protected Indian Ocean Island to Christianity, but was killed by the notoriously cautious tribe when he tried to confront them, The Sun reports.

However, Sam Brownback, the Ambassador-at-Large for Religious Freedom, has now confirmed that the United States will not be pursuing the prosecution of the protected tribe, which resides in arguably one of the most isolated islands in the world.

"The US government has not asked or pursued any sort of sanctions that the Indian government would take against the tribal people in this case," he said. "That's not been something that we have requested or have put forward. It's a tragic situation and a tragic case of what's happened, but that's not something that's been asked."

Meanwhile, Dr. Patrick Chau, John's father, has blamed "extreme Christianity for his untimely demise, saying the influence of evangelicals pushed his son to a "not unexpected end."

In a conversation with The Guardian, he said, "John is gone because the Western ideology overpowered my [Confucian] influence. If you have [anything] positive to say about religion, l wish not to see or hear [it]."

In the wake of the 2004 tsunami, this member of the Sentinelese tribe was photographed firing arrows at a helicopter. (Indian Coastguard/Survival International - Representational purposes only)

Chau wrote to his parents in one of his final letters: "You guys might think I'm crazy in all this, but I think it's worth it to declare Jesus to these people. Please do not be angry at them or at God if I get killed. Rather, please live your lives in obedience to whatever he has called you to and I'll see you again when you pass through the veil."

The North Sentinel Island is a small island in the Bay of Bengal about the size of New York's Manhattan Island. While it is a part of the Andaman and Nicobar archipelago, it falls under India's jurisdiction.

According to previous reports, the 26-year-old missionary bribed local fishermen to transport him to the island, despite its forbidden status. The Indian government has made it illegal to visit the island in order to protect the indigenous population from modern-day diseases, against which they have no defense.

The Sentinelese stand guard on an island beach. (Courtesy: Christian Caron for Survival International - Representational purposes only)

Survival International, a campaign group which fights for the rights of indigenous tribes, defended the Sentinelese' choice to be left alone. "They [The Sentinelese] vigorously reject all contact with outsiders," they said. "It is vital that their wish to remain uncontacted is respected - if not, the entire tribe could be wiped out by diseases to which they have no immunity. Contact imposed upon other Andaman tribes has had a devastating impact."

The North Sentinel Island is home to around 150 people, who are markedly protective of their tribe and have violently shun all contact with the outside world for decades. In 2004, the Sentinelese were captured on film firing arrows at a helicopter which tried to get a closer look at them. Two years later in 2008, two fishermen were killed after their boat accidentally drifted ashore the isolated island.
