Fire-safety: Delhi HC entertains plea seeking policy for periodic inspection of all hotels, guest houses

Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh where the tragedy happened | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: A week after the deadly fire at Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh claimed 17 innocent lives, a bench of the Delhi High Court on Tuesday sought a response from concerned stakeholders over immediate action against hotels or guest houses violating fire-safety norms in the national capital. Chief Justice Rajendra Menon and Justice VK Rao issued notices to the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government and Delhi's three civic bodies.

The bench was hearing a plea demanding action against errant officials whose negligence led to the tragic loss of life apart and compensation to the families of those who died in the fire. In addition, the plea also suggested that a policy is framed and implemented for periodic inspection of all hotels, community halls and guest houses in Delhi.

Delhi Police registers case under IPC Section 304 (Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder) in connection with the fire that broke out in Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh today. Police say name of responsible persons will be added in the case. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/VClQjs4GCN — ANI (@ANI) February 12, 2019

During the hearing, the petitioner also apprised the court of a severe situation which may occur if structures in the national capital are not made to adhere to fire-safety norms. In response, the court directed the Delhi government and all three municipal corporations to furnish their response to the plea by the next date of hearing in this matter on March 13.

On February 12, a massive fire broke out at Hotel Arpit Palace in Delhi's Karol Bagh area. The deadly blaze led to the death of 14 innocent civilians. Following the incident, several reports asserted that the structure of the hotel was brazenly flouting fire-safety norms which led to the fire. The owner of Hotel Arpit Palace, Rakesh Goel was arrested earlier this week by a team of Delhi police officials.

Must Read: Dilapidated MHADA buildings claimed over 800 lives in last four decades, reveals data
