Pakistani prisoner murdered in Jaipur jail

A Pakistani prisoner in the Jaipur central jail was allegedly murdered by group of fellow prisoners on Wednesday after an argument over a TV programme, officials said.

The incident comes in wake of heightened tensions between India and Pakistan over the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama left 40 Central Reserve Police Force troopers dead.

Inspector General, Jails, Rupinder Singh identified the prisoner as Shakarullah, alias Mohammad Haneef, 45, who was undergoing imprisonment after being convicted for spying.

According to Additional Commissioner of Police Lakshman Gaur, Shakarullah was killed after an argument over a TV programme with other prisoners turned violent.

Speaking to media, Additional Chief Secretary, Home, Rajeev Swaroop also attributed the cause of the prisoner's death to an argument. "At 1.20 p.m., nine prisoners were watching TV when they had a quarrel over a programme. As the tension escalated, Shakarulla was stoned to death," he said.

The other prisoners at the spot were identified as Ajeet, Manoj, Kulvendra, Bhajan Meena, Haaji Khan, Mahesh, Nandlal and Mallaki.

A case has been registered and investigations are on, Swaroop said, adding that there has never been any case of fighting among the 66 prisoners lodged in the same ward.

Asked about the formalities to be completed for sending back the body, Rajasthan's Director General, Jails, N.R.K. Reddy said, "The post mortem will be conducted soon. The Home and the External Affairs Ministries have been informed about the incident. We are completing all formalities in this case."

He said that Shakarulla was undergoing life imprisonment under being convicted under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and had been imprisoned there since 2010.

Meanwhile, security for other Pakistani prisoners is being enhanced, a police official said.

--IANS

arc/vd

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
