Someone lift the online fog

BY- Chirantan Chatterjee

On February 14, even as the news of the grisly terrorist attack in Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir, rocked India, the Indo-US Commercial Dialogue and the Indo-US CEO Forum convened in New Delhi. GoI noted that the forum will help highlight key market access issues enabling ease of doing business in both countries. But was that mere lip service? Or, as recent reports suggest, could India and the US be heading for a trade war?

India has introduced tariffs on motorcycles, imported whisky, and price controls on medical devices.

A recent warning on buying oil from Venezuela was also issued by GoI. But perhaps most damaging is the introduction from February 1 of ‘tightened’ ecommerce regulations that will reportedly hurt corporations like Walmart and Amazon in India. The ‘new’ rules bar Amazon and Walmart-owned Flipkart from owning inventory and require them to treat all vendors equally. Both firms are now required to reduce cashback payments and discounts that had affected smaller sellers in India, already hurt by the goods and services tax (GST) and demonetisation.

Some free market proponents wonder why Amazon and Walmart should bear the political idiosyncrasies of India’s leaders. However, remember, its election year here. Both Amazon and Flipkart have started removing thousands of products from virtual shelves and are redrawing contracts with merchants.

Consumer welfare will be affected. For example, baby diapers are cheaper on Amazon than in brickand-mortar medical stores. Meanwhile, a banker and Dalal Street senior analyst told me that cost structures for these ecommerce firms are irrational. For instance, compare the salaries of the HR head of Flipkart with his counterpart at, say, Unilever. These new regulations could make Amazon and Walmart frugal and efficient in India for the long-run.

The updated ecommerce rules may also end up preventing the creation of ‘vertical restraints’ — competition restrictions in agreements between firms or individuals at different levels of the production and distribution process.

In their seminal 1986 paper, ‘The Logic of Vertical Restraints’ (goo.gl/mr86eu), economists Patrick Rey and Jean Tirole show how in theory, exclusive territories or resale price maintenance (as examples of vertical restraints) could have adverse social welfare implications. Empirical evidence on this has been mixed, though as Francine Lafontaine and Margaret Slade point out in their 2007 work, ‘Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries: The Evidence’ (goo.gl/7wtRLU), a structural separation — one can either be a marketplace or be in the market — has been a key principle in US competition policy. The US Congress way back in 1906, for example, passed a law prohibiting railroads from transporting goods they owned.

So, in the net, if regulation shifts the rents back from ecommerce players to potential consumers by preventing vertical restraints, whether that would offset the harm in their welfare (with shrinking discounts and choices given the regulation) can only be understood with a systematic dynamic welfare analysis.

Meanwhile, Indo-American bonhomie does have a long enough recent history. But there is also despair with the US failure to understand some of the perceived idiosyncrasies in Indian policymaking.

State intervention is not new in India in various ways, as a former US diplomat confided. In addition, there is also the China factor, more so now after the Pulwama attack. As a leading USbased legal scholar said, ‘There’s also a real fear that India is literally shooting itself in the foot by being even more aggressively anti-foreign than China.’

Ultimately, who will be the winners and losers in the long run?

Consumers, workers, producers, manufacturers, foreign investors, or political leaders? Looking ahead, New Delhi and Washington need to better understand how ecommerce markets work in India, and how these policies reflect market realities. Too much ambiguity persists on this issue today.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
