Saudi Arabia to release 850 Indian prisoners after PM Modi's request to Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman

Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman on Wednesday ordered the release of 850 Indian prisoners lodged in jails in his country on the request of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) spokesperson Raveesh Kumar revealed the move in a tweet.

"At the request of the PM @narendramodi, His Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia has ordered the release of 850 Indian prisoners lodged in Saudi jails," Raveesh Kumar tweeted.

Another big deliverable!



At the request of the PM @narendramodi, His Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia has ordered the release of 850 Indian prisoners lodged in Saudi jails. pic.twitter.com/jIVTCbIRLa Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) February 20, 2019





Kumar also informed that, along with this gesture, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman has also announced the increase in quota for Indian Haj pilgrims to 2 lakh at the request of PM Modi, which would help more Indian pilgrims to perform the Haj.

The Saudi prince who arrived on a one-day trip on late Tuesday night in New Delhi, following his visit to Pakistan held talks with the Indian leadership on key areas of mutual interest.

Crown Prince Salman and PM Modi held extensive talks in the day, during which India raised the issue of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism. Forty CRPF soldiers were martyred last week in a suicide attack carried out by the Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pulwama.

Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman also spoke of his admiration for Prime Minister Narendra Modi and described him as an older brother during conversations at Rashtrapati Bhavan.

The prime minister personally welcomed Crown Prince Salman to India as he arrived in New Delhi last night, and joined President Ram Nath Kovind in greeting him this morning during a ceremonial reception at Rashtrapati Bhavan, where the Saudi leader inspected a guard of honour.

Mohammed bin Salman recently wrapped up a visit to Pakistan, and his trips to the two South Asian neighbours are part of a larger tour of the region.
