NA unanimously condemns Indian allegations against Pakistan

Speaker Asad Qaiser read the resolution on behalf of the House.

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) - National Assembly in a unanimous resolution today condemned the baseless and unfounded allegations by India on Pakistan in the wake of Pulwama attack.

The House noted that despite Prime Minister Imran Khan’s offer to India to act against those involved provided New Delhi gives actionable intelligence, the response from Indian government is lamentable.

The resolution expressed concern over the increase in harassment and intimidation of Kashmiri people across India.

It said that Occupied Kashmir is an unresolved issue since partition and this lingering issue must be resolved according to UN resolutions and as per the aspirations of Kashmiri people.

Speaker Asad Qaiser read the resolution on behalf of the House.

The House has been adjourned to meet again tomorrow at 10 a.m.

India’s threat to Pakistan

Tensions increased between India and Pakistan after the Pulwama attack. New Delhi leveled baseless allegations on Islamabad and threatened to isolate Pakistan at international level afterwards.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said those behind the terror attack would pay a "very heavy price" and had made a "huge mistake".

Union Minister Arun Jaitley said India will take all possible diplomatic steps to ensure "complete isolation" of Pakistan.

Pakistan’s response

Pakistan Prime Minister (PM) Imran Khan Tuesday vowed to retaliate against any Indian aggression without thinking after New Delhi accused Islamabad of involvement in the Pulwama attack.

“Pakistan will not think of retaliation, Pakistan will retaliate,” he pronounced.

Imran Khan addressed the nation in a video message and said India alleged Pakistan without any evidence. The premier told India to leave its “judge, jury and execution” approach. He said, “War is easy to start but difficult to end as it does not remain in human hands afterwards. It is not a sane approach to start a war.”

Imran Khan said New Delhi needs to rethink its policies regarding Kashmir because oppression against them will not improve the situation. He urged India to move towards dialogues.

Pulwama attack

At least 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed on Thursday in Indian-occupied Kashmir in one the deadliest attacks. The attack saw explosives packed inside a van rip through buses in a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying some 2,500 members of the paramilitary CRPF.

Two blue buses carrying around 35 people each bore the brunt of the massive blast, heard miles away, around 20 kilometres (12 miles) from the city of Srinagar on the main highway to Jammu.

Kashmir has been divided between India and Pakistan since independence. Rebels have been fighting for an independent Kashmir, or a merger with Pakistan, for 30 years.

Last year was the deadliest in a decade, with rights monitors saying almost 600 Kashmiri people died, most of them civilians. Thousands more have been maimed in recent years by pellet-firing shotguns used by Indian forces.
