Budget session: House pays homage to Pulwama martyrs

Haryana State lawmakers on Wednesday resolved to donate one month’s salary each to the next of kin of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldiers martyred in the terrorist attack in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on February 14.

The State Government also passed a resolution, strongly condemning the terrorist attack in Pulwama district and urged the Central Government to give a befitting reply to the enemy for the ghastly act.

Leader of the House and Chief Minister Manohar Lal moved the resolution condemning the attack on brave jawans of CRPF in Pulwama which was unanimously passed by the House.

“The House strongly condemns the terrorist attack and salutes these great soldiers for their supreme sacrifice of laying down their lives for the nation,” read the resolution.

The members of House also observed a two-minute silence to pay homage to the departed souls. Haryana Assembly has a strength of 90 MLAs. One MLA of INLD Jaswinder Singh Sandhu had passed away recently.

Leader of Opposition and senior INLD leader Abhay Singh Chautala said that his party MLAs have decided to donate one-month salary to the next of kin of the CRPF soldiers killed in Pulwama attack.

After this, Congress Legislature Party leader Kiran Chowdhary too announced that her party legislators will donate one-month salary for the family of the CRPF martyrs. Condemning the attack, she said there has been a steady escalation in terrorist activities sponsored by Pakistan, and time has come that they be given a befitting reply. It is the time when talks should be stopped with Pakistan and the neighboring national should be given a befitting reply, she said.

Supporting the opposition's move, Chief Minister Manohar Lal moved a resolution that the legislators will donate a month's salary.

Later, he also moved another resolution strongly condemning the Pulwama terrorist attack, which was unanimously passed by the House.

The House also paid tributes to Sepoy Hari Singh of Rajgarh village in Rewari district, who was killed in an encounter between security forces and militants in J&K's Pulwama.

Notably, 44 CRPF personnel were killed on February 14 in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a suicide bomber of the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad group rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

Assembly pays tribute to former Union Minister George Fernandes

On the first day of budget session of Haryana Assembly, the state legislators on Wednesday paid tributes to prominent personalities including former Union Minister George Fernandes, MLA Jaswinder Singh Sandhu, former Ministers Sita Ram Singla and Ved Singh Malik, freedom fighters and martyrs, who lost their lives during the inter-session period.

The members of the House observed a two-minute silence to pay homage to the departed souls.

The Chief Minister Manohar Lal, who is also the leader of the house, paid tributes to former Union Minister, former Minister of State and member of Haryana Vidhan Sabha, freedom fighters, martyrs of Haryana and close relatives of members of Haryana Vidhan Sabha.

Speaker Haryana Vidhan Sabha, Kanwar Pal also read out the obituary resolutions and paid tribute to the departed souls.

Leader of Opposition Abhay Singh Chautala and Leader of Congress Legislative Party (CLP) Kiran Choudhry also read obituary resolutions on behalf of their parties.

The House also placed on record its deep sense of sorrow on the sad demise of five members of a family of village Kasni district Jhajjar who died in a tragic road accident near village Raiya.

Tributes were paid to Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi, who hailed from Hisar and died in a mid-air collision between two aircraft of Indian Air Force's aerobatic team Surya Kiran near Bengaluru on Tuesday.
