Man kills father over property dispute in Dhanbad, absconding with wife

The quarrel over property was going on for the last three days. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Dhanbad: A man allegedly murdered his father over property dispute in Dhanbad on Friday. The accused who has been identified as Awdesh Yadav was a resident of Barmashia under Dhansar police station. Awdesh and his wife Sulekha Devi are absconding.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the police filed an FIR on the complaint of Akhilesh Yadav, the younger son of the deceased, after they received the postmortem report.

Awdesh who is a fiver by profession wanted his share of property that his father Ramvilash owned at his native place in Sheikhpura in Bihar. He also wanted his father to divide the cattle so that he could live separately with his wife.

Also Read: Thief thrashed to death by friend after quarrel about alcohol in Hyderabad

Reportedly, the quarrel over property was going on for the last three days. Ramvilash tried to stop Awdesh from drinking late on Friday night. It is suspected that enraged over the arguments of the last few days, Awdesh hit his father on the head with an iron rod. Ramvilash died on the spot.

Yogendar Paswan, Dhansar police station incharge, said that the family initially tried to cover the crime saying that the victim died after being knocked down by a buffalo. However, truth was revealed when the neighbours told the police that they heard screams of family members including the victim's daughters and wife. The FIR filed by Akhilesh after the postmortem report was received confirmed to the police's suspicion of the crime.

The deceased's body was handed over to the family after the postmortem. A police team is tracing the accused and his wife.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
