YSRCP, TRS blackmailing TDP leaders: Naidu

‘They are switching loyalties fearing threat to their interests in Hyderabad’

Training his guns against the Opposition YSR Congress Party, Chief Minister and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) national president Chandrababu Naidu on Wednesday accused it and the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) for “blackmailing” the TDP leaders that their properties and businesses in Hyderabad would not be safe if they continued in the party. Succumbing to these “blackmails”, the TDP leaders were joining the YSRCP, he alleged during a teleconference with party leaders.

To save their properties, some TDP leaders were switching loyalties to the YSRC. The TDP would not buckle under pressure come what may. It would also not tolerate such intimidation and pressure tactics, he asserted.

The BJP, the TRS and the YSRC were doing gross injustice to Andhra Pradesh, he alleged. Their evil plans would not be fruitful if the TDP was voted to power. Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao wanted a puppet in Andhra Pradesh and not a stable and competent government as he was afraid that his failures would come to fore if the TDP retained power. Hence, he was propping up YSRC president Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, he alleged.

Exactly five years ago, Andhra Pradesh was betrayed. Five crore people were deceived. We must to organise protests to highlight the betrayal and injustice, he said.

Referring to the killing of 40 CRPF jawans in the Pulwama attack, the Chief Minister said people had doubts over the attack. The nation was debating West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s line on it. The TDP would not keep quiet if the national security was compromised. It would not tolerate if the Army was used as a pawn for political mileage.

The Centre should take stringent measures to control terrorist attacks, he said. National security would be at risk if there was inefficient leadership. The BJP would stoop to any level to come back to power. It was trying to control the States with remote control. The non-BJP parties’ alliance was a democratic and secular compulsion, he added.
