In virtual world, ‘traitor trackers’ wage their own war

Papri Banerjee’s family is frantic. The lecturer at Icon Commerce College , a private institute in Guwahati, has been missing since the morning of February 17 after being interrogated by police in connection with two FIRs — one filed in the Assam capital, the other in Silchar — accusing her of public mischief and other offences. In the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack, Banerjee had posted comments on social media in which she had also referred to atrocities by armed forces in Kashmir.Banerjee has been suspended from her job. “We have filed a case against her and interrogated her. Since the sections she was charged under were bailable, she was allowed to go home,” Guwahati police commissioner Deepak Kumar told TOI. Since she has gone missing, police officers said she will be arrested after she re-surfaces.According to her family, Banerjee was disturbed by several threats of physical violence and sexual assault made against her by people online. “This might have prompted her to leave the house and disappear,” said a relative. A Silchar resident, Subhashish Choudhury, had filed an FIR against Banerjee.On Monday, eight persons, including students were booked in Aligarh, Lucknow, Moradabad, Shahjahanpur, Mau, Rampur, Ballia and Basti districts, while police were working on a case from Noida where a youth pursuing MBA from a private institute had allegedly posted “objectionable” content.Following the attack and the public outcry that has followed, dozens across India – a police team from Tripura is on its way to Mysuru to arrest a person alleged to have posted “anti-national” messages online – have been charged for using what authorities believe to be seditious or mischievous language.Organised groups of online activists have been gathering details about people who have posted what they believe to be anti-national comments, mounting pressure on employers and educational institutions to take action against them. One of the groups, ‘Clean the Nation’, formed on Facebook, had claimed to have “acted” against 50 such ‘anti-nationals’. The group was formed on February 16. Its account has now been deleted.Asked about the charges, Prashant Kumar, ADGP, Meerut, said, “If someone is blatantly promoting cessation, or justifying the damaging deed of an unfriendly nation, that automatically comes under the purview of sedition. In short, anything which demeans your own country is anti-national. All precautions are taken by the police department while applying it (the sedition charge).”Rights activists, some of whom said that the timing of the posts “was all wrong”, worry that the police cases and court appearances would have a lasting impact on the youths — almost all of them young — and affect their lives and careers. In the meantime, the cases are piling up, from Bihar to Karnataka, UP to Delhi and beyond.
