Can't turn other cheek always, says Army ex-chief General Bikram Singh

In the wake of Pulwama terror attack, which snuffed out the lives of 40 CRPF troopers, former Indian Army Chief General Bikram Singh on Wednesday said India must take Pakistan to task.

General Singh was speaking at a panel discussion on the topic 'Uprooting State-Sponsored Terrorism: An Imperative for Peace in South Asia' at WION Global Summit 2019 in Dubai.

"Let's not allow the epicentre of terrorism to raise problems. We need to take Pakistan to task," the former Army Chief said.

Speaking on the Pakistan, which is considered to be the epicentre of International terrorism, Singh said, "In Pakistan, the basic problem is that it is the only nation where the intelligence agency is owned by the Army."

Terrorism is providing jobs to Pakistanis in a country which is riddled with poverty, he said. "It has become a matter of prestige for Pakistani youths to join terrorism," Singh said.

The former Army chief said, "Around 2.5 million kids are studying in madrasas, in various parts of Pakistan, are either going to become maulavis or terrorists. They are told in madarsas that fighting jihad is the shortcut to heaven."

General Singh said countries should refrain from bringing religion to politics. "This is detrimental for democracy," he said.

Speaking on how the entire South Asian region is suffering because of the terror infrastructure in Pakistan, Singh said, "We cannot allow one country's agenda to stall the other's collective work. This is going to continue to be thorn in everyone's flesh," he said.

Referring to India's policy on Pakistan, General Singh said, "We have been adopting idealistic agenda for too long. You cannot keep giving your cheek and get slapped. Let's not allow epicentre of terrorism to raise problems. It is time India took Pakistan to task."

G Parthasarathy, former Indian High Commissioner to Pakistan, Husain Haqqani, director of Hudson Institute, US, Kanwal Sibal, former foreign secretary and Micheal Kugelman, South Asia expert from the Wilson Centre were the other panellists. "Every country has an Army but in Pakistan, an Army has a country," said Parthasarathy.

UAE Minister Opens WION Global Summit
