Trump wishes to see Pakistan, India getting along

WASHINGTON: US President Donald Trump on Tuesday called Pulwama attack a ‘horrible situation’ and said it would be wonderful if Pakistan and India could get along.

Answering a question about the attack in a the media appearance, he said, "I have watched; I have got a lot of reports on it. We will have comment at an appropriate time. It would be wonderful if they get along."

Last week, the White House had stated that it supported India's right to self-defense against cross border terrorism. Meanwhile, Pakistan's ambassador to the United States Dr Asad Majeed was on Tuesday called in for a meeting by the White House senior officials to discuss issues concerning South Asia.

The meeting lasted around 30 minutes. Details of the meeting were not shared but the Trump administration has been urging Pakistan to help negotiate a political settlement with the Taliban for peace in Afghanistan. In the current situation after the bloody attack in Pulwama, the United States has also called on Islamabad to take action against terror groups within its territory.

Pakistan's embassy here confirmed that the meeting took place but maintained that, "it was a routine meeting scheduled some time ago and was part of the round of ambassador's introductory calls in DC and had nothing to do with Pulwama."

Replying to a question put forward by The News, the embassy said in the meeting "whole range of bilateral and regional issues of interest to both sides came under discussion." Meanwhile, the State Department yesterday also said that the administration had been in contact with the Indian and Pakistani governments on the Pulwama attack issue as well.

The department's deputy spokesperson, Robert Palladino, repeated, "We urge Pakistan to fully cooperate with investigation into the attack and to punish anyone responsible." He told reporters that the US had been in close communication with the government of India to express not only condolences but strong support for India as it confronts this terrorism. "We have a close, cooperative relationship with India, a security relationship, and that includes counterterrorism operations. As so we're committed to working with India, the Indian government, and on these counterterrorism efforts, both bilaterally and multilaterally, including at the United Nations."

He further said "the perpetrator of that heinous act claimed allegiance to the United Nations-designated, Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad, and we call on all countries to uphold their responsibilities pursuant to the United Nations Security Council resolutions to deny safe haven and support for terrorists."
