JN Ganesh finally in police custody

Eagleton Resort

Somanath temple

Congress MLA Anand Singh

Athani MLA appears in HC

MLA has been on the run for a month, was arrested in AhmedabadKampli MLA JN Ganesh, who has been on the run for almost a month, has finally been arrested by police officials on Wednesday. Ganesh, who absconded after he assaulted MLA Anand Singh at the, was arrested from a hotel in Ahmedabad, Gujarat where he was having lunch with his friends after visiting theRamanagar police officials received a tip-of that Ganesh was in Gujarat. The three special teams of officers formed to looke for the MLA reached Ahmedabad on February 17 and they searched for the MLA for three days.Along with Ganesh, two of his friends from the state and one more person will be brought to Bidadi late on Wednesday.Ganesh is facing an attempt to murder charge for assaulting fellowduring a drunken brawl at Eagleton Resort near Bidadi on January 20. His arrest comes exactly a month after he assaulted Singh.Fearing poaching of its MLAs by BJP under Operation Lotus, the Congress had kept its MLAs at the resort. Ganesh and Singh too were part of the Operation Lotus along with another MLA Bhima Naik.On January 20, there was an argument between the two. Ganesh abused Singh for leaking information of their whereabouts to the Congress leaders. He also said to have spoken ill of Singh’s brother-in-law.Ganesh blamed Singh for spoiling the plans to join the BJP. He later pounced on Singh and assaulted him with flowerpots, wooden logs besides punching and stamping on his chest and onto his face. Singh sustained severe injuries leaving three of his ribs broken and his left eye turned black.He had gone missing on January 23 after Congress let its MLAs go to their Constituencies.A former rowdy sheeter, the MLA had recently applied for a bail. Singh in his complaint had said that Ganesh would have killed him if a few MLAs had not intervened. Ganesh is also said to have assaulted former minister Tanvir Ahmed.The MLA will be produced before the local court in Ramangara soon after he is brought here, said the police.As Ganesh is a former rowdy sheeter in Ballari district, the police could reopen the rowdy sheet again. Home Minister MB Patil had earlier said that an attempt to murder case automatically attracts reopening of rowdy sheet for Ganesh.Following a Habeas Corpus petition alleging that Athani MLA Mahesh Kumathalli was in the illegal custody of another MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi, the former was present in the High Court when the petition came up for hearing on Wednesday. Advocate Pramod Hiremani, the Youth Congress president in Athani, had filed the petition alleging that the whereabouts of Kumathalli was not known and a missing complaint filed with the local police was not investigated.Kumathalli was one of the four Congress MLAs who was absent from the Assembly proceedings earlier this month and who was presumed to be in touch with the BJP for shifting allegiance. Kumathalli and other rebel Congress MLAs retuned to the fold and attended the Assembly later.After he was present in the HC in the Habeas Corpus petition, the Additional Advocate General Ponnanna submitted that the petition was filed for publicity and exemplary cost should be imposed on the petitioner. He argued that the police complaint was filed on February 7 and the petition in the HC was filed the very next day. The petition had unnecessarily wasted the precious time of the court, he argued. The division bench of the HC has disposed the original petition and said it would pass a suitable order concerning the AAG’s plea on February 27.
