Light Combat Aircraft cleared for combat

Light Combat Aircraft

LCA Tejas

DRDO

The LCA Tejas does a manoeuvre at the Aero India

The LCA Journey

LCH at the show

HD Kumaraswamy Chief Minister





.

More than three decades after the(LCA) Tejas programme was conceived it finally become combat ready.On the inaugural day of the Aero India, thewas accorded the Final Operational Clearance (FOC) by the military aviation certifying agencies. Chief of Air Staff BS Dhanoa, who received the release to service document fromChief G Satheesh Reddy, said, “It a major milestone today that we have got the FOC for the LCA Mark 1. Like I had told you the saying the proof of the pudding is in eating it.In Exercise Gagan Shakti in April 2018 and February this year in Exercise Vayu Shakti we showed you as to how accurately this aircraft can dispense weapons on the target. So that is the proof of the pudding that we can not only sustain a very high sortie rate but we can also carry out very accurate weapon delivery like it was shown in these Exercises in both air to ground and air to air.”The LCA project is among the most delayed indigenous defence projects. The Ministry of Defence had initiated in the 1980s to replace the ageing MiG-21s. However, it could be inducted in to the IAF only in July 2016. Though the aircraft were inducted into the IAF No. 45 Squadron, they were only Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) compliant. The IOC aircraft were armed with Close Combat Air to Air Missiles, Helmet Mounted Display and Precision Guided Weapons.These aircraft were also capable of dropping unguided bombs with much higher accuracy. The FOC aircraft would incorporate Beyond Visual Range (BVR) missiles, improved and better stand-off weapons and air-to-air refueling capability.Project sanctionedEstablishment of ADA, the nodal agency for the LCA programmeADA begins full-fledged functioningProject Definition completed & proposal sent for project clearanceRs 2,188-crore including Rs 560-cr sanctioned earlierFirst Flight of LCA-TejasFirst flight of Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraftLCA Naval prototype rolls out .First Initial Operational Clearance (IOC)The maiden flight of the Naval variant of the LCASecond IOCMoD hands over first series production LCA made by HAL to the IAF.LCA flies out of India for the first time to participate in the Bahrain International AirshowAir Chief Marshal Arup Raha becomes the first chief of air staff to fly LCA. * July 1, 2016 : LCA joins IAF SquadronAchives Final Operational Clearance (FOC)The State has become a destination for leading businesses because of a powerful combination of thriving ecosystem, highly skilled and talented workforce, great technical expertise, relentless innovation and business friendly policies
