Four of family among 5 killed in Jhajjar mishap

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Jhajjar, February 20

Five persons, including four of a family, were killed when their car collided with a truck near Raiya village on the Jhajjar-Kosli road on Wednesday, the police have said.

The deceased have been identified as Virendra (37), his wife Sushila (35), son Priyanshu (15), daughter Rinku (17) and Sunil (32). They were returning from New Delhi to their village Kasni in Jhajjar after attending a wedding.

There were light rains in the area where the accident took place around 7 am, the police said.

The collision was so severe that Virendra and Sunil died on the spot. Residents of nearby areas took out their bodies entangled in the front portion of the car.

Virendra was driving the car, while Sunil was sitting beside him. The truck driver fled, leaving the vehicle behind.

A team of the CIA police, which was on its way back to Jhajjar after conducting a raid in a nearby area, was the first to reach the spot on hearing the sound of the collision.

The police took Sushila, Priyanshu and Rinku to the Civil Hospital in Jhajjar, where doctors declared them brought dead.

Later, a JCB machine was pressed into service to clear the road.

Investigating Officer Ranbir Singh said an unidentified truck driver had been booked, while the investigation was in progress to ascertain the cause of the accident. “The bodies were handed over to the family od the deceased persons after the postmortem examination,” he added.

Bus overturns in Karnal, 12 injured

Karnal: In all, 12 passengers were injured as a Haryana Roadways bus, going to New Delhi from Yamunanagar, overturned following a collision with a car on the Karnal-Indri road on Wednesday. They were taken to hospitals in Indri, Karnal and Ladwa. The condition of all 12 persons was said to be stable. “The investigation is in progress. The case has not been registered so far,” said Satparkash, SHO, Indri police station. He said the car collided head on with the bus when it tried to overtake a truck near Budheri village. The impact of collision was such that the bus overturned in a trench. TNS
