Bhatinda: Rape accused manages to flee while constable uses washroom

The accused escaped when the constable had gone to the washroom (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bhatinda: After being accused for rape, a woman allegedly escaped from police custody. The co-accused fled from the Bhatinda civil hospital while she was under police custody. The woman fled from the hospital on Wednesday afternoon. The police had taken her into custody after she was co-accused in a rape case.

The accused fled from the Bhatinda civil hospital after she was brought there for a medical check-up. Amandep Kaur, the accused, is a 25-year-old who hails from the village Ghumiara in Muktsar. Manjit Kaur was the constable escorting the accused.

Also Read: Bunty aur Babli 2.0? Couple swindle crores from unsuspecting residents; caught

According to the Times of India's report, the accused escaped when the constable had gone to the washroom. On returning, the constable discovered that the accused was absconding, following which, she raised an alarm. The accused and her husband have charges of rape and criminal conspiracy under their names.

The couple was brought to the Bhatinda jail in January after they were accused of rape and criminal discrimination. While talking to the TOI, Senior Superintendent of Police, Nanak Singh, stated that the police were making constant efforts to nab the accused. He also added that the constable was suspended after being booked for negligence.

In a similar incident, a couple who hails from Bhatinda was caught by the Delhi police earlier this month. The police caught them after a long chase. The two accused had 20 cases of cheating under their name and had constantly managed to escape from the police.

In an attempt to nab them, the police decided to raid all their hiding spots only to find that they were absconding. It was only after they visited Surya Vihar in Ghaziabad that the couple was caught. The two accused had duped various people and were even court offenders.
