Error of judgement by IndiGo’s crew resulted in wing tip clash with Kuwait Airways: probe report

The probe report into an incident of a Mumbai-Jaipur IndiGo aircraft's winglet coming in contact with that of a Kuwait Airways aircraft at Mumbai airport while taxing has revealed that human factor played a role in causing the incident calling it an error of judgement on the part of the crew of IndiGo.

The probe report has cited that crew of IndiGo assumed that they were clear of the other aircraft (Kuwait Airways) further continuing taxing without realising that left winglet had contacted the aircraft of Kuwait Airways.

The report of the inquiry committee set to probe the incident has further stated that that medical study reveals that it is not possible to accurately judge absolute distance or separation when the line of sight distance is more than 10 metres.

The incident took place in November 2016 early when the Kuwait Airway's Airbus A330 was taxing towards the parking bay and the IndiGo aircraft was taxing out for departure to Jaipur. The Air Traffic Control (ATC) at Mumbai had instructed the IndiGo pilot to follow the Kuwait Airways aircrafts' arrival, and the Kuwait Airways pilot was advised to move ahead to make way for the former.

The probe report further reads, "When following a taxiway route, pilots are expected to keep a good lookout and are responsible for taking all possible measures to avoid collisions with other aircraft and vehicles. Due to an error of judgment on the part of the crew of aircraft 1 (IndiGo), while crossing taxiway N keeping aircraft 2 (Kuwait Airways) on the left on W4 resulting in the LH wing tip (sharklet) coming in physical contact with the wing of aircraft 2."

The report has said that initially, the flight crew of IndiGo were not aware of the contact, but once apprised by the cabin crew decided to return back to the bay for rectification.

The report has further given some safety recommendation to Mumbai Airport Limited (MIAL) that is the operator of Mumbai Airport along with to Airport Authority of India (AAI).

The recommendations read, "MIAL/ AAI may review the procedure for taxiing on taxiway N when an aircraft is holding on the taxiway. MIAL/ AAI may declare the W4/ N as hot spot till a permanent fix is available for the point. MIAL may carry out an assessment of the visibility conditions in the portion of W4 / N and take necessary corrective action if required."

Meanwhile, when contacted, IndiGo in a statement said, "The incident was investigated by the Aircraft Investigation Board and their preliminary findings and recommendations were communicated to IndiGo soon after the incident.

The first recommendation -- of sensitising pilots on the airline providing guidance material to the flight crew regarding the difficulty associated with assessing wingtip clearance -- has been complied with by way of a circular. The other recommendations are for implementation by the airport operator (MIAL/ AAI.)
