Telangana man shot dead in US while working at store, police arrest 3

Telangana man shot dead in US while working at store, police arrest 3

Reddy had gone to the US seven years ago. He is survived by wife, and two daughters, studying in Class 10 and Class 7.

news Crime

A man from Telangana was shot dead by unidentified persons in the state of Florida in the United States of America. 50-year-old K Goverdhan Reddy, who hailed from Yadadri Bhongir district, was killed when unknown assailants opened fire at a departmental store where he was working as a manager.

According to information reaching his family in Hyderabad, Reddy was killed when some armed men barged into the store and opened fire. The incident occurred around 8.30 pm on Tuesday (local time) in Pensacola city. Another employee of the store was reported to have been injured in the attack. The assailants, however, reportedly did not take any money from the store after opening fire.

Reddy had gone to the US seven years ago. He is survived by wife, and two daughters who study in Class 10 and Class 7. His family has appealed to the Government of India to arrange for the body to be brought home.

Meanwhile, the Pensacola police said that based on CCTV footage, they identified at least three people who were involved in the crime and arrested them.

A husband, father was shot and killed last night while working at a Pensacola gas station. @CNylanderWEAR has the full story here: https://t.co/tXvy1IHLR8 pic.twitter.com/oaZtzZNKeh — WEAR ABC 3 (@weartv) February 21, 2019

This is far from the first incident where a native of Telangana has been shot in the US. In January, a 26-year-old man from Warangal district was shot in his mouth by robbers in Detroit, leaving him in a critical state in the hospital. The robbers stole his car, wallet and other belongings, leaving him freezing in the cold.

According to reports, when Sai stopped at a Mexican joint, armed robbers threatened him with a gun to drive them. They later shot him at an isolated place and stole all his belongings. Sai had left for the US in 2015 to do his Masters in Electronics and Electrical Engineering.

In November last year, a 61-year-old man from Telangana, Sunil Edla, was shot dead in New Jersey by a 16-year-old in a carjacking incident. Sunil was a native of Medak district, working as a night auditor in the hospitality industry in Atlantic City. When Sunil was leaving his home for his overnight shift, the minor shot him and escaped with his car. Sunil died on the spot. Sunil, who had migrated to the US in 1987, was to travel to India later that month to visit his family.

IANS inputs
