After tragedy, a veil of safety

TimesView The factors that could have contributed to the student’s death must be probed seriously so that lessons are learnt at this spot and elsewhere. The journey to and from school should not be so risky.

KOLKATA: A day after an accident claimed the life of a six-year-old girl on her way to school in Dum Dum, allegedly due to illegal parking of buses, the area wore a changed look, with the buses moved to a vacant plot and traffic cops posted to make the roads safer.On Tuesday morning, Anushka Kar, a Class I pupil of Dum Dum Christ Church Girls’ High School, was crushed to death by a private bus at the Clive House crossing on Jessore Road.The tragedy occurred around 9.40am, barely a two-minute walk from the girl’s school near Nagerbazar. After getting down from the bus on the New Barrackpore-Park Circus route the duo boarded from Kalindi More, the little girl was following her mother in crossing the road. The bus driver could not spot the girl and stepped on the accelerator, running the girl over, just a few steps behind her mother.The accident triggered a massive protest in the area on Tuesday, with local residents and parents of other students blocking Jessore Road for over a couple of hours. The protesters demanded a revamp of the traffic signalling system at the intersection of the road that leads to the school and police deployment on the stretch during school hours. Some guardians also staged a demonstration on the school campus, accusing the authorities of not taking the initiative to ask police to deploy personnel at the Clive House More bus stop during school hours. The locals also blamed illegal parking for the tragedy, pointing fingers at an illegal terminus for buses on route 219 (Nagerbazar to Howrah) off Jessore Road, under the Nagerbazar flyover.On Wednesday, traffic cops were posted at the Clive House crossing. And the buses on route 219 were shifted to a vacant plot adjacent a petrol pump behind the boundary wall of Christ Church School to clear the sidewalk of the Nagerbazar-bound flank of Jessore Road.But the illegal parking of private vehicles under the flyover wasn’t stopped. “With parked vehicles on a nearly 650-metre stretch on Jessore Road from Clive House crossing to ILS Hospital blocking the way, school students don’t even get a little space to take the footpath safely. Tuesday’s accident also occurred due to illegal parking of private and commercial vehicles on both the Airport- and Lake Town-bound flanks. We have complained several times to the police but the cops hardly take any action,” said a local trader.Also on Wednesday, the girl’s school was remain closed in her memory. Schoolteachers, students and their guardians also took out a candle-lit procession from the school to the girl’s home at Lake Town’s Kalindi. “We also met the bereaved parents, who are in deep shock. Anushka’s mother Sushmita, who fell ill after the accident, is in no state to talk. Her father, Debabrata, is a cardiac patient. They have broken down,” said a teacher.
