Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh

It is very significant that two states of the Northeastern region – Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram – have completed 32 years since they were elevated to full-fledged states. While the two states have two different kinds of journey into statehood, the journey of both the states to the present level of development is definitely important and interesting. Mizoram’s is a wonderful story of transformation from one of the worst insurgency-affected area into an island of peace. Likewise, Arunachal Pradesh’s journey began as North-East Frontier Agency – NEFA – an area which was initially under the Ministry of External Affairs, and has emerged as one of the most focused states of the country in terms of India’s relationship with China.

Taking a closer look, one finds that Mizoram has also become one of India’s most literate states, which in turn has impacted positively on the overall human development indices. Likewise, it is one state that has stood out among all other states as a case study for peaceful political transition. No violence, no personal attacks, no bribing of voters, no disturbance to people’s daily life, no rallies that block public roads and thoroughfares – are some of the aspects that other states of the country should ideally emulate during run-ups to elections. The involvement of youth and the Church in maintaining social discipline that Mizoram experimented with, in fact, has constituted the foundation of the model code of conduct that the Election Commission introduced several years ago.

Arunachal Pradesh, on the other hand, must be congratulated for fast emerging as a role model of development. The state which constitutes a huge portion of the Eastern Himalayas – the world’s largest environmental hotspot – is fast emerging as the country’s most popular tourist destination. Likewise, Arunachal Pradesh has also attracted one of the highest investments in the infrastructure sector, with roads, airports and power projects gearing up like never before. The state has of late witnessed the completion of several bridge projects, especially in its eastern region, which in turn have brought about a sea change in the lives of a large number of villagers who have seen new hopes in horticulture. Orange cultivators in Tirap and Changlang have already got a bonus this season, this being a direct outcome of the Bhupen Hazarika Setu and other bridges that have been completed and commissioned in the past one year or more.

The most significant about the two states is the emergence of bold leaders. While Mizoram has since the time of the rebellion in the early 1960s witnessed the emergence of leaders like Laldenga, Brig Sailo, Lal Thanhawla and Zoramthanga; Arunachal Pradesh must be congratulated for having presented to the country one of the most popular Union ministers in the present times, he being none other than Kiren Rijiju. The emergence of such able leaders in fact can be wonderful case studies of how good leaders can emerge from the frontier states which are still believed to be out of the mainstream. Congratulations Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh on the occasion of their 33rd Statehood Day.
