Pakistani murdered in Jaipur prison brawl: 2 officers put on APO, 2 suspended

Police officials at the Jaipur Central Jail following the incident. (Photo: Nikhil Sharma)

A Pakistan national belonging to the terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) was allegedly murdered in a brawl with other prisoners at the Jaipur Central Jail on Wednesday, officials said.

As a fallout of the murder of Pakistani prisoner, today jail superintendent Sanjay Yadav and deputy jailor Jagdish Sharma have been placed as Awaiting Postal Order (APO).

Two other jail officers- warder Ramswaroop and head warder Baidyanath Sharma have been placed under suspension.

Meanwhile, a detailed enquiry has to be conducted into the incident.

The prisoners fought over the volume of a TV set and hit Shakirullah alias Hanif Mohammed (50) with a rock, Additional Commissioner of Police Laxman Gaur said.

The police official said four prisoners were responsible for killing the life convict, who is from Sialkot in Pakistan's Punjab, and have registered a case of murder.

"A Pakistani prisoner was allegedly murdered today at the Central Jail. The matter will be investigated by a judicial magistrate and also by the police," Rajasthan Director General of Police Kapil Garg said on Wednesday.

The incident comes amid heightened tension between India and Pakistan after the Pulwama terror attack, a suicide bombing in which 40 CRPF jawans were martyred.

Inspector General (Prisons) Rupinder Singh said Shakirullah had been lodged in the jail's special cell since 2011.

Earlier, he and seven others were held in a Punjab jail, accused of radicalising young people.

The module operated under the directions of its handlers in Pakistan, Jaipur Police Commissioner Anand Srivastava said.

Rajasthan's anti-terrorist squad had brought the eight accused from Punjab for interrogation in similar charges and booked them under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, the official added.

In 2017, the LeT operative was sentenced to imprisonment for life.

Senior administration and police officials rushed to the jail after learning about the death.

Rupinder Singh said the post mortem will be conducted on the jail premises under judicial supervision.

(With inputs from PTI)
