Mumbai fire brigade’s new hi-tech 'Hazmat' van to battle chemical fires

Hazmat was received by the Mumbai Fire Brigade on January 17 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A new fire-van will now be used by the Mumbai fire brigade to ensure efficiency of firefighters. Known as level 2 and 3, 'Hazmat' is the highest level of security that has been procured for the Mumbai fire brigade to help the firefighters in extinguishing and managing chemical fires.

The fire fighters will be given the 'hazmat' to help them save lives and also in effectively fighting chemical fires. The material with which the 'hazmat' suits have been made, resists all kinds of chemicals and gases.

Also Read: Mumbai hit and run case: Victim's sister finds crucial CCTV footage in search for 'closure'

The #Mumbai Fire Brigade has procured a new hi-tech Fire-Van called 'Hazmat' to battle chemical fires in the city. @nehakulkarni29 pic.twitter.com/Mhk4wj8MgT — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 21, 2019

While talking to Mirror Now, the Chief Trainer of Hazmat, Milan Dubravac, stated that since the hazmat suits are completely encapsulated, no liquid or chemical can enter inside them. They also resist all gases and chemicals which can help the firefighters in cases of chemical fires. An upgrade to the existing tools and equipment present with the fire brigade department, the tools in the hazmat will help the fire department in decontaminating the scene and controlling the fire.

As a part of a strategy, 60 people will be trained to operate the fire-van in cases of chemical fires. While talking to Mirror Now, Fire Brigade chief, Mumbai, P Rahangadale stated that though one vehicle would not be enough to combat large scale tragedies, it is a big step towards efficiency.

The Mumbai Fire Brigade team received Hazmat on January 17. A chemical hazard combat vehicle from Slovania, the vehicle will help the fire department in managing chemical fires and calamities. A huge challenge, however, will be posed to hazmat by the congested roads of Mumbai.
