PM Modi was busy shooting film in Jim Corbett during Pulwama attack: Congress

There is no better example than this of Mr. Modi's insult to our soldiers. At 3:10PM, when Pulwama attack occurred and was all over news, Mr. Modi was shooting for a film till 6:45PM in Corbett National Park: @rssurjewala #ModiFailsNationalSecurity — Congress Live (@INCIndiaLive) February 21, 2019

How did the terrorists acquire this huge amount of RDX and rocket launchers and How was the vehicle allowed to carry these explosives through the security? 48 hours before the attack JeM released a video warning the attack. There was an intelligence report on the sanitization of IED on 8th February. Why were these warnings ignored? In 56 months of the Modi government, our 488 Jawans were martyred in Jammu and Kashmir alone, why? Why did Demonetisation not stop the terror attack, as Modi told the country? On one hand, we were picking pieces of martyrs, and on the other hand, Prime Minister Modi was shooting his propaganda film and making tea snacks. Is it BJP nationalism?

The Congress party on Thursday teared into Prime Minister Narendra Modi alleging he was recording for a movie at Corbett National Park for almost four hours after the Pulwama terror attack took place. Congress said that there is no better example than this of Modi's insult to our soldiers. Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said, “At 3:10PM, when Pulwama attack occurred and was all over news, Mr. Modi was shooting for a film till 6:45PM in Corbett National Park.” It also hit out at the prime minister over the joint statement issued after his talks with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, saying the PM "forgot" to write the name of "terror nourisher" Pakistan in the document. The party also shot five questions to Modi on Pulwama attack.Earlier on Wednesday, the Congress chided Prime Minister Narendra Modi for breaking protocol to personally welcome Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman (MBS) to India who “pledged $20 billion to Pakistan.” Prince Mohammed, who came to India a day after his visit to Pakistan, was received Modi with a warm hug. The Crown Prince had flown back to Saudi Arabia from Pakistan before coming to India. He visited Pakistan days after a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber attacked a CRPF convoy on February 14, killing 40 soldiers.
