kesari trailer: Akshay Kumar’s Kesari is all about patriotism, love for motherland and valour

Akshay Kumar

Battle of Saragarhi

Salman Khan

Karan Johar

Coming together for a film produced by friends, @BeingSalmanKhan and @karanjohar, starring me! Out in 2018. https://t.co/aOyfZS4p94 — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) 1483374605000

A film I'm extremely excited about personally and emotionally... #Kesari releasing Holi 2019. https://t.co/sDLrZWIl2R — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) 1507642269000

Unveiling @SonsOfSardaar My tribute to Warriors of Saragarhi: A tale of Rage, of Love, of Bravery. #SonsOfSardaar https://t.co/kjI44uCvzI — Ajay Devgn (@ajaydevgn) 1469761802000

Anurag Singh

After teasing fans with teasers, the makers of Kesari have released the trailer of the, Parineeti Chopra-starrer. In no time, the trailer of the film raised anticipation amongst the audience. Kesari is based on a true story of one of the bravest battles India has ever fought in history. After having seen Akshay bring the achievements of real people alive on screen in Toilet: Ek Prem Katha, Pad Man and Gold, Akshay’s fans are all excited to see him in the role of a Sikh warrior who fought along with other 20 other Sikh warriors against 10,000 Afghans in 1897 in theThe trailer shows the glimpses of war against the Afghans, the valour of 21 Sikh warriors who fought for their motherland, the people who believed in these warriors and romantic moments between lead pair Akshay and Parineeti.It can be recalled that Akshay along withandannounced the collaboration in 2017. While Akshay was supposed to play lead, Salman and KJo collaborated as producers.However, due to reasons unknown, Salman made his exit from the project. Akshay stepped into the producer’s shoes and shared the news on social media.On the other hand, Ajay Devgn also was keen on bringing the story of the brave warriors on screen. He also shared the poster in 2016 and captioned it, “Unveiling @SonsOfSardaar My tribute to Warriors of Saragarhi: A tale of Rage, of Love, of Bravery. #SonsOfSardaar.” But later, Ajay’s Son of Sardaar: The Battle of Saragarhi was shelved.Akshay's avatar in a turban received praise from netizens. But the film also faced difficulties while shooting. It can be recalled that due to a major fire, the film set was totally destroyed. The makers had recreated the Saragarhi and Gulistan forts in Wai district of Maharastra. After fire gutted the set, the makers recreated the Saragarhi fort in Mumbai.Directed by, the film is set to release on March 21.
