Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor shoot a song for 'Street Dancer 3D' on top of London's iconic O2 arena

Soon after wrapping up the Punjab schedule, the team of ' Street Dancer 3D ' including lead actors Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor headed towards London, where they are shooting a major chunk of the film in a 40-day schedule. The team kick-started the shooting from February 10 and the latest news is that the makers have shot a song for the upcoming dance film on top of London's iconic O2 arena, the ninth largest building in the world.The song was shot on the rooftop of the dome-shaped O2 arena. Reports suggest that this is the first time a Bollywood film song is being shot at the top of the stadium. Besides the rooftop, the song will also feature the interiors of the stadium. The song is reportedly a fun-romantic track.Actor Varun Dhawan took to his Instagram handle to give us a glimpse of the sets from where he was shooting for the song. The actor posted the video to thank his fans and followers who he says always showers him with all their love. Have a look at the video here-Only 20 members from the crew besides Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor were allowed on the rooftop for the shoot. Also, the crew was attached to the harnesses to ensure their safety so no one loses their balance. The team had to trek for 10 minutes to get on top of the building.Lead actress Shraddha Kapoor also took to her Instagram handle to share an exclusive image of the crew from the top of the O2 arena. In the picture, we can see Varun and Shraddha along with Salman Yusuf Khan, Dharmesh, director Remo D’Souza and other crew members dressed in warm clothes and attached to their harnesses. The actress also revealed that they have shot in the freezing cold without their safety gear, plus she was wearing an outfit comprising of shorts and a crop top.Directed by Remo D'Souza , the film also stars Prabhudheva, Nora Fatehi , Shakti Mohan, Vartika Jha, Sonam Bajwa, Punit Pathak. Dharmesh Yelande and Raghav Juyal. The film will be shot in 3D and converted to 4DX later. The first schedule of the film was shot in Amritsar last month. The film is slated to hit the screens on November 8, 2019.
