Those who want to stall alliance have ordered raids, alleges Akhilesh Yadav

The aim of the Samajwadi Party (SP) is to win a maximum number of seats in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, and those who want to stall it have ordered the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) raids on SP and BSP leaders, alleged former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav.

Akhilesh Yadav’s veiled attack at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) at the Centre came following the reports of Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and the Samajwadi Party inching closer to stitch an alliance in Uttar Pradesh ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha polls. The reports were followed by raids conducted at the residences of a SP leader and a BSP leader in connection with its investigation into an illegal sand mining case.

Also Read | CBI likely to investigate former UP chief minister Akhilesh Yadav in illegal mining case

"The BJP has taught us alliances and we are walking on the same path. We are trying to form an alliance with the BSP. The aim of the SP is to bag maximum number of seats but the ones who wish to stop us, they have the CBI," Akhilesh Yadav alleged.

Terming the raids as politically motivated, Akhilesh Yadav said, "The CBI is welcome. I will answer if I am questioned but the CBI, too, will have to answer. It’s for you to analyse the credibility of the investigation agency."

Hours after Akhilesh Yadav made veiled accusations at the BJP, Uttar Pradesh minister Sidharth Nath Singh hit back saying that the Samajwadi Party leader cannot loot and beat his chest over it.

"Akhilesh ji you cannot loot, and beat your chest over it. You've looted the people and law is taking its course. In 2016, Allahabad HC took cognizance of the matter and gave it to the CBI. The CBI does not work keeping in mind timing of elections or gathbandhans [alliances]," Sidharth Nath Singh said.

Sidharth Nath Singh, UP Min: Akhilesh ji you cannot loot, & beat your chest over it. You've looted the people & law is taking its course. In 2016 Allahabad HC took cognizance of the matter & gave it to CBI. CBI does not work keeping in mind timing of elections or gathbandhans. pic.twitter.com/ib3zpwSftD ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 6, 2019





Congress’s Kapil Sibal also attacked the BJP, saying that whoever speaks against the saffron party is raided. "Now that the reports of SP-BSP alliance have come, raids have started against Akhilesh. This was expected, whoever speaks against them [BJP] is raided, that's how this government is running," he said.

The CBI on Saturday (January 5) searched 14 locations in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh, including the residence of a woman IAS officer, a SP leader and a BSP leader, in connection with its investigation into a case of illegal sand mining, with sources saying the role of former Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav, who held the portfolio of mining, will also be probed.

Akhilesh Yadav, who was the chief minister of the state between 2012 and 2017, held the mining portfolio during 2012-13 apparently bringing his role under scanner, according to the FIR.

He was succeeded by Gayatri Prajapati, who took charge as mining minister in 2013 and was arrested in 2017 following a complaint of rape by a woman residing in Chitrakoot.

With inputs from Nelanshu Shukla, Kumar Abhishek and agencies

Also Read | Supreme Court refuses to dilute ban on sand mining

Also Watch | IAS officer Durga Shakti Nagpal's batchmate attacked during a raid against illegal sand mining in Himachal
