Kamal Haasan happy Prakash Raj ‘walks the talk’ after latter’s decision to contest 2019 Lok Sabha polls

Kamal Haasan.

Chennai: Following actor-turned-political activist Prakash Raj’s advent into mainstream politics and his announcement on Saturday that he would contest the upcoming Lok Sabha elections from Bengaluru Central constituency as an independent candidate, another veteran actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan extended his greetings by saying that he is happy Raj ‘walks the talk’.

Haasan, who has himself floated his own party – Makkal Needhi Maiam – from Tamil Nadu, praised Raj on social media platform Twitter and wished him ‘all the best for his political journey.

Wishing My friend Mr. @prakashraaj all the very best in his Political Journey. Thanks for walking the talk. #citizensvoice #justasking — Kamal Haasan (@ikamalhaasan) January 6, 2019

Even Aam Aadmi Party extended their regards to Raj, with Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia welcoming him through a tweet.

"I welcome the decision of @prakashraaj & all good people are welcome in politics."- @msisodia pic.twitter.com/vxqUxpfsCV — AAP (@AamAadmiParty) January 4, 2019

Earlier southern superstar Rajinikanth had also announced his plans of entering politics.

Raj had announced on January 1 that he would contest the general elections this year but he did not state which constituency he would fight from.

Putting all rumours to rest, Raj announced his entry into politics with the upcoming Lok Sabha polls. Known for his anti-Bharatiya Janata Party stand, Raj has been vocal about his angst against Hindutva activists after his friend and activist Gauri Lankesh was murdered in cold blood in 2017.

The 2019 Lok Sabha elections are scheduled to be held in April-May.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
