It will take a long time for Pakistan to start behaving: PM Modi on surgical strikes

Prime Minister_Narendra Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said the Indian Army Special Forces' commandos, who conducted the 2016 surgical strikes across the Line of Control (LoC), were told to come back before sunrise, irrespective of the mission's success.

Speaking to news agency ANI, Modi said the date of the attack was changed twice, keeping in mind the safety and security of the troops.

"I gave clear orders that whether you get success or failure, don't think about that but come back before sunrise. Don't fall for the lure and prolong it (the operation)," he said.

The surgical strikes were carried out days after a terrorist attack on an Army camp in Kashmir's Uri had killed 20 soldiers. Modi said the surgical strikes were carried out because "rage" was building inside him and within the Army after the attack.

Responding to whether the objective of the strikes was achieved, Modi said he will not like to discuss the topic in public domain.

"Ek ladai se Pakistan sudhar jayega, yeh sochne mein bahut badi galti hogi. Pakistan ko sudarne mein abhi aur samay lagega (It will be a big mistake to think that Pakistan will start behaving after one fight. It will take a long time for Pakistan to start behaving)," Modi said.

"I knew it was a big risk. I never care about any political risk to me. the biggest consideration for me was the safety of our soldiers," Modi told ANI, adding that he was "anxious" the entire night, while he was keeping a tab on the operations, and things became "extremely difficult" when live information stopped flowing for about one hour in the morning.

Modi said the politicisation of the surgical strikes was done by the Opposition and not the government.

"An Army officer apprised the nation (India) of the operation... But it is unfortunate for the country that the same day, leaders of some parties raised doubts over the strikes," Modi told ANI.

"It was necessary for Pakistan to speak like this (to deny), to keep their morale intact. But what Pakistan was saying, was being said here too. To lend weight to their views, they were citing the Pakistani version. Politicisation started from that point," he added.
