The world's most fascinating cinemas, from Los Angeles to Egypt, photographed by Stephan Zaubitzer

Advertisement

You might want to cosy up with some popcorn while viewing this fascinating photo series documenting cinemas around the world.

Paris-based Stephan Zaubitzer has spent the past 16 years photographing movie houses, with his travels taking him to the coast of Egypt and the bright lights of Los Angeles.

He told MailOnline Travel that he wants to document the big screen's golden era, as 'with the arrival of video and television, the very existence of these cinemas is under threat'.

Paris-based Stephan Zaubitzer has spent the past 16 years photographing movie houses. Above, the Rio cinema in downtown Alexandria, Egypt, has two cinema auditoriums, with one outside on the roof

Zaubitzer told MailOnline Travel that he wants to document the big screen's golden era, as 'with the arrival of video and television, the very existence of these cinemas is under threat'. Above, an interior shot of the Cinema Avenida in Tetouan, Morocco. It was founded in 1945, restored in 1996, and the auditorium has a capacity of more than 1,000 seats

Explaining why he's saddened by the demise of cinema, Zaubitzer says: 'The cinema hall moulds its neighbourhood as much as the neighbourhood and environment do. Whenever a cinema shuts down it very often takes the soul of the neighbourhood away.

'Photographing the cinemas helps keep these halls alive.'

Zaubitzer's images show how cinemas contrast in different cities, with varying styles of architecure.

Some have brutalist-styled exteriors, while others look pretty nondescript from the outside.

One particularly eye-catching cinema is the Million Dollar Theatre in Los Angeles, with a towering tiled facade.

One particularly eye-catching cinema is the Million Dollar Theatre in Los Angeles, with a towering tiled facade. Commenting on the zany design, Zaubitzer says: 'The theater's unique architecture reflects the 1918 period when it was built, a time when Los Angeles was just beginning its tremendous growth as a centre of the film industry'

Zaubitzer ventured into the Nishat Cinema in Mumbai to get this shot showing an audience in waiting. The photographer says this is one of the most popular spots in the bustling city to watch films

One of Zaubitzer's favourite movie houses is the Raj Mandir Cinema in Jaipur. Zaubitzer muses: 'The cinema is green and looks like a gigantic cake. The decoration in the auditorium is awesome, with indirect lighting that changes colours, hidden behind and underneath a frond fern leaf-like plaster trough which has openings all over the ceiling and walls. It certainly lives up to its reputation as one of the most remarkable cinemas in India'

A shot showing the interiors of the former Odeon Eltham Hill in south London. This cinema opened in 1938 and had 1,711 seats. In the 1970s the venue closed and the interiors were ripped out to make way for a bingo hall, as seen above

Commenting on the zany design, Zaubitzer says: 'The theater's unique architecture reflects the 1918 period when it was built, a time when Los Angeles was just beginning its tremendous growth as a centre of the film industry.'

The cameraman says one of the most beautiful cinemas he's documented is the Rio picture house in Alexandria, Egypt.

The venue houses a large auditorium that can hold 800 spectators and there's also an outdoor rooftop cinema there that is open in the summer, with stunning views over the coastal city.

Another of his favourite movie houses is the Raj Mandir Cinema in Jaipur. Zaubitzer muses: 'The cinema is green and looks like a gigantic cake.

'The decoration in the auditorium is awesome, with indirect lighting that changes colours, hidden behind and underneath a frond fern leaf-like plaster trough which has openings all over the ceiling and walls.

'It certainly lives up to its reputation as one of the most remarkable cinemas in India.'

Above, an exterior shot of a cinema called Majestic on a street in Tunisia

Zaubitzer says that Lynx cinema in Morocco (pictured) shows classic movies and Arabic films and that it has 1,200 seats

A dramatic shot highlights the main screen and interiors of the El Sharq Cinema in Cairo, Egypt

The tired-looking exterior of a former cinema in the Lebanese town of Raya

Looking a little less chic is a cinema in Tetouan, Morocco.

Zaubitzer says it was the 'saddest' building that he's come across so far, and it was torn down shortly after he visited to make way for parking in the city centre.

The avid traveller, aged 52, originally started photographing cinemas while travelling around the city of Ouagadougou in Burkina Faso.

He went about documenting the open air cinemas of the capital, which were simple in style, and says 'since then, these collective places of projection have become a passion'.

The photographer adds: 'Every year, rain or shine, I try to add a new destination to the series.

Zaubitzer says the Metro Cinema in Cairo is 'worth visiting for a blast into the past'. The venue was apparently built in the early 1940s to showcase MGM movies in the city and it opened with an Egyptian premier of Gone With The Wind. It was the first cinema in Egypt to have air conditioning. The photographer adds: 'Designed by New York architect Thomas Lamb in a stunning Art Deco style... nowadays, it shows a broad range of movies from America and Egypt'

A photograph showing the imposing Aakash cinema building in Delhi, with a banner outside promoting the latest movie releases

Stephan Zaubitzer says of this image: 'Originally opened in 1918, a second screen was recently added to this movie house off Wenceslas Square in the heart of Prague. The seating capacities are for 488 in the original screen and 356 in the new screen. It features mainly American hits, with Czech subtitles, as well as some Czech films and independent films. The cinema has two licenced bars selling beers'

Zaubitzer says the Paramount Theatre in Oakland California is a 'truly magnificent example of Art Deco style, beauty and construction' and a 'marvellous counterpart to Radio City Music Hall in New York'

'In 2013, sponsored by private donors, I went to California to shoot the cinema halls in Hollywood.

'At the beginnings of 2014, I seized the opportunity of a residency work at the French Institute in Morocco to photograph halls in Marrakech, Oujda, Meknes, Casablanca, Tangier and Tetouan.

'In the same year, in December, I worked in Rio with the financial support of the House of France and then I was in Lebanon, in Tunisia, shooting the cinemas.'

This year Zaubitzer plans to return to Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and Lebanon to update his cinema project image library.

He concludes: 'I will then prepare my next trip to Algeria to complete the inventory of cinemas on the southern bank of the Mediterranean.'

A shot of the West Wind Drive-In in Santa Barbara, California, with the large white screen ready to entertain. Zaubitzer says the drive-in opened in the summer of 1966, and closed in 1991 before reopening in May 2010

Zaubitzer journeyed to Sangam Theatre in the suburbs of Delhi to capture its striking exteriors. The building features a mix of geometric patterns with faded red and green paint

The sparse lobby of the Colorado Cinema in the Lebanese city of Tripoli, complete with funky railings and balcony area

Zaubitzer took this night time shot of the Strand cinema in downtown Alexandria, Egypt. He says the outdoor screening spot has since been demolished and it no longer exists

This year Zaubitzer plans to travel to Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and Lebanon to document cinemas. Above, a shot showing the interiors of an abandoned cinema in Tunisia, with the chairs uprooted and the screen missing
