Pulwama remarks controversy: Navjot Singh Sidhu now BANNED from entering Film City in Mumbai

Navjot Singh Sidhu continues to face the ire of his comments post the dastardly Pulwama Attack. After being sacked from The Kapil Sharma Show, where he used to be the special guest, the cricekter-turned-politician has now been banned from entering the Film City in Mumbai. The decision has been taken by the Federation of Western India Cine Employees after a meeting that was held on Thursday in Mumbai. Sidhu used to shoot for the episodes of the comedy show in the studios situated inside the Film City premises.

Recently, the Federation had also announced a complete ban on working with Pakistani artists in India. On Thursday, in a letter to the managing director of the Film City in Mumbai, the Federation stated that not just the Pakistani artists but also Navjot Singh Sidhu should be banned from entering the premises of the Film City and should not be allowed to shoot in the studios that are situated inside its premises. This comes soon afte the Federation had directed the Indian filmmakers not to work with Pakistani artistes and to also not release their films in Pakistan.

Sidhu invited a lot of flak for his comments post the Pulwama Terror Attack in Kashmir, in which a convoy of 40 CRPF jawaans got killed on February 14, 2019. While the denizens of the country were demanding on a total ban on the Pakistani artists in India, Sidhu went on to say that the entire nation (Pakistan) should not be held responsible for the actions of a handful of people. His comments ended up enraging the netizens who demanded that he should be fired from Kapil Sharma's comedy show.

Soon after that, Sidhu was sacked and reportedly, Archana Puran Singh was signed to replace him on the show. Commenting on the developments, Kapil Sharma had shared that he stands with the decision of the government but also went on to say that firing Sidhu from the show wasn't the right solution. His colleague from the show and former arch rival Krushna Abhishek also showed solidariy with the decision to ban Pakistani artistes in India and added that he had no clue about Kapil's statements on Sidhu.
