Why Exactly Should Bengal Honour A 19th Century Wahhabi Radical?

With Titumir’s mujahids increasing in numbers, the British were alarmed and despatched a small force against him. But the British were routed in a small battle. An emboldened Titumir then attacked the Gobardanga zamindar Kaliprasanna Mukhopadhyay and Purha zamindar Krishnadev Roy.



Titumir had, by then, erected a bamboo fort surrounded by a high double curtain wall of bamboo stakes filled in with mud cladding and sun-baked bricks at Narikelberia (near Barasat town). This fort has been romanticised in many Bengali novels. He then declared independence from the British and established Islamic rule in a large area comprising the present-day districts of North 24 Parganas and Nadia in Bengal and Faridpur in Bangladesh.

Titumir’s jihadists had by then become proficient in guerilla tactics and could repel attacks by the private armies of the zamindars who were supported by the British. Ultimately, the British decided to crush him and a strong force under Lieutenant Colonel Stewart and comprising a hundred cavalry, 300 native infantry and artillery with two cannons, attacked the bamboo fort on 19 November 1831. The fort was destroyed and Titumir with many of his followers were killed.

Today, many historians defend and glorify Titumir. In this newspaper report , historian and scholar of Islam Gautam Bhadra, who was formerly with the Centre for Studies of Social Sciences, is quoted as saying: “Titu destroyed one Hindu temple and killed one priest who worked in the temple of a talukdar (tax collector holding land) Deb Roy. (And) that is not because of any communal reason but because of the nature of his movement, [which was] directed against an irrational tax regime implemented by the land holders”.



But this scholar fails to explain how the priest was responsible for the taxes imposed on peasants by his employer. Bhadra also admits that Titumir spearheaded the Wahhabi movement (or Salafi movement) in Bengal and that, in itself, is a strong and severe indictment of Titumir since Wahhabism (or Salafism) is a regressive and puritanical form of Islam that preaches intolerance, bigotry, killing of kafirs and jihad.

Prof. Atis Dasgupta, formerly with the Sociological Research Unit of the Indian Statistical Institute in Kolkata, writes in his essay Titu Meer’s Rebellion: A profile (1983) that Titu preached Wahhabism, advocated Sharia and was against the Sufi and folkish, syncretic form of Islam in Bengal. But then, Dasgupta places Titumir’s revolt against the larger context of uprisings of peasants in Bengal. Again, this is simply whitewashing the bigotry of Titumir and justifying his jihad against Hindus.

Incidentally, this issue snowballed into a public controversy in March 2017 when it came to light that Class X ‘History and Environment’ textbooks approved by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education contained a chapter stating that Titumir and his Wahhabi followers “killed several Brahmins and destroyed many temples...Muslims opposing Wahabism also were not spared”.



The chapter ‘Wahabi movement in Bengal (1822-1831)’ read: “After return from Haj in 1822, Titumir preached Wahhabism to rural Muslims of North 24 Parganas and Nadia districts, who followed folk Islam that included aspects of Hinduism and Animism. He also built people’s resistance against taxes on mosques and beard imposed by landlord Krishna Dev Roy, besides protesting against indigo farming of the British. This movement came to be known as Tariqahi-Muhammadiyah” (read this ).

This chapter was removed after protests by many, including Bengal’s mass education minister Siddiqullah Chowdhury . Tellingly, Chowdhury was the president of the Bengal unit of the Jamaat Ulema-i-Hind and is quite a controversial figure. After the Supreme Court’s triple talaq verdict, he had proclaimed that the apex court has no right to interfere in Islamic customs and asserted that the Quran will prevail over the Indian Constitution. Chowdhury, who received his Islamic education from the hardline Darul Uloom Deoband, had opposed the death sentences passed on Razakars responsible for the horrific 1971 Bangladesh genocide by the International War Crimes Tribunals in Bangladesh. He has also been strong critic of the crackdown on Islamists by the Sheikh Hasina regime in that country, but is considered to be close to Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee.
