Condolences pour in for victim families

Condolences pour in from inside the country and abroad on Thursday, February 21, 2019 following a ghastly fire that broke out at Dhaka’s Chawkbazar area claiming at least 70 lives. Photo: Anisur Rahman

Condolences poured in to the bereaved families of those killed in the deadly blaze at Old Dhaka's Chawkbazar on Wednesday night.

Foreign Minister AK Abdul Momen expressed his deep sympathy towards those who had lost their loved ones to the fire, wished eternal peace for the departed souls and quick recovery of the injured.

Law Minister Anisul Huq extended his condolences to the mourning families.

Jatiya Party Chairman HM Ershad, also leader of the opposition in parliament, expressed shock at the huge loss of lives in Chawkbazar fire incident, reported UNB.

In a statement, he also demanded that the government take prompt actions against those responsible.

British Secretary of State for International Development Penny Mordaunt expressed deep shock over the loss of lives.

“I am deeply saddened to hear of the terrible loss of lives following the chemical warehouse fire in Dhaka, a city I visited earlier this week,” she tweeted yesterday morning. “My thoughts are with those families who have lost loved ones.”

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee also extended her condolences on her twitter account.

“Saddened to hear about the tragic loss of lives because of the devastating fire in Bangladesh. My heartfelt condolences to the grieving families. We wish the injured a speedy recovery,” she wrote in a tweet.

India's Ministry of External Affairs also conveyed condolences following the tragic incident.

.@PennyMordaunt: I am deeply saddened to hear of the terrible loss of life following the chemical warehouse fire in Dhaka, a city I visited earlier this week. My thoughts are with those families who have lost loved ones. — DFID (@DFID_UK) February 21, 2019

Raveesh Kumar, official spokesperson for the ministry, said in a twitter statement, “India is saddened by the loss of lives as a result of the tragic fire in Dhaka on February 20. We offer our deepest condolences to relatives of those affected by the accident. As a close neighbour and partner, we stand by the people and the Government of Bangladesh in this hour of grief.”

Saddened to hear about the tragic loss of lives because of the devastating fire in Bangladesh. My heartfelt condolences to the grieving families. We wish the injured a speedy recovery — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) February 21, 2019

Shaheen Anam, executive director of rights organisation Manusher Jonno Foundation, expressed deep sorrow over the loss of at least 67 lives in the incident. She demanded that the government take immediate actions so that such incidents don't occur again.

India is saddened by the loss of lives as a result of tragic fire in Dhaka on February 20. We offer our deepest condolences to relatives of those affected by the accident. As a close neighbour & partner, we stand by the people & the Government of Bangladesh in this hour of grief. — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) February 21, 2019

Meanwhile, legal aid organisation Ain O Salish Kendra said an investigation should follow and action should be taken based on the findings.
