Pak in troubled water: India will stop its share of water which flows to Pakistan, announces Nitin Gadkari

Pak in troubled water: India will stop its share of water which flows to Pakistan, announces Nitin Gadkari

The Union Cabinet chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi today has approved implementation of Shahpurkandi Dam Project, Punjab on river Ravi. For this, Central Assistance of Rs. 485.38 cr (for irrigation component) would be provided over five years from 2018-19 to 2022-23.

Implementation of this project would help minimising some of the water of the River Ravi which at present is going waste through the MadhopurHeadworks downstream to Pakistan. The decision comes in aftermath of the Pulwama attack where Pak terrorist group JeM's terrorist killed 40 CRPF men. Union Waterways Minister Nitin Gadkari first in a public meeting announced the decision and rather gave more details of it on Twitter.

Also read: Subramanian Swamy's five point formula to solve Kashmir problem

According to government communique, on completion of the project an Irrigation Potential of 5,000 ha in Punjab State and 32,173 ha in J&K State would be created.Funding for Central Assistance to Shahpurkandi Dam project shall be made through NABARD under existing system for funding of 99 PMKSY-AIBP projects under LTIF.

In addition to existing monitoring mechanism for projects by Central Water Commission, a committee headed by Member, Central Water Commission and consisting of concerned Chief Engineers of Punjab and J&K and other concerned officers would be constituted to oversee/monitor the implementation of project.The Advisory committee of MoWR, RD&GR on Irrigation, Flood Control and Multipurpose Projects accepted the second Revised Cost Estimate amounting to Rs. 2715.70 crore (February, 2018 Price Level) in its 138th meeting held on 31.10.2018.

The project would be implemented by Govt. of Punjab with Central Assistance of Rs. 485.38 crore The project would be completed by June 2022.

Water of three rivers flowing into Pakistan, over which India has full rights under the Indus Water Treaty, will be diverted to Yamuna river, Union Minister of Water Resources Nitin Gadkari said on Thursday, against the backdrop of anger in India over the Pulwama terror attack.

The bilateral Treaty, signed in 1960, governs the rights of India and Pakistan on three of the six common rivers, respectively. As per the agreement, India has full rights over Ravi, Beas and Sutlej rivers while Pakistan has full rights over Jhelum, Chenab and Indus.

“After partition, three rivers each were divided between India and Pakistan. The water of the three rivers over which India has rights was going to Pakistan. We have constructed projects after which the water of these rivers will be diverted to Yamuna river. Once this happens, there will be more water in Yamuna,” Gadkari said at an event here on Thursday.

#WATCH Union Minister Nitin Gadkari says,"Bharat aur Pakistan hone ke baad, jo humari 3 nadiyan Pakistan ko mili thi aur 3 Bharat ko mili thi. Humare teen nadiyon ke adhikar ka paani Pak mein ja raha tha, ab uss par 3 project karke yeh paani bhi Yamuna mein wapas la rahe hain." pic.twitter.com/w6EfYi3cGg — ANI (@ANI) February 21, 2019

His statement comes at a time when India is exploring options to "punish" Pakistan for the Pulwama terror attack of February 14 in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed. The suicide bomb attack was claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror outfit, which is based in Pakistan and backed by the Pakistani establishment.

He later said on Twitter, "Our Govt. has decided to stop our share of water which used to flow to Pakistan. We will divert water from Eastern rivers and supply it to our people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab. The construction of dam has started at Shahpur- Kandi on Ravi river. Moreover, UJH project will store our share of water for use in J&K and the balance water will flow from 2nd Ravi-BEAS Link to provide water to other basin states.All the above Projects are declared as the National projects."

With agency inputs
