EXCLUSIVE: India's action plan to avenge Pulwama terror attack ready, big powers briefed

Follow us on Pulwama Attack

Angered with Pakistan over the Pulwama terror attack, India has stepped up its offensive against the neighbouring country over the loss of 40 CRPF bravehearts in the deadly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir a week ago. India has worked out a solid plan to avenge the killings, with its eyes also set on minutest movements of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar.

It was on February 14 when a suicide bomber rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district, killing at least 40 personnel and leaving many critically wounded.

As per inputs to India TV, the plan to avenge the killings has been readied but the timing of the action remains a secret. USA, Russia, UK and France are the four countries that have been briefed by National Security Advisor Ajit Doval about the secret plans.

The government is also believed to be tracking the movement of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, whose Pakistan-based terror outfit had claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack.

Following the brutal attack, India has taken a series of bold decisions against Pakistan, from withdrawing the "most favoured nation" status to hiking the customs duty to 200 per cent on all goods imported from the neighbouring country.

Other important stories on Aaj Ki Baat:

India stops its share of water flowing to Pakistan from eastern rivers

The government on Thursday has decided to stop India's share of water flowing to Pakistan. The water from Eastern rivers will now be diverted for supply to people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab. "Under the leadership of Hon'ble PM Sri @narendramodi ji, Our Govt. has decided to stop our share of water which used to flow to Pakistan. We will divert water from Eastern rivers and supply it to our people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab," Union Minister Nitin Gadkari made the announcement on Thursday.

"The construction of dam has started at Shahpur- Kandi on Ravi river. Moreover, UJH project will store our share of water for use in J&K and the balance water will flow from 2nd Ravi-BEAS Link to provide water to other basin states. All the above Projects are declared as the National projects," he added.

Pakistan bans Hafiz Saeed-led JuD, but keeps mum on Masood Azhar, Jaish

Pakistan on Thursday banned the 2008 Mumbai attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed-led Jamat-ud-Dawa and its charity wing Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation. Pakistan, however, did not mention a word on terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed and its chief Maulana Masood Azhar, who were behind the deadly Pulwama attack. "It was decided during the meeting to accelerate action against proscribed organisations," their spokesperson said in a statement. It was further decided that Jamat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation be notified as proscribed organizations by the Ministry of Interior, he added.

Withdrawal of security to mainstream political workers a retrograde step, says Omar Abdullah

National Conference leader Omar Abullah termed as a "retrograde" step the withdrawal of security to some mainstream political activists in Jammu and Kashmir, noting that it will weaken the political activity in the state. Urging Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik to reconsider his administration's decision, the former chief minister said they will approach the court if it is not revisited. He alleged that there seemed to be an element of pick and choose at play in the decision to withdraw the security of some mainstream political activists.

Army chief flies in home-grown Tejas, calls it 'wonderful' aircraft

Army chief General Bipin Rawat on Thursday took to the skies in the home-grown Light Combat Aircraft Tejas at the Aero India show here and described the fighter jet as a "wonderful aircraft" that would add to the air power. Sitting behind the pilot in a two-seater trainer variant of the Tejas, General Rawat took a sortie, a day after the HAL-made fighter jet received the Final Operational Clearance (FOC) at the air show, signalling that it was combat ready.

FULL VIDEO:

Latest India News
