‘BJP politicising Pulwama terror strike’

Seven days after the Pulwama terror attack, the Congress accused the BJP of politicising the martyrdom of soldiers. The party alleged that Prime Minister Narendra Modi was busy doing self-promotional photo-shoots when the soldiers were getting martyred in Pulwama.

What has irked the Congress is a statement from BJP President Amit Shah at a rally in Assam that the sacrifice of soldiers won’t go in vain as it’s a BJP government, not a Congress government at the Centre. “The stark reality is, that there is no political response or accountability of Modi government to the Pulwama terror attack. While our Armed Forces face every onslaught bravely, making supreme sacrifice, Modi government has zero policy to tackle Pak-sponsored terrorism in the last five years,” Congress’ media in-charge Randeep Singh Surjewala said.

Surjewala said the attack took place on February 14 at 3:10 pm and Modi was busy in Corbett National Park, Nainital, participating in a photo-shoot for Discovery Channel. “Not only this, PM Modi was enjoying a boat ride from Kalagarh dam to Dhikala. Its horrific that as our jawans were getting martyred in Pulwama, the Prime Minister was busy doing self-promotional photo-shoots,” Surjewala said.

He maintained that the Pulwama terror attack was an assault on the collective conscience and sovereignty of the nation. “Pakistan will never succeed in its proxy war against India by such acts of cowardice. Let Pakistan remember the befitting lessons that were taught by the Congress governments and our Armed Forces in the Indo-Pak wars of 1947, 1965, 1971 and 1999,” he said.

Maintaining that the party unequivocally supports the Army and the Centre, Surjewala said PM Modi and BJP leaders’ shameful behaviour and politicisation of the sacrifice of the martyrs have forced the Congress to react after seven days of restraint. “Modi and Shah are habitual offenders in playing politics on terrorism. While the 26/11 terror attack was taking place in Mumbai, Modi was holding a press conference near the site in Mumbai,” he said. “What is even more painful is that despite the horrific Pulwama terror attack, PM Modi didn’t announce ‘national mourning’. Not only this, Modi came an hour late at the Delhi airport on February 16 to offer homage to Pulwama martyrs as he was busy politicking in Jhansi,” Surjewala added.

He said BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj was “shamefully smiling, waving and holding a road show” standing next to the body of Pulwama martyr in Unnao. “In a despicable act of self-promotion, Union Tourism Minister Alphons Kannanthanam clicked a selfie with a Pulwama jawan’s body in Wayanad, Kerala,” he accused. Kannanthanam had denied this charge earlier.
