Masood Azhar says ‘Kashmiri freedom struggle doesn’t need foreign support’

Srinagar: Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar has absolved Pakistan of blame for the Pulwama attack, which killed more than 40 CRPF soldiers.

In an audio that is doing rounds on social media Azhar can be heard as saying that Kashmiri freedom struggle doesn’t need any foreign support, “The attacker was a Kashmiri and it happened near Srinagar, not near the border of Pakistan,”

Azhar has asked the Pakistan government ‘not to succumb to the pressure from India’.

“As usual India is crying all over the world, despite the face that Pulwama attack was carried out by a Kashmiri on murderous India. But this time it didn’t work,” he said adding that even the Donald Trump didn’t mention it or condemn it. “European Union also didn’t put forth any statement on it and Chinese media didn’t report it,” he said in the audio.

He added that world bodies did not condemn the attack since no civilian was killed in the attack

“Modi will go further backwards, if our government does not succumb to the pressure. But if our government comes under the pressure of Modi and accepts some of his demands, it can help him regain his position,” he said.

India is not being heard globally this time, Azhar said, given the attacker was a Kashmiri.

In the audio message, Azhar has said that the attack is answer to the claims that militancy in valley has been wiped out from Kashmir.

Azhar also said that the attack has badly affected Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s position ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.

“Some people are saying this attack will help Narendra Modi in his election campaign. This is not true,” Azhar said in the audio clip. “People who think so don’t understand India’s politics nor are they aware of the Hindu mindset. This has sent his popularity to the graveyard. He was making hullaballoo about the elimination of militant ranks by operation all-out. So how did this attack happen?” Masood.

Azhar can be also heard making fun of Indian media saying he laughed his heart out on their coverage.

He further congratulated Kashmiris saying that their voice had been heard.
