Narendra Modi has completely failed in Kashmir: Masood Azhar – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR: Following the militant attack in Pulwama, Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Maulana Masood Azhar has released a new audio which is viral on social media.

In the latest audio which is also telecast by different national News channel, Masood Azhar has denied any hand in the Pulwama attack, even as he claimed that he had never met the militant Adil Ahmed Dar.

In this audio released on Thursday, Masood Azhar said that the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, will suffer losses in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections by the Pulwama attack. He also said that he does not want to push Pakistan into any kind of war. The audio also says that China will always support Pakistan, so there is no need to panic. He said that Narendra Modi has completely failed in Kashmir.

In the audio, Masood Azhar said, “Give me as much as I want, but say nothing against Adil Ahmed, the fight for freedom in Kashmir has been standing on his feet. There is no need of foreign power there. “

He refused to have any connection with Adil in this audio he said that the whole world is connecting Adil with me. But it is my pleasure to wish that I had ever met him. “If I were killed because of Adil, there will be no grief, it will be martyrdom for me” he added. (PTK)

Bajrang Dal asks Kashmiris to return after raising Indian flag at home

SRINAGAR: Following the 49 CRPF men were killed by a suicide bomber in Pulwama area of South Kashmir, Vikas Verma, a Bajrang Dal leader in Uttarakhand said that India that Kashmiri students had to leave the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-ruled state.

Verma, who is the right-wing organisation’s convener for Dehradun, Vikas Nagar and Purola, said that the Kashmiri students could return to Uttarakhand only after Kashmiris stopped throwing stones on the security personnel stationed in Kashmir, and the Indian flag was raised in every house in Kashmir Huffington Post reported.

Verma also said that students could return to Uttarakhand after Article 370 of the Indian Constitution, which gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir State, was abrogated, and Indians could live, work and buy property in Kashmir.

“Kashmiri students cannot come to Uttarakhand until the stone pelting in Kashmir stops. Kashmiri students cannot come here until there is an Indian flag raised in every house in Kashmir,” he said.

The deadly attack on Indian soldiers stationed in Pulwama on 14 February has triggered a backlash against Kashmiri students in different cities of the country, but largely in BJP-ruled Haryana and Uttarakhand.

Previously locals, led by a village sarpanch, demanded that Kashmiri students studying in the locality of Mullana in Ambala, Haryana, leave within 24 hours.

Kashmiri students have been forced to leave hostels or rented rooms in Haryana and Uttarakhand. Almost a dozen have been either suspended or expelled from college for expressing “offensive” views on the Pulwama attack. At least five students — one in Bengaluru and four in Rajasthan — have been booked for sedition under the Indian Penal Code by the local police.

While, on the one hand, Verma says the Bajrang Dal is targeting Kashmiris who allegedly raised “pro Pakistan” slogans and lauded the 19-year-old suicide bomber, Adil Ahmed Dar, on social media.

On the other, the 41-year-old activist, who has studied till class 12 and has worked with the Bajrang Dal for the past five years, accused “all” Kashmiri students in Uttarakhand of engaging in some kind of “anti-India” activities.

“Our campaign against them will continue,” he said. (PTK)

Er. Rasheed accuses national parties of doing politics of convenience for their vote Bank

SRINAGAR: Accusing national parties of doing politics of convenience, AIP President Er. Rasheed has said that former Home Minister P. Chidambarm’s statement that many Indians need Kashmir but not Kashmiris is nothing but an attempt to keep Majority community in Jammu & Kashmir in good humor.

While addressing various deputations in Handwara today Er. Rasheed said, “While thoughts, views and designs of BJP and right wing forces are known to all, it is shameful that so called secular parties including congress, BSP, SP, Jantadal and other so called likeminded parties are not far behind to BJP in adding fuel to the fire and are trying to stop BJP from gaining political dividends from Pulwama incident by talking often in a harder tune than the hardliners.

The politics of convenience being played by these parties is visible on TV screens when their leaders speak more than BJP about taking revenge and abusing all resistance voice in Jammu & Kashmir. What P. Chidambarm has said is absolutely true but at the same time congress needs to answer that what compelled the party to criticize Narendra Modi for hugging Saudi Crown Prince Shahzada Salman.

While congress leave no opportunity to gain sympathy of Muslims in entire India, but by raising unwanted question over Prince Salman’s visit to India, the party has exposed itself as cornering Narendra Modi for hugging Prince Salman is just to give a notion to the majority community in India that congress hates Saudi rulers for their relations with Pakistan. Congress has often talked in double speaks in Jammu and Kashmir. It has been observed very often that while in Jammu the party tries to be more ultra nationalist than BJP and other radical parties, in Kashmir congress plays secular card and speaks about minor rights of Kashmiri Muslims”.

Er. Rasheed also condemned the murder of Pakistani prisoner Shakrullah who was beaten to death by his inmates in central Jail Jaipur. Er. Rasheed said “Beating an unarmed helpless prisoner to death has no justification and proves the fact that the politics of hate-redness and revenge is crossing all limits and this stupidity may escalate further tension between the two countries.

In this situation Kashmiris are rightly worried about the security and fate of Kashmiris lodged in Jails outside Kashmir. Government must discharge its duties without being further biased and communal in its attitude and should lodge all Kashmiris back in various jails in the valley to avoid any untoward episode”. (PTK)
