India should fight its own battle: Shiv Sena

Bravery lies in fighting our own war than looking to America or Europe, the party said.

Mumbai: The Shiv Sena has said that India should fight its own battle against terrorism instead of depending on other countries for their support. Bravery lies in fighting the war on our own instead of looking to America or Europe, the party said.

"Despite the terror attacks on Pathankot, Uri and Pulwama, we are only making threats. We are busy patting our backs over what Donald Trump, France and Iran had to say about the attacks," said the Sena in an editorial in its mouthpiece 'Saamana' Thursday.

"The world commended Sri Lanka after it ended the menace of the LTTE. The US killed Osama Bin Laden inside Pakistan and the world appreciated that country's courage. However, we are patting our backs even after doing nothing. It is one thing for countries like the US and France to condemn the terror attack in Pulwama and another thing to openly say that Kashmir is a part of India," the editorial said.

The Sena said that Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan asserted that his country would retaliate if India took action over the Pulwama terror attack. Unless countries like the US and France told Pakistan that it would be a loser in case of conflict with India, such nations could not be considered true friends of India.

The party also raised questions over the BJP-led government's response to the Pulwama terror attack, asking it not to wait "till the eve of polling" to act against Pakistan.

The Sena said that a war between India and Pakistan was underway on social media, adding that this marked the start of election campaigning. This social media war had to be stopped, it said. "The martyrdom of soldiers and terror attacks becomes a tool to win elections. How will such a nation face enemies? There is the rhetoric of teaching Pakistan a lesson. First do it and then speak. We are only sounding warnings since Pathankot, Uri, and now the Pulwama (terror attacks)," the Sena said.
