CRIME-BRIEFS

Man dies after falling from DTC bus in Delhi's Nandnagri

New Delhi, Jan 6 (PTI) A 29 year-old man died and another was injured after falling from a moving DTC bus in northeast Delhi's Nandnagri area, police said Sunday.

The incident took place on Friday, they said.

The victims were rushed to a nearby hospital, where Kishore succumbed to injuries during treatment, officials said.

Investigation has revealed that the door of the bus was open when the accident took place, a police officer said.

A case has been registered against the accused driver, he added. PTI AMP



**********



Woman dead, husband injured after falling from flyover in Delhi

New Delhi, Jan 6 (PTI) A woman died and her husband sustained injuries after falling off the Barapula flyover here Sunday, police said.

The deceased, Nisha (30), and her husband, Sunny (30), are residents of Dwarka sector-7, they added.

The couple were returning from a marriage function at Trilokpuri when they were allegedly hit by a car, following which, they fell off the flyover, a senior police officer said.

The victims were rushed to a hospital, where Nisha was declared brought dead, the officer said.

The car which hit the couple was being driven by Madhur (65), a resident of the Nizamiddin West area, police said.

Sunny sustained injuries to his head and leg and was admitted at the AIIMS Trauma Centre, the officer said, adding that a case has been registered against the driver. PTI NIT



**********



Minor boy dies after being hit by school van in Delhi's Mahendra Park

New Delhi, Jan 6 (PTI) A 15-year-old boy was killed after being allegedly hit by a school van in the Mahendra Park area here, police said Sunday.

The incident took place on Friday, they said, adding the deceased was identified as Sachin, a student of Class X.

A school van driver rammed into Sachin and two of his friends while reversing his vehicle, a senior police officer said.

Although his friends managed to escape, Sachin was trapped.

It is alleged that the driver, instead of applying brakes, accelerated the vehicle, leading to Sachin's death, he said.

The accused driver fled from the spot after the incident, the official added. PTI AMP IJT
