All 26 acquitted in 2010 Dattawadi shooting case

Even as the accused were found to be in possession of weapons during the incident, which led to a death, the special court failed to prove MCOCA charges as witnesses turned hostile



In May 2010, a gang war erupted in Dattawadi, leading to the death of 30-year-old Sachin Kudle. The midnight armed brawl between the deceased’s Gajanan Marne gang and the Ghaiwal mob saw enough bloodshed to stoke a law and order situation in the city. Cops had soon initiated action under the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) against the Ghaiwal gang. Nine years on, the 26 of the gang, including notorious gangster Nilesh Ghaiwal and his brother Sachin Ghaiwal were acquitted by the Special Court for MCOCA as the prosecution failed to prove the charges after the witnesses turned hostile.



The gang of 26 was booked under section 120B (criminal conspiracy), 143 to 149 (offences against public tranquillity), relevant sections of the Maharashtra Police Act and MCOCA, following a complaint from Atul alias Pappu Kudle, a resident of Sinhagad Road.



According to the prosecution’s case, Atul had come to the Dattawadi police station on May 8, 2010, for meeting a 17-year-old gang member, who was detained in a rioting case. As soon as they left the police station, around eight people, including Ghaiwal, chased them on four motorbikes. They opened fire of which a bullet hit Sachin Kudle, who was riding a bike. He died on the spot while pillion rider, Balaji Kadam, was injured.



The gang continued chasing the van being driven by Pappu, which carried about six people. He stopped near the Dattawadi police chowky but was hit by a bullet in the arm before he could enter the premises. Santosh Gawde, a close aide of the Ghaiwals, had also thrown a sharp weapon at him, missing only by inches. This escalated situation between the two rival gangs stretched for half an hour.



When the case was opened for a probe, the cops found that the Ghaiwal gang had committed the offence in order to gain supremacy over the rival gang headed by Gajanan Marne. The primary motive was financial gain, which prompted the police to invoke MCOCA.



During the trial, the prosecution examined 25 witnesses out of which 17 turned hostile — except the police witnesses, none supported the case. Even Sachin Kudle’s brother, Atul, did not support the contents of the FIR. He cleared that he suffered injuries just because he fell on the ground and not because of the bullets. The star witnesses, who were being banked on, narrated a different story during the cross-examination. Furthermore, some of them could not describe the bikes that were ridden by the assailants. Thus, the prosecution failed to prove that the accused had hatched criminal conspiracy to kill Kudle and also could not prove that there was an unlawful assembly which had the common object to commit offences of riot and murder. In conclusion, the 26 accused could not be proven guilty even as weapons like choppers, sickles, knives and kukaris, were found in their possession. Therefore, special judge AN Sirsikar acquitted them from the charges slapped under MCOCA as well.



Along with the Ghaiwal brothers, the special court has acquitted Ujwal Choudhary, Ramesh Raut, Vikrant Kokate, Nilesh Sharma, Santosh Dhumal, Yogesh Sambre, Sanjay Sakat, Umesh Kirve, Prashant Dhumal, Adesh Kale, Santosh Kamble, Tanaji Nalawde, Shriman More, Shivaji Sashte, Jankiram Gaikwad, Ravindra Bhandwalkar, Ganesh Bidve, Nitin Deshmukh, Anna Taware, Rupesh Amrale, Sagar Jogawade and Bablu Shaikh.



Advocates Sudhir Shah, Santosh Bhagwat and Anup Pande represented the accused. Speaking to Pune Mirror, Shah, who represented the Ghaiwal brothers, said, “Almost all the witnesses in the case turned hostile. The prosecution did not fail to prove that there was an assembly which gathered with a common object to murder Sachin. None of the witnesses supported the case and also, the complainant changed his statement during the cross-examination. According to the FIR, the accused had tried to murder him by firing bullets as well — with one brushing past his right forearm. However, during the cross-examination, nothing came to fore.”


