Internal inquiries breed bias, claims FTII students’ assn

External members demanded to probe eviction of hostelite; I&B ministry involvement questioned



In protests since a 2016 batch art direction scholar was evicted from his hostel room at the Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) on Friday, the students’ association has demanded that any committee inquiring into their matters be constituted of external members, on the lines of the Ombudsman allowed under the University Grants Commission (Grievance Redressal of Students) Regulations, 2018. They are convinced that involvement of any internal faculty or staff can only yield biases.



“We’ve always noticed prejudice in reports given by committees on students’ complaints. Often, students are served notices. If we fail to give an explanation, the institute sets up a committee comprising faculty members,” said Rajarshi Majumdar, general secretary of the FTII Students’ Association. The body is now rallying around Srinivas Rao, who was locked out of his room on Friday after he failed to comply with the eviction order served to him on February 6 this year.



Rao and another batchmate — Manoj Kumar Verma — were suspended on December 21, 2018, on the complaint of the head of the department (HoD), for misbehaving with him. An internal committee was set up to inquire into the complaint, and its report submitted on January 21. While Verma disappeared immediately, before he was tracked to his hometown, Rao was served the eviction notice and at 9.15 pm on Friday, he was locked out of his room.



The student body has since pitched a tent outside the gates of the national institution, alongside the recreated Raj Ghat. “We have also written to Graduates of FTII (GraFTII) on the issue, despite the evicted student’s income proof establishing his inability to afford private accommodation. There is an urgent need for fairness so that students are not faced with severe punishments,” argued Majumdar.



The protesters feel Rao has got his comeuppance, having lost 54 academic days, which included important studio exercises. They underscored that there are serious infrastructural issues that they have all been complaining about, which was at the centre of the confrontation between Verma, Rao and the faculty of their department. “We will continue to protest until we get some reply. Our only demand is a fair inquiry with representation of the students’ side,” Majumdar added.



Bhupendra Kainthola, director of FTII, shrugged away the students’ demand, claiming, “To the best of my knowledge, all academic institutions set up inquiry committees comprising of internal staff or faculty. In some cases, an external member is co-opted. FTII has been following the same practice. Those who don’t agree with the report of the inquiry committee are free to approach forums for redressing their grievances.” As a case in point, he referred to a recent incident when a student was injured during an outdoor shoot. “In the September 2018 accident, when a student fell from a rented crane during a shoot at Diveagar, we had a five-member committee, of which two were external,” he insisted.



DUBIOUS INTERROGATIONS



The FTII students’ association also objected to interrogations made by an official on Monday evening, claiming to be the additional director general of police (DGP) from the ministry of information and broadcasting. The man allegedly called Rao’s guardian in Telangana. The association said, “Vijay Kumar Reddy interrogated Rao’s cousin and asked for additional information about his parents. When we called Reddy for an explanation, we asked if the call was under some official process from the ministry. But, he refrained from answering and cut the call.”



Students questioned how a person who’s not related to FTII and its internal matters can call the local guardian of a student and interrogate him about the student’s personal details, with the help of confidential personal data available only with FTII.


