Congress, BJP spar over PM Narendra Modi's whereabouts

After a show of unity after the Pulwama attack, political parties returned to slugfest on Thursday with the Congress launching a vitriolic attack directly at Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the PMO denying the allegations. They alleged that the PM continued shooting for a TV documentary in Uttrakhand's Jim Corbett National Park, on February 14, when terrorists bombed 40 CRFP personnel in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir.

At a press conference, Congress spokesperson shared images of the PM with filmmakers in the park. Sources in the PMO, however, denied Congress' claim, saying the PM was there in the park only in the morning where he met top officials inquiring the number of tigers along with measures to boost their population. "The PM was scheduled to address a rally at Rudrapur, but due to inclement weather, he addressed the rally through phone," they said.

The Congress also took umbrage at the PM reacting to the incident too late, inferring that he was informed late by National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval. Officials at the PMO said soon after learning about the attack, the PM went to Ram Nagar circuit house and talked to the Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Doval on phone. He refused to eat or even take tea, and insisted on returning to Delhi.

"Since night landing and takeoff facilities were not available at the nearby airport, he drove down straight to Bareilly, a five-hour journey, and took a plane to reach New Delhi," they said.

Modi had arrived in Dehradun at around 7am in the morning on February 14. He was subsequently taken to the Jim Corbett National Park using the MI-17 chopper. The shooting for his upcoming documentary recalling his spiritual sojourn in the Himalayas had finished by noon.

The BJP blamed the Congress for "politicising" the Pulwama terror attack by attacking the PM. Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said that the PM stayed put in the area till evening despite the attack. He claimed, "The Prime Minister knew when the terror strike took place in afternoon. Yet he, a person who claims himself to be a nationalist, continues to shoot a film till evening."

He alleged that the PM also continued to "enjoy boat rides" and later "ensured" that there was a "slogan shouting" by BJP workers in his favour. The Congress spokesperson also questioned the "gross intelligence failure" and the "priorities" of the PM at this "sensitive time".

Taking exception, the BJP president Amit Shah asked the Congress to desist using Pulwama attack to further their political interests. "They created an issue of the PM Modi's presence in a programme on the day of the attack.

But I want to tell them that for Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the nation's security is the top-most priority. He is toiling 18 hours a day. No comments on his intentions to keep the nation safe will make any difference," Shah added.

"The BJP is the only political party in the country to have a zero tolerance against terrorism. Congress... don't teach patriotism to us. We are the ones who are ready to lay down our lives for Bharat Mata," Shah said. "I would like to tell the Congress party not to politicise the terror attack as it is not going to benefit them," he added.

Senior BJP leader and Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad also said the Congress is trying to weaken the morale of the country and the armed forces by speaking in the "same tone" as that of Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan at a time when the whole world is "firmly standing" with India. "Styles of what Imran Khan and the Congress have said may be different, but there is a striking resemblance in their tone and contents," he said.

Prasad said the Congress is now showing its "true colours" after maintaining the "facade" of standing with the government and security forces following the terror attack.

Diary: Feb 14

PM Modi had arrived in Dehradun at around 7 am in the morning on February 14. The shooting for his upcoming documentary recalling his spiritual sojourn had finished by noon.
