History-sheeter arrested for paramour’s murder

RAJKOT: A history-sheeter was arrested on Thursday for allegedly murdering his paramour and setting her body ablaze on the way to Kantolia village from Gondal in Rajkot district on the night of February 13.The accused was identified as Gondal history-sheeter Imran Kataria alias Imalo (27) and the victim as Arti Goswami (25). Kataria had shot Goswami dead with his country-made pistol in Khatkivas locality of Gondal and then set her body ablaze in the bushes near Kantolia village.According to police, Kataria had set afire Goswami’s body after dousing it with petrol and diesel. However, as some of her body parts did not burn completely, he packed them into a bag and dumped it under the bridge over a stream.Police swung into action after rumours started doing rounds in Gondal that Goswami had been murdered. Her brother Paresh Goswami lodged a missing complaint with Gondal city police station on February 15.“We tracked Kataria on the basis of Goswami’s call record details. Her cellphone was found from under the bridge over a river in Khatkivas. As she had last spoken to Kataria, we rounded him up from his residence. During his interrogation, Kataria confessed to the crime,” said M N Rana, inspector with Rajkot rural special operation group During interrogation, Kataria told the cops that he had a four-month-old affair with Goswami and that he had murdered Goswami as she insisted on marrying him after she returned to Gondal from Ajmer in Rajasthan where she had gone for an excursion with Kataria and his friends.“Kataria said as he was already married, he felt pressurized to keep relations with Goswami who wanted to move to his house. Hence, he decided to kill her. On the night of February 13, when Goswami again broached the issue of marriage, the couple fought, following which Kataria pulled out his pistol and shot her dead,” said Rana.After killing Goswami, Kataria called his three friends, identified as Junej Memon, Sav Bapu Saiyed and Noor Mohemmed, who helped him dispose of Goswami’s body in an SUV. The trio have been absconding since then.
