Pulwama: The tragedy of using a tragedy

The murder of over 40 CRPF personnel by a suicide bomber allegedly from the Jaish-e-Mohammad on 14th February has shaken the nation

If the terrorist attack in Pulwama a week ago was soul-shattering, the shameless use of the same by certain (predictable) sections to paint themselves as victims and murkily politicise the issue has been equally dispiriting.

The bulk of India has come forward and showed commendable solidarity with the victims’ families and the Indian army. Marches expressing condolences to those perished in the heinous attack, candle-light vigils, posters of sympathy and empathy —- all from the common public across the country — point to a mood of cohesion and being one with the nation at this moment of crisis.

Of course, there is also helpless anger among the people, and those extremely emotional have resorted to words and terms that should not be used in public platforms. Right wing trolls on social media platforms have been downright nasty and provocative. The verbal attacks on Kashmiris living elsewhere in the country are wrong and need to be nipped in the bud. There have been reports, too, of physical attacks on Kashmiris in other States. But when the media got down to investigate, almost all of them turned out to be false alarms.

But that has not stopped the bleeding-heart liberals from making a hue and cry on social media platforms, as if all of Kashmiris are under siege now. In fact some them have made this non-issue as being bigger than the original tragedy.

Seriously, we checked and analysed many of reported events emanating from various parts of the country. Most cases were simply instances of someone saying there was a ‘threat’ of attack, or hearsay. But it has been played up significantly on social media. We are not belittling people’s fear, but when things are blown out of proportion, they need to be called out. Unfounded rumours and motivated claims are what they have turned out to be.

Also, most of these reports are, illuminatingly, emerging from places like JNU, Jamia, AMU. They are political tinder boxes even in normal times. Now, they are rife with all kinds of extreme emotions. Without beating around the bush, these places of education do harbour forces that are inimical to the nation. But their actions have long been condoned by the Lutyens’ media and the liberals under the ground that democracy has place for all kinds of dissent.

Story continues

Indeed, a healthy democracy does allow a free run for all shades of opinions. And this government has been guilty of using heavy-handed methods when faced with criticism. But it is equally a fact that the so-called dissenting sections have been using their democratic rights to undermine the very idea of democracy.

JNU student leader Shehla Rashid has been booked for ‘promoting enmity’ for her tweet.

Take for instance Shehla Rashid, one of the leaders of this motley. She put out a tweet about Kashmiri girls trapped in a Dehradun hostel. The Uttarakhand police swung into action quickly, and it was a clear instance of fear-mongering. A case has been filed against her, which of course will come in handy for her supporters to play victim that the governmental system is harassing them.

As you can see, there is a clear pattern to this. Raise false alarm, get found out, but play victim when faced with action or criticism. That these people who call themselves liberals are resorting to this in the backdrop of major calamity is the biggest tragedy of all.

Powered by Trivone Content Services Pvt Ltd
