Home guard ‘raids’ home posing as a policeman, extorts Rs 83k from yoga trainer, pals

Home Guard

yoga trainer

Bangalore

Can cops barge into your house?

A 21-year-oldhas been arrested and two of his associates are on the run after they carried out a plan to make a quick buck out of aand three others.The Home Guard, Kushal Pavad, and the two others posed as police officers to ‘raid’ the yoga teacher and extort him.The 28-year-old yoga trainer S Ananda and his friends Sangesh, Satish and Reddy, were playing cards at a friend’s house in Electronic City phase II. Pavad, in his khakhi uniform, and his two associates in civilian clothes, barged into the house claiming to be police officers. They said they were raiding the house as they had been tipped off about illegal activities going on there. The accused extorted Rs 83,600 from the victims and also made them sit in a line and took their photographs. Just before leaving the house, the three threatened the occupants of the house that an FIR would be registered against them.But Pavad made one error in judgement, which eventually led to his capture.He gave the victims his phone number asking them to keep in touch with him if they needed any help from the police. Ananda filed a complaint against the three accused on Sunday and Pavad was arrested two days later. Pavad is with the Sarjapura Home Guards Unit and his associates are said to be residents of Hebbagodi.A police officer toldMirror about the sequence of events. “Ananada had gone to meet his friend Prashanth to the house of another friend, Ranjith, in Shanthipura. Prashanth was not there so he and three others started playing cards. Around 11.15 pm, the four heard somebody knocking on the door. Assuming it to be Prashanth, they opened the door, when the three accused barged inside claiming to be raiding the house as they were informed about some illegal activity going on there,” the officer said.He said the trio threatened them with filing a police complaint and took Rs 83,600 from among them. “The Home Guard had a lathi in his hand and he even threatened to beat them if they raised alarm. The accused had taken the victims’ mobile phones too, but later returned them. The gang then escaped on a bike and the victims managed to note down the registration number and handed it to the police,” he said.The officer admitted that it was Pavad’s “strange” act of giving his mobile number to the victims that speeded his arrest. “The victims approached the police and gave details of the bike’s registration number and also the mobile phone number,” the officer said.The police have registered a case of extortion (IPC 384) and cheating by personation (IPC 419) against the three.“According to Karnataka Police Act, no policemen can barge in under the pretext of raid without a search warrant. The police officials should obtain a search warrant from the sub division Assistant Commissioner of Police or obtain the search warrant from the jurisdictional court. Without search warrants, they cannot enter any premises,” said a senior police officer.Advocate Gopala Krishna said, citizens should demand from the policemen prove their identity by displaying their identity cards. “If anybody knocks on the door claiming to be the police and that they have come to search the house, citizens should not open the doors till the policemen prove their identity and produce a search warrant. If they fail to do so, the citizens should call the police control room and complain,” the advocate said.
