Pulwama attack: Gujarat mill creates sarees with images of soldiers to pay tribute to CRPF martyrs

Annapurna Industries Pvt Ltd, a textile mill in Surat, printed the sarees with images of the paramilitary troopers. (Photo: ANI)

India is still reeling from the events of last week where 40 CRPF jawans were killed in one of the deadliest terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama. An explosive-laden SUV rammed into one of the buses in the CRPF convoy at Awantipora town in the Pulwama district on February 14.

Over 40 CRPF jawans were killed on spot in the terror attack orchestrated by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), while many continues to still battle their lives.

People from all walks of lives paid tributes to the CRPF jawans in their own possible way.

Paying tribute to the martyrs of the Pulwama attack, a textile mill in Gujrat's Surat manufactured a batch of sarees where they printed images of CRPF jawans protecting our nation.

Photo: Twitter/ANI

Annapurna Industries Pvt Ltd, a textile mill in Surat, printed the sarees with images of the paramilitary troopers said it will "donate the entire profit earned to the families of the martyred CRPF jawans as a mark of tribute to the CRPF jawans".

Photo: Twitter/ANI

Speaking about the unique tribute to the CRPF jawans, Manish, Director of the mill: "We've portrayed strength of our defence in these sarees. We've shown jawans' strength, new tanks, Tejas and others. The response has been good. We're getting orders from across the country. We'll donate the entire profit to families of the jawans."

Manish, Director of the mill: We've portrayed strength of our defence in these sarees. We've shown jawans' strength, new tanks, Tejas and others. The response has been good. We're getting orders from across the country. We'll donate the entire profit to families of the jawans. pic.twitter.com/XHqwDaSBjB ANI (@ANI) February 21, 2019



Earlier, a man from Sridungargar town in Rajasthan's Bikaner tattooed the names of 71 martyred soldiers, including the names of 40 CRPF jawans killed in the Pulwama attack. Gopal Saharan said he tattooed the 71 names on his body to pay homage to the gallant Indian soldiers as they sacrificed their lives in the line of duty.
