K’taka Cong MLA JN Ganesh remanded to 14-day judicial custody in assault case

K’taka Cong MLA JN Ganesh remanded to 14-day judicial custody in assault case

JN Ganesh had been absconding for a month after allegedly assaulting fellow MLA Anand Singh, before he was arrested by the police on Wednesday.

news Assault

Karnataka Congress legislator JN Ganesh was remanded to 14-day judicial custody, a day after he was arrested in an assault case at a resort in the Ramanagara district, the police said on Thursday.

"Principal Civil Judge Anita sent Ganesh to 14-day judicial custody when he was produced before her court at Ramanagara for allegedly assaulting his party's legislator Anand Singh at a resort on January 20," Ramanagara district Superintendent of Police Ramesh Bhanot told IANS.

Ganesh, arrested by a state police from a hotel in Gujarat's Somnath town, was flown to Bengaluru from Ahmedabad earlier in the day. He had gone missing after attacking Singh.

"As we have collected sufficient evidence and recorded statements of the accused and the complainant, resort officials and fellow legislators, we did not seek his police custody as preliminary inquiry has been completed," said Bhanot.

The police registered an assault case against Ganesh on Singh's complaint under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), which relates to attempt to murder.

Though Ganesh was to be sent to the district prison at Ramanagara, about 40 km from Bengaluru, the judge considered his plea to be lodged in the Bengaluru Central Jail.

While Ganesh represents Kampli assembly segment in the Ballari district, Singh is from Vijayanagara segment.

After the alleged assault, Singh was admitted to a private hospital in Bengaluru. He has been discharged from the hospital.

Congress state President Dinesh Gundu Rao suspended Ganesh after the police registered an FIR against him on January 21.

JN Ganesh had been absconding for a month after the incident before he was arrested by the police on Wednesday.

Ganesh was booked under sections 323 (Voluntarily causing hurt), 324 (Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons), 307 (Attempt to murder), 504 (intentional insult to breach peace) and 506 (Criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) by Bidadi Police Station.

With IANS inputs
