Boeing Current Affairs, GK & News

Boeing Current Affairs, GK & News

Indian Navy received 10th anti-submarine warfare aircraft P-8I from US-based aerospace company, Boeing. Key Points Contract for eight P81 aircraft was signed by defence ministry in 2009. In 2016, ministry signed a contract for four additional P-8I aircraft. 10th P-81 aircraft is the second aircraft to be delivered under option contract for four additional aircraft ..

Month: Current Affairs - July, 2021

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Boeing • Boeing P 81 aircrafts • Indian Navy • P-8I Aircrafts • Significance of P81 aircraft

On November 24, 2020, President Ram Nath kovind boarded the Air India one-B777 aircraft. The president boarded the aircraft to visit Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh and offer prayers at the Venkateshwara Swamy temple. The aircraft is carrying its first VVIP official. About Air India one The Air India one will be a call sign for ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2020

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Boeing • Missile • President of India • Prime minister • Vice President of India

On November 16, 2020, SpaceX launched four astronauts into the space under Mission Crew 1. The Crew Dragon capsule becomes the first spacecraft to be certified by NASA after 40 years. Being the first in a series, there will be regular flights by the SpaceX to the International Space Station. Highlights The SpaceX Falcon 9 ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2020

Category: Science & Technology Current Affairs

Topics: Boeing • Crew Dragon • Crew Dragon Capsule • crew1 • Falcon 9 rocket • International Space Station • NASA • SpaceX

The Defence Ministry of Israel has declared that it has conducted a successful test of the country’s advanced defence system against long-range ballistic missiles. The flight-testing of Arrow-2 interceptor was part of Israel’s technological effort that ensures that the country will be one step ahead of its enemies all the time. Details of the Test ..

Month: Current Affairs - August, 2020

Category: International Current Affairs

Topics: Arrow-2 • Arrow-3 • Boeing • israel • Israel Aerosspace Industries • USA

On April 18, 2020, NASA announced that it will launch its flight of astronauts on May 27, 2020. This is the first flight of NASA in 9 years. Highlights The mission is to use Falcon-9 rocket. The astronauts are to be sent for an extended stay at the international space station. The mission is to ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2020

Category: Science & Technology Current Affairs

Topics: Boeing • Demo-1 • Demo-2 • International Space Station (ISS) • NASA • space • SpaceX
