Supreme Court issues notice to Centre, 10 state governments to take steps to prevent attacks on Kashmiris

Supreme Court direction to prevent attacks on Kashmiris: Sporadic incidents of violence have been reported from various parts of the country in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack which claimed lives of 40 CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14, 2019.

Supreme Court direction to prevent attacks on Kashmiris: The Supreme Court on Friday issued notices to the Central government and 10 states and sought their response on a plea seeking its intervention to prevent alleged attacks on Kashmiri students in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack. A Supreme Court bench, comprising Chief Justice Rajan Gogoi and Justices L N Rao and Sanjiv Khanna, was hearing a petition highlighting the alleged targeting of Kashmiri students in the country following the Pulwama terror attack on February 14. The judges took note of senior advocate Colin Gonsalves’ submission that the hearing is urgent as it relates to the safety and security of students.

Sporadic incidents of violence have been reported from various parts of the country in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack which claimed lives of 40 CRPF jawans in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14, 2019. Kashmiri students and traders, who are living in other parts of the country, are stressed and living in constant fear of being attacked at any moment. Recently, students from the Valley studying at the Dayabhai Patel Physical Education College in Maharashtra’s Yavatmal town were attacked by the members of Yuva Sena. Yuva Sena is the youth wing of the Shiv Sena.

Apart from that, a video showing a Kashmiri shawl seller being mercilessly beaten up by a group of angry men at an undisclosed location in West Bengal’s Nadia district surfaced on Monday. The victim, who was later identified as Javed Ahmed Khan, was forced to say India Zindabad, Bharat Mata ki Jai and Vande Mataram amid abuses hurled at him.

In another incident, Quantum University in Uttarakhand on Tuesday suspended seven Kashmiri students for allegedly posting anti-national stuff on social media. The university said that the suspension order was issued after more than 400 students demanded the expulsion of students. Registrar Quantum University RK Khare said the protesting students threatened to leave the campus if their demand was not met. The Kashmiri students had allegedly unloaded anti-national stuff on Facebook and Instagram.

As many as 10 Kashmiri students have been booked and 24 suspended or rusticated from colleges across the country for allegedly posting anti-national posts on social media platforms, The Indian Express reported.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
