Modi can trace 3 kg beef but not 350 kg RDX, says congress leader

(Web Desk) – Delhi Congress working president Haroon Yusuf, referring to the Pulwama attack, said India Prime Minister Narendra Modi can trace three kg beef but not 350 kg RDX.

He defended his statement and maintained that what he said was reality. He asked if anyone could deny that, and stated that lynching was done for polarisation.

@narendramodi Ji can trace 3 kg of beef but cannot trace 350 kg of RDX #ModiFailsNationalSecurity — Haroon Yusuf (@haroonyusuf22) February 21, 2019

He questioned,“isn’t Modi informed by security agencies?” and said Modi failed national security.

Pulwama attack



At least 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed in Indian-occupied Kashmir in one the deadliest attacks. The attack saw explosives packed inside a van rip through buses in a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying some 2,500 members of the paramilitary CRPF.

Two blue buses carrying around 35 people each bore the brunt of the massive blast, heard miles away, around 20 kilometres (12 miles) from the city of Srinagar on the main highway to Jammu.

Security lapses in India



Pulwama incident is not the first major attack during Modi’s tenure. Two highly sensational attacks in Pathankot and Uri had also occurred during Narendra Modi’s term as premier.

Pulwama attack is unprecedented because the attacker succeeded in breaching the check points which are heavily guarded. All these lapses should give India an eye opener to improve its security instead of blaming Pakistan every time.

Congress leader Surjewala said, “Questions must be asked about the gross intelligence and security failure of this government. Questions must be asked of the priority of a prime minister, who at a sensitive time as this has gone on another foreign tour to South Korea instead of tackling terror and terrorism in India…Why Modi, the National Security Advisor and the Home Minister have not owned up responsibility for the unpardonable failure of national security and intelligence apparatus? How did local terrorists acquire hundreds of kilograms of RDX, M4 Carbine and rocket launchers? How was an RDX-laden car permitted to enter the most secure Jammu-Srinagar national highway, despite standard operating procedure for sanitizing the convoy stretch?”

Pathankot airbase attack had also occurred despite advance warning by intelligence. Around 150 National Security Guards (NSG) had been deployed at the airbase but failed to stop the attack.
