Three Kashmiri youths allegedly attacked in Delhi NCR, Delhi Police registers FIR

According to the report, the three Kashmiris were travelling from Delhi to Haryana. | File Photo

New Delhi: In yet another case of targeted onslaughts against Kashmiris across the country following the dastardly terror attack in Pulwama, three more Kashmiris were allegedly attacked in the National Capital Region.

“The incident was committed by certain fringe elements in Nangloi area and the Delhi Police has lodged a First Information Report following this incident. We are preparing their sketches and we will be able to apprehend them as soon as possible,” DCP Madhur Verma told Mirror Now.

According to the report, the three Kashmiris were travelling from Delhi to Haryana.

“We do have minority pockets in the city and we try to maintain communal harmony in those areas. The police regularly conduct Jan Sampark meetings and religious committee meetings to maintain law and order,” Verma said.

3 #Kashmiri youth allegedly beaten up in a train en route #Delhi to #Haryana; forcefully asked to reveal their identity pic.twitter.com/Tx7rocYMJG — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 22, 2019

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray’s son Aaditya Thackeray condemned the attacks where some Kashmiri students were attacked in Yavatmal district in Maharashtra.

“There was an unfortunate incident yesterday in Yavatmal, with some students of Jammu and Kashmir. The Shiv Sena had issued a press note yesterday itself which hasn’t been printed today, maybe to further sensationalise the issue or defame us, while ignoring our disciplinary action. As of last evening, the Party has sacked those involved in the act. Jammu and Kashmir is a part of India and no Indian, or for that matter, nobody should face the brunt of anger that is towards terrorism. We understand the angst but it must be against terror, not innocent people,” he said on social media platform Twitter.

As of last evening, the Party has sacked those involved in the act. J&K is a part of India and no Indian, or for that matter, nobody should face the brunt of anger that is towards terrorism. We understand the angst but it must be against terror, not innocent people. — Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) February 22, 2019

Banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14 in Awantipora area of Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. The attack took place around 3:30 pm after a suicide bomber, identified as local boy Adil Ahmad Dar, in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying over 2500 CRPF personnel on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.
