Mulayam’s barbs don’t matter. His politics failed and SP cadre see his son as the future

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

Mulayam Singh Yadav’s disappointment over Akhilesh Yadav surrendering half of UP’s seats to BSP will find few takers within the Samajwadi Party. In 2014, SP was down to five seats with Mulayam’s family members winning all five. In the 2017 assembly elections, SP was again bested in the polls. Given these circumstances and BJP’s aggressive espousal of Hindutva politics, the division of Muslim votes between SP and BSP, Akhilesh and SP are clearly on a weak wicket.

Mulayam has claimed that SP was stronger under him because of which he went on to be defence minister and UP chief minister. But Mulayam cannot absolve himself for SP’s weakness today. In the early 1990s, SP had capitalised on the decline of the Congress, the inheritance of the Janata Dal mantle, Ajit Singh’s squandering of Charan Singh’s legacy, and finally the demolition of Babri Masjid to rise to prominence in UP. His alliance with Kanshi Ram in 1993 blunted the Ram Mandir movement forever even if Hindutva sentiment survived.

This is not to say that Mulayam was a passive beneficiary of all these events. He played his cards well, recognised the space for OBC assertion through the Yadav community, built a party organization, and in seeking to quell the Ram Mandir movement won the loyalty of UP Muslims. But this is where Mulayam’s success story ended. As an administrator, he failed to replicate his success as a politician.

Let’s fast forward to 2002 and Mulayam’s tenure as UP CM. This period coincided with India finally entering the fast growth trajectory. But UP was left far behind. Reports of rising crime graph, poor progress in sociological ecoNomoc index and the lawlessness of SP cadres dominated the news from UP. Cut to 2007, Mayawati capitalised on the heartburn and delivered, perhaps, the first functional government in UP’s history. Corruption may have been rife but Mayawati had a clear developmental agenda – most evident in Noida’s rapid growth – and determination to fix law and order.

When UP’s complex caste calculus failed Mayawati and SP stormed back to power, Mulayam handed over the throne to his inexperienced son because he was nurturing ambitions of becoming Prime Minister. The government of four and a half chief ministers touched its nadir in July 2013 during the Muzaffarnagar riots when thousands of Muslims had to flee their homes. SP’s mishandling of the police force during the riots raised suspicions that the party was pinning its hopes on Muslim vote consolidation in the face of resurgent Hindutva.

The strategy backfired. Many Muslims switched to BSP while Hindus consolidated behind BJP. The Modi wave came along and then finished Mulayam’s political career. For Akhilesh, it was a moment of reckoning and he slowly began asserting himself. By mid-2016, Akhilesh had the party firmly in his reins and then proceeded on a political coup in which he ousted Mulayam as the party’s national president. A desperate Akhilesh had already sued for peace with Mayawati in 2016 but she was quick to refuse in the vain hope of a BSP revival. The SP-Congress alliance was a mistake but it showed that Akhilesh had already read the mood of the electorate and the desertion of SP’s Muslim vote.

A chastened Mayawati was quick to warm up to SP in 2017 and victories in three Lok Sabha and two assembly bypolls followed. It is Akhilesh who was the prime mover of the SP-BSP alliance, though he missed a trick by not bringing Congress also on board. If Priyanka Gandhi stays put in UP, Congress could become a force to reckon with and this will hurt Akhilesh and Mayawati in the long run. Congress’s failure to accommodate BSP and SP in MP, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan has been repeatedly cited by Akhilesh as a reason for Congress not being accommodated.

If BJP faces a tough challenge in the general elections of 2019, Akhilesh will get a lot of credit for the SP-BSP alliance that has electoral arithmetic going in its favour. For Akhilesh, the bigger challenge is to take control of OBC-Muslim politics and move beyond the characterization of the party as a Yadav-Muslim vehicle. He has failed to articulate the angst among educated OBCs/STs/SCs over the end of the 200-point roster system unlike Tejashwi Yadav.

Perhaps, Akhilesh may be looking at crafting a new politics based on aspirations. Time will only tell. Mulayam’s praise for PM Modi and his quibble about SP’s decline are the famous last acts of a fading man. Mulayam may have been the better politician but Akhilesh has age on his side, and for this reason SP cadre will patiently stand by his side.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
