Telangana govt announces Rs 25 lakh to kin of troopers who died in Pulwama attack

Telangana govt announces Rs 25 lakh to kin of troopers who died in Pulwama attack

As soon as the House met for the Budget session, the Chief Minister moved the resolution and termed the attack as ‘inhuman’ and ‘barbaric’.

news Politics

Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao on Friday announced Rs 25 lakh financial assistance each to kin of the 49 CRPF troopers killed in the February 14 Pulwama terror attack. He made the announcement while moving a resolution in the state Assembly to condemn the terror attack claimed by the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror outfit.

The resolution was unanimously passed with members cutting across party lines condemning the attack. The House also observed a two-minute silence.

As soon as the House met for the Budget session, the Chief Minister moved the resolution and termed the attack as ‘inhuman’ and ‘barbaric’.

"This was an attack on the nation," he said and conveyed his condolences to the bereaved families.

Leader of Opposition Mallu Bhatti Vikramarka said the entire nation was united behind the families of the victims.

All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) legislator Ahmed Balala and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) legislator Raja Singh also backed the resolution and condemned the attack.

A total of 49 CRPF jawans were killed in a deadly terrorist attack in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir on Feburary 14 after a 'fidayeen' (suicide) attacker belonging to the Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) terror outfit rammed an explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF troopers’ bus in Lethpora area of Pulwama district on the Jammu-Srinagar highway. The attack left several others injured, and they were rushed to the Army base hospital in Badamibagh cantonment, Srinagar.

The CRPF convoy consisted of 78 vehicles and 2,547 jawans moving from Jammu to Srinagar. According to an earlier report, the attack happened despite the Intelligence unit having issued a warning of such a possibility around two days ago. A video was uploaded by JeM with a threat message and visuals showing a troop-laden truck in Somalia being blown up using an Improvised Explosive Device (IED).

IANS inputs
