India blamed Pakistan without any evidence after Pulwama attack: DG ISPR

RAWALPINDI: Director General Inter-Services Public Relation (DG ISPR) Major Gen Asif Ghafoor addressed a press conference at General Headquarters Rawalpindi.

DG ISPR said that India blamed Pakistan for the Pulwama attacks without any evidence. He said that India never accepted Pakistan as nation since 72 years. He also said that “In 1965, tensions emerged at the Line of Control. Our country that had taken the path to progress was affected. Then in 1971, our geographical distance from East Pakistan was exploited. The Mukti Bahini group is in front of you. The real terrorism was done then through Mukti Bahini. But we were able to get through that as well because of our resilience. From 1971 to 1984, there were no incidents on our eastern border. The situation was relatively calm, and there weren’t any cross line of control firings. We began progressing again. But the Siachen happened. One day, when Pak Army wasn’t there, ‘you came and occupied our area, and since then the Pakistan Army has been battling there Then it moved towards nuclear weapons. India started using indirect strategies, and began promoting terrorism in our country. If this hadn’t happened, we would have been able to prevent the entry of terrorists from the western border. Then in 2008 when we were forced to fight terrorism again. The purpose was to scuttle our counter-terrorism efforts, and the live proof of this is Kulbhushan Yadav.”

DG ISPR further said that whenever there is an important event in Pakistan or when Pakistan is becoming more stable, some sort of incident is staged in India or India-occupied Kashmir. In 2001, attack on the Indian parliament took place ahead of their general and presidential elections. Then later in 2008, Mumbai attacks were happened when we were fighting war against terrorism. Eight years later Pathankot incident happened before the general election in India. So whenever some important event is going to happen incident such as Pulwama happens.

Then he recalled the main events happening right now. He said that “This month, there were eight significant events. Saudi crown prince was visiting, there was a discussion due on terror listing in the UNSC, Afghan peace talks were ongoing and there were developments in European Union and the United Nations on IOK. There was also the Yadav hearing, the FATF hearing, a meeting on Kartarpur border as well as PSL matches.”

The struggle for freedom in Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK) was highlighted by DG ISPR. He said that situation in IOK is out of India’s Hand now. It is failure of Indian Army if a any person crosses LoC, which is protected by large number of Indian security forces, which is greater then the local population. The car used in the attck was local, the explosive was local and the suicide bomber was local.

India is trying to isolate Pakistan diplomatically , but it failed all the time. He said that foreign heads of state and dignitaries have been visiting Pakistan.

DG ISPR recalled Prime Minister Imran Khan’s offer of peace. If India has any evidence give it to us, we will help them in investigation.
