UNSC condemns Pulwama; but China must crack down on Pakistan for aiding terror

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

In a significant diplomatic victory for India, the UN Security Council has issued a statement condemning the Pulwama terror attack on Indian security forces in Kashmir. The statement also names Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Muhammed as responsible for the heinous attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans. In fact, the statement condemns those supporting and sponsoring terrorism and asks all countries to cooperate with India to bring the perpetrators of terror to justice.

Ironically, China, a permanent member of UNSC, has been blocking Indian efforts to get Jaish chief Masood Azhar proscribed by the UN. This is absurd since Jaish as an organisation itself stands proscribed as a terror outfit. Thus, the Chinese protection for Azhar makes no sense. Plus, China itself has been a victim of terror. So for it to not sympathise with India on the Azhar issue only leads to one conclusion. The China-Pakistan all-weather friendship is far more important for Beijing.

It also follows that China perhaps wants to strategically hem in India and therefore doesn’t want Pakistan to completely shut off the terror tap. If this is the case, then India should prepare appropriate counter-measures against China. With Chinese companies viewing India as a big market, perhaps New Delhi should plan stiff tariffs against Chinese goods until Beijing fully supports its position against Pakistan-based terror. China can’t have its cake and eat it too. It can’t talk about an Indian-Chinese compact for Asia and yet refuse to help New Delhi with Pakistan-sponsored terror. Beijing needs to choose.

Read also: UNSC condemns ‘heinous and cowardly’ Pulwama terror attack, names Pak-based Jaish-e-Mohammed

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
