Uttar Pradesh mining scam: After raid, BJP calls for Akhilesh Yadav's head

A day after the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) raided 14 locations across Delhi and Uttar Pradesh in connection with a mining scam, the BJP on Sunday demanded that the investigating agency also probe the role of former chief minister and Samajwadi Party leader Akhilesh Yadav. On his part, Yadav has claimed he is ready to face any inquiry and will even have to tell the probe agency about his 'alliance with Mayawati'.

In a media briefing, Uttar Pradesh Health Minister Sidharth Nath Singh said Yadav, who was the chief minister from 2012 to 2017, had presided over a government that was "hand in glove" with the mining syndicate in the state.

"If you loot public money, then law will take its own course," Singh said, emphasising that the CBI is reporting to the Allahabad high court, which had ordered a probe in 2016. Singh claimed that the mining scam could run into several thousand crores.

Amid the talks for a possible alliance between SP and BSP, the UP health minister said the two opposition parties are fighting for their survival. "Those who are physically handicapped need crutches," he said.

Meanwhile, talking to reporters in Lucknow, Yadav said he is ready to face the CBI, but people are also ready to answer the BJP. "Now we have to tell the CBI as to how many seats we have distributed in the gathbandhan (alliance). I am happy that at least the BJP has shown its colours. Earlier, the Congress gave us the chance to meet the CBI, and this time it is the BJP, which has given us this opportunity," Yadav said, adding, "The Samajwadi Party is making efforts to win maximum Lok Sabha seats. Those who want to stop us, have the CBI with them. Once the Congress did CBI probe, and I was questioned. If the BJP is doing all this, the CBI will question me, I will answer (them). But, the people are ready to give an answer to the BJP."

The CBI, on Saturday, carried out searches at 14 locations in connection with its FIR against 11 persons including IAS officer B Chandrakala, Samajwadi Party MLC Ramesh Kumar Mishra and Sanjay Dixit to probe alleged illegal mining of minor minerals in Hamirpur district during 2012-16.

MINING SCAM

The CBI, on Saturday, carried out searches at 14 locations in connection with its FIR against 11 persons, including IAS officer B Chandrakala, to probe alleged illegal mining of minor minerals in Hamirpur district during 2012-16.

(with agency inputs)
