Pakistan says India can't unilaterally end Indus Waters Treaty: Sources

Following Union Minister Nitin Gadkari's statement that India has decided to end the Indus Waters Treaty as one of the ways to punish Pakistan, in wake of the Pulwama attack where 40 CRPF personnel were martyred, Pakistan has now reacted on the current development saying that India can't unilaterally end the treaty and stop the flow of water to Pakistan from the rivers which belongs to it as per the treaty.

According to reports, Pakistan Indus Water Commissioner Mehr Ali Shah has reacted to this development and said that India cannot intervene under any circumstances on the western rivers and that New Delhi cannot unilaterally end the Indus Waters Treaty.

However, speaking in respect to the eastern rivers which comes under the Indus treaty namely Ravi, Sutlej and Beas, Pakistan said that they are neither concern nor have any objection if India diverts water of eastern rivers to be used it for its own people or for some other since Indus Waters allows to do it. But Pakistan will definitely raise its objections and concerns if India will use or try to divert waters of western rivers including Chenab, Indus, Jhelum because they have the right to use them.

Sources have said that Pakistan might seek World Bank's intervention in this regard. Earlier, Union Minister for water resources Nitin Gadkari said that under the leadership of PM Modi, the government has decided to stop our share of water which used to flow to Pakistan. "We will divert water from Eastern rivers and supply it to our people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab," he added.

Gadkari also said that the construction of the dam has started at Shahpur- Kandi on Ravi river. Moreover, Ujh project will store our share of water for use in J&K and the balance water will flow from 2nd Ravi-Beas Link to provide water to other basin states.

Under the leadership of Hon'ble PM Sri @narendramodi ji, Our Govt. has decided to stop our share of water which used to flow to Pakistan. We will divert water from Eastern rivers and supply it to our people in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab. — Nitin Gadkari (@nitin_gadkari) February 21, 2019

Modi government's latest move on the Indus Waters Treaty is being seen as one of the ways through which it can pressure Pakistan after the Pulwama attack killing 40 CRPF personnel. India is also trying to build consensus among the world community to declare terror organisation JeM's (which had taken responsibility of the Pulwama attack) chief Masood Azhar name in the global terror list and also build up international pressure on Pakistan to act against terror havens it has been operating on its soil.

India on February 14 witnessed possibly one of the worst terror attacks when a suicide bomber blew off an explosive-laden SUV near a CRPF convoy carrying personnel to Kashmir. 40 CRPF personnel were martyred in the attack and several had injured.

Addressing the people through various public platforms, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said that his government has given a free hand to the Army to avenge the Pulwama attack.
