Damning indictment of Pakistan: Watchdog says Islamabad has failed to curb financing of JeM and LeT

Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: AP

New Delhi: In a damning indictment of Pakistan and its Prime Minister Imran Khan who talks of pace with India, the global terror financing watchdog has categorically stated that Islamabad has failed to curb the financing of terror groups, including Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT).

Condemning the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama last week in which 40 personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force were killed, the Paris-headquartered Financial Action Task Force (FATF) said Pakistan has not been able to demonstrate a proper understanding on financing of terror groups and the risks posed due to the same.

The FATF said in a statement that there was a need for Pakistan to act on the same and address the strategic deficiencies.

"The FATF notes with grave concern and condemns the violent terrorist attack last week that killed at least 40 Indian security forces in Pulwama in the State of Jammu and Kashmir," the watchdog said in a statement after a week-long FATF plenary.

"Pakistan has revised its TF (terror financing) risk assessment. However, it does not demonstrate a proper understanding of the TF risks posed by Da'esh (ISIS), AL-Qaida, JuD (Jamat-ud-Dawa), FIF (Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation), LeT (Lashkar-e-Taiba), JeM (Jaish-e-Mohammad), HQN (Haqqani Network) and persons affiliated with the Taliban," the statement stated.

On February 14, Pakistan-based terror group JeM carried out a suicide bombing that claimed the lives of 40 CRPF personnel. Another five were injured as a terrorist rammed and explosives-laden SUV into a CRPF convoy in Awantipora area of J&K’s Pulwama district in the afternoon. This was the deadliest terror attack on security forces in Jammu and Kashmir.

While the JeM claimed responsibility for the attack, Pakistan PM Imran Khan demanded India to provide ‘actionable intelligence’ and warned India against any military action to avenge the terror attack.
