36 per cent want war with Pakistan for Pulwama revenge, PM Modi best to tackle terror: PSE Poll

Indians overwhelmingly believe Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the most capable leader to deal with terrorism, an India Today-Axis My India poll suggests.

The poll was conducted across 29 states by Axis My India for India Today's Political Stock Exchange (PSE) in the wake of the deadly Pulwama attack.

According to the survey, as many as 49 per cent of respondents pick Narendra Modi as their most preferred choice to lead India's fight against terror.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi trailed far behind at 15 per cent. Only three per cent of respondents found former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh fit for the anti-terror job.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi, the BSP's Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav of the Samajwadi Party secured one percent of the votes each.

MODI'S PAK, KASHMIR POLICY

Forty-seven per cent of the respondents also found the Narendra Modi government's Pakistan and Kashmir policy better than the UPA's (22 per cent) and the Vajpayee administration (12 per cent).

WAR OVER SURIGCAL STRIKES

A higher number of respondents regard war against Pakistan as the perfect solution to combating terrorism, the PSE poll, which was conducted in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack, shows.

Thirty-six per cent of the respondents favoured a full-scale conflict with Pakistan compared with 23 per cent, who supported surgical strikes. The responses were to the question: What should India's response be for the Pulwama terror attack?

Eighteen per cent backed the idea of an operation against Jaish-e-Mohammad head Masood Azhar, on the pattern of US Special Forces capturing and killing Osama bin Laden in Pakistan's Abbottabad in 2011.

Barely 15 per cent supported moves to isolate Pakistan diplomatically and economically.

ROLE OF ISI, PAKISTAN ARMY

Asked about the real architect of the February 14 Pulwama strike, more than 30 per cent of the respondents described Pakistan's army and the rogue spy agency ISI as the main culprits.

Thirteen per cent blamed Jaish-e-Mohammad, which claimed responsibility for the Pulwama terror attack, and 19 per cent Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, the PSE poll showed. Twenty-five per cent blamed every component of Pakistani state -- Jaish, the ISI, Pakistan's army and PM Khan.

2016 SURGICAL STRIKES

Asked about the impact of the 2016 surgical strikes, 58 per cent found them to have succeeded in checking Pakistan-sponsored terror. Twenty-five per cent disagreed.

Most of the respondents -- 57 per cent -- ticked the "don't-know" box over the question of what might have caused terror in Pulwama to unfold on February 14.

Thirteen per cent blamed it on intelligence failure and 17 per cent on the government's "weak anti-terror policy".

The PSE survey, based on telephone interviews with a sample size of 12,815, was conducted between February 20 and 22.

Also Read | Kashmiris, not Pakistanis, behind Pulwama attack: Pakistan's rail minister
