Pulwama Attack: As pressure increases, Pakistan govt claims to take control of JeM headquarters in Bahawalpur

As pressure mounts on Pakistan to act against the perpetrators of Pulwama terror attack, it took over the headquarters of United Nations designated terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad and appointed an administrator "to manage the affairs."

According to reports, Pakistan's Punjab government has taken control of all Islamic seminaries run by Jaish. JeM has claimed responsibility for the deadly attack on CRPF forces in Pulwama in the Jammu and Kashmir that resulted in the death of 40 jawans on February 14.

The alleged move came a day after a crucial meeting of Pakistan's National Security Committee where it was decided to ban Jamatud Dawa (JuD) and Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation (FIF) charities that are fronts for Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT)- the masterminded the 2008 Mumbai attacks.

“The government of Punjab has taken over the control of a campus comprising Madressatul Sabir and Jama-e-Masjid Subhanallah in Bahawalpur, reportedly the headquarters of Jaish-e-Mohammad and appointed an administrator to manage its affairs,” reported Pakistan's Tribune quoting a spokesperson for the interior ministry.

The report added that the action was taken in line with the decision of the NSC meeting held on Thursday under the chairmanship of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan.

The Pakistan government's official Twitter handle tweeted the same after a while:

The Government of Punjab has taken over the control of a campus comprising Madressatul Sabir and Jama-e-Masjid Subhanallah in Bahawalpur: Spokesman of the Ministry of Interior — Govt of Pakistan (@pid_gov) February 22, 2019

The Spokesman said that the action was taken in line with the decision of the National Security Committee meeting held yesterday under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister Imran Khan. — Govt of Pakistan (@pid_gov) February 22, 2019

According to the spokesperson, currently, 600 students are studying at the campus, which has a faculty of 70 teachers.

According to various reports, these seminaries operate as JeM's main base of operations. The mosque called Jamia Masjid Subhan Allah on Bahawalpur's outskirts, along National Highway 5, houses the new headquarters of Jaish-e-Mohammed. The place is just eight kilometres away from Bahawalpur's army cantonment, home to the headquarters of Pakistan's 31 Corps, an army unit of 30000 troops.

Bahawalpur is the birthplace of its JeM chief Masood Azhar.

India, however, has rejected the moves made by Pakistan in last 24 hours. Sources speaking to WION said, "Pakistan's scrambling to put together even this cosmetic response is evidence of the coordinated diplomatic campaign that India has undertaken across multiple capitals and in Delhi."

UNSC names Masood Azhar’s JeM in statement on Pulwama

The United Nations Security Council comprising 15 nations on Thursday condemned in the "strongest terms" the "heinous and cowardly" terror attack by Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pulwama.

The Security Council also stressed on the need to hold organisers and financiers of such "reprehensible acts" accountable and bring them to justice.

The press statement, issued by the most powerful UN body, significantly named the Pakistan-based terror group headed by Masood Azhar.

"The members of the Security Council condemned in the strongest terms the heinous and cowardly suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir, which resulted in over 40 Indian paramilitary forces dead and dozens wounded on February 14, 2019, for which Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility," the UNSC press statement on the 'Suicide Bombing in Jammu and Kashmir' said.

"The members of the Security Council underlined the need to hold perpetrators, organisers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism accountable and bring them to justice, and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate actively with the Government of India and all other relevant authorities in this regard," it said.

The UNSC members expressed their deepest sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims, as well as to the Indian people and the government, and wished a speedy and full recovery to those who were injured.

"The members of the Security Council reaffirmed that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security," the statement said.

The members also reiterated that any "acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed".

The condemnation by the UNSC comes just a day after Pakistan's Permanent Representative to the UN Maleeha Lodhi met top UN leaders, including with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the Security Council President Anatolio Ndong Mba, briefing them about the escalating tensions in the region in the wake of the Pulwama attack.

In a major boost to India's efforts to get Azhar on the list of global terrorists, France is expected to soon move a proposal at the UN to ban the head of the UN-proscribed group.

The proposal, when moved, will be fourth such bid at the UN in past 10 years.
