Ajith and Prabhas meet at Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad

Ajith and Prabhas meet at Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad

While Ajith is busy shooting for the remake of 'Pink' in Tamil, Prabhas is on the sets for 'Saaho'.

Flix Tollywood

Recently, Tamil star Ajith Kumar and Baahubali fame Prabhas had an opportunity to meet at the Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad where they were both shooting for their films. Apparently, when Ajith heard that Prabhas was at the film city, he wanted to meet him and it was arranged. Reports are that both the stars were seen chatting on the sets for close to one hour and discussed a lot of issues related to cinema. Both Ajith and Prabhas are currently busy with these respective films, the Pink remake in Tamil and Saaho, a multi lingual.

Recently Ajith visited the sets of Mohanlal starrer Marakkar Arabikadalinte Simham, which is also being shot in the same film city.

Pink was a critically acclaimed film and had won the National Film Award for Best Film on other social issues. It is being remade in Tamil with Ajith roped in to play the lead role. The project is helmed by Vinod of Theeran Adhigaram Ondru fame and bankrolled by Zee Studios in association with Boney Kapoor. Yuvan Shankar Raja has been roped in to compose the tunes for this venture.

On the other hand, Saaho, directed by Sujeeth, is bankrolled by V. Vamshi Krishna Reddy and Pramod Uppalapati under the banner UV Creations on a budget of Rs 300 crore. The film’s star cast also includes Neil Nitin Mukesh, Lal, Arun Vijay, Mandira Bedi, Jackie Shroff, Vennela Kishore, Mahesh Manjrekar and Chunkey Pandey in supporting roles.

While Prabhas plays the male lead in this action entertainer, sharing the screen space with him as his heroine is Shraddha Kapoor. The technical crew of this film includes Shankar – Ehsaan – Loy for composing music with R Madhi cranking the camera and A Sreekar Prasad editing. Saaho is a trilingual that will be released in Tamil, Telugu and Hindi. Reports are that the action sequences shot in the Middle East for Saaho will be its highlight.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
