If Pakistan fails to mend its ways, India will block its share of water: Nitin Gadkari

Nitin Gadkari had tweeted that India has decided to “stop” the flow of its share of water to Pakistan from rivers under the Indus Water Treaty.

Union Water Resources Minister Nitin Gadkari warned on Friday that if Pakistan doesn’t mend its ways, then all the water that flows into Pakistan will be blocked. His comments came a week after a terror attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

Amid mounting tensions over the Pulwama terror attack carried out by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), Nitin Gadkari on Thursday tweeted that India has decided to stop the flow of its share of water to Pakistan from rivers under the Indus Water Treaty.

In an exclusive interview to India Today TV, Nitin Gadkari said, "The entire nation is burning with anger, and people feel that India should block the flow of water to Pakistan, completely. No decision has been taken yet. At present, India has only blocked its share of water into the neighbouring nation."

"We haven’t touched the share of water which comes under the treaty. Our relationship with Pakistan is not cordial. When we got into the treaty with Pakistan, we decided that harmony and brotherhood would prevail. If Pakistan kills our people and promotes terrorism, then how will the harmony continue?" he asked.

Under the Indus Water Treaty signed in 1960, the waters of the western rivers the Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab was given to Pakistan and those of the eastern rivers the Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej to India.

"Pakistan should remember that we allow our share of water because they use it for developmental works, irrigation and drinking purposes. If Pakistan continues to behave in this manner, and given that people are extremely angry at the moment, we will have to take extreme steps," Nitin Gadkari warned.

JeM, the accused of Pulwama terror attack, is based in Pakistan, and India has accused Islamabad’s spy agency ISI of involvement. Pakistan has, however, denied its role in the attack.

Talking about Pakistan-sponsored terror on India soil, Gadkari said, "Pakistan is encouraging and supporting terrorism, and helping them on our soil. If the situation continues in coming days, we can stop Pakistan share of water too. Though the government has not considered this option, but if Pakistan continues with this approach, it will not hesitate to take stern measures."

Gadkari had on Thursday (February 21) said that the construction work on a dam on the Ravi river -- the Shahpur-Kandi project -- had begun in Punjab.

"It will take time to implement the decision. We will have to build a dam, canals, and lay pipelines. We are preparing a plan and we have everything in place. There is a common sentiment among people that if Pakistan goes on with its nefarious acts, India should reply. Keeping this in mind, Pakistan should improve its trade and should work to stop terrorism. If such incidents continue to take place, Pakistan will have to face the consequences. We are aware of the new technologies. After taking the decision, we won’t think the economic viability of such steps."

Nitin Gadkari said the Congress should not politicise the martyrdom. "The prime minister of the country is not just a BJP prime minister and should be respected. The language used by the Opposition is not appropriate. When the country is facing a crisis on the security front, everybody should stand united and stop politicising the issue," he concluded.
