Congress in coma; ‘The Accidental Prime Minister’ is reality the way I saw it: Sanjaya Baru

Sanjaya Baru and his book The Accidental Prime Minister | Pic Credit: Twitter | Photo Credit: Twitter

Sanjaya Baru is a man in deep acquaintance with the “Ripple Effect”, for the book he authored ‘The Accidental Prime Minister’ did indeed create waves. Was it is a true picture of events during the period from May 2004 until August 2008 when he served as the media advisor and chief spokesperson to the then Prime Minister Manmohan Singh? Or was it an exaggerated version? Former National Security Advisor MK Narayanan went on record to say that the book “is full of lies”. But Baru offers a plausible explanation to that.

In a literary event organised in South Delhi recently, Sanjay Baru pinned it down to the “Rashomon Effect”. The famous Japanese film director Akira Kurosawa produced a psychological thriller in 1950 recounting different versions of the same story of a man’s murder and the rape of his wife.

Baru says, “It’s when the same incident is interpreted in four different ways by four different persons. All of us may be present in a space but each one has a different recollection; that “Rashomon Effect” is true for a lot of things. My book ‘The Accidental Prime Minister’ is the way I saw things, there must be a different way that MK Narayanan saw things. But it does not mean that my book is lies.”

That apart, the former media advisor goes on to tell how he was approached for the book to be made into a film: “Around four years ago producer Sunil Bohra came to me with the idea of making a film. He had not himself read the book but had come on the basis of Aamir Khan’s recommendation. I pondered over it for a few days and said that I would sign the contract for film rights but not get involved.”

Sanjaya Baru had his reasons for not getting associated with the film’s production.

“It was a conscious decision on my part. Anyone who has read books and seen movies based on them, know that films never do full justice. With the single exception of the movie of Ian Fleming. I remember Graham Greene saying he felt wretched watching films made on his books.”



The Anupam Kher and Akshaye Khanna starrer was based on the book by Sanjaya Baru | Pic Credit: Twitter

The former journalist-turned-political analyst admits that some creative leeway has been in taken in the Anupam Kher–Akshaye Khanna starrer as well, wherein few things not mentioned by him have been shown. But then laughs that at least it has been spared Bollywood eccentricities: “I knew that if someone makes a political film it will have some mirch masala to spice it up. I was relieved that they did not make Sonia Gandhi dance around trees and Dr Manmohan Singh also run around trees, singing to her.”

This point onwards the conversation turns somber, taking a hardnosed look at the political state of the nation. Sanjaya Baru brings out the grim gradations. After seventy odd years of Independence, India has been turned into a country with only a single national party, he feels.

“I have written in my book ‘The Accidental Prime Minister’ that time has come for a new centrist party. You have BJP as a national political party. But you don’t have a second political party. The Congress is in secular decline for the last 25 years. Many outside the Congress do not recognise this. But I can tell you many within the Congress do recognise this.”

“Just look at the country, Congress has virtually no presence in states like West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh or Telangana, where I come from. One of its most senior leaders Kishore Chandra Deo recently resigned, saying this party is in coma. There is a crisis in the Congress Party and that crisis goes back to the decision of the party to become a first-family-led party.”

“The rot started early on. Of course, there are many other parties now which are also dynastic but that logic begs the question – ‘Who started the trend?’”

Baru also adds that he doesn’t see much difference between the Congress and the BJP in terms of the politics that they pursue. Particularly at the state level, their policies on issues like agriculture, education and healthcare are similar to each other.

Baru gives credit to former Prime Minister PV Narasimha Rao for trying to reverse the Congress drift. The political analyst had, in fact, first written a book ‘1991, The Year Narasimha Rao Made History’, which he values to being superior to the one on Dr Manmohan Singh. “I feel prouder of the earlier book than ‘The Accidental Prime Minister’. There I had analysed the politics of 1991 and examined Narasimha Rao’s performance as a prime minister on the political, economic and foreign policy side.”

Baru credits Rao for much vision and work. “One of the endeavours of Rao was to liberate the Congress party from the (Gandhi) family. After all, it was the party of the national movement.”

Today, Congress has been reduced to being another “family-based regional party”, as per Baru.

“How is it different? It’s now regionally confined to a couple of states and it is unlikely to come out of this state even if more and more people of the (Gandhi) family come out and provide leadership,” he says decisively.

Clearly, Sanjaya Baru’s verdict on Priyanka Gandhi’s debut is already out.
