Kashmiri youth thrashed, threatened in Pune, Delhi – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, FEB 22 (PTK): A case of road rage quickly reached another level when local youth from Pune thrashed a Kashmiri youth after finding out that he is from Jammu and Kashmir. ‘Tuze Kashmir Bhej Denge (We will send you back to Kashmir)’, is what the local youths threatened the Kashmiri youth while beating him up in the middle of the road.

The incident took place at around 10.30 pm on Thursday night near Girija hotel on Tilak road. Jibraan Nazir Dar, the 23-year-old is a media professional and he has been living in Pune from last one and half years. Jibraan has sustained fracture on his left hand and multiple bruises on his body after he was attacked by local youths.

After the attack in Pulwama in which 40 Central Railway Police Force (CRPF) personnel lost their lives, there have been reports from some parts of the country that the Kashmiri people are being targeted by locals. Jibraan however, stated that it was not an organised attack on him and the incident initially started with road rage.

Speaking about the incident, Jibraan said, “I was riding my two-wheeler Tilak road. When I halted at the red signal near Girija hotel, a couple of men on a two-wheeler were constantly honking at me. I told them that the signal was red and I would not go ahead, dnaindia reported.”

“The rider saw my number plate which has Himachal Pradesh passing and he told me that they will send me to Himachal Pradesh if I argue with them. However, when I told them that I am not from Himachal Pradesh but from Jammu and Kashmir, they suddenly got furious and got down from their vehicle. Before I could realise what was happening, they started thrashing me,” he said.

According to Jibraan, the duo called few friends of their and they all joined them in beating him up. While they were leaving from the spot, Jibraan managed to note down the vehicle registration number of one of their vehicle and he went to the police station.

When contacted inspector Ashok Kadam, in charge of Swargate police station, he said, “We are in process of registering a complaint against the youths. We are including Indian Penal Code (IPC) section 279 (rash driving), 337 (Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) and 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt) against those men.” (PTK)

Three more Kashmiris allegedly attacked in Delhi

SRINAGAR, FEB 22 (PTK): In yet another case of targeted onslaughts against Kashmiris across the India following the attack in Pulwama, three more Kashmiris were allegedly attacked in the Delhi.

“The incident was committed by certain fringe elements in Nangloi area and the Delhi Police has lodged a First Information Report following this incident Mirror Now reported.

According to the report, the three Kashmiris were travelling from Delhi to Haryana.

“We do have minority pockets in the city and we try to maintain communal harmony in those areas. The police regularly conduct Jan Sampark meetings and religious committee meetings to maintain law and order,” Verma said.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray’s son Aaditya Thackeray condemned the attacks where some Kashmiri students were attacked in Yavatmal district in Maharashtra.

“There was an unfortunate incident yesterday in Yavatmal, with some students of Jammu and Kashmir. The Shiv Sena had issued a press note yesterday itself which hasn’t been printed today, maybe to further sensationalise the issue or defame us, while ignoring our disciplinary action.

As of last evening, the Party has sacked those involved in the act. Jammu and Kashmir is a part of India and no Indian, or for that matter, nobody should face the brunt of anger that is towards terrorism. We understand the angst but it must be against terror, not innocent people,” he said on social media platform Twitter. (PTK)

Mehbooba, Omar welcome SC directive for protection of Kashmiries

SRINAGAR, FEB 22 (PTK): Former Jammu and Kashmir chief ministers Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah on Friday welcomed the Supreme Court’s directive to 11 states to take “prompt” action to prevent incidents of threat, assault and social boycott of Kashmiris in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack.

Seeking a response from the states, the apex court directed their chief secretaries and director generals of police to take “prompt” and necessary action to prevent such incidents from happening.

“Relieved about the SC order to ensure Kashmiri students based outside J&K are not harassed or face social boycott. Shameful that the honourable judiciary took decisive action where others conveniently turned a blind eye,” PDP chief Mehbooba wrote on Twitter.

National Conference vice president Abdullah added that he was grateful to the Supreme Court for doing what the government at the Centre should have done.

“Grateful to the Hon Supreme Court of India for doing what our elected leadership in Delhi should have been doing. The union HRD minister was busy living in denial & a Governor was busy issuing threats. Thank goodness the Hon SC stepped in,” Abdullah said in a tweet. (PTK)

Closing colleges for Kashmiri students outside Valley tantamount to pushing them to wall: Kadfeen

SRINAGAR, FEB 22 (PTK): Congress leader Kadfeen Choudhary on Friday expressed concern over the expulsion of Kashmiris students from various colleges outside the state, terming such crises worrisome and tantamount to pushing already perturbed youth to the wall.

Kadfeen in a statement has urged upon the authorities to take remedial measures without delay so that the students feel secure outside Valley and can return to their colleges without any fear. “There is a need of rebuilding the trust that has received the heaviest hit recently when fanatic groups vandalised educational institutes and terrified the innocent students. Reconciliatory approach can alone assuage the ruffled situation,” said Kadfeen.

Instead of showing younger generation dark and dreadful face of communalism, there is a dire need to show this young lot the windows of country’s secularist image so that instead of getting scared to study there, they could discover it their Eldorado. “Prime Minister must come forward and shun the partisan approach to address the situation, appeal for tranquility and ensure safety to the people of Kashmir. This is what the Prime Minister is ought to do,” Kadfeen said.

He added the civil society groups of the country too need play a role in pacifying the situation and make colleges and universities outside Valley safer places to study for Kashmiri students. (PTK)

JKPSA arranges accommodation for Students of Kashmir valley

SRINAGAR, FEB 22 (PTK): Private school’s association Jammu and Kashmir today arranges accommodation food and other requirements for the Students of Kashmir valley from different states at Bathindu Jammu.

Pvt school’s association Tariq Bali coordinator PSAJK Hafiz Zahid general secretary PSA JK and chairman Mia Nadvi trust and his team provide 24 hours service to the students and other people’s the management also provide facilities to the female students and passengers. (PTK)
