Chidambaram questions PM’s silence on Kashmiris

Says the BJP wants to divide and rule India, slams its alliance with AIADMK, PMK

Veteran Congress leader and former Union Minister P. Chidambaram on Friday condemned Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s “continuing silence” on the attacks on Kashmiri students in many States in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack.

Addressing a public meeting in Chennai, Mr. Chidambaram said: “Kashmiri students are facing attacks in many States in the country. They are being threatened, made to leave their colleges, leave their hostels and go back to Kashmir, fearing attacks. The Prime Minister has not yet uttered one word condemning these attacks.”

“The BJP wants to divide and rule India. The last time someone divided and ruled India, it was the British,” he alleged.

The Congress leader alleged that none of the promises made by Mr. Modi in the 2014 election campaign had been kept. “Modi promised to bring back all black money within one month of coming to power. Has he kept that promise? He promised youngsters two crore jobs a year...and then he said even making Pakodas is a job. He promised to double farmers’ incomes. They have only fallen,” he said.

The only thing Mr. Modi implemented without announcing it as a poll promise was demonetisation, which brought millions on to the streets for many months, destroyed jobs and left the poor without any source of income for months together,” he said.

“Had he made it a poll promise, would you have voted for him?” the Congress leader asked.

Flays Anbumani

He also slammed the AIADMK-BJP-PMK alliance, saying there could be no bigger betrayal by the AIADMK than aligning with the BJP which, he said, was dividing people on the basis of religion, caste and creed.

“What is even more shameful is that the PMK is going with them. Anbumani (Ramadoss) had detailed corruption cases against the AIADMK, given letters to the Governor, and now, they are aligning with them,” he said.

The Congress manifesto, he said, would have something for everyone, unlike the “hollow promises” made by Mr. Modi in the last election.

TNCC president K.S. Alagiri said the upcoming Lok Sabha election was “like a fight between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, with the Kauravas, led by Modi, bent on destroying India and the Pandavas — the Congress — focussed on welfare”.
