LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

Modus Operandi Of ‘Neo-Goenkars’

CURTORIM MLA Alexio Reginaldo Lourenco has asked the government to conduct comprehensive checks on all cases where migrants have adopted Goan names and surnames. This is a very serious matter and the matter needs to be handled with all seriousness.Changing the name and surname can change the whole identity of a person. It can give a completely different perspective as regards the person’s place of origin, background, culture, etc. By just changing one’s name besides taking advantage of several government schemes, the person will reside in the state as a Goan and not consider himself/herself as a non-Goan. Some may even apply for a Portuguese passport after attaining Goan names. Goans who live in other states in the country do not opt for a change of name and surname. There seems to be a sinister design in migrants opting for a change of name. Having two voting cards – one in the native state and another in Goa – can give them a dual identity. Antisocial elements on the run may resort to a change in name to hoodwink the police. It is pertinent to note that like in other states, Goans too have names and surnames which are unique to the state, and Goan Catholic names have a Portuguese background. It seems necessary to introduce stricter norms and cross verification and find out the reason behind migrants adopting for a change in name and surname.

ADELMO FERNANDES, VASCO

Pakistan A Refuge For Terrorists

BOWING to intense global pressure, Pakistan has imposed a ban on Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e-Insaniat, the two offshoots of the notorious Lashkar-e-Taeba. The LeT is headed by Hafiz Saeed, the mastermind behind the 26/11 Mumbai attacks of 2008 that killed 166 people. However, the latest ban has been viewed as another Pakistani ploy, for in the past too these organisations had been banned in that country only to be revoked later. Moreover, it has strongly been felt that the tactical move precedes the international meeting of the Financial Action Task Force, fearing sanctions against that country. Pakistan’s wings can be clipped only if the world unites against the country, which has been a safe haven for global terrorists. It is saddening that despite the Pulwama attack being owned up by the UN-proscribed Jaish-e-Mohammad its mastermind Masood Azhar is moving freely in Pakistan, and that country has sought evidence from India on the involvement of the JeM on the Pulwama outrage. Outraged by the Pulwama massacre, France has said that it will approach the UN seeking a ban on Azhar. It is unfortunate that China despite all the evidence pointing at Azhar is still not convinced in putting him on the terror list.

MICHAEL VAZ, MERCES

Handle Pulwama Attack Aftermath Tactfully

WHAT happened in Pulwama is condemnable. Any terror act has no place in a civilised society. The dastardly terror attack, which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans, raises certain questions. Firstly, why was the route of the convoy not sensitised despite there being inputs of a possible terror strike? Secondly, how is that the suicide bomber laden with more than 300 kg of explosive material in his vehicle managed to pass through several check-posts unchecked? Thirdly, how is that the suicide bomber managed to procure explosives and carry out his plan meticulously and get secret information about the convoy’s itinerary? It is difficult to imagine as to how a single person can carry a terror act of such a magnitude. What one can deduce from these probing questions is that the role of an insider cannot be ruled out. All these questions highlight the massive failure of the intelligence agencies, which has righty been acknowledged by the Jammu and Kashmir Governor. In this backdrop West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has raised a very valid question as regards the timing of the terror act: she has expressed her apprehension that the central government will try to politicise the martyrdom of our jawans and cash in on the massacre to bolster its dwindling vote share. Post-Pulwama attack, discussions on TV news channels and social media have become vitriolic. Those questioning the government on its intelligence failure and for its failed Kashmir policy are called anti-nationals. The data recently released by the ministry of home affairs has revealed that between 2014 and 2018 Jammu and Kashmir witnessed a total of 1,708 terrorist incidents, averaging 28 terrorist incidents every month for five years. The figures have clearly indicated a rise of 176 per cent of the terrorist acts in the last five years, highlighting the failure of the Modi government on the Kashmir front. The Pulwama massacre has been the biggest terror attack, but not the only one in the last five years. If the bilateral talks on the Kashmir tangle are abandoned then how will the complex issue get resolved? Kashmir has been on the boil for the last 30 years.

SAMIR KHAN, MAPUSA
