FIR lodged against 8 shopkeepers in I-T raid

LUDHIANA: In another twist to the mysterious income tax survey conducted on three garment shops located in Bhadaur House area on Thursday, an FIR has been registered against eight shopkeepers for disrupting the raid. According to the FIR, which was registered by officials of the income tax department at Division 1 police station on Thursday, the accused not only disrupted the survey, but also abused government officials and threatened them.Shopkeepers who have been named in the FIR include Gurwinder Singh , Surinder Kumar, Gurcharan, Bunty, Lucky, Rahul, Sonu, and Rishab Grover. Officials of the investigation wing Ludhiana — who until Thursday were maintaining they did not conduct this action — could not be contacted on the issue. However, TOI tracked down the main complainant, deputy director of income tax ( Parwanoo ), Zahid Parvez, who confirmed that he and other officials — who were leading the action on Thursday — did lodge a complaint with the police.According to ASI Jagdish Singh , the investigating officer of the case, based upon a complaint received from income tax officials Zahid Parvez, Gaurav Bihari, Vijay Kumar Garg, Ashwani Kumar , and Mukand Singh Tiwana, an FIR had been registered against eight shopkeepers under sections 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of duty), 186 (obstructing public servant in discharge of public function), 506 (punishment for criminal intimidation) and 294, 148,149. As of now, investigation is on in this matter, and very soon, some arrests too will be made.Notably, Thursday’s income tax raids were conducted on three shops in Bhadaur House area, two of which are located inside the AC market, while one is located outside. As soon as news of the raid spread, all the shops of the area were shut down, and hundreds of shopkeepers gathered inside the AC market. There were also unverified reports of power being deliberately shut down by the shopkeepers, and resistance shown to the I-T teams, after which these teams returned. But a survey on the third shop located outside the AC market continued on Thursday night as well.Mysterious diary behind I-T actionAccording to sources, this action was the follow-up of I-T raids conducted in December last by the department’s investigation wing (Ludhiana) on three leading builders and property dealers of the city. The realtors are into the business of buying old buildings and demolishing them for converting them into malls and shopping complexes, and even building residential complexes.During the December raid, a diary from a property dealer linked with these three businessmen was found by I-T officials. This diary contains names and details of dozens of property dealings done by the diary owner with other businessmen who have shops, offices, and commercial property in the AC market and other areas. Sources also claim the names of three shopkeepers surveyed on Thursday too figure in this diary. However, senior officials of the investigation wing (Ludhiana) denied conducting any raid on Thursday in Bhadaur House area.
