How to watch Oscars 2019 Live in India, Date | Everything you need to know about the 91st Academy Awards

Bohemian Rhapsody has certainly been a hit among movie-goers with the Rami Malek starrer grossing over $800 million dollars worldwide, but does it have what it takes to take home the big prize? However, Malek, whose portrayal of Freddie Mercury earned him a lot of praise from all corners of the movie world is one of the frontrunners for the Best Actor award over Christian Bale (Vice) and Bradley Cooper (A Star is Born). Olivia Colman (The Favourite) is a clear favourite to win the Best Actress award and is likely to pip Lady Gaga (A Star is Born) and Melissa McCarthy (Can you ever Forgive me?) this year.

(ALSO READ: See the full list of 2019 Oscar nominations here )

Oscars 2019: Who votes for the Oscars and how does it work?

If anyone remembers the Oscar ceremony of 2017 and more importantly the gaffe that happened while announcing the Best picture winner, you will know that this is the most important part of the award ceremony. Amidst all the glitterati, the Oscar ceremony is the hard-work of hundreds of organisers who work day in and day out to present a spectacle come the big day at the iconic Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles.

In a strict process, 7,902 members of the The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences select the winners through a voting process. These members are divided into 17 branches -- actors, directors, producers among others. The candidates who vote for the winners need to active or otherwise have 'achieved distinction' in the industry. The voting for the winners was closed as on Tuesday, February 19.

Oscars 2019: Yet another dud affair?

One of the biggest challenges for the Oscars 2019 will be to be simply entertaining. The past few years have been a long, at times boring affair. In an attempt to make it crispier, the Academy had announced earlier about a plan to hand out four awards -- best cinematography, film editing, live-action short, and makeup and hairstyling -- during the commercial breaks. But with widespread protests casting a dark cloud over the Oscar run-up, the Academy eventually bowed to the complains and restored these categories on the main show.

With decreasing television ratings every year, The Oscars have been battling a losing fight on running time. Last year's Oscars for example ran close to an exhausting four hours. According to Academy research, people tend to lose interest after three hours (Can we blame them?) dragging down the overall viewership numbers. Oscars 2019 could very well suffer the same fate and could be yet another dud.

How to watch Oscars 2019 live in India?

The Academy Awards are scheduled to take place on the night of February 24 in Los Angeles, USA. This means that Indian viewers will be able to catch the ceremony live on February 25. Star Movies will be telecasting the entire award ceremony while you will be able to catch it online only on Hotstar, which will be streaming it live from 6:30am.

NOW READ

Bohemian Rhapsody's Rami Malek on emulating the performer that was Freddie Mercury

Black Panther review: It's a cinematic revolution

The 2019 Oscars are going hostless

> More on Entertainment
