Protect Kashmiris: Terrorists win if innocents from Kashmir are harassed

In a welcome move, the Supreme Court has directed the chief secretaries and police DGPs of 11 states to take prompt action to prevent incidents of threat, violence and social boycott of Kashmiris in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack. Such incidents have been reported from Maharashtra, Punjab, UP, Bihar, J&K, Haryana, Meghalaya, Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Delhi and Uttarakhand. Worse, public personalities have been instigating their followers to carry out hate crimes. We even had Meghalaya governor Tathagata Roy asking people to boycott everything Kashmiri. Roy occupies a high constitutional post but clearly has no understanding of either the letter or spirit of the Indian Constitution.

The Pulwama terror attack has shocked the nation, and the rage felt by many is entirely understandable. But ventilating that rage by engaging in witch hunts, hate crimes or mob violence amounts to aiding terrorists who want to sow suspicion, chaos and division in the country. In that case, the sacrifice of the jawans will have been in vain. Those perpetrating violence or abuse are anti-national because they are essentially in agreement with the separatists: neither see Kashmiris as part of India. Plus, in these hyper-connected, social media driven times, images of minorities being abused will only fuel the terror propaganda machinery.

Some parts of the Valley may have succumbed to jihadi intimidation. But Kashmiri students or traders outside the state are the best hope for saving it from Islamic fundamentalism. While law enforcement agencies must strictly enforce the Supreme Court’s directive to protect Kashmiris, governments and civil society must supplement that by building bridges with ordinary Kashmiris. There have already been some admirable initiatives in this regard – such as CRPF taking a group of Kashmiri teens on a trip to Kolkata. Alongside fighting terrorists, combating radical narratives must also be an essential part of our strategy.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
