Man stabbed to death outside Rajkot Central Jail

Police inspecting the crime scene

Rajkot: A 27-year-old man was stabbed to death by two persons right outside the Rajkot Central Jail premises in Popatpara on Friday morning allegedly to avenge a murder that was committed in September last year in Railnagar area.

The deceased was identified as Manoj Vadecha who was driving a scooter with his cousin Vipul Vadecha as pillion rider. The duo were on their way to the central jail to give food to their cousins lodged there.

According to Pradhyuman Nagar police, the attack on the deceased was pre-planned as the accused Rahul Tekwani and his aide (not yet identified) were already waiting armed with sharp-edged weapons. As soon as Manoj and Vipul neared the entrance gate of the central jail, Rahul allegedly stabbed Manoj who was driving the scooter.

Vipul’s cousins are accused of kidnapping and murdering Rahul’s brother Vishal in September 2017.

Police inspector B M Kataria told TOI “The accused wanted to kill Vipul but since Manoj was driving he got targeted. The accused thought that Manoj will stop after the attack. But Manoj did not stop the vehicle and drove right inside the jail gate. This saved Vipul.”

Manoj, who was bleeding heavily, was rushed to civil hospital, where he was succumbed. Meanwhile, the accused escaped after the Manoj and Vipul entered the jail premises.

Police has registered a case of murder against Rahul and one unidentified person who was with him based on the statement of Vipul.

The roots of the attack lies in a petty incident at Railnagar in September last year when Vipul and Vishal’s bikes had collided. After the collision Vishal had attacked Vipul with a knife and injured him.

Sensing trouble, Vishal’s father Rajesh Tekwani decided to send Vishal to Ahmedabad. But when he was going to drop him to bus station, Vipul’s cousins Jitendra allies Jitu Vadecha, Sunil Vadecha and four others allegedly kidnapped Vishal. They then thrashed him with pipes and sticks before throwing him near Hadmatia railway crossing.

Vishal was taken to a hospital where he slipped into a coma and died two days later. Sunil and Jitendra and his four friends were later arrested and are are currently lodged in Rajkot Central Jail, where Vipul and Manoj were going to give them food.


