Hammer Pak hard: India wants permanent solution after Pulwama terror attack

A large number of Indians regard a war with Pakistan a preferable permanent solution to the scourge of terrorism, an India Today TV poll suggests.

Thirty-six percent of the respondents favoured a full-scale conflict with Pakistan compared with 23 percent supporting surgical strikes. Eighteen percent backed the idea of an operation against Jaishe-Mohammad head Masood Azhar, on the pattern of US Special Forces capturing and killing Osama bin Laden in Pakistan's Abbottabad in 2011. Barely 15 percent supported moves to isolate Pakistan diplomatically and economically.

The poll was conducted across 29 states by Axis My India for India Today TV's Political Stock Exchange (PSE) in the wake of the deadly Pulwama attack claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammad.

Role of ISI, Pak Army

Asked about the real architect of the Feb 14 Pulwama strike, in which more than 40 CRPF men died, more than 30 percent of the respondents described Pakistan's army and the rogue ISI as the main culprits. Thirteen percent blamed Jaish and 19 percent Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, the PSE report showed. Twenty-five percent blamed every component of Pakistani state -- Jaish, the ISI, Pakistan's army and PM Khan.



2016 Surgical Strikes

Asked about the impact of the 2016 surgical strikes, 58 percent found them to have succeeded in checking Pakistan-sponsored terror. Twenty-five percent disagreed. Most of the respondents -- 57 percent --ticked the "don't-know" box over the question of what might have caused terror in Pulwama to unfold on Feb 14. Thirteen percent blamed it on intelligence failure and 17 percent on the government's "weak anti-terror policy". Indians overwhelmingly believe Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the most capable leader to deal with terrorism, the poll suggests.

Modi best bet

According to the survey, as high as 49 percent of Indians rate Modi as their most preferred choice in India's fight against terror. Congress president Rahul Gandhi trailed far behind at 15 percent. Only three percent of respondents found former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh fit for the antiterror job.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi, the BSP's Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav of the Samajwadi Party secured one percent of the votes each.

Pak, Kashmir policy

Forty-seven percent of the respondents also found the Modi government's Pakistan and Kashmir policy better than the UPA's (22 percent) and the Vajpayee administration (12 percent). The PSE survey, based on telephone interviews with a sample size of 12,815, was conducted during Feb 20-22.
