Very, very bad situation between India and Pakistan: Donald Trump

New Delhi:

US President Donald Trump on Friday described the current situation between India and Pakistan as "very, very bad" and said that his administration was in contact with both sides and hoped hostilities would soon end in the Valley. "Right now, between Pakistan and India, there is a very, very bad situation. A very dangerous situation. We would like to see it (hostilities) stop. A lot of people were just killed. We want to see it just stop. We are very much involved in that (process)," Trump told reporters at the Oval Office.

The US president was responding to questions on last week's terrorist attack in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir. At least 42 CRPF personnel were killed in one of the deadliest terror attacks when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 80 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded. More than 2,500 Central Reserve Police Force personnel, many of them returning from leave to rejoin duty in the Valley, were travelling in the convoy of 78 vehicles when they were ambushed on the Srinagar-Jammu highway at Latoomode in Awantipora in south Kashmir.



ALSO READ | Pakistan takes control of Jaish-e-Mohammed's headquarters in Bahawalpur: Reports

"India is looking at something very strong. India just lost almost 50 people in the attack. I can understand that too," Trump said, adding that his administration was talking to authorities in both countries.

"We're talking. A lot of people are. It's going to be a very, very delicate balance. There is a lot of problems between India and Pakistan because of what just happened," he said.

The president said the US has improved ties with Pakistan and works are on for meetings with Pakistan leaders and officials.

"I stopped paying Pakistan the USD 1.3-billion that we used to pay them. In the meantime, we may set up some meetings with Pakistan. Pakistan was taking very strong advantage of the United States under other presidents. We were paying Pakistan USD 1.3 billion a year. I ended that payment, because they were not helping us in the way they should have," Trump said.

However, United States' relation with Pakistan has developed in the last few months, he said.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
