Election Expenditure

It’s common knowledge that money plays a prominent role in Indian elections. The graph in this is steadily rising, despite the Election Commission effecting substantial controls over poll-spends. But, like in every other rule and regulation, this too is observed more in the breach than in its adherence.

A widely publicized observation made by an Indian-born expert in the US this week that the poll expenses in India pegged at $5 billion (approximately Rs 3500 crore) in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections is bound to phenomenally increase in the coming polls this year. Both the ruling party and the Opposition are running neck and neck as of now, and this is bound to raise the heat more, pushing rival sides to spend more. Notable is also the fact that the US presidential and congressional polls in 2016 cost the wealthy nation about $6.5 billion. The Indian spend this time could well exceed this.

A safe guess would be that the recorded expenditure here – or even in the US – might be far less than what was spent for the polls. In a way, spending as much money may not, prima facie, be a scary factor for the reason that this would correspondingly boost market mechanisms. Locking money in bank vaults is not the right prescription for economic growth.

However, the huge spend by candidates and parties needs be minimised. The BJP being in the driving seat has access to huge funds, fair or foul and is the largest spender in recent polls. Even candidates are selected by regional parties in several states based on their money power. Those who can afford to pay, say, Rs 30 – 50 crore, get named as candidates for some political parties. In the process, democracy might degrade itself into a kind of oligarchy – the system that democracy originally aimed to replace. This is also time for several politicians to indulge in heavy fund collection and pocket large parts of the money.

Perfecting a system is easier said than done. This is possible only if those who are at the helm of governments – senior politicians – put their hearts and minds into such causes. This has not been the case in India. The process of election reforms in India is progressing at snail’s pace. Election commission organising raids in the weeks before the voting day to unearth hoarded money from candidates or parties is of little consequence. This is more for effect than in helping serve a purpose.
