Building rules in Delhi undergo change to prevent mishaps like Karol Bagh

Move comes about 10 days after 17 people were burnt to death in a massive fire at this Karol Bagh hotel where several fire-safety norms had allegedly been flouted.

Prohibiting rooftop and basement kitchens and not issuing fire-safety certificates to guesthouses with more than four floors are part of 10 amendments to Delhi's building regulations that the Aam Aadmi Party government approved on Friday.

The move comes about 10 days after 17 people were burnt to death in a massive fire at a Karol Bagh hotel where several fire-safety norms had allegedly been flouted. As per the new norms, guesthouse owners will now need to submit plans for each floor to the Delhi Fire Services while seeking a no objection certificate (NOC). The amendments were approved by an interdepartmental meeting chaired by Delhi home minister Satyendar Jain, said a government statement.

It also said that special directives have been issued regarding the use of rooftops, basements and exit routes to prevent spread of fire in public buildings.

"We have to strictly ensure that no one dies during such fire mishaps in the city," Jain was quoted in the statement. On February 12, seventeen people were killed and three others injured after Hotel Arpit Palace caught fire.

The owner of the hotel, Rakesh Goel, and his brother, Shardendu Goel, in whose name the licence had been issued, are in police custody. An initial probe shows that many of the building regulations were not followed that aggravated the impact of the blaze.

The amendments also say that any storage of inflammable material will not be allowed on rooftops.

"All existing and future guesthouses must install carbon monoxide smoke alarms, fire doors on each floor and remove all kinds of combustible materials from passages, exit routes and rooftops," the government said.

The statement said that it has been observed that many rooftops and basements are being misused for different activities which may have potential fire threats.

"The Delhi government will follow a policy of zero tolerance against those playing with the lives of people," Jain said.
