UN Security Council list from 2001 confirms Pakistan as Jaish base: India's Envoy

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Syed Akbaruddin shows UN Security Council list from 2001

Sharing a UN Security Council list dating back to 2001, India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations Syed Akbaruddin confirmed terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed's location as Pakistan. The development put all speculations to rest as Jaish-e-Mohammed, that claimed responsibility of the Pulwama terror attack, has been listed as an associated entity of terror mastermind Osama bin Laden in the list.

The October 19, 2001 statement brings attention to paragraph 8 (c) of resolution 1333 (2000) which calls on all states to freeze funds and other financial assets of designated entities, connected to Bin Laden, on the list, in a bid to completely block funding to Laden, who had claimed responsibility for the ghastly 9/11 attacks in the United States.

Akbaruddin took to Twitter and said the issue was settled way back in 2001.

"May I jog your memories? To all friends who think that the UN Security Council does not know where the Jaish-e-Mohammed is located, my humble submission is that issue was settled way back in 2001," Mr Akbaruddin tweeted.

India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations Syed Akbaruddin also posted the letter on Twitter.

Earlier during a press conference of the Pakistan Army, its spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor had dismissed his country's involvement in the attack, despite the terror group's claim of responsibility.

India has asserted that since JeM, which is based in Pakistan, had itself claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack, there was no more evidence required.

Meanwhile, the United States had, immediately after the attack, called for Pakistan to stop providing support and a safe haven to terror outfits in their country, further cementing their stand against terrorism.

Washington, along with other countries, had expressed solidarity with India in the wake of the February 14 attack, in which over 40 CRPF soldiers were killed.

Latest India News
