Mumbai: YouTubers nabbed for trying to extort money from senior citizen

The Amboli police on Friday arrested five YouTubers, including a woman, for allegedly extorting a senior citizen after shooting his video in a compromising position. Those arrested have been identified as Hussain Hanif Makrani (36), Yuvraj Singh (29), Narendra Chauhan (30), Rehman Vahid Shaikh (45), Keval and the woman Lucky Brijkumar Mishra (32).

According to the police, the victim who is also the complainant in the matter saw an advertisement on an online portal, offering a full body massage at a considerable price. When the complainant approached the massage service company, they sent a team of five people, four men and a woman at the victim’s residence in Amboli. While the accused men were foot massaging the victim, Lucky started filming a video in the room and said that the video was for the company's promotion campaign.

“Two days after the massage, one of the accused called up the victim and demanded Rs 25 crore in exchange of not uploading the video clip on social media in which the victim was seen in a semi-nude state and other compromising positions. The victim considering it to be a prank call ignored it and refused to comply. After this, the victim received the video in a personal chat on Whatsapp. He approached the Amboli police on Thursday night and registered an official complaint against the miscreants,” said a police officer.

On Friday morning, Amboli police formed a team and nabbed the accused from their residences in Goregaon and Malad respectively. The police further added that all the accused were professional YouTubers and they owned a channel named - Crime Discovery Crime where videos of people in similar vulnerable positions were uploaded.

“We have registered a case under section 120(b), 384, 385 and 381 of the Indian Penal Code and section 67(a) of the Information Technology Act. We are ascertaining whether more senior citizens have been conned using the same modus operandi. We are yet to identify the other victims and more arrests are likely to be made in this case,” added the officer.
