Sangrur could witness clash of the titans in this election

PATIALA: With the Congress, the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) and the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), all three are contemplating to field political heavyweights to contest the upcoming Lok Sabha elections from Sangrur constituency, the heart of Malwa is set to witness clash of the titans.More than 14 lakh voters will cast their votes to elect their next representative to be sent to Parliament. While AAP has already announced that it will again be fielding sitting MP Bhagwant Mann, who was recently also reinstated as the president of the state unit, from the Congress it could be the former chief minister Rajinder Kaur Bhattal or Kewal Singh Dhillon. Sources in the party said the Congress was considering the name of its last MP from Sangrur, Vijay Inder Singla, but since he cabinet minister in Capt Amarinder Singh government, was left out of final decision making process.There are a number of other local leaders, who are also vying to get the party ticket, but if the party could go by the seniority of the candidate.SAD is deliberating on the names of its sitting MLA from Lehra Gagga and former Akali Minister Parminder Singh Dhindsa or Iqbal Singh, who is the party’s district president.Union minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal had challenged Mann to contest Lok Sabha elections from Sangrur again, which he had accepted immediately. While Harmisrat is most likely to contest from her seat of Bathinda , but if she decides to take Mann on directly the elections can become a contest to watch. This scenario with Bhattal too jumping in the fray will make it a ‘clash of titans’.Sangrur parliamentary constituency comprises six assembly constituencies that fall under the Sangrur district and three falls in Barnala district . Of these nine constituencies, Congress holds three, AAP five and SAD only one.While cabinet minister Vijay Inder Singla represents Sangrur, minister Razia Sultana had won from Malerkotla . The Congress also got representation in Dhuri where its candidate Dalvir Singh Khangura won the 2017 assembly polls.However, it was AAP that dominated many seats during the 2017 state elections. Sunam voted for Aman Arora and Dirba elected leader of the opposition in the state assembly Harpal Singh Cheema. Bhadaur in Barnala had also fallen in the AAP kitty and is presently represented by Pirmal Singh Khalsa. Mehal Kalan was won by Kulwant Singh Pandori for AAP and Barnala had voted for Meet Hayer again from AAP. While Lehra elected SAD leader Parminder Singh Dhindsa.The constituency has a total population of 20,43792, out of which 67.32% is rural while 32.68% lives in cities. Around 29.11% population is scheduled castes.As per the voter list of 2017, there are 14,87193 electorates and there were 1,597 polling stations in this constituency. Voter turnout in the 2014 parliamentary elections was 77.21%, down from 74.41% in the 2009 elections.AAP, the Congress and SAD got 48.5%, 16.5% and 29.24% votes in the last Lok Sabha election. These vote were primarily divided amongst the Congress and SAD during the 2009 parliamentary elections during which these two parties had bagged 38.52% and 34.13% vote shares.
