Salman Khan & Sanjay Leela Bhansali reunite, 19 years after 'Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam'!

Atif Aslam's song from 'Notebook' to be re-recorded by another singer, Film will not release in Pakistan! Sanjay Leela Bhansali (Photo: Web) Speaking about the collaboration, the source further added that, "He had discussed the idea with Salman before the release of his last directorial, Padmaavat. Salman is equally excited to collaborate with him. Sanjay has been working on three scripts simultaneously and was in talks with several big actors. He has finally decided to go ahead with this one which will be spearheaded by Salman." Salman with Aishwarya in 'Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam' (Photo: Web) Confirming the news, Prerna Singh, CEO of Bhansali Productions told Mumbai Mirror that, “Yes, Salman Khan and Sanjay Leela Bhansali are reuniting after 19 years for a love story. Their collaboration is the best thing that can happen in terms of story-telling.” 'Notebook' TRAILER OUT: Salman Khan launches the trailer featuring debutantes Pranutan Bahl-Zaheer Iqbal! Salman with Manisha Koirala in 'Khamoshi' (Photo: Web) After finishing 'Dabangg 3', Salman's yet-untitled film with Bhansali will reportedly go on floors in September. Salman will jointly produce the film with Sanjay Leela Bhansali. Salman with Sonam in 'Saawariya' (Photo: Web) For the uninitiated, the duo first worked together in 1996 film 'Khamoshi: The Musical' before 'Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam'. Both the films are one of the finest works of Sanjay Leela Bhansali. Also, Salman has played a small role in his 2007 film 'Saawariya'. Stay tuned for more updates!

Bollywood superstar Salman Khan, whose last film 'Race 3' failed to do wonders at the box-office, is busy shooting for his next film 'Bharat' co-starring Katrin Kaif. Post which, the actor will start shooting for 'Dabangg 3' with Sonakshi Sinha. One of the busiest actors of Bollywood, Salman Khan has reportedly signed another big film after 'Dabangg 3'. According to a leading daily, Salman is all set to reunite with Sanjay Leela Bhansali for a love story after 19 years of 'Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam' which was their last film together.Salman Khan (Photo: Instagram) Speaking about Salman & Sanjay teaming up after a long time, a source told the portal that, "Both of them have been looking to team up on a film for a while now. Everything has finally fallen into place."
