Pulwama aftermath: All CRPF personnel on leave recalled to Valley; 10,000 extra boots on ground, NIA makes breakthrough

2/6

Asserting that there is a lot of problems between India and Pakistan, US President Donald Trump has said New Delhi is looking at something "very strong" in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack.

Forty CRPF personnel were killed and five injured on February 14 in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) rammed a vehicle carrying a huge quantity of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district.

Moderate Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq Saturday condemned JKLF chief Yasin Malik's detention and the crackdown on the Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir leadership, saying force and intimidation will only worsen the situation.



Police swooped on Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir members in Kashmir during the intervening night of Friday and Saturday, and detained around two dozen of its cadres, including its chief Abdul Hamid Fayaz - hours after JKLF chief Yasin Malik was detained on Friday night.

Strongly condemn the nocturnal crackdown on Jamat-e-Islami leadership and cadres and the arrest of Yasin Malik. Such illegal and coercive measures against

Kashmiris are futile and will not change realities on ground. Force and intimidation will only worsen the situation, Mirwaiz posted on Twitter.

In view of recent events, the government is shoring up reserves in Kashmir owing to the volatile situation. An additional 10,000 boots will be on the ground in Kashmir including 45 companies of CRPF, 35 of BSF, 10 of ITBP and 10 of SSB.

All CRPF personnel have been recalled immediately owning to the situation and their leaves have been cancelled.

Kashmiri separatist and JKLF chief Yasin Malik was detained by the police late on Friday night.

The cops apprehended him from his Maisuma residence here. He reportedly has been taken to the Kothibagh Police Station.

Read: BCCI to write to ICC, urge cricket community to sever ties with terror nations



Malik’s detention comes ahead of a crucial hearing on Article 35-A in Supreme Court which is likely to take place on Monday (February 25). The article, incorporated into the Indian Constitution in 1954, grants special rights and privileges to the citizens of Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, in new revelations from the Pulwama investigation, the National Investigative Agency (NIA) has found that the car used in the terrorist attack was of the 2010-11 model which was re-painted.

The NIA team also found a can with 30 kg RDX near the site of the blast. The vehicle used was a Maruti Eeco. A shock absorber found near the site of the blast indicated the model of the car and the year it was manufactured.

The NIA will also take DNA samples from slain terrorist Aadil’s family to match with the blood found at the site of the blast. This will help confirm if Aadil was the only one in the car or if he had someone else with him.

In one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir's three decades of militancy, a JeM suicide bomber rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district on Thursday, killing around 40 personnel and leaving many critically wounded.

Read: Subramanian Swamy's blueprint to break terror's backbone in J&K

Read: BCCI to write to ICC, urge cricket community to sever ties with terror nations

Read: Maybe you knew in advance: BJP slams Rahul Gandhi

Read: Donald Trump empathises with India after Pulwama terror attack

India launched a major diplomatic offensive against Islamabad after the attack and highlighted Pakistan's role in using terrorism as an instrument of state policy.

The international community led by the US pressed Pakistan to deny safe haven to terror groups operating form its soil and bring the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack to justice.

Trump, after his meeting with a visiting Chinese trade delegation led by Vice Premier Liu He, told reporters in the Oval Office of the White House on Friday that "in Kashmir, it's very dangerous".

The President referred to the possibility of a strong response from India in the wake of the terrorist attack.

"India is looking at something very strong. And I mean, India just lost almost 50 people with an attack. So, I could understand that also," he said when asked about India's right to self-defence.
