Salman Khan asked Navjot Singh Sidhu to step down





According to reports, it was The Kapil Sharma Show’s producer Salman Khan who asked Navjot Singh Sidhu to step down from the show. However, the final decision on his exit is on hold.

Boycott Kapil Sharma trends after comedian speaks in support of Navjot Singh Sidhu

Kapil Sharma came out in support of Navjot Singh Sidhu and said that sacking him is not the solution.

After #BoycottKapilSharmaShow and #UnsubscribeSonyTV, the latest hashtag to trend on social media post Navjot Singh Sidhu’s comments on Pulwama terror attack is #BoycottKapilSharma. The hashtag started trending on social media right after Kapil Sharma gave his piece of mind about the controversy and said sacking Sidhu is not the solution.

Kapil spoke after taking an oath for a drug-free India at an Art of Living event this week. “These are very small things, or can also be a part of propaganda. I feel banning someone or sacking Navjot Singh Sidhu from the show (The Kapil Sharma Show) is not the solution. We need to look for a permanent solution,” he told the reporters.

Talking about the Pulwama attack, Kapil said that he is with the government. “We are with the government but still we need a permanent solution. The cowardly act in Pulwama that killed our soldiers shouldn’t be forgotten and the culprits should be punished,” he added.

Kapil Sharma’s comments have not gone down well with the netizens who are not attacking the comedian viciously.

Navjot Singh Sidhu has been asked to step down from The Kapil Sharma Show by producer Salman Khan, but the final decision is still on hold. Sidhu’s comments on Pulwama terror attack has landed him in trouble and the Punjab minister and popular television personality received severe backlash from all quarters. #BoycottKapilSharmaShow started trending soon after. As per reports, although Salman called up Sidhu and asked for his resignation, because he didn’t want the ratings of the show to be affected for the sake of one person, he has decided to put the final decision on Sidhu’s exit on hold as he’s waiting for things to cool down. However, Sidhu will not be shooting a few episodes.

Sidhu’s controversial comment on Pulwama:“For a handful of people, can you blame the entire nation and can you blame an individual? It (the attack) is a cowardly act and I condemn it firmly. Violence is always condemnable and those who did it must be punished,” Sidhu was quoted as saying.
