Top news of the day: Air India receives hijack threat, Modi says our fight is not against Kashmiris, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Paying homage to the CRPF personnel killed in the Pulwama terror attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Saturday that peace in the world will not be possible if terrorism continued.

A call has been received at the Air India’s Airport Operation Control Centre in Mumbai regarding a threat to an Indian Airlines flight getting hijacked to Pakistan.

Addressing the budget session of the Delhi Assembly, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said the Delhi government is unable to perform its duties towards people of the city because it lacked power.

Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) chief Yasin Malik and socio-religious group Jamaat-e-Islami’s (JeI) 30 members, including the top leadership, were arrested after a night-long clampdown in Kashmir on Saturday.

The international community led by the US pressed Pakistan to deny safe haven to terror groups operating form its soil and bring the perpetrators of the Pulwama attack to justice.

A fire broke out in the general parking area of the Aero India at the front of Yelahanka Air Base here, damaging over 300 vehicles.

The billowing smoke was spotted at the end of the morning aerobatics display on Saturday and caused mild panic. Earlier on Tuesday, just a day before the commencement of the show, a plane had crashed during rehearsals.

The Home Ministry has also asked all States to ensure security of Kashmiris who were reportedly attacked in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Jammu city in the last few days.

Ko Channabasappa, former judge, writer and a well-known liberal voice in Karnataka, passed away on Saturday. He was 97.

North Korean leader Kim Jong-un told the U.S. secretary of state he did not want his children to live with the burden of nuclear weapons, a former CIA officer involved in high-level diplomacy over the North’s weapons was quoted as saying on Saturday.

Oshada Fernando and Kusal Mendis struck unbeaten half-centuries as Sri Lanka claimed a historic eight-wicket win over South Africa in the second and final test at St George's Park for a 2-0 series victory on Saturday.
