MH-ATHAWALE-ALLIANCE

Sena-BJP alliance: Athawale says his party was ignored

Nagpur, Feb 23 (PTI)Union Social Justice Minister and

RPI (A) president Ramdas Athawale rued Saturday that his party

was not spared a single seat by NDA allies BJP and Shiv Sena

while announcing their alliance for the coming polls.

In politics "doors are always open" but he still

wanted the next government to be formed under Prime Minister

Narendra Modi's leadership, the Dalit leader said here.

"We are happy that the Shiv Sena and BJP have come

together, but they did not leave a single seat for RPI, and

this is unfortunate.

"RPI had been instrumental in garnering votes for the

BJP in 2014 Assembly elections (in Maharashtra)," Athawale

told reporters.

His party should have been taken into confidence by

the Sena and BJP while sealing their deal, he said.

The RPI was not even called for the joint press

conference (held Monday to announce the alliance), he said.

"Our party cadre and people are disappointed that RPI

is not getting a single seat. Chief Minister Devendra

Fadnavis and (Sena chief) Uddhav Thackeray should think about

our demands," the Union minister said.

RPI leaders will be meeting in Mumbai on February 25

and discuss this issue, he said.

His party was not thinking of switching allegiance to

the Congress, Athawale said.

Asked if he had met NCP supremo Sharad Pawar recently,

Athawale answered in the negative.

"I got message from (NCP leader) Chhagan Bhujbal,

inviting me for a meeting. But I replied that our stand is

still not clear, so nothing will come out of a meeting, let's

see, in politics doors are always open," he said.

"If injustice continues, then we will see what to do,"

he added.

Overcoming their strained ties, the BJP and Shiv Sena

on February 18 announced a seat-sharing pact for the Lok Sabha

and Assembly elections in Maharashtra. The BJP will contest 25

and the Shiv Sena 23 of the 48 Lok Sabha seats in Maharashtra.

The two parties said they will contest equal number of

seats, after allotting allies their share, in Assembly

elections which are due this year.

Talking about his visit to families of CRPF

personnel from Maharashtra who were killed in the Pulwama

terror attack, Athawale urged the Dalit youth to join the

armed forces in large numbers.

He has demanded reservation for Dalits in the Army as

they are very brave, he said. PTI CLS

KRK KRK
