26-yr-old Telangana man shot in the mouth in the US, battles for life

26-yr-old Telangana man shot in the mouth in the US, battles for life

The victim, Sai Krishna was shot by robbers in Detroit when he was returning from work.

news Crime

A 26-year-old man from Telangana's Warangal district has been shot in his mouth by robbers in Detroit, leaving him in a critical state in the hospital. The robbers stole his car, wallet and other belongings, leaving him freezing in the cold. The incident took place four days ago on Thursday. However, it came to light on Sunday.

The victim, P Sai Krishna, an electrical engineer from Lawrence Tech University, Southfield Michigan is a native of Mahabubabad. According to his friends, Sai was shot at around 11.30 pm, when returning home from work. Sai was working an automotive company in Detroit.

According to reports, when Sai stopped at a Mexican joint, armed robbers threatened him with a gun to drive them. They later shot him at an isolated place and stole all his belongings.

Sai left for the US in 2015 to do his Masters in Electronics and Electrical Engineering. He reportedly comes from an underprivileged background and doesn't have health insurance, his friends in the US have been raising donation through gofundme towards his medical expenses, rehabilitation and monthly expenses.

Sai's father, Yellaiah is a government teacher. He is presently seeking an appointment with TRS working president KT Rama Rao, seeking his help to travel and bring back his son.

Just two months ago in a similar incident, a 61-year-old man from Telangana, Sunil Edla was shot dead in New Jersey by a 16-year-old in a carjacking incident.

Sunil was a native of Medak district, working as a night auditor in the hospitality industry in Atlantic City. When Sunil was leaving his home for his overnight shift, the minor shot him and escaped with his car. Sunil died on the spot.

Sunil, who had migrated to the US in 1987, was to travel to India later that month to visit his family.
