Airports on high alert after hijack threat

Hyderabad/New Delhi: Airports all over the country were put on high alert after Air India's operation control centre in Mumbai received a phone call threatening to hijack its plane to Pakistan following which Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) ordered all airlines and CISF to ensure enhanced security protocols. According to sources, the BCAS, the Aviation Security Group (ASG), Airport Security Units (APSU) and all aircraft operators to adopt a series of measures with immediate effect.

Accordingly, strict access of entry into the terminal building, airside areas like arrival, parking, refuelling, loading, and departure of all aircraft, all operation area and other aviation facilities are put in place. Intensive checking of vehicles entering car parking area has to be carried out to prevent the possibility of car bomb attacks, besides, screening of passengers will be enhanced. That apart, staff working at various facilities at the airport and visitors will also have to undergo enhanced random screening at the main gate.

In addition, there will be enhanced screening and protection of hold baggage, cargo, cargo terminal, catering, mail and other facilities.While all the security mechanisms are beefed at the Mumbai Airport, the other airports are also on alert to prevent any untoward incident taking place.

As part of the precautionary measures surveillance through CCTV as well as manual surveillance in and around the terminal building and operations will be stepped up and the Quick Response Teams (QRT) and perimeter patrolling to be strengthened.

Also, manning of all cargo gates and vehicle entry gates will be strengthened with strong-armed support. The officials and airport authorities are asked to take any other necessary security measures basing on the local intelligence inputs provided to them. Security up at Hyderabad airport



Hyderabad: The police have stepped up security at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport in Shamshabad following intelligence inputs to be on high alert. According to the RGI Airport police, more security personnel were deployed in the aftermath of the Pulwama terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. The airports remained on high alert and security is further intensified on Saturday, and vehicle checking has been carried out all day. The RGI Airport police inspector said airports are not only prepared as much as they should be but also requires a plan of action to prevent any kind of terror attack.


