Our fight for Kashmir, not against Kashmiris: PM Modi

Tonk (Rajasthan), Feb 23: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday denounced attacks on Kashmiri youths in some parts of the country following Pulwama bombing last week in which at least 40 soldiers were killed.

ADVERTISEMENT

PM Modi said Kashmiri youths should not be targeted anywhere in the country.

Speaking at a public rally in Rajasthan’s Tonk, the PM said, “Our fight is against militancy, the enemies of humanity…Our fight is for Kashmir not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris.”

“What happened to Kashmiri youths in the last few days…It does not matter whether the incident was small or big, such things should not happen. Kashmiri youths are victims of militancy. Every child of Kashmir is with India in our fight against ‘terror’,” said PM Modi.

The prime minister said incidents like these “give power to Bharat ke tukde honge gang” and their supporters. “It is the responsibility of every Indian to protect every laal (child) of Kashmir,” he said.

ADVERTISEMENT

The prime minister served another warning to Kashmiri separatist leaders, many of whom were stripped of their security cover early this week. The Union home ministry had ordered to review the security provided by the government to the separatist leaders in the wake of Pulwama attack.

PM Modi said, “Action has been taken against separatists and more action will be taken against such people…We can’t keep silent, we know how to crush militancy.”

Asserting that the government has moved swiftly to “avenge” Pulwama attack, PM Modi said all the major institutions of the world have condemned “the attack that was engineered at Pulwama”.

“I am proud that our security forces sent the perpetrators (of Pulwama attack) within 100 hours to where they belong,” he said referring to encounter in Pulwama a day after the attack on Jammu-Srinagar highway, where a CRPF convoy carrying more than 2,500 troopers was targeted by a suicide bomber.

“Trust the brave soldiers of the country and trust the Modi government…This time, everyone will be taken to justice and complete justice will be served,” said PM Modi adding, “Your pradhan sevak is busy finishing ‘terror’…If I am destined to put locks to the factory of militancy, so be it.”

PM Modi referred to his congratulatory phone call to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, when he assumed office after the general elections in Pakistan last year.

He said, “As per protocol, I telephoned Pakistan’s new prime minister. I told him we have fought for long. Let India and Pakistan together fight poverty and illiteracy.”

“Pakistan’s prime minister told me, I am the son of a Pathan. I do what I say. It is time to test his words,” PM Modi said at his rally in Rajasthan.

He also talked about the steps, the government has taken to put pressure on Pakistan following Pulwama attack. He said, “Pakistan is being accounted for everything that they have done. There is anxiety in Pakistan due to the steps we have taken after the attack.”

A day after Pulwama attack, the government decided at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) to withdraw the most favoured nation (MFN) status granted to Pakistan in 1996. The government also hiked tariff on goods to be imported from Pakistan by 200 per cent.

The external affairs ministry reached out to more than a dozen countries to corner Pakistan, which denied its hand behind the attack in Jammu and Kashmir despite Jaish-e-Mohammed, a militant group based out of that country, claimed responsibility for the attack on the CRPF personnel.

On Thursday, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) passed a resolution condemning Pulwama attack. The UNSC named Jaish-e-Mohammed in its statement. The UNSC resolution was unanimously approved by all members including China, which has been shielding Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar from being declared as global terrorist by the top UN body.

Omar thanks PM

Srinagar, Feb 23: National Conference leader Omar Abdullah Saturday thanked Prime Minister Narendra Modi for breaking his silence on attacks against Kashmiris in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack and expressed hope that such incidents would not recur.

“Thank you @narendramodi Sahib. Aaj aap ne hamaray dil ki baat keh di (you have conveyed the feelings of our heart),” Abdullah tweeted.

His another tweet read: It’s been a more than a week since the terrible attack in Pulwama & more than a week that Kashmiris have been bearing the brunt of the public anger. Perhaps finally after PM @narendramodi Sb has spoken these forces targeting Kashmiris will stop in their tracks.

Addressing a rally at Rajasthan’s Tonk district, the prime minister said, “Our fight is not against Kashmiris.”

Assault on Kashmiris : Nodal police officers appointed

Press Trust of India

New Delhi, Feb 23: All states and Union Territories have appointed nodal police officers to resolve problems of Kashmiris who are being targeted in the aftermath of the Pulwama suicide attack, officials said Saturday.

The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has also asked all states to ensure security of Kashmiris who were reportedly attacked in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Jammu city in the last few days.

The details of these nodal police officers have been uploaded on the MHA website.

In its advisory sent on Friday night, the MHA has conveyed to the state governments and Union Territory administrations to take all necessary steps to prevent any act of assault, threat, intimidation, social boycott etc., against Kashmiris as well as minorities in accordance with the order of the Supreme Court.

The ministry said the central government is concerned about the reports of incidents of assaults and harassment against residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially students in some parts of the country, in the aftermath of the Pulwama suicide attack, which killed at least 40 CRPF personnel on February 14.

In this regard, an advisory was issued on February 16 also to all state governments and Union Territory administrations to take necessary steps to ensure safety and security of the people belonging to Jammu and Kashmir.

Modi’s dare for Imran, ‘son of a Pathan’

Tonk (RJ), Feb 23: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday threw a challenge to his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan, asking him to act honourably by bringing to justice those responsible for the Pulwama attack.

Addressing a rally in Rajasthan’s Tonk, PM Modi recalled the phone call he made to Khan to congratulate him for winning the Pakistani elections last year.

“I told him there have been plenty of fights between India and Pakistan. Pakistan got nothing. Every time, we won. I told him let us fight against poverty and illiteracy. He told me, ‘Modi ji, I am the son of a Pathan. I speak true and I do true’. Today, the time has come for him to stand true to his words. I will see whether he stands true to his words or not,” he said.

Pathans, an ethnic group with roots in Iran, are known for their deep sense of honour and self-respect.

A suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama last week killed over 40 CRPF soldiers

More than 40 personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were killed in a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama last week. India has blamed Pakistan for supporting those responsible for the attack after Jaish-e-Mohammad, a militant group based in the country, claimed responsibility.

Pakistan has denied the charge with Imran Khan saying the country will retaliate against any attack or “misadventure” by India.

PM Modi went on to say on Saturday that he was committed to strike Pakistan diplomatically and in terms of trade as retribution for the attack.

“Enemies of humanity must be taught a lesson. Everything will be accounted for. Pakistan must be isolated in the world. Your chowkidar (watchman) is working just for this,” he said.

The Prime Minister said that most of the countries and global organisations are united against the Pulwama terror attack and the decisions taken in its wake had rattled Pakistan. (Agencies)
