Pakistani troops open fire at Indian posts in Jammu and Kashmir

Even when relations between India and Pakistan are strained after the horrific Pulwama terror attack, Pakistani forces violated ceasefire on the Line of Control on Sunday.

Pakistani forces opened fire with their weapons in the wee hours of Sunday. The ceasefire violation took place in Nowshera in Rajouri District in Jammu and Kashmir. Indian forces swung into action and retaliated swiftly.

Ceasefire violations have continued on the LoC after Pulwama terror attack that took place on February 14. 40 CRPF jawans had lost their lives after an explosive-laden vehicle was rammed on a bus in the convoy.

On February 21, Pakistan violated ceasefire in the Poonch sector of Jammu and Kashmir.

Nowshera sector had witnessed another ceasefire violation when Pakistani forces targetted forward posts of Indian Army. One Indian soldier was injured in the firing.

Pakistan is increasingly being cornered internationally after Jaish-e-Mohammad hand in Pulwama terror attack came in light. Jaish terrorists including founder Masood Azhar enjoy free reign in Pakistan.

Even US President Donald Trump has said that "Pakistan was taking very strong advantage" of USA's help to the country in the past. He also said that "India is looking at something very strong" hinting his support to the hardened Indian stand in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack.

However, the Pakistani stance has been to blame India, as it has been a usual practice.

On Saturday, Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi wrote to United Nations Security Council (UNSC) and accused India of threatening regional security.

"It is with a sense of urgency that I draw your attention to the deteriorating security situation in our region resulting from Indian belligerence and threats of use of force against Pakistan. The situation poses a threat to international peace and security," Qureshi said in the letter addressed to UNSC president Anatolio Ndong Mba.

He alleged that India is blaming Pakistan for the Pulwama attack "to cover up its own operational and policy failures".

The UNSC has already named Jaish-e-Mohammad while condemning the terror attack in Pulwama.

(With inputs from Sunil Bhat)
