Kashmiri youth need jobs, training & safety

The rising graph of local Valley youth, taking up arms in the J&K, has again brought back the focus on the efficacy of the central government-funded schemes like Himayat, Udaan, and Special Scholarship.



These schemes were initiated during the UPA – II tenure in February 2011 as an outcome of the recommendations of Dr C Rangarajan Committee report. The idea behind these schemes was to engage J&K youth, especially Valley youth gainfully and help the assimilate with mainstream India by excelling in education, skill development and take up jobs or start their own entrepreneurial initiatives.



However, 7 to 8 years down the line, the schemes have not been able to make much difference on the ground for which they had aimed at.



Though there is no official word yet, sources in the government said that Udaan scheme, a Special Industry Initiative (SII) to enhance skill and employability of graduates and three-year engineering diploma holders and offer of jobs in the private sector, has been discontinued because of lack of enthusiasm shown by the youth.



As per the last figures, though under Udaan, over 32,000 candidates had joined training against the target of 57,000 jobs, only about 15,000 were offered jobs in domestic and multinational companies. But the number of those who joined and did not drop out is not known as the Ministry of Home Affairs has so far not come up with the figures, giving an impression that the actual number of people joining the corporate world is too small from the Valley.

Officials, dealing with the scheme, concede tacitly that despite Kashmir having a wonderful talent pool, youth are not ready to take up employment outside because of safety and security and think that the best bet for them is to either have a job or a business in secure environments of the Valley.

Also Read: Against all odds...

The situation is no different in case of Himayat scheme, a skill development programme for the youth under implementation since 2011. It envisages training and equipping with skills that are great in demand to 1,24,180 youth with placement assurance of at least 70 per cent.

As per the latest data available, of the 32 projects sanctioned and target allotted to train 53,547 candidates, only 6,977 candidates are under training and 3,118 have been trained.



The most successful of the schemes, special scholarship has also come under a cloud after the recent Pulwama strike, leading to mass exodus of Kashmiri students leaving their respective colleges and heading home.



Officials agree that the only way to succeed and make these scheme work is building trust among youth through political approach for which even the larger society will have to contribute.

Also Read: To the Valley, with love

Feb 14, 2019

A Kashmiri suicide bomber, believed to be associated with Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), rams an explosive-laden vehicle into a CRPF convoy at Lethpora, Pulwama.

Death toll: 40

July 14, 2018

Terrorists carry out a suicide attack on a district police complex in South Kashmir’s Pulwama Police Line, killing security personnel & CRPF men

Death toll: 8

Aug 26, 2017

A group of JeM suicide attackers storm the District Police Lines in South Kashmir’s Pulwama, injuring 6 people

Death toll: 8

Nov 29, 2016

A group of JeM suicide attackers storm the District Police Lines in South Kashmir’s Pulwama, injuring 6 people

Death toll: 8

Nov 29, 2016

Three terrorists attack security forces in two separate strikes in Nagrota in Jammu district & Chamliyal in Ramgarh sector of Samba district. The attack left 8 people injured

Death toll: 7

Sept 18, 2016

A group of four heavily-armed JeM suicide attackers storm into the 10 Infantry Brigade headquarters and unleash mayhem. They injure 20

Death toll: 18

June 25, 2016

Terrorists open indiscriminate firing at a CRPF bus at Pampore on Srinagar-Jammu National Highway. Twenty-two people were injured in the attack

Death toll: 8

June 3, 2016

Terrorists ambush a Srinagar-bound Border Security Force (BSF) convoy at Bijbehera town. They injure 6

Death toll: 3

Compiled by DNA-Research N Archives
