4 more Kashmiris attacked in Delhi, journalist, lawyer tortured

ISLAMABAD: The targeted onslaughts against Kashmiris across India continue unabated after Pulwama attack as three more Kashmiri youth were attacked in New Delhi, while a journalist and an advocate were beaten up in Pune and Srinagar.

According to Kashmir Media Service (KMS), Hindu fanatics assaulted three Kashmiri youth in Nangloi area of New Delhi.

In another incident, a 24-year-old Kashmiri journalist, Jibran Nazir, was beaten up in Pune.

Jibran Nazir, who works with a newspaper in Pune, said that the assailants told him that they would send him back to Kashmir.

Meanwhile, the authorities have booked an illegally detained youth under draconian law, Public Safety Act (PSA), in Pulwama district.

The authorities shifted Muzamil Ganai, a resident of Chatpora area of the district, to Kot Bhalwal Jail in Jammu after slapping him with the PSA.

Muzammil was arrested by the police last week on the charges of pelting stones on the Indian forces’ personnel. His family members, however, refuted the police claim that he was involved in stone pelting.

Meanwhile, a civilian, Muhammad Ishaq Lone, of Shopian was admitted in a hospital in Srinagar after Indian Army personnel subjected him to severe torture at their camp.

According to KMS, Muhammad Ishaq Lone told media men that he received a call from personnel of army’s 34 Rashtriya Rifles stationed at Nagisharan Shopian, on late Wednesday evening, summoning him to the camp.

Lone, a resident of Rawalpora who runs a small pharmacy in Shopian town, said that the next day as he visited the camp along with the village head, he was beaten to pulp by the army men. “After abusing me, they took off my clothes and beat me with canes,” Lone said. He said that he was told by the army men to bring his brother Wilayat Ahmed.

Lone was immediately rushed to district hospital Shopian from where was sent to SMHS hospital Srinagar given the nature of his grave injuries.

Meanwhile, the human rights commission has directed Senior Superintendent Police (SSP) Srinagar to respond to a petition filed by an advocate alleging that he was beaten by the Indian Army personnel.

The aggrieved advocate, Shafqat Nazir, hailing from Sopore area of Baramulla district, who practices in the High Court in Srinagar, filed the petition saying that the army personnel beat him up along the highway in Srinagar. “Since the army doesn’t fall within its jurisdiction, the commission issued notice to the police,” an official of SHRC said.

Hindu fanatics damaged three shops and two vehicles in Mendhar town of Poonch district. The overnight damage caused by the extremist Hindus prompted the authorities to impose Section 144 of Criminal Procedure Code, banning assembly of more than five persons in the town, KMS reported.

Official said that one shop and one vehicle were completely damaged while others were partially damaged.

Meanwhile, the Bareilly police in Uttar Pradesh have registered a false case against three Kashmiri students. The police registered the case against the Kashmiri students identified as Dr Ufak, Dr Shamia Irshad and Dr Humaira Fayaz Khankhashi, studying in the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI). They have been charged of making objectionable remarks on the Indian Army.
