Notes from the 560: A Soldier’s War

Pulwama

Indian Army

wage war

By Aditya MagalA nightmarish few days have passed over India like a bad storm. Theterrorist attacks which killed 40 CRPF soldiers has no doubt rattled our emotions but also stirred up a host of feelings which at this time is overwhelming. There is an inexplicable sense of loss and grief for the families, friends and close ones of the Jawans killed in the attack. Our prayers are with each and everyone going through this period of mourning.It’s unimaginable when you bid adieu to a soldier. He is sent to the border in service of the country and when he returns in a coffin with the tricolour draped over it, all one can do is stand back in shock and grieve.Anger and frustration is what we as Indians display after every terror attack. The same sense of hopelessness and resignation pervades after a bomb blast or a terror attack. We mourn our martyrs, blame our adversaries and wish revenge on enemies. At such a time our passions can become destructive and misguided.Don’t get me wrong – I’m not exactly saying that the option of war and retaliation against the enemy is wrong. I’m simply saying that we as civilians who lead privileged lives should not be the ones telling the establishment especially theto. It’s something that has to be left completely and totally upto them.There have been a ton of messages on social media and WhatsApp forwards which have been circulating rapidly. In no uncertain terms these messages call for war and are demanding the army to avenge Pulwama by means of attacks. Anyone who does not support this sentiment is also being branded ‘anti national’ and ‘unpatriotic’ by troll armies of a particular ideological persuasion.Soldiers who have died in Pulwama are from the length and breadth of the country. Maddur in Karnataka’s Mandya district, a few hours from Bengaluru is home to H.Guru who was martyred in the attacks. It’s a disservice to him and every other soldier if people keep war mongering like this. It’s easy to be a WhatsApp warrior when all you have to do is type a message and forward it like propaganda.The harder thing is to become a soldier who risks his life and even loses it everyday fighting an enemy hell bent on destroying us. As a nation, decisions of war and revenge have got to be left to the army.Soldiers make the hard choice and die not only fighting enemies but also in the discharge of their duty. As the Aero India show in Bengaluru flies ahead, we are reminded of the peril of the soldier’s life even in peacetime. Unfortunately, a collision between 2 Surya Kiran aircraft during preparations has led to a collision and death of Wing Commander Sahil Gandhi.The point is that be it floods in Kerala or landslides in Uttarakhand we rely on soldiers. A soldier’s life is at risk even when not in combat, just flying a plane can prove fatal because of accidents. Factor in terror attacks and maintaining peace at the borders, it’s an extremely hard life and it’s all to protect us civilians.It’s high time we stop advising, demanding and suggesting options to the Armed Forces. Be it surgical strikes or war, the Armed Forces make the choice. They need our support, not our demands.— Follow Aditya Magal on twitter @jhunjhunwala
