Opposition plotting to kill Kerala BJP MP Muraleedharan: PM Narendra Modi- The New Indian Express

By Online Desk

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday claimed that the bomb hurled at Kerala BJP MP V Muraleedharan's house last week was part of a conspiracy to kill him.

BJP workers in Kerala are being targeted every day, he said, while addressing BJP workers in Andhra Pradesh through video-conference.

Modi also attacked Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu saying that he is pushing the state into "sunset" to see his "son rise", a mock reference to the state's tagline "Sunrise AP". The PM invoked "Telugu pride", alleging that Naidu betrayed Telugu Desam Party (TDP) founder N T Rama Rao by joining hands with the Congress.

"Telugu pride can only be restored when you (Naidu) put the interests of AP above your political interests and lust for power," the prime minister said. "A true tribute to NTR (the late N T Rama Rao) and what he stood for would be voting out those who betrayed NTR's values and sullied his memory. NTR's dream of a Swarna Andhra Pradesh will only be realised when every citizen of AP enjoys the fruits of development and not just one family," Modi said.

Calling NTR a "true icon of Telugu pride", Modi recalled that it was NTR who led a "Congress-mukt Bharat" movement by forming an anti-Congress National Front.

"Today, his own son-in-law (Chandrababu Naidu) has bent his head before the Congress to save his power. NTR was true icon of Telugu pride. NTR never forgave Congress for hurting Telugu pride and its betrayal of Telugu interests," the prime minister said.

"Today, those in power in AP are so desperate to save their power that they betrayed Telugu interests and stabbed NTR in the back for the second time," he said.

He also wondered how Telugu pride would be served by neglecting people and sacrificing their interests for power.

"How is Telugu pride served by lying and abusing Modi day in and day out, just because you are worried that you will lose power? How is Telugu pride served by daydreaming about becoming prime minister when you have failed as CM?" Modi said, hitting out at Naidu.
