Our fight is for Kashmir, not against Kashmiris: PM Narendra Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday warned against targeting of Kashmiris in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, that claimed lives of over 40 CRPF troopers, and said: "Our fight is for Kashmir, not against Kashmiris..."

Addressing a Vijay Sankalp rally in Tonk (Rajasthan), the PM said: "Kashmiris have suffered the most due to terrorism, and the rest of the country must stand in their support."

Paying tributes to Pulwama martyrs, Modi said it was of utmost importance to take along the youth of Kashmir in the battle against terror as Kashmiris too were victims and must be protected.

"What happened to Kashmiri youths in the last few days…It does not matter whether the incident was small or big, such things should not happen. Kashmiri youths are victims of terror. Every child of Kashmir is with India in our fight against terror," Modi said. He added that incidents like these "only empowers tukde, tukde gangs" and their supporters. "It is the responsibility of every Indian to protect every laal (child) of Kashmir," he said.

The Supreme Court too had on Friday asked states to take "prompt action" to stop incidents of violence against Kashmiris.

Stating that stern action has been taken against separatists in Jammu and Kashmir, and a "free hand" has been given to the Army, the PM said: "Believe in Army jawans on the borders, Maa Bhawani blessings and Modi government, all scores will be settled this time."

He also issued a stern warning to Pakistan, saying the new India would not hold back in its response to terrorism. He said he was proud of the forces, "who within 100 hours (of the Pulwama attack) sent the perpetrators, to the place where they belong."

"I called Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan after he was elected as part of protocol and told him that we have fought enough but now we should fight a united battle against poverty and illiteracy. He said to me that he was son of a Pathan and will stand by his words. Today, it is time to test if he will stand by his words," Modi said.

The PM said a strong consensus has been reached against terrorism and the entire world is with the families of those killed in the Pulwama attack. "Not just India, the entire world is with you (families). Have faith in soldiers and the government," he said. Peace in the world is not possible if terror factory continues to go on like this. Today, there is a consensus against terrorism. We are moving ahead with strength at every front, Modi said.

‘Oppressed In Pak’
