CBI team attacked by family of accused in YEIDA land scam

A five-member team of CBI officials, including a woman constable, was attacked allegedly by relatives of an accused, also a CBI official, in a 2014-land fraud case from his village in Greater Noida on Saturday. Police have arrested a man in connection with the case.

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is probing a 2014 case of alleged land fraud, amounting to Rs 126 crore, linked to the Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority (YEIDA).

According to the police, the incident occurred on Saturday morning when the sleuths reached Sonpura village to look for the accused when his relatives attacked them.

"We were informed about the family and relatives of the accused misbehaving with CBI officials. The police reached the spot and detained some persons from the spot. A case has been registered and legal proceedings are underway," said Vaibhav Krishna, SSP Gautam Budh Nagar.

Police said the relatives have been charged with holding government officials hostage, assaulting them and obstructing government officials' work.

" A couple of CBI officials were injured during the scuffle with the relatives, who forced the sleuths inside a private property in Sonpura village and beat them up with sticks and bare hands to help the accused escape, the agency said in a statement issued in Delhi," said Krishna.

The CBI officials alleged that mobile phones, ID cards of some members were burnt by the attacker on February 3, the agency booked two of its officials posted in Ghaziabad, both of who were probing the case, on charges of criminal conspiracy and under the Prevention of Corruption Act.

The accused CBI Inspector VS Rathore was arrested while ASI Sunil Dutt has been absconding. However, Dutt's brother Yudhveer Singh has been arrested, police said. According to police, some YEIDA officials, including its former CEO PC Gupta, in association with private firms, had purchased around 57 hectare "useless" land in 2014 in seven villages of Mathura in lieu of compensation to their owners by the Authority.

At least six people have been arrested in the five-year-old case in which 21 people have been named as accused, police said.

Crime Sheet

At least six people have been arrested in the five-year-old case in which 21 people have been named as accused. The accused CBI Inspector VS Rathore was arrested while ASI Sunil Dutt has been absconding.
