‘Strong steps are being taken to check terror’

Vibha Sharma in New Delhi

Vibha Sharma in New Delhi

Yudh hungame se nahi, ranniti se hota hai’ (Wars are not fought with cacophony but strategy), says Union Minister for Minority Affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, in wake of public clamour for strong action against Pakistan following the Pulwama attack. In conversation with The Tribune, Naqvi, who is among the few in the PM’s Council of Ministers known for their accessibility, grip and straight talk on issues, says “war-mongering” should be clearly avoided. Excerpts from the interview:

After the Pulwama attack, there have been incidents of Kashmiris being targeted in the country. As Union Minister of Minority Affairs what would you like to tell people of Kashmir?

I don’t think common Kashmiris are being targeted. No country would like such separatist forces who are a danger to the country’s security and attack the very men guarding the country by throwing stones and firing at them. It is for the first time that the security of separatist leaders has been removed. So far what was happening was that some Congress and opposition party leaders would visit them in Kashmir and have ‘biryani’ with them? So these leaders thought that no one can touch them and they can foment any conspiracy against India. The strong action against them has taken them by surprise.

What about Kashmiri students and ordinary Kashmiris who became victims of harassment in many parts of the country? Won’t such incidents alienate them?

I don’t think there are any such general incidents. There could be a few isolated incidents. At the same time, I must say that common Kashmiri students should not be targeted. It is wrong and the same is condemnable. Kashmiris have as much right over the country as every Indian. Those giving hype to such incidents are doing them more damage. By politicising such incidents, they are worsening the situation.

Questions are being raised over the government’s response to the attack. What would you like to say?

After Pulwama, three major steps have been taken. First, the MFN status from Pakistan was taken away. Secondly the security cover of separatist leaders, who have all this while been openly supporting the terrorists, has been taken away, and, third, commanders of terror group Jaish have been eliminated. Before 2014, every 15 days to one month, there would be a terrorist attack in the country. Akshardham temple, Sankat Mochan temple, Mumbai attacks, Ajmer attack, Mecca Masjid, Delhi, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Kolkata, not a single part of the country remained unaffected by terror attacks killing thousands of people. There has been a complete control on such terror attacks. The situation in Kashmir too had improved but unfortunately Pulwama happened. Terrorists are breathing their last and are now operational in some parts of Kashmir only. They will be finished soon. To eliminate terrorism, strong and effective steps are being taken.

You are saying that terrorism in Kashmir is on its last legs?

In India, terror and terrorists have not been able to get the kind of hold they have in other parts of the world. ‘Jis tarah duniya mein apni jarein jamayi hai us tarah se veh Bharat main nahi kar pa rahe hain’ (The way terrorists have able to establish roots in other parts of the world, they have not been able to do so in India). In Kashmir, if in some parts, they are being able to carry out such attacks, it should be understood that they will be finished. See, all this is Pakistan-sponsored. Pakistan is a terror factory, which is a danger not just to India but for the peace and harmony of the world. With its diplomatic policies, India has been able to expose and isolate Pakistan before the world.

But people are expecting a strong visible action against Pakistan. Do you think the measures taken are sufficient to assuage those feelings?

People believe in Prime Minister Narendra Modi and they also know the country’s interests are fully secure in his hands, that there will be no harm to it in any way. The government and the security forces are taking long-term and effective actions. There have been several terror attacks across the world — in Paris, England, and the US, but the way our security forces managed to take retaliatory action within three to four days, the terrorists should be frustrated and worried. But we should not do war-mongering. ‘Yudh hungame se nahi, ranniti se hota hai’ (Wars are not fought with cacophony but strategy).

What is your response to allegations of the Congress?

The problem is that the Congress has always acted irresponsibly on sensitive issues like national security. This is how it has behaved similarly this time also. Similar thing happened when our security forces were battling in Kargil. Sonia Gandhi had questioned Atal Bihari Vajpayee, who was the Prime Minister then, on the action and called him kafan chor (a coffin thief). After the Uri surgical strikes, they again raised questions. On Rafale, they created a bawaal (hulabaloo) and now on this, they are raising questions again. This is nothing but poor politics.

Questions are also being raised on the government’s foreign policy. Have you really been able to isolate Pakistan, especially after the visit of Saudi Crown Prince there?

First thing, did the Saudi Prince come here and support the terror attack on Pulwama? Did any country support the Pakistan-sponsored attack? Pakistan has been isolated in the entire world because of India’s diplomatic efforts. The visit should be seen in context of Saudi Arabia’s importance to India, not of Pakistan. It is only then we will be able to understand how important it is for India to have good relations with Saudi Arabia. Countries act in their own interests. We cannot change the conduct of every other country and that should not be our aim. They should be dealt purely on the basis of self-interest.

But politically, it is now you (BJP) versus them (Congress). Comparisons are being made. What do you have to say about it?

When I see their reactions, and that includes the Congress, I feel ‘chot kahin lag rahi hai, dard kahin ho raha hai’ (Injury is being inflicted to someone and pain is being felt by someone else). With strong action against separatists, they know their political game is being spoiled.

So all this will not have any effect on the BJP or its political prospects?

The above-mentioned three actions plus the strong stance on river waters are all visible actions. There is no harm in people having expectations. You only have expectations from someone you believe in. But the political parties indulging in this should also be aware of their political history and geography.

Did party chief Amit Shah not make that comparison with the Congress in Assam soon after the attacks?

That is not politicising. None of our leaders said a word when terrorists were eliminated. None of us took any credit, leaving it to the security forces to deal with the situation. The Prime Minister himself has said we are giving a free hand to the security forces, that they will take the action and whatever, and whenever, is right for the country will be done. The Congress is worried and has, hence, jumped in and activated its machinery to create confusion.

But old statements of BJP leaders are also being pulled out, for example what Prime Minister Modi said after the 26/11 attacks? What’s your take?

Should we also start pulling out what Sonia Gandhi said about Atal Bihari Vajpayee at the time of the Kargil War? I think by circulating old statements and false and hypothetical stories, they will not gain anything.

How do you see the Pulwama attack affecting BJP’s political prospects in the coming Lok Sabha elections?

We do not equate national security with political gain or loss. National security has always been our priority and it will remain that way. Neither would we like to play politics on it and nor do we want others to do so.

Kashmiris should not be targeted. They have as much right over the country as everyone else. Those giving hype to such incidents are doing more damage.— Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
