Drop your mask of innocence: Asaduddin Owaisi tells Pakistan PM Imran Khan

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi came down heavily on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan over the Pulwama terror attack and said he "should drop his mask of innocence".

"We would like to tell Pakistan PM [Imran Khan] don't give that message to India which you want to by sitting before a TV camera. You started this, it wasn't a first attack. There was Pathankot, Uri and now Pulwama. We would like to tell Pakistan PM to drop his mask of innocence," Owaisi said at a rally in Mumbai, news agency ANI reported.

Owaisi said the Pulwama terror attack, where 40 CRPF jawans were killed on February 14, was "hatched" by Pakistan. He said the Pakistan government, Army and intelligence agency--ISI--were involved in the attack.

"This attack has links to Pakistan. It was done as per plan of Pakistan govt, Pakistan Army and ISI," Owaisi said.

Owaisi also hit out at the Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) for its role in the dastardly terror attack in Pulwama. He said that a disciple of Prophet Muhammad, the founder of Islam, would never kill a person.

"I would like to tell the outfit that killed our 40 men and claimed its responsibility, you're not Jaish-e-Mohammed, you are Jaish-e-Shaitan. A soldier of Mohammed [Muhammad] does not kill a person, he is merciful towards humanity. You are Jaish-e-Shaitan, Jaish-e-Iblis. Mazsod Azhar, you are not a Maulana, you are a disciple of the devil. It is not Laskhar-e-Taiba, it is Lashkar-e-Shaitan," Owaisi said.

He also said that Pakistan should not worry about Indian Muslims as they are here by choice after refusing Jinnah's proposition in 1947.

He also outlined the country's diversity and said that the neighbouring country is jealous by the unity of Indian citizens.

"One of the ministers from Pakistan had said that they will stop the prayer bells from ringing in temples of India but I want to tell him that he doesn't know India. Till Muslims of this country are alive, Azaan will sound from mosques and bells will ring in temples. This is the beauty of our country which the neighbouring country sees because of jealousy. People in this country live as one and when it will come to the country we all will be together," Owaisi said.

(With inputs from ANI)
