Mann Ki Baat: PM says martyrdom of jawans in Pulwama attack will keep inspiring country relentlessly to uproot very base of terrorism

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi today said, the martyrdom of jawans in the recent Pulwama terror attack will keep inspiring the country relentlessly to uproot the very base of terrorism and it will fortify peoples’ resolve.

Mr Modi was sharing his thoughts in the 53rd episode of the monthly Mann Ki Baat programme of All India Radio. He stressed the need to take up the challenge of terrorism forgetting all barriers of casteism, communalism, regionalism and other difference, so that India’s steps against the menace are firmer, stronger and more decisive. The Prime Minister said, the brave soldiers made the supreme sacrifice in securing the lives of the people of the country.

Paying tributes to the martyrs, Mr Modi said, the bravehearts displayed exemplary capabilities in restoring peace and retaliated in equal measure, in a language the attackers understand. Mr Modi said, as a consequence of the Pulwama attack and the sacrifice of the brave jawans, people across the country are agonized and enraged. He said, the Army has resolved to wipe out terrorists and their harbourers.

The Prime Minister lauded the family members of the jawans and also those who have even expressed to send their second son. Mr Modi urged the young generation to know and understand the fortitude and the sentiment displayed by these families and to understand the virtues of patriotism, sacrifice and perseverance.

Talking about National War Memorial which will be dedicated to nation tomorrow, the Prime Minister asserted that it will be a small step towards repaying a great debt of country’s Armed Forces. He said, the Memorial, which is in close vicinity of India Gate and Amar Jawan Jyoti, is a symbol of the nation’s gratitude to those who made the supreme sacrifice after the country gained Independence.

Mr Modi expressed hope that for the countrymen a visit to the Memorial will be akin to a pilgrimage to a holy place, where people will throng, to get information on the great martyrs, to express their gratitude and to conduct further research on them.

Citing a letter sent by a listener who said that on the 3rd of March, 1900, the British arrested Birsa Munda, Mr Modi said, Bhagwan Birsa Munda not only waged a struggle against the British for political freedom but he also actively fought for the social and economic rights of the tribal folk. He said, Birsa Munda sacrificed his life at the tender age of 25 and illustrious sons of Mother India, such as Birsa Munda have come into being in each and every part of the country.

Remembering Jamsetji Tata, whose birth anniversary is to be celebrated on 3rd of next month, the Prime Minister said, Jamsetji Tata was a true visionary, who not only foresaw India’s future, but also duly laid strong foundations. Mr Modi also recalled the contribution of former Prime Minister Morarji Desai who was born on 29th of February.

He said, Morarji Desai steered the course of the country through some difficult times, when the very democratic fabric was under threat. The Prime Minister said, to save democracy, Morarji Desai flung himself in the movement against imposition of Emergency.

Highlighting the achievements of Padma awardees, Mr Modi said, the country is honouring those who are doing their work at the grass-root level without any care for a reward. They, by their diligence, are powering positive changes in the lives of others in myriad ways. The Prime Minister mentioned about Odisha’s Daitari Nayak, who chiselled through the mountain literally with his hands and carved a three kilometres long canal in his village and put to rest forever the problem of irrigation. Mr Modi also mentioned Abdul Ghafoor Khatri of Gujarat, who has done an amazing job of reviving the traditional Rogan painting form of Kuthch.

The Prime Minister added that it has perhaps happened for the first time that in the roll of Padma awards bestowed this year, 12 farmers have been the recipients. He also highlighted the success of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana scheme under Ayushman Bharat’s umbrella. Mr Modi said, about 12 lakh impoverished families have benefited from the scheme over the last five months. He added that it brings about a transformation in the life of the have-nots.

The Prime Minister also extended his wishes to students who will appear in boards examination of the tenth and twelfth standards in the next few weeks. Mr Modi lauded the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ program saying it has been a really wonderful and sublime experience for him.

The Prime Minister said, in the next two months, the country will be busy in the hurly-burly of the general elections and to maintain respect for healthy democratic traditions, the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will be broadcast on the last Sunday of May. He expressed confidence that with the power of people he will begin this series of conversations again after the Lok Sabha elections.
