Will return with your blessings in May: PM Modi in last Mann Ki Baat

PM Modi today delivered his last Mann ki Baat radio show for the 2014-2019 government. Hosting the second Mann Ki Baat programme for 2019, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said this is the last time he will be addressing the nation via radio broadcast till the 2019 general elections.

He said since he will be contesting the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, he cannot host any more Mann Ki Baat programmes till the elections are over. He said he will not host the programme, which became a landmark outreach programme for the Modi government in March and April.

This is because the Model Code of Conduct for elections is expected to be imposed from next month. It prevents elected officials from using government machinery for campaigning.

However, PM Modi reassured listeners that he will be back to hosting the Mann Ki Baat after the elections. He said the next broadcast will be on last Sunday of May.

"March, April and whole of May -- the thoughts and feelings I have about these three months, I will address after the elections with renewed faith. With the strength of your blessings once again, the series of our correspondence through Mann Ki Baat will resume. I will keep doing Mann Ki Baat for years and years," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said.

Tweeting about February 24's Mann Ki Baat broadcasts, the prime minister had said it will be a special one. "Today's Mann Ki Baat is special! Do tune in at 11 AM. Later on, don't say I didn't tell you in advance," he wrote.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi spoke about the Pulwama attack, which killed 40 CRPF jawans last week, in his broadcast. He said the people of India are hurt and angry after the Pulwama terror attack. "10 days ago, Mother India had to face the loss of many of her brave sons. People across the nation are agonized and angry. There is a wave of support and condolence towards the martyrs and their families."



Addressing the nation, PM Modi said, "I am here with a heavy heart. Our Bravehearts lay down their lives so Indians can sleep peacefully. The people of the country are angry. I bow down to those who have lost their lives for Bharat Mata," he said.

He also made a reference to the father of Ratan Thakur, a CRPF jawan who lost his life in the Pulwama attack, saying "The fortitude displayed by Ram Niranjan ji, father of Martyr Ratan Thakur of Bhagalpur, Bihar, in this moment of tribulation is truly inspiring. He has expressed the wish of sending his second son too, to take on the enemy; if need be, he himself would go and fight."

The prime minister also used the occasion to talk about National War Memorial which he will inaugurate on Monday. The memorial will honour soldiers who have laid down their lives for the country since Independence.

"I am surprised and saddened that there is no National War Memorial in India. A memorial where tales of those who sacrifice their lives for the nation are curated. I decided that such a memorial should be built" he said.

The prime minister also urged the youth to reflect on the sacrifices made for the nation. He urged them to visit the war memorial. PM Modi said, "I hope the youth will visit the war memorial. When you visit the memorial, do post the photos you take on social media so that they inspire the rest of the nation to visit it."
