Karachi Bakery: Twitterati come out in support against the mindless attack

Karachi bakery

intolerance

attack

reactions

Karachi Bakery was founded by Khanchand Ramnani, a #Sindhi who was forced to leave #Pakistan during partition of… https://t.co/pApAmrPdOO — Sapna Moti Bhavnani (@sapnabhavnani) 1550896236000

BTW they sell @makeinindia products only https://t.co/XkGIXkUVYF — BG Mahesh (@bgmahesh) 1550898260000

This is so sad. Bombay Bakery in Hyderabad, Sindh, displays its name with pride and has never had to hide. *sigh* https://t.co/GcDQVGGOyr — Bina Shah (@BinaShah) 1550901075000

Has it come down to this? https://t.co/nv9cVXeVTj — Yogendra Yadav (@_YogendraYadav) 1550945019000

Protesters thronged KARACHI bakery in Indiranagar, Bangalore and demanded that Karachi part on sign board must be c… https://t.co/1XZKDFPn67 — Nagarjun Dwarakanath (@nagarjund) 1550897329000

Known for its delectable offerings, the fruits biscuits in particular, thewas attacked by unknown miscreants on Friday night. What comes across as another incident ofand lack of awareness on the part of many, post the Pulwamawhere 40 CRPF personnel were killed; the bakery had to cover the word ‘Karachi’ on its signboard in order to allay the mob’s wrath. A case was registered against the miscreants and police have arrested nine persons with attacking and threatening the staff at the eatery’s Indiranagar branch at 100 Feet Road.The mindless act has drawn sharpfrom Twitterati. Most are livid with the miscreants taking the law into their hands and demanding the management to change the bakery’s name.Director Onir feels that it’s absurd since Bombay, Delhi and Calcutta restaurants are flourishing all over Pakistan.Celebrity hairstylist, Sapna Moti Bhavnani, too, condemned the attack on the bakery and said the name was a reminder to all Sindhis about a home lost by the community during the partition.Some even went all the way to vouch for the fact that all products were entirely “Made in India”According to the police, a group of nearly 15-20 men stormed the bakery and raised slogans against the bakery's name. However, miscreants did not damage any property and fled the spot before police arrived. Fearing repercussions, the staff immediately covered the name and also put up the Indian National Flag on the building. Sukumar, manager of the establishment, said that the bakery was opened six months ago.“The mob created ruckus by shouting slogans. Miscreants stayed for about 30 minutes, demanding to change the bakery’s name. The name is being used for the last 53 years," he added.“It is a trivial incident. We explained things to them. There was some confusion. We are open and business is as usual,” said Saagar, another manager.“The Indiranagar police registered a case against unidentified miscreants. They fled the spot when police rushed to the spot,” Rahul Kumar Shahapurwad, DCP (East) told Mirror.
