PM Modi sets the agenda for 2019; says GST helps eliminate hidden taxes

Moneycontrol News

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on January 1 said the ordinance for Ram Mandir will come in only after the Supreme Court pronounces its judgment on the issue.

Speaking to news agency ANI, Modi said the solution to Ram Mandir will be "under the ambit of the Constitution".

"Those sitting in the government have tried to stall the Ram Mandir issue for the past 70 years," Modi said.

Read More: Ordinance on Ram Mandir only after Supreme Court pronounces verdict, says PM Modi

The title suit of the disputed site in Ayodhya is pending in the Supreme Court. The top court is expected to announce a date this week on when it would begin to hear the case.

On GST

Asked to comment on Congress President Rahul Gandhi calling GST 'Gabbar Singh Tax', the PM said, "The way someone thinks is the way someone talks. Have GST processes not been done taking a consensus with all political parties in the country? Since Pranab Mukherjee was FM, the GST process has been going on."

"Earlier, there were so many hidden taxes. The tax rates were also high. GST has made things simpler. It has also brought down the taxes on so many commodities," Modi added.

On demonetisation and Urjit Patel

The PM, speaking on demonetisation, said the move was not a 'jhatka.'

"We had warned people a year before, that if you have such wealth (black money), you can deposit it, pay penalties and you will be helped out," Modi said. "However, they thought Modi too would behave like others so very few came forward voluntarily," the PM added.

Stating that former Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Urjit Patel did a "good job", Modi said no political pressure was applied on him. "He himself requested (to resign) on personal reasons. I am revealing for the first time, he was telling me about it for past 6-7 months before his resignation. He gave it even in writing," Modi told ANI.

Read More: No political pressure, Urjit Patel wanted to quit 6-7 months ago, says PM Modi

Patel had resigned on December 10 amidst reports of differences between the central bank and the government.

2019 polls a 'battle between janata and gathbandhan'

Responding to the Opposition's efforts to stitch together a grand alliance for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, Modi said the elections will be a battle between the 'janata' and 'gathbandhan'.

"Modi is just a manifestation of public love and blessings," he told ANI. Modi also said the surgical strike was a big decision for the troops. "The Uri terror attack on the Army enraged me," Modi said.

On losing recently-held assembly polls in five states

When asked about the loss in the recently concluded state assembly elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told ANI, "In Telangana and Mizoram, nobody gave BJP any chance. In Chhattisgarh a clear mandate was given, BJP lost. But in 2 states there was a hung assembly. Secondly,15 years of anti-incumbency was being fought by our people. We are discussing what was lacking."

On loan waivers

Asked about his "lollipop" comment on the farm loan waivers granted by the three new Congress governments in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan, PM Modi said, "To say a lie and mislead, that is what I called lollipop. Like saying 'we have waived all farm loans'. The truth is that nothing like that has happened. Please see their own circulars, they should not mislead."

"Farm loan waiver is a political tool, but how many are actually benefited from this? If you see, only a handful are able to take loans from banks. For me, farmer welfare is not about politics. I want to do everything possible to improve the lives of our farmers," the PM added.
