Mob burns Arunachal deputy CM's house over permanent residence certificate row, Army called in

Police station and a fire station in Itanagar vandalized | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Angry protesters burned down the house of Arunachal Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Chowna Mein and sacked the office of the deputy commissioner today to protest against permanent residence certificate (PRC) which grants permanent resident certificates to six communities, police said.

Later, the mob also gathered at CM Pema Khandu’s house but they were dispersed. Home Minister Rajnath Singh spoke to CM Pema Khandu and Governor B. D. Mishra and necessary instructions have been given to the Army. The Ministry of Home Affairs is keeping a close watch on the situation.

#WATCH Permanent residence certificate row: Violence broke out in Itanagar during protests against state’s decision to grant permanent resident certificates to non-#ArunachalPradesh Scheduled Tribes of Namsai & Chanaglang; Deputy CM Chowna Mein's private house also vandalised. pic.twitter.com/FrcmqWbL8c — ANI (@ANI) February 24, 2019

Defying curfew, the irate mob marched through streets and damaged public property and vehicles after one person injured in police firing succumbed to his injuries at a hospital.

A large number of vehicles parked in the compound of the DC's office were also torched by protesters after which they blocked the road leading to the Naharlagun railway station.

State authorities imposed indefinite curfew in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday after protesters started to stone pelting in which 35 people, including 24 police personnel, were injured.

Today’s incident comes after the Army conducted flag marches in Itanagar and Naharlagun on Saturday. 6 companies of Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) have been deployed in Itanagar to restore law and order situation. As per the local media reports, internet services have been suspended in Itanagar and Naharlagun.

Reports are also coming that all the markets, petrol pumps and shops have been closed while most of the ATMs are out of cash.

Protesters have said if the PRC is granted to the 6 communities then it would compromise the rights and interests of the locals. The six communities are Deoris, Sonowal Kacharis, Morans, Adivasis, Mishings and Gorkhas.
