Rs 31 lakh hawala money seized from trader in Udaipur

JAIPUR: The Special Operations Group (SOG) and Udaipur police on Saturday seized unaccounted Rs 31.45 lakh, suspected to have been routed through a Hawala network, from a businessman in Udaipur.Prashant Maheshwari, a native of Ajmer was staying at a hotel under the limits of Surajpole police station area in Udaipur. The sleuths of Udaipur police raided his hotel room and found a briefcase with Rs 31.45 lakh."The SOG had shared a specific intelligence input about some hawala operative staying in Udaipur. Our teams raided the place and found the case," said Udaipur SP, Kailash Chand Bishnoi.Speaking to TOI, Bishnoi said that the police seized the cash, and informed the income tax and GST department about the matter. "We asked Maheshwari about the money, but he was not able to provide any satisfactory answer. Then we asked him to tell us about the source of money, but he fumbled again," he said.The police officials realized that it was unaccounted cash for which Maheshwari did not have any receipts or bills books. "He claims to be a businessman based in Ajmer, however we don't know the veracity of his claims yet. Also, when we asked him to explain as to what he was doing in a Udaipur hotel with so much of money, he failed to provide any answer," an official informed TOI.The sources informed TOI that Maheshwari told cops that he runs a one-week series publication house from Ajmer and had come to collect his payment. The police however, said that he allegedly failed to show any documents to support his claims. Surajpole police then rang up officials of the local income tax office, and GST unit about the case. "We have handed over his case to the tax authorities, they will investigate if it was black money or not," an official said.The SOG officials in Jaipur informed TOI that for past many days inputs were pouring in about a suspected Ajmer trader travelling to Udaipur with huge amount of cash. The police said that they have not ruled out hawala connection into the matter.
