Foreign Minister urges India to avoid warmongering mantra

Foreign Minister urges India to avoid warmongering mantra

Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has advised the Indian government and leaders to avoid war mongering mantra and de-escalate the tensions created in the aftermath of Pulwama incident.

Speaking at a media briefing in Islamabad on Sunday, he asked the Indian government to halt continuing atrocities against the Kashmiri people in Occupied Kashmir.

The Foreign Minister warned the Indian government against even thinking of a misadventure and reminded that the whole Pakistani nation, leadership, political parties and armed forces are united.

He said Pakistan is a peace-loving country and wants peace in the region, however, it cannot be intimidated with flimsy tactics of war.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said India should not even think of casting an evil eye on Pakistan.

Expressing his dismay over the Indian government’s high-handedness stirred by belligerent attitude, the Minister said the Indian government is whipping up tensions by issuing notifications regarding leaves cancellation of its medical professionals and asking people to ensure supply of grains in their store.

He said additional troops are being sent to Occupied Kashmir which clearly indicates Indian aggression.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi also lamented creation of an environment of fear and insecurity in the occupied Kashmir and said the Kashmiris have been subjected to brutal violence in several Indian states.

He said large-scale arrests have been made in the held valley and all the Hurriyat leaders have been put under arrest after the Pulwama incident.

Foreign Minister said the Hurriyat leaders are being forced to leave Kashmir and even the politicians like Mehbooba Mufti are also now raising their voices against the Indian atrocities.

The Foreign Minister said All Parties Hurriyat Conference leader Mirwaiz Umar Farooq has declared that India can unleash aggression of any extent, but it cannot suppress the facts.

He said the new generation of Kashmir has the searing spirit for freedom from the illegal Indian occupation of the valley.

Foreign Minister said the Bharatiya Janata Party and its government should shun such attitude.

He asked India to avoid putting the whole region into turmoil.

Shah Mehmood Qureshi said that in Indian states, Kashmiri people are being attacked and cited that a shop carrying the name of Karachi was vandalized.

He also lamented the killing of a Pakistani jail inmate Shakirullah in Jaipur, who was attacked in the presence of police which watched the whole incident as silent spectators.

Foreign Minister said Indian government is keeping a mum over the growing intolerance and aggression despite the fact that the Indian Supreme Court has issued directives for the government and secretaries concerned to intervene and save people from such attacks.

He also reiterated Pakistan’s complete support to the Kashmiri people in their just cause.

Earlier, an important consultative meeting chaired by Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi was held at the Foreign Office.

It was attended by former Foreign Secretaries and diplomats.

The meeting was convened in view of the worsening situation in Occupied Kashmir as well as aggressive designs of India.

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi told media that the consultation was aimed at devising a comprehensive and integrated course of action.

He said such consultations will also be held on regular basis in future.
