Congress-BJP political slugfest over Chitrakoot twin's murder, BJP demands judicial inquiry

BHOPAL: The abduction and killing of twins in Chitrakoot has triggered a major political squabble between the ruling Congress and opposition BJP with the latter demanding a judicial probe into the case and resignation of home minister Bala Bachahan. BJP has also announced it will launch a state-wide protest on February 25 against the incident. The Congress has alleged responsibility of BJP ruled government of Uttar Pradesh for failure in arresting criminals operating from across the MP-UP border.Making a scathing attack on chief minister Kamal Nath-led Congress government, leader of opposition (LoP) Gopal Bhargava said it was very unfortunate that police failed to rescue the two innocent twins."Despite repeated reminders in public and in the state assembly, the Congress government failed to take a serious note of the matter which resulted in the gruesome killing of the children. The government is interested only in two businesses - abduction and transfers", said Bhargava reacting sharply over the incident. Bhargava also shot a missive to CM Kamal Nath on Sunday demanding judicial inquiry in the incident and to sack the home minister.BJP leaders Rajneesh Agrawal and Rahul Kothari have also demanded resignation of home minister Bala Bachchan for deteriorating law and order situation in the state. The BJP also held a candle march in all district.Hitting back at the BJP, Congress leader and state law and public relations minister PC Sharma said that it was the Uttar Pradesh government which was responsible for spate in crimes in MP and UP."It's an unfortunate incident. The bodies of the twins were found in Uttar Pradesh and they were abducted from MP-UP border, such elements have been operating in UP. But, BJP is politicising the issue. Why should the home minister resign? The incident occurred on MP-UP border and the bodies were found in Uttar Pradesh s,o UP CM should resign instead", Sharma reacted to the reporters' queries, on Sunday.Former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan , who reached Rewa in the morning, also condemned the murder and said, "Congress turned the `Island of Peace' into `Continent of crimes'. He further said, "I pay my homage to the two children. It was an unfortunate incident. We had hoped that the government and administration would take it seriously and rescue the children. But, Congress keeps saying 'Waqt Hai Badlav Ka' (It is time for a change). Is this the change that they promised? This is Mr Bantadhar Returns", said Chouhan.Home minister Bala Bachchan, who initially did not comment on the incident saying police would deliberate upon the case, told reporters later that the incident was very unfortunate and strong action will be taken against those involved in the crime."I have told the police to provide every detail of the killing. This is a shocking incident and we have asked the police to work hard and control law and order in the state", said Bachchan.On February 12, five-year-old twins of an oil trader Brajesh Rawat were abducted at gunpoint from their school bus in Chitrakoot. Their bodies were found lying near river Yamuna in Uttar Pradesh's Banda area on Sunday. Police said that the abductors killed the boys even after receiving the ransom amount.
