Eye for eye policy needed

Fighting Terrorism

Omkar Dattatray

J&K read Kashmir has been bleeding from the last over three decades due to Pak sponsored terrorism and proxy war. There is no respite from the naked dance of death and mayhem. The nation has faced many terrorist attacks upon the civilians and the brave, disciplined and patriotic security forces and army Jawans who are guarding our borders along with the BSF and Indo-Tibitan forces. But the violence and the terrorist attacks are continuing with each passing day and consuming precious lives our security men and the innocent civilians.

The Pulwama suicide bomber terror attack by the outlawed Jaish-e-Mohmmad – terrorist organization at the behest of Pakistan is unprecedented one, given the magnitude, severity and big loss of our valiant Central Reserve Police Force personnel. The human bomb attack and striking an IED laden car with a bus of the convoy which was more than 350 kg of weight has destroyed the CRPF bus and turned it into a heap of mingled iron & debris. It resulted into the martyrdom of forty CRPF Jawans and injury to several others who are being treated at 92 Army base Hospital at Srinagar. Ones spines shiver at this tragedy and mayhem of worst kind in which CRPF men were martyred from as many as sixteen states of India and grief enveloped the length and breadth of India over this barbaric and inhuman tragedy committed by the so called Jehadies of JEM.

This terrorist act is first of its kind with forty causalities and the nation is grieved and angered on this tragedy of unprecedented magnitude and is demanding a strong and bold response from the government. Then on 18th Feb, while fighting the JeM militants our valiant forces of army and state police numbering five personnel were martyred but it resulted in a great setback to the module of JeM when three militant commanders of Jesh-e-Mohammad were eliminated. The days of soft handling and soft approach to fight the menace and scourge of the terrorism in J&K has gone. The soft policy with human approach to deal with the problem of terrorism is no more required.

The knee jerk attitude to fight terrorism has completely failed and we are facing death and destruction by the terrorists who are intoxicated by the so called Jehad and entering paradise after committing heinous crimes which are against man and God and are thus inhuman and cannot be termed as Jehad even in the Islamic terminology. But the sad story is that the highly educated and even technically trained local youth are lured into militancy and terrorism and in this Pak plays its dirty role and there is need to declare Pakistan as a terrorist country by the UNO as Pakistan is the originator and mother of terrorism and proxy war against India which is a peace loving country. But now the level of tolerance of the people has waned and they are demanding strict action against the terrorists, their sponsors and the over ground workers and supporters of the terrorist activities.

The Kakapora Pulwama tragedy brings shivers down ones spine and the attack which has consumed precious lives of our brave and patriotic security men saddened all and sundry naturally and now the stunned nation is demanding a strong and bold action against the perpetrators of this heinous crime and against all other terrorists who are dancing to the tunes of the enemy country. Thus there is need to identify those involved in this crime and also those who have given support and logistics to the suicide bomber. So both internal and external terrorism should be fought with an iron hand and even surgical strikes are any other strict option available before the government should be taken to tackle the scourge of terrorism and put a complete halt to radicalization, terrorism and fundamentalism.

Terrorists and their over ground supporters and sponsors are no innocents and they need to be taught a lesson through bold handling of the terrorist menace. No leniency or laxity should be shown with the terrorists whether Indian or foreign and hard pursuits should be followed for tackling terrorism and no sympathy needs to be shown against the enemies of humanity and nation but they should be punished for their nefarious and murderous assault on our valiant security forces while they were in a convoy. The days of soft approach have gone as it did not yield any positive effect upon the militancy, terrorism, radicalization and fundamentalism. So the only option available to the powers is to deal with the militants with an iron hand.

Therefore eye for eye and tooth for tooth policy should be followed while dealing with militancy. Governments’ soft approach, adhoc approach and leniency has been taken as a weakness by the enemies within and without and now the time has come for a decisive action and tit for tat policy and ensure stringent punishment to the terrorists. Those involved directly and indirectly in the Pulwama terror attack should be identified and taken to task for their wrong doing and anti-human as well as anti-religious act. The intelligence failure if any should also be probed and investigated which is said to be one of the causes of this dastardly act.

The martyrs families should be helped with adequate compensation by the central and the state governments and it should be seen as to how their families can be rehabilitated with government jobs – civilian or military and Para-military. It is good that our Prime Minister has talked of giving free hand to security forces for dealing with terrorism and militancy. But this should not be rhetoric only but should be implemented on the ground zero. Even Pakistan should be made to pay a heavy price for their involvement in this and other terrorist activities. The CRPF’s statement that ‘na boolegay, na maaf karegay’ has become a common refrain of the masses who want strict and quick action against those involved in this and other terrorist attacks. Pressure should be exerted on the international community to declare Pakistan a terrorist state. GOI has done well to have revoked the most favored nation status to Pakistan.

The masses are in grief and angry and want strict and quick action against those involved in this and other terrorist attacks. We have been facing and braving the terrorist attacks and Pulwama suicide attack is not the first one. Earlier Uri attack, Sunjawan attack, Nagrota army attack, Pathankot attack are few such attacks and the attack on civilians by terrorists are Chattisingpora attack, Nadimarg attack, Wandhama attack are to name a few. We have lost many precious lives of the security men as well as civilians. Rajnath Singh Home Minister of the country has said that security of those supporting terrorism and having links with the foreign country will be reviewed and now it is to be seen how it would be implemented at ground zero. Why to provide security to the Separatist leaders who spew venom and have sympathy with the terrorists and their security should be taken back to send a clear message that the government wants business. Then the announcement of HM that civilian transport movement will not be allowed on the national highway during movement of convoy.

It is also a good step. Pakistan and their proxies in India work on their nefarious design of bleeding India by thousand cuts and they are also working on the scheme of operation TOPAK of Zia-ul-Haq and thus we are facing terrorism from the last so many decades. Now it is a do-or-die battle for India and Indian government should work as per its bold decision and announcement and should translate announcements into practice. At the same time those Separatists and political parties should be isolated who have soft corner for militants. One would like to ask the Separatists as where has their conscience gone and why they have not condemned the brutal killing of our security Jawans. They do not cry for the human rights violations of the security forces as if these unfortunate but patriotic sons of India do not have human rights. But at the same time if a terrorist gets killed as the Separatists cry horse about human rights violations of the terrorists and this a double speak of the Separatists and they should be exposed for their deceit, duplicity and double speak.

To sum up it can be said that the terrorists involved in this crime and in other acts of terrorism should be identified and given strongest punishment quickly so that such incidents will not happen in future. For this, tooth for tooth and eye for eye policy is the only viable and practical alternative and the people of the country will not accept anything less than this. May the souls’ of our brave, martyred CRPF Jawans rest in peace. Tatha-astoo.

(The writer is columnist

and a social activist)
