Need to win hearts & minds of Kashmiri people

Need to win hearts & minds of Kashmiri people

There is a feeling of general outrage after attack on CRP convoy in Pulwama close to Srinagar in Kashmir in which 42 persons were killed and some injured. The attack was carried out by Jaish-e-Mohammad module in which a suicide bomber crashed a car laden with explosives into a convoy of CRP. This follows attacks carried out by Pakistan based outfits on Uri Army camp and Pathankot airbase.

The Pak national who was a mastermind of the latest attack has been killed in counter action by Indian security forces. There is, however, widespread demand for more action against the militant groups based in Pakistan and their supporters in Kashmir. Militancy has become a major point of conflict between India and Pakistan. The Indian Government was further annoyed by the response of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan who instead of condemning the attack and promising action asked for credible proof before action could be taken. He totally ignored series of dossiers provided to Pakistan authorities after Mumbai attack or attack on Pathankot base.

It is no secret that the Indian security forces will have to take appropriate action against Pakistan at the time and date of their choosing. The Government of India has given free hand to the forces in matter of tactics. But at the same time an unfortunate trend has been observed like attacks on Kashmiri traders and students staying and working in different parts of the country. This is condemnable and should be put down with a heavy hand. After all as we claim in one voice that Kashmir is a part of India we also should own up Kashmiri people as part of India in one voice.

Kashmir has held several free and fair elections to elect members of State Assembly and faced open attacks as well as guerrilla warfare for several decades. We have been able to defeat them because majority of Kashmiri people chose to side with us and helped us by providing information about the intruders from Pakistan and local militants. As a result of it in majority of cases persons involved in any major attack have been neutralised. As such we should understand that we not only need to use force to neutralise militants but at same time make every effort to win hearts and minds of Kashmiri people.

No amount of force can hold any territory nor it is desirable to hold any territory by force only. The lesson of Kashmir has been that it chose to be a part of India by its own will because it wanted to be a part of secular India and not join Pakistan because of religious link only. The first resistance was offered to Pakistan's attempt to occupy Kashmir by force was provided by Sheikh Abdullah and men belonging to National Conference before Indian troops could reach Kashmir Valley.

This correspondent, who has covered Kashmir for over two decades saw the local people provided first information about attempts at infiltration in 1965 when the irregulars had reached some parts of city including one colony close to police lines. The same story was repeated in 1971 when a war broke out between India and Pakistan on issue of Bangladesh leading to division of Pakistan and capture of over a lakh of Pakistan soldiers by Indian forces.

As such we have to realise that battle between India and Pakistan on Kashmir can be won not only by bravery and zeal of Indian forces but also by winning battle for hearts and minds of Kashmiri people. It is no secret that in the last two years the situation in Kashmir has not been normal and also witnessed rise in recruitment of locals in ranks of militants. This needs to be changed.

Along with action by security forces we also need political action to attend to all grievances of local people. As Jammu and Kashmir is under Central rule, it is the responsibility of Central Government to undertake this task. It should try to control militancy and restore peace, whenever good governance was provided during the time of G.M. Sadiq and Sheikh Abdullah progress was made.

Kashmir under the Indian Constitution has been provided a special status through Article 370 and an assurance needs to be given that this will be maintained. The same in some form has been provided to North East also. These mechanism only strengthen the integrity of Nation as India is an example of unity amidst diversity.

(Brij Bhardwaj is a veteran journalist and commentator)

—[IFS]
