Security forces gun down 3 PLFI ultras in encounter at Gumla

Three dreaded ultras of Peoples’ Liberation Front of India (PLFI), including Gujju Gope who had a bounty of Rs 10 lakh on his head, were killed in an encounter with the security forces at Aam Toli forest under Kamdara police station area in Gumla district on Sunday. The personnel were from district police and the CoBRA battalion.

Gope, police said, was PLFI’s second in command. Jharkhand sector CRPF’s public relation officer PC Badal confirming the report said security forces have also recovered two AK 47 rifles and Bolt Action rifles and three pistols during searches carried out after the gun battle.

Acting on intelligence inputs regarding gathering of PLFI extremist the forces started a combing operation at Aam Toli jungle. After spotting the police team, the PLFI cadres opened fire leading the security forces to retaliate. After the extremist fled, police recovered three bodies of PLFI cadres from encounter site.

IG CRPF Jharkhand Sanjay Anand Lathkar said the encounter broke out at around 6 am on Sunday adding it continued intermittently during a search operation of the elite force 209 CoBRA. He added efforts are on to establish identities of deceased ultras.

Lathkar said security forces have also traced blood stains in the contiguity of the encounter site which indicates that other extremists may also have been hit by bullets. Explaining intermittent firing by PLFI PC Badal said, “On the run ultras indulge in ‘harass firing’. The ultras do this when they get outnumbered, outwitted and their dispersal in panic to save their lives and weapons.”

“The police are tracking the extremists’ activities across the State. This has led to major success in the recent times. The Government has adopted multi-pronged strategy against the extremists. Recently the National Investigation Agency had also carried out searches at 10 places related to PLFI supremo Dinesh Gope and seized incriminating documents,” said IG (Operations) Ashis Batra.

Sources said the 209 battalion of CoBRA has turned out to be a great ‘terminator’ of PLFI as its onslaughts against PLFI beginning January 29 has been of spectacular success. Badal said on January 29 five ultras of PLFI were felled in encounter on the border of Khunti Chaibasa at Arki Bandgaon police station areas. Seventeen days later on February 14 this 209 battalion of CoBRA neutralized one PLFI cadre at Raneeya jungle under Khunti district.

Sources said the way 209 battalion of CoBRA has incapacitated this banned ultra outfit PLFI days ahead of the announcement of Lok Sabha polls has sent out a strong message that any naxal outfit be it the big umbrella the CPI Maoist or the splinter group PLFI or TPC or JMM will have no buying power with it for any booth to extract extra pound from the contestants.

Sources said right from Maoists down to splinter group of ultras the rebels create an atmosphere of being their manager of votes in interior and cut off areas’ booths for a hefty premium from dubious candidates in poll fray but here with this Gumla setback to PLFI the vote management card of the splinter group especially the PLFI stands too badly broken and crushed.
