'If Pak attacks with one atomic bomb, India can finish us with 20,' says Pervez Musharraf

'If Pak attacks with one atomic bomb, India can finish us with 20,' says Pervez Musharraf

International

oi-Deepika S

Islamabad, Feb 24: Former president General (retd) Pervez Musharraf on Sunday ruled out prospects of any nuclear attack from Pakistan on India even after the relations between the two nuclear countries have reached "dangerous level".

"If Pakistan will attack India with one atomic bomb then the neighbouring country could finish us by attacking with 20 bombs," Musharraf was quoted saying by Dawn.

Addressing the press conference in UAE on Friday, Musharraf said: "Indian and Pakistan relations have again reached a dangerous level. They will be no nuclear attack. If we would attack India with one atomic bomb, then the neighbouring country could finish us by attacking with 20 bombs. Then the only solution is that we should first attack them with 50 atom bombs so that they cannot hit us with 20 bombs. Are you ready to first launch an attack with 50 bombs."

Pak Hindu MP appeals for peace, offers to play role of mediator" title=" Pak Hindu MP appeals for peace, offers to play role of mediator" /> Pak Hindu MP appeals for peace, offers to play role of mediator

The former Pakistan president's reaction comes days after 40 CRPF jawans were killed in a terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama. Pakistan-backed terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the attack.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has rejected India's accusation of Islamabad having a hand in the Pulwama terror attack, and said his country will retaliate in case India starts a war.

"I have been hearing and seeing on Indian media that their politicians are calling for revenge on Pakistan. If India attacks, then Pakistan will not think but retaliate," he said.

Khan said that he understood it was India's election year and the narrative of blaming Pakistan would make it easier to get votes from the masses but he hoped that better sense will prevail and that India would be open to dialogue.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Sunday, February 24, 2019, 21:43 [IST]
