Retailers expect relief as MCG ropes in 2 private slaughterhouses to supply meat

GURUGRAM: The MCG ’s decision to empanel two private slaughterhouses to supply meat in the city has come as a relief for hundreds of meat sellers. With official slaughterhouses cleared, they hope their pending licences will soon be cleared.The decision on granting licences was pending due to lack of a slaughterhouse in the city.According to Tahir Pradhan, the head of the meat sellers association in Sadar Bazaar, Gurugram, there are around 500 licences pending with the corporation. “They were not issuing licences since a slaughterhouse was not available. With that cleared, we hope they will soon start issuing licences,” said Pradhan.According to MCG, they have already issued 106 licences to meat shop owners in the city. One of those shop owners in Sadar Bazaar, Gurugram said, requesting anonymity, “We had applied for licence around a year back. There has been no response from the corporation so far. With the new development, we hope applications will be cleared soon.”Meat shop owners also believe with the system getting formalised, the harassment they had to face time to time will also come to an end. There have been cases of “fringe groups” forcefully shutting down meat shops in the city, especially during Hindu festivals. In terms of logistics as well, the empanelment comes as a positive development for meat sellers. Many of them told TOI that they have to go to Delhi to procure raw stock. But with the government providing a slaughterhouse nearby, they will benefit from it.Abbas Ali, who runs a meat shop in Dundahera near the Delhi border, said, “We anyway used to bring meat from Delhi. If we find a facility nearby, it will make things easier for us.”TOI had earlier reported that MCG has empanelled two private agencies — Gitwako India Firms Private Limited and AOV Agro Foods Private Limited. The empanelled agencies will be able to supply up to 40 metric tonnes of mutton and 36 metric tonnes of chicken to licensed meat shops, hotels and restaurants every day.MCG was earlier supposed to build a modern slaughterhouse as per a n announcement by the chief minister. However, due to unavailability of land, the plan was dropped. Instead, the government decided the corporation will empanel private agencies to slaughter, process and provide fresh meat to retailers, and that slaughtering won’t be allowed within municipal limits.MCG commissioner Yashpal Yadav said they had frozen licenses of 129 meat retailers, which the corporation is now in the process of renewing. Besides, once the new system is stabilized, they could think of issuing new licences, as long as vendors agree to follow norms.
