Upper caste reservation: Jumla that may pay off in 2019 election

For over a decade, Sanjeev Singh has worked with various news channels as a field reporter. His interest lies in politics, sports and most “desi” things from the Hindi heartland. LESS ... MORE

Facing flak from Congress over the multimillion dollar Rafale deal in Parliament, the Narendra Modi led government has gone ahead and announced 10% reservation for upper castes. BJP supporters claims it is a game changer and will lift the party’s plummeting stock in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha election. But the timing of this decision has raised eyebrows as there are many hurdles in BJP’s path of being able to deliver reservation for upper castes.

The last time a central government tried to give reservation just before elections was by Dr Manmohan Singh’s UPA in 2014. UPA tried to woo the Jat community desperately and decided to add them to the Other Backward Class (OBC) category which would have given them reservations in government jobs and educational institutions. This was however struck down by the Supreme Court in 2015 on the ground, “caste cannot be the sole factor” in deciding backwardness. The court added, “backwardness has to be social and not educational or economic backwardness”.

#BREAKING | Union Cabinet approves 10% reservation for economically weaker sections https://t.co/g1bepm0ACb pic.twitter.com/WwC6ueWoB6 — Times of India (@timesofindia) January 7, 2019

The Devendra Fadnavis led BJP government announced 16% reservation for Maratha community under a new Socially and Economically Backward Category (SEBC). This was done on the report of the state Backward Class Commission (MSBCC) which reportedly puts Marathas in this category with very little representation in government and semi-government services. The decision is yet to pass legal scrutiny as the matter is being heard in the Bombay High Court.

10% quota for poor among upper caste: Who all are eligible https://t.co/Bfcj8k4s34 pic.twitter.com/GCcSzlT0xh — Times of India (@timesofindia) January 7, 2019

If the past is anything to go by, giving reservations beyond the existing percentage is a legal landmine. As per the legal requirements, backwardness cannot be judged by any single criteria including ‘economic backwardness’ and that such backwardness must emanate from their social and educational backwardness. This will prove to a big challenge for this government to stand scrutiny in this case. Even if the government does secure this 10% reservation, given the criterion, Muslims would be the biggest gainers.

Given the timing, this decision would take months for it to be legally challenged and the courts to decide. This would give BJP and Narendra Modi enough time to encash this in the 2019 election. Whether the benefits will pass on to the upper castes, that may be another ‘jumla’.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
