IHK turns into garrison town

HELD SRINAGAR: The Indian Held Kashmir (IHK) is wearing the picture of a garrison town, as the authorities have detained hundreds of pro-freedom leaders and Muslim activists in an escalating crackdown with the region remaining on high alert following the Pulwama suicide bombing.

Police said about 400 arrests had been made over the weekend in late-night raids aimed at weakening support for groups resisting the Indian rule in the Himalayan territory. The sweeps follow the February 14 attack on an Indian convoy in Pulwama district which killed 44 soldiers.

The attack has pushed India and Pakistan into a fresh round of sabre-rattling as thousands of extra paramilitary troops are deployed to the occupied valley. Requesting anonymity, a senior police official said most of those swept up in the raids were linked to "fundamentalist religious groups".

"We don’t want militants to operate with high morale after the Pulwama attack. We are hitting at their support base with urgency," the officer said. "We want to starve the terrorists of their support network and finish them off like fish without water."

Pro-freedom groups whose leaders were rounded up called for a general strike on Sunday across Kashmir over what they called a "reign of repression".

India has accused Pakistan of supporting the attack -- a claim rejected by the Islamabad government -- and there have been widespread calls for Prime Minister Narendra Modi to order a reprisal strike.

Modi has promised a "jaw-breaking response", spiking tensions in Kashmir where many fear a military strike against Pakistan is possible. At least 1,000 paramilitary troopers were rushed to the region and more were on the way, with concerns for security ahead of India’s general election due by May, a statement issued by the governor’s office said Sunday.

Helicopters and fighter jets flew low over the Kashmir Valley late Saturday, sparking panic as residents rushed to shops to buy fuel and other essentials. The government has issued urgent appeals to quell the panic in the region, where hundreds of paramilitary troops are patrolling the streets and manning additional roadblocks.

Several freedom groups have been fighting Indian forces for decades in the territory New Delhi controls, including JeM which claimed responsibility for this month’s car bomb attack.

Tens of thousands of people, mostly civilians, have been killed in 30 years of fighting in the restive region. Police said Sunday that at least one suspected Mujahideen and an Indian police officer were killed during a gunbattle in the Kashmir Valley.

Meanwhile, three people were killed in a gunbattle between the freedom fighters and Indian security forces in the occupied valley.

Three more soldiers were wounded in the battle in Turigam, a village in South Kashmir’s Kulgam district, defence and police officials said. Two of the guerrillas were from India, and one a foreigner, said a senior police officer who asked not to be identified.

Meanwhile, Pakistan on Sunday expressed concerns about the safety of Hurriyat leader Shabbir Shah amidst reports that he had been attacked and injured in Indian Tihar Jail.
