Massive fire in the parking lot at Aero India 2019 (Bangalore)

V.Narayan Distinguished - BHPian

Join Date: Aug 2014 Location: Delhi-NCR Posts: 3,093 Thanked: 37,857 Times

re: Massive fire in the parking lot at Aero India 2019 (Bangalore) I normally don't write posts that criticize India too strongly. I am too nationalistic. But as a trade insider, with Aero India, allow me to make an exception.



First very sorry to see that hundreds of car owners have lost an important and valuable asset and may end up running from pillar to post to get the documents needed for the insurance.



For several years I participated in the Aero India show and have experienced first hand as a participating exhibitor how terrible is the organization and attitude of the Defence Exhibition Organization of the Ministry of Defence. It does not come as a surprise that a horrific event like this took place.



The airstrip would 100% have had 2 to 4 fire tenders standing by on alert as landings and take-off's were in progress. I wonder if they were deployed ASAP as they would have been within the campus only 1 or 2 kms away as the crow flies.



<rant starts>

We treat the Aero show as a big event. But sadly in the world of aviation it usually does not feature on the travel list of most aviation industry organizations. Three or four of the big guys set up stalls & chalets as they hope to sell warplanes to the Indian Govt. even if it takes 15 years to not get a decision. But the mid-tier and upper mid-tier companies, with revenues from $200 million to $4 billion, who are the backbone of the industry rarely exhibit at Bangalore. I used to sponsor a chalet and stall till some years back at the cost of millions of rupees but stopped due to zero returns and having to deal with the organizers. The money saved was spent more efficiently at Dubai, Singapore & Geneva.



The organization of the show and the harassment of non-sarkari visitors makes this the worst show in Asia, Europe & Americas. After having exhibited at a dozen shows, overseas, about 50 odd times I can say this with hand on heart. The other shows are far larger (Paris, Shanghai, Geneva, Dubai), visitors are treated as customers and guests and all visitors are permitted onto the tarmac. Here, at Yelankana, if you are a non-Govt sponsor, who has paid millions as fee, you have to jump through hoops to get your business visitors on the tarmac for a walk around while PSU employees and their kids are freely roaming around. Sadly it is a sarkari show for their own ilk.

<Rant over>
