‘Ask Doval for Pulwama Truth’ Says Raj Thackeray

Thackeray attacks government

NEW DELHI: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray targeted National Security Advisor Ajit Doval for the Pulwama attack. The “truth” he said will come out of Doval is questioned.



“If NSA Ajit Doval is investigated, then all the truth about the Pulwama terror attack will come out,” Thackeray said in Kolhapur district of Maharashtra according to PTI.



He further said that the CRPF troopers who were killed in the suicide bomb attack were “political victims.”



Supporting the Congress allegation Thackeray said, “At the time of the Pulwama attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was busy shooting for a film at Corbett National Park. Even after the news of the terror attack was flashed his shooting continued.”



And further added that “every government manufactured such things but it is taking place more frequently under Modi’s rule”.



Asked for comments, state BJP spokesperson Madhav Bhandari told PTI, “Raj Thackeray has been doing mimicry all through his career. Now he is aping Rahul Gandhi by levelling allegations against Doval.”



While most opposition parties including the Congress have refrained from making such public allegations, murmurings within raise several questions about intelligence failure and the responsibility for the attack. However, except for Janata Dal(S) leader Deve Gowda and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee most opposition leaders have maintained their counsel over the bombing. The Congress has attacked Prime Minister Narendra Modi for posing for a photo shoot in the Corbett wild life sanctuary, and remaining inaccessible during the day of the attack. It has been silent on the issues arising from the attack, including the anti-Kashmiri attacks in different parts of India.



Mamata Banerjee held a press conference recently to lambast the government on intelligence failure. "When elections are knocking on the door you are trying to stage a war... a shadow war. Amit Shah and Narendra Modi are delivering political speeches. Even after such a big mishap you do not resign taking responsibility and are instead delivering political speeches," she said. She wanted to know why a large convoy of CRPF personnel was allowed to move on the highway despite intelligence inputs with the government about a possible terror attack. She said she had planned not to speak about the attack and the subsequent communalisation except that “some people are trying to teach us what patriotism is.”


