SC Rejects Plea Seeking Judicial Inquiry In To Uri And Pulwama Terrorists Attacks

The Supreme Court on Monday dismissed a PIL by Advocate Vineet Dhanda seeking a direction to the Government to constitute a committee headed by a retired apex court Judge to conduct an inquiry into the Uri and Pulwama terrorist attacks. "The enquiry is needed to find out the role of the Indian citizens in executing the attack. How else could 350 kg of RDX be arranged and deployed (at...

The Supreme Court on Monday dismissed a PIL by Advocate Vineet Dhanda seeking a direction to the Government to constitute a committee headed by a retired apex court Judge to conduct an inquiry into the Uri and Pulwama terrorist attacks.

"The enquiry is needed to find out the role of the Indian citizens in executing the attack. How else could 350 kg of RDX be arranged and deployed (at the convoy of the CRPF jawans)? This cannot be the job of one person!...two terrorists were about to be killed but they were rescued and they managed to escape...besides, the Hurriyat leaders are inciting the Kashmiri youth. Their bank accounts must be freezed as they give funding for all these anti-national activities...", contended Advocate J. P. Dhanda for petitioner Vineet Dhanda.

After hearing the Counsel for a few minutes, Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi stated, "we are not inclined to interfere", proceeding to junk the petition.

The petition alleged that the Government of India and the army after investigation found several procedural lapses but the reason and people behind such lapses were not identified and punished and rather the local support which was given to Pakistani terrorists by the few disgruntled and anti – India residents of Kashmir was also not investigated and no action whatsoever was taken to go into the depth of Uri attack, as a result of which the confidence of these terrorist outfits like Jaish-e-Mohammad was increased to such an extent that on 14 February, the same outfit carried out a suicide attack on our brave soldiers of CRPF as a result of which more than 40 soldiers were martyred.

It was also alleged that the government of Jammu and Kashmir has not adopted an approach stringent enough to control the lawlessness in the State and rather it has encouraged stone-pelting at the armed forces in the state.
