Illegal gold-rush at Chennai Airport; officials seize smuggled goods worth Rs 1.5 crore in a day!

In one day alone, gold and foreign exchange worth Rs 1.5 crore have been seized in the Chennai international airport, causing a sensation. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In a series of sensational seizures, the customs team at Chennai International airport detected gold and foreign currency worth over Rs 1.5 crores being smuggled into the country from Dubai. As Emirates flight from Dubai arrived here at 8.40 AM on Sunday, the customs officials were engaged in the regular screening of passengers.

At that time, three passengers who were returning from their visit to Dubai on a tourist visa had brought a lot of baggage with them. The three, 48-year-old Al Qasim, 24-year-old Aslam Khan and 29-year-old Magadhar Khan were noticed to be a little fidgety as well. This created doubts in the minds of the officers and they decided to check their baggage in detail.

When the electronic gadgets they had brought along were examined, it was found that gold bars and jewellery were concealed in them. Their total weight of the smuggled goods is reported to be 900gms and their value in the international market could be Rs 30 lakh according to the officials. The three have been remanded to custody after seizing the smuggled goods and investigations are on.

Meanwhile, a man identified as 22-year-old Sayubi Ali, who arrived by another flight from Dubai was carrying children’s toys. When the toys were checked, a total of 340 grams of gold and 13 gold foils were found. Moreover, he had concealed gold bars within his undergarments. Rs 80,000 worth foreign cigarettes were also found in his possession and confiscated.

In another case at the Chennai airport, an Air India flight that landed from Dubai at 5 AM was to leave for Delhi at 6.10 AM. Air India contract employees were involved in cleaning the aircraft when one of their staff found a black packet lying below one of the seats. Fearing that this might be a bomb, the cleaning staff alerted the officials who rushed to the aircraft to check the packet.

It later turned out that there were gold bars inside the packet which were handed over to the authorities. On examination, it was found that the 9 gold bars weighed 50grams each and was worth Rs 36 lakh. Thus, in one day alone, gold and foreign exchange worth Rs 1.5 crore have been seized in the Chennai international airport, causing a sensation.


