DSP & Army Jawan Martyred, While Three JeM Terrorists Gunned Down In Kulgam Encounter

An encounter broke out between security agencies and terrorists in Kulgam district of Jammu and Kashmir on Sunday. In the encounter that ensued, a Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP) Aman Kumar Thakur and an Army soldier were martyred while three Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists were killed.

Wreath laying ceremony for our colleague #DySP Aman Kumar who attained #martyrdom today at #Kulgam was held at DPL #Srinagar. Officers led by DGP laid floral wreaths on mortal remains & paid rich tributes to martyr for supreme #sacrifice made in the line of duty. @JmuKmrPolice pic.twitter.com/FpTcNuhbmf — Kashmir Zone Police (@KashmirPolice) February 24, 2019

The encounter took place in Turigam area of Kulgam after the police received tip-off regarding presence of militants taking shelter inside a residential house. Thakur was gravely injured in the neck and succumbed to his injuries while being rushed to an Army hospital.

A non-commissioned officer Havaldar Sombir also succumbed to his injuries while an Army major and two other soldiers were injured. The identity of the three terrorists who were killed is yet to be ascertained.

Jammu: Jammu & Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik & MoS PMO Jitendra Singh at wreath laying ceremony of DSP Aman Thakur, who lost his life in encounter with terrorists in Tarigam, Kulgam yesterday. pic.twitter.com/fLqqlvNj2z — ANI (@ANI) February 25, 2019

The encounter broke out at around 3 pm on Sunday. NDTV had reported that around a thousand locals had surrounded the encounter site and had starting pelting stones at the security forces.

Thakur was a 2011-batch J&K Police Services officer and had been posted in kulgam for the last two years. He had been heading the counter-terrorism wing of the state police in the area. Last month, Thakur was also awarded the DGP's Commendation Medal and Certificate for his exemplary service.

Photo: Twitter/DSP Aman Kumar Thakur

Jammu and Kashmir Director General of Police (DGP) Dilbagh Singh told TOI, "It is an unfortunate incident, in which we have lost a brave officer. He was a fighter and he led Sunday's operation himself."

Later in the day a wreath-laying ceremony for was also organised for Thakur where officers led by DGP laid floral wreaths on mortal remains & paid rich tributes to martyr for supreme sacrifice made in the line of duty.

Over forty CRPF soldiers were martyred on February 14 in a terror attack. Ever since the attack, the security forces have become vigilant about the presence of any JeM terrorists all across India. On Friday, two alleged JeM terrorists who were posing as students students were arrested from Deoband in Saharanpur district, Uttar Pradesh.
