Centre is hatching a big conspiracy ahead of General Elections 2019: Raj Thackeray

Kolhapur: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray said that if National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval is questioned, the truth about the government conspiracy will come out. "Central government is hatching a big conspiracy ahead of the elections so that people forget demonetisation, Rafale and corruption over the last four and half years. The truth will come out if Ajit Doval is put under an inquiry," said Thackeray. He also alleged that the soldiers martyred in Pulwama attack were the victims of this very politics.

Thackeray was speaking at an event to launch a private news channel in Kolhapur. Speaking on the occasion, Thackeray criticised BJP government on a number of issues. "The media has stopped reporting on what the failures of the government are over last four and half years. Everyone is reporting on war, Kashmir and elections. The autocratic functioning of the government has created a verticle rift in the CBI, RBI, Police and Armed Forces. This is not good for the nation," he alleged.

Reacting to the announcement to cut water flowing to Pakistan, Thackeray poked fun saying, "Did the government supplied water to Pakistan through taps? The water distribution is done as per the international treaty involving three countries. Anyone of them can not decide unilaterally. But the government is consistently making such announcements to portray Pakistan as the enemy."

"The news such as stopping water flowing to Pakistan and possibilities of aeroplane hijack are being planted to divert people's attention from other serious issues and failures of the government. Prime Minister Modi was busy in shooting for four hours in Jim Corbett Tiger Reserve. He should have rushed to Delhi when such a massive attack had taken place. On the contrary, Modi and Shah went on public meeting spree. Modi was seeking votes during the public meetings he was not at all bothered about the soldiers martyred at Pulwama," Thackeray added.

Poked fun at Shah

Thackeray also said, "I felt like drawing a cartoon on this announcement. Make Shah sleep like a dam to stop water flowing to Pakistan." This sent waves of laughter among the audiance.

Vertical rift in the instututions

Speaking on the condition of various institutions in the country, Thackeray said, "The current situation has been created for the first time in the history. There is a vertical rift in all the institutions, let it be media, CBI, RBI, Police, Army. This is not a good sign. Many people are not aware of how the news is spread and reported."

Thackeray hinted at the government sacrificing soldiers to garner sympathy among the voters, which he had predicted four months back at a public meeting at Vikhroli in Mumbai.

The other political leaders have taken extra caution to react to the allegations.
