Indo-Pak war will disrupt global peace, says Mushaal Mullick

Srinagar

A painting exhibition titled “Paintings of Freedom, Paintings of Peace” was held in Pakistan arranged by Peace and Culture Organisation to pay tribute to the Freedom Struggle of Kashmiris, reported PakistanToday.

According to a report published by Pakistan Today said speaking on the occasion, Mushaal Hussain Mullick, Chairperson of Pakistan Peace and Culture Organisation, said: “India has acted like an irresponsible state and the exhibition was arranged to showcase a wide array of photographs that shed light on the plight of innocent Kashmiris, particularly pellet gun victims including women and children who suffered from injuries at the hands of forces.” “Former prime minister of Norway Bondevik graced the occasion as a chief guest,” said the report.

Today, Mushaal Hussein Mullick hosted her Paintings Exhibition titled ‘Paintings of Freedom, Paintings of Peace’, as a tribute to the Freedom Struggle of Kashmiris. Former Prime Minister of Norway Mr Kjell Magne Bondevik graced the event as Chief Guest. #OccupiedKashmir pic.twitter.com/u0xLEz1DMX — Mushaal Hussein Mullick (@MushaalMullick) February 24, 2019

The newspaper Pakistan Today quoted Mullick as having said that the Kashmiris are peace-loving people and wanted resolution of the decades-long despite through table talk; however, if India continued with its tactics to press the voices of Kashmiris through use of its mighty, she warned, that such tactics would serve no purpose rather it would further complicate the situation.

Coming down hard on forces for the fresh wave of “atrocities” in the valley in the wake of Pulwama attack, Mushaal said that Indian government should bear in mind that its warmongering hysteria could destabilise the whole world.

The report quoted Mullick as having said that “forces have been committing genocide in Jammu and Kashmir; however, no action has been taken by the world community to rein in the unbridled forces.”

The report said that she called upon the international community to wake up to massive human rights violations in Kashmir.

The newspaper quoted Mullick as having said that an alarming surge has been witnessed in forces attacks on the innocent Kashmiris after the Pulwama attack, as students and Kashmiris business are being beaten outside the valley.

Mushaal said that they started a massive crackdown on leaders in Kashmir and arrested Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) Chairman Yasin Malik along with other Kashmiri leaders, which is condemnable.

A PTV News special report on the efforts of @MushaalMullick who brings the pain & suffering of the people of Indian Occupied Kashmir to light, through artistic expression. #KashmirBleeds pic.twitter.com/tkr0oR52fN — PTV News (@PTVNewsOfficial) February 24, 2019

She said that such “illegal and coercive measures” against Kashmiris were “futile and would serve no purpose” rather such tactics would only worsen the situation.

She said that “the Indian government is giving threat to Pakistan to stop water flowing from India so as to convert Pakistan into a desert,” adding that if water is diverted towards Kashmir, it would submerge the whole valley.

Mushaal warned that if India resorted to such extreme step, it would not only badly affect the Kashmiri people, but it could also trigger a war between the two nuclear countries; hence the UN and the world powers should pay heed to the fast-deteriorating situation before it is too late.

She demanded that since the Kashmir dispute is the actual bone of contention; hence the UN should resolve the long-pending issues according to the UN resolutions.

“Kashmiris want independence from India; therefore, the UN should play role in this regard to save the continent from war, because if war will happen, there would be no peace in the whole world,” PakistanToday quoted Mullick as having said.
