Probe India’s NSA Ajit Doval to reveal truth on Pulwama attack: Raj Thackrey

Thackrey called the Indian soldiers killed in Pulwama attack 'political victims'. Photo: File

The chief of Indian extremist political party Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) Raj Thackrey called the Indian soldiers killed in the Pulwama attack “political victims” and said the truth would be revealed if the country’s National Security Adviser (NSA) Arjit Doval was probed.



“If NSA Ajit Doval is investigated, then all the truth about the Pulwama terror attack will come out,” Thackrey was quoted as saying by the Indian media.

The MNS chief said Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi was shooting for a film at the time of the Pulwama attack. “Even after the news of the terror attack his [Modi’s] shooting continued. "



Speaking about the Indian soldiers killed in the attack and calling them political victims, Thackrey further said, “Every government manufactured such things, but it is taking place more frequently under Modi’s rule."

Following the Pulwama attack in Indian occupied Kashmir, the government of Indian Prime Minister Modi levelled baseless allegations of Pakistan’s involvement.

Prime Minister Imran Khan has called on New Delhi to share actionable intelligence with Pakistan. "Pakistan is ready to investigate the attack and act if India provides actionable intelligence. Not because we are under pressure but because it is our policy," Prime Minister Khan said in a televised address to the nation last week.

"I have been hearing and seeing on Indian media that politicians there are calling for revenge from Pakistan. If India thinks it will attack Pakistan then we will not just think but retaliate," Prime Minister Khan added.

During a news conference, Pakistan’s military spokesman warned India against any misadventure. Major General Asif Ghafoor said Pakistan was not preparing for war but India but only using the right to self-defence. “We can respond to full spectrum threat. And I hope you get us and don’t mess with Pakistan," Major General Ghafoor asserted.
