Musharraff Warns Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan Of Any ‘Misadventure” Against India

Amidst tensions between India and Pakistan in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack, Pervez Musharraf, former Pakistan President has warned the Pakistan government that any misadventure of a unilateral nuclear attack against India will be fatal for it.

Reminding Pakistan PM Imran Khan that any such action would lead to Pakistan's elimination, he said, India would retaliate with a greater nuclear force.

The former military dictator was addressing a press conference in the UAE.

Musharaff noted that the relations between the two countries are at a low.

“If Pakistan launched even a single nuclear attack on the neighboring country, India could finish us by attacking with 20 (nuclear) bombs,” Musharraf warned Imran Khan.

He said relations between India and Pakistan have entered a dangerous level and hoped there would be no nuclear attack.

Musharraf is also a former army chief. He said if Pakistan wanted to save itself from a harsh retaliatory attack from India, then it must have the resources to attack India first with at least 50 atom bombs.

“Are you ready to launch an attack with 50 bombs?,” he asked the Pakistani leadership.

Pakistan-based group Jaish-e-Mohammed has been blamed for Pulwama terror attack. The highway suicide bomb attack killed 41 armed forces in the Kashmiri town when one of the military vehicles was ambushed by a car laden with explosives.

Musharraf, living in the UAE is looking for a political comeback in Pakistan after setting up a political party named All-Pakistan Muslim League. He assumed power in 1999 after a military coup against then Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Later Musharraf became Pakistan’s president for nine years.

De-escalate tension

Meanwhile, the European Union (EU) urged Pakistan to take “clear and sustained” action against UN-listed transnational terrorist groups and all individuals connected with terror attacks in the wake of the Pulwama incident.

Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the EU for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy called up both Pakistan and India to “de-escalate” the tension.

Mogherini, who is also the Vice-President of the EU Commission, spoke to Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi in this regard. The EU is also in touch with India, according to a statement. Photo: Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images
