Bharat Bandh on 8th and 9th January 2019: Who is supporting the strike and who is not – Details here

Representational image | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Around 20 crore workers of the Central Trade Unions will from Tuesday begin a 48-hour nationwide strike to protest against the government's alleged anti-worker policies. The BJP has, meanwhile, opposed the Bharat Bandh calls.

According to AITUC general secretary Amarjeet Kaur, 10 CTUs have joined hands to go on the strike and 20 crore workers are expected to join the Bharat Bandh. "This is the largest number of workers from formal and informal sectors joining the strike against anti-people and anti-worker policies of the BJP-led central government," added Kaur while addressing a joint press conference of the 10 CTUs.

As per the AITUC general secretary, sectors like banking, education, coal, steel, telecom, health, electricity, insurance and transport, inter alia, are likely to extend support to the strike.

"We will go on a protest march from Mandi House to Parliament in New Delhi on Wednesday. Similar protests would be done across the country," she said.

Underlining that the CTUs are against unilateral labour reforms, Kaur said: “We have given suggestions on labour codes. But during the discussion...trade unions' demands were rejected. We went on strike on September 2, 2016. We also did 3-day 'Mahapadav' (agitation) from November 9-11 in 2017. But the government did not come for dialogue rather went ahead with unilateral labour reforms.”

Bharat Bandh 2019: Who is supporting the strike and why

Farmers across the country will also join the strike. According to Hannan Mollah, the general secretary of the CPI(M)-affiliated All India Kisan Sabha: "AIKS and Bhumi Adhikar Andolan will observe 'gramin hartal', rail roko and road roko on January 8 and 9, the day trade unions are observing a nationwide general strike. This move is against the Modi government's failure to address rural distress issues, to save rural farmers' lands from the corporate. The farmers will extend all support to the ensuing general strike."

Bharat bandh today by trade unions and farmers LIVE: Tap for updates

The 10 Central Trade Unions going on strike include Indian National Trade Union Congress, All India Trade Union Congress, Hind Mazdoor Sabha, Centre of Indian Trade Unions, Trade Union Coordination Centre, Self Employed Women's Association, All India United Trade Union Centre, All India Central Council of Trade Unions, Labour Progressive Federation, and United Trade Union Congress.

"The government has failed to create jobs and grossly ignored unions' 12-point charter of demands. The Group of Ministers headed by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on labour issues has not called unions for any discussion since September 2, 2015 strike. This has left us with no other option but to go on strike," Kaur said.

The CTUs also claimed that the government went on with its "aggressive attack with arrogance on the lives and livelihood of the working people". They also raised their voice against the proposed amendments in Trade Union Act, 1926, calling them irrational.

Student and teacher organisations of various universities are also supporting the strike.

Bharat Bandh in January 2019: Who is opposing the tomorrow’s bandh

A number of trading organisations have rejected the call by the Central Trade Unions, saying they will keep their establishments open on January 8 and January 9. RSS’ affiliate Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) will not participate in the strike tomorrow.

Officials in the Kerala Trade and Industries Coordination Forum have vowed not to participate in tomorrow’s strike.

The Kerala Hotel and Restaurants Association, Kerala Textile and Garment Dealers Association, Kerala Travel Mart Society, and Bakers Association have also announced their decision to stay away from the strike.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
