Massive crackdown on resistance leaders in IOK condemned

SRINAGAR (Web Desk) - In occupied Kashmir, the chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC), Syed Ali Gilani and other Hurriyat leaders and organizations have condemned the massive crackdown on resistance camp terming the present situation as serious and explosive.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar said, “Our just struggle has been crushed leading to sorrow and painful tales of death and destruction all around. But by the grace of Almighty every sincere and dedicated soul has come out stronger by these mean and coercive actions.”

Commenting on the statement of Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi that “our fight is not against Kashmiris”, the APHC Chairman said just after the Pulwama attack, horror and hatred against Kashmiris reached its crescendo with the free hand remarks. He said such blunt lie can only come from the experts in deceit, who despite print, electronic and social media footage, despite valley numbered vehicles burned in front of their owners in Jammu, rulers are intoxicated by the morphine of pseudo nationalism, very brazenly and bluntly publically dare to issue such statements.”

Meanwhile, the APHC in a statement in Srinagar strongly condemned the arrest of its General Secretary, Haji Ghulam Nabi Sumjhi, Mohammad Yaseen Aataie and Syed Imtiyaz Haider. It said that unending and continued arrest spree indicates frustration on the part of India and it has waged a war against the entire population, but such repressive measures can in no way legalize and legitimize their forced occupation.

Spokesperson for Mirwaiz led Hurriyat forum in a statement said the Indian forces have been given a free hand to instill fear and create suffocating atmosphere across the Valley leaving people in shock and despair.

He denounced the crackdown, mass arrests and continued nocturnal raids across Kashmir and slammed the arrest of resistance leaders, Muhammad Yasin Malik, Ameer of Jamat-e-Islami Abdu Hameed Fayaz and dozens of other Jama’at leaders. “By resorting to arbitrary and illegal arrests, intimidation and restrictions the authorities will not achieve anything as in the past, nor will it force the people of Kashmir into submission,” he added.

The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Mohammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement in Srinagar condemned the fresh arrest spree in Kashmir and said massive crackdown against JI leaders, activists and others is unjustified and undemocratic. He said such actions have created a sense of insecurity and chaos in Kashmir.

He urged the authorities to stop arrest spree, and release all the illegally detained leaders and activists.

The Jammu and Kashmir Peoples League in a statement also strongly denounced the crackdown, mass arrests and continued nocturnal raids across Kashmir. The JKPL slammed the arrest of resistance leaders including party Chairman, Mukhtar Ahmad Waza, Muhammad Yasin Malik and Jamaat-e-Islami Ameer, Abdul Hameed Fayaz.

Senior party leader Nisar Ahmad Rather in a statement said, “By resorting to arbitrary and illegal arrests, detentions intimidation and restrictions the rulers will not achieve anything, nor will it force the people of Kashmir into submission. New Delhi must understand that Kashmir dispute will not be written off from the pages of history by using force to suppress the people’s voice.”
