Producer Kona Venkat confirms Tamil version of 'Silence'

Producer Kona Venkat confirms Tamil version of 'Silence'

Directed by Hemant Madhukar, the film will have Madhavan and Anushka Shetty playing lead roles.

Flix Tollywood

Director Kona Venkat is bankrolling Silence with Madhavan and Anushka Shetty in the lead roles. Confirming the project, he had tweeted, “Official announcement regarding the Tamil version of our film with Madhavan, Anushka, Anjali, Shalini Pandey, Subbaraju etc.. will come soon.. shooting begins from March. Nothing is official till then. @peoplemediafcy @KonaFilmCorp.”

There are also reports that Michael Madsen of Kill Bill and Reservoir Dogs fame will be roped in for a pivotal role in the film. However, there is no official word on it yet. Touted to be a multi-lingual, Silence will be directed by Hemant Madhukar.

Reports are that the team will be flying down to the US next month to shoot a major portion of the film there. With the weather conditions being extreme and going to minus degrees, it will certainly be hard for the team to shoot. However, the director is intent on shooting the film in those harsh conditions to get the best visuals effects.

It may be noted here that Hemant Madhukar made his directorial debut in 2010 with A Flat and had directed Vastadu Naa Raju, and Mumbai 125 KM so far. This is the first time he is associating with R Madhavan and Anushka Shetty.

Meanwhile, Madhavan is busy with Rocketry: the Nambi Effect, which will also mark his directorial debut, he also has a number of projects needing his attention including the web series Breathe 2. Maddy will be playing the rocket scientist Nambi Narayanan. A lot of research has gone into this project, we hear.

On the other hand, Anushka Shetty will be focusing solely on Silence. It may be mentioned here that Anushka is one of the most wanted heroines in the film industry with her performance in Arundathi, Rudramadevi and Baahubali speaking volumes of her acting skills. Her role in Silence is also expected to be performance-oriented.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
