Need for awareness of LGBT rights: activists

Urge DGP to issue circular in this regard

In the wake of a woman from Coimbatore, belonging to the LGBT community, seeking help from the Chennai police after her parents reportedly threatened her and her partner, activists feel that there is a need for increased awareness about the rights of the LGBT community among parents and police.

A few months ago, Sivagami (name changed), a woman police constable working in Chennai, and Kavitha (name changed), a third-year-engineering student from Coimbatore, got into a relationship. “They met through a common friend. Kavitha informed her parents about her orientation, and asked them not to look for any alliance,” said T.D. Sivakumar, co-founder, Nirangal.

Though Sivagami’s mother agreed to the relationship, Kavitha faced resistance from her parents. Subsequently Kavitha came to Chennai and took refuge with an NGO. Her parents contacted the NGO and tried to take their daughter back with them. As they failed in their attempts, they sought help from the Tirumangalam police.

On February 18, Kavitha and Sivagami were summoned to the Tirumangalam police station. “Police personnel were talking about Tamil culture and wanted Kavitha to go back with her parents,” said another activist.

Senior police officers, however, claimed that they only counselled the parents and the two women. “Being adults, we cannot deny their right to choose their life partner,” said a senior police officer. Subsequently, Kavitha went back to the NGO, while Sivagami has been transferred to another wing in the police department.

Risk of violence

However, activists feel that Sivagami continues to be at risk of an attack by Kavitha’s parents.

“The government should create awareness about Supreme Court decriminalising Section 377 of the IPC, which criminalised consensual relationships among adults. The stigma against LGBT community should end. Society should accept them,” added Mr. Sivakumar.

L. Ramakrishnan from the public health NGO SAATHII suggested that the DGP send a circular to all police stations in the State.
