Cow vigilantism a pretext for nationalists to target India’s Muslim minority, report says

The Human Rights Watch report is one of the first detailed surveys of deaths linked to violent cow protection groups

Radical cow protection groups in India have killed at least 44 people over the last three years and often received support from law enforcement and Hindu nationalist politicians, according to a new report from Human Rights Watch.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

The 104-page report unveiled last week examines Hindu nationalist vigilante attacks and said 36 of the dead were members of India’s large Muslim minority. About 280 people have been injured in more than 100 attacks between May 2015 and December 2018, the report by the New York-based group said.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Cow vigilantism a pretext for nationalists to target India’s Muslim minority, report says Back to video

Members of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, which supports policies to protect cows revered by the country’s majority Hindus, have “increasingly used communal rhetoric that has spurred a violent vigilante campaign against beef consumption and those deemed linked to it,” the group said.

Modi has previously condemned vigilante violence and said killing people because of cow worship “is not acceptable.” In India’s federal structure, law and order is a state subject.

“No less than the prime minister called such elements criminals and urged state governments to act against anyone perpetrating violence under the false pretext of cow vigilantism,” BJP lawmaker and spokesman G.V.L. Narasimha Rao said in a text message on Wednesday. He said cow-related violence has also happened under opposition Congress party governments.

The report, which also highlights the impact these so-called cow vigilantes have had on the rural economy, comes ahead of national elections in which some expect increased religious tensions between Hindus and Muslims. A recent major attack against security forces in India’s Muslim-majority Jammu and Kashmir has also heightened tensions, with one BJP-appointed governor of an Indian state calling for citizens to boycott traveling to Kashmir and Kashmiri businesses outside of the state.
