Attorneys question potential jurors in Kalamazoo Uber shooter trial

UPDATE: Jason Dalton pleads guilty to murder charges in Kalamazoo Uber shooter trial

KALAMAZOO, MI — The prosecutor and the defense attorney will question potential jurors in the Jason Dalton murder trial today in an attempt to seat a jury.

Jury selection in the case started Thursday, Jan. 3. Just over 200 prospective jurors were summoned, and the prosecutor and defense attorney whittled that down in a closed courtroom Thursday and Friday before voir dire started in open court Monday.

Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Judge Alexander C. Lipsey has issued a decorum order stating the courtroom will be closed to media and the public during the first stage of jury selection and would have access to a remote-operated pool video feed to observe voir dire. After MLive filed a motion requesting access to cover jury selection in the courtroom, Lipsey ruled a pool reporter would be allowed in the courtroom to cover voir dire but not hardship questioning.

Dalton, 48, faces six counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and several felony firearms charges for a shooting rampage that crossed Kalamazoo County Feb. 20, 2016. His case has been on hold for nearly three years as it wound its way through appellate courts.

In an interview with detectives, Dalton said the Uber app “literally took over his mind and body” on Feb. 20 when the color of the app’s symbol changed from red to black. Dalton told the detectives the app symbol changed colors when he spoke the name of the Eastern Star symbol.

Dalton’s trial has been delayed as his defense attorneys appealed a piece of the case, arguing detectives violated his Miranda rights in interviews the day after the shooting. Ultimately, the Michigan Court of Appeals decided the interviews will not be allowed at trial.

The trial could last up to two weeks.

Police say Dalton shot Tiana Carruthers, 25, in the parking lot of the Meadows town home complex, 5066 Meadows Blvd,, just before 6 p.m. on Feb. 20, 2016. Dalton allegedly shot and killed father and son Rich, 53, and Tyler Smith, 17, in the parking lot of Seelye Kia on Stadium Drive just after 10 p.m. that same evening. Police say he then shot four women and a 14-year-old girl in the parking lot of Cracker Barrel, 5581 S. 9th St. in Texas Township.

Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda; Mary Jo Nye, 60, Dorothy “Judy” Brown, 74, and Barbara Hawthorne, 68, all of Battle Creek, were killed and the 14-year-old girl, Abigail Kopf, survived but was critically injured.

Dalton allegedly drove erratically that afternoon, picking up Uber fares between the shootings.
