He had too many names

Actress Samsun Nahar Shimla said she would fully assist the investigation into Sunday's attempted plane hijack in which her ex-husband Polash Ahmed is a suspect.

"I am ready to give any assistance for the investigation. I am ready to help the investigation process any time for the sake of my country's interest," the National award winning actress told The Daily Star over phone last night.

Shimla, who is currently in Mumbai for a film shoot, said she had divorced Polash three months ago after knowing his “real background” and that he was "mentally imbalanced".

“He looks sound but mentally he is not... I realised it two to three months into our marriage. We did not live together because my work was the first priority and he also appreciated it.”

Shimla said it was afterwards that she came to know that Polash was already married.

She added that given his mental state, she decided to not prolong the relationship.

Their marriage had lasted for over eight months.

"He committed a crime and tarnished the image of the country. I would not accept even if my father did something like this.

"I am saying that he got what he deserved."

About her introduction with Polash, she said, during the shoot of her 2017 film “Naior”, its director Rashid Palash invited her to his birthday party.

It was there where she met Polash Ahmed.

“I attended the programme as a guest and there were many people in the programme. I was introduced to one Mahibijan [alias Polash], who was producer...,” she said.

Polash had apparently used a different identity at first.

“A person cannot say such lies and use such disguises. His family also asked how a person could have so many names.”

After the introduction, they began to speak over the phone.

“Then on March 3, 2018, we got married. I divorced him on November 6 of the same year.”

Since then, Shimla said she had no communications with Polash. She, however, said she had spoken to him two weeks before Qurbani Eid.

“I can't recall exactly [the date],” she said.

She said during their last conversation, Polash said he was going to England for work and would return in four or five months.

Afterwards, he called her several times but the actress maintained she did not receive any of his calls.

When asked if he had called her on or before Sunday, she, however, said he had not as she had changed her number after the divorce.

When asked if she had ever found him involved in criminal activities, Shimla said, “No. No. Never ever.”

Biman's flight BG-147, carrying 143 passengers and seven crew members, made an emergency landing at Shah Amanat International Airport in Chattogram following an attempted “hijacking”.

After a two-hour stand-off, Polash, the suspect, was killed in a commando operation.
