IAF operation in Pakistan Live Updates: Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal postpones hunger strike for full statehood

Live Updates:

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal postpones hunger strike for full statehood

In view of prevailing Indo Pak situation, I am postponing my upwas for full statehood of Delhi. We all stand as one nation today. — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019



03:45 PM | Gujarat on High alert after air strikes across LoC

Following India’s preemptive strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s (JeM) biggest terror camp in Pakistan, Gujarat police issued a “high alert” across the state on Tuesday.

Gujarat’s Director General of Police Shivanand Jha cancelled a conference on crime-related issues scheduled at the Police Bhavan in Gandhinagar and asked all officers who reached here to attend it to return to their respective headquarters in view of the alert sounded in the state.

03:40 PM | In a special meeting of the National Security Committee, Pakistan PM said that India’s story on air strikes is fictitous. It was created for domestic consumption in poll year.

03:30 PM | Remain prepared for all eventualities: Pakistan PM Imran Khan

In his first response after the Indian air strikes, Imran Khan accused India of lying and said that he will take the international media to the site of attack to expose New Delhi.

03:00 PM | China has asked both the nations to exercise restraint

China has reacted on the Indian Air Force’s strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s biggest training camp in Pakistan. Beijing came out with a short statement asking both nations to exercise restraint.

02:40 PM | India says over 300 terrorists eliminated

“This was an intelligence based counter terror strike not a military action for sake of war. Have demolished entire terror set up in the suicide bombing training centre in Balakot, and over 300 terrorists were eliminated in the covert operation by Indian Air Force,” government sources said.

02:20 PM | Sushma Swaraj calls all-party meet at 5 pm on IAF air strikes on JeM camps across LoC in Balakot

1:40 PM | Our New India will not spare any acts of terror: Amit Shah

In a series of tweets, BJP chief Amit Shah said that the airstrikes conducted by the IAF on Tuesday “further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong and decisive leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.”

12:35 PM | Akshay Kumar, Ajay, Abhishek & others praise IAF pilots

Several Bollywood personalities took to social media to laud the Indian Air Force and the surgical strike. Taking their official Twitter accounts, Akshay Kumar, Abhishek Bachchan, Swara Bhaskar and many others saluted the daring pilots.

12:20 AM | One Pakistani Ranger was killed and others injured after being shot by BSF following a ceasefire violation in Jammu’s Kanachak: Reports

12:05 AM | Foreign Secretary Gokhale gives out details of IAF operation across LoC

Large number of Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists, trainers and senior commanders were eliminated in largest Jaish camp in Balakot, foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said.

11:40 AM | Imran Khan’s party reacts post IAF strikes

Pakistan’s ruling party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf lashed out at Indian media for ‘war mongering’. In a tweet from its official handle, the party said that the coverage of the event shows a “disturbing bloodlust and deteriorating mindset at a time when Pakistan is on an upward trajectory”

We always knew Indian media was irresponsible, but beating the war drums shows a disturbing bloodlust and deteriorating mindset at a time when Pakistan is on an upward trajectory. Indian jets scrambled back from Balakot which lies close to the LOC.#Pakistan — PTI (@PTIofficial) February 26, 2019

11:15 AM | India undertook Non-military preemptive strike to specifically target terror camps: Vijay Gokhale

Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said that India targeted known terror camps — following specific intel inputs — located in deep forests away from the civilian population were targetted. Gokhale termed the strikes a non-military preemptive action and refused to take any further questions.

10:45 AM | Details of locations hit by IAF in Pakistan

According to the reports, Balakot, which is 24 kilometre northwest of Muzaffarabad, capital of Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, was struck between 3:45 am and 3:53 am. However, there is still confusion over whether this place falls in PoK or proper Pakistani territory.

Muzaffarabad, capital of Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, was hit between 3.48 am and 3.55 am.

Chakoti, was he last to be hit between 3:58 am and 4:04 am

10:40 AM | IAF operation lasted less than 21 minutes: Reports

According to the reports, the IAF strike lasted not more than 21 minutes, right from take off till the return into Indian territory. The strike took place in Balakote, 24 kilometre northwest of Muzaffarabad at around 3: 45-3:53 am. The joint training camps of JeM, LeT and Hizbul Mujahideen were hit.

Reports further suggested that the terrorist groups had emptied their launchpads but not the training camps.

10:30 AM | PM Modi holds high level security meeting

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is chairing a high-level CCS meeting in New Delhi along with Union ministers Rajnath Singh, Nirmala Sitharaman and Arun Jaitley.

10:05 AM | Congress Chief Rahul Gandhi salutes IAF operation in Pakistan

?? I salute the pilots of the IAF. ?? — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 26, 2019

10:00 AM | IAF has put on high alert all air defence systems along the International Border and Line of Control

09:45 AM | Defence Ministry not confirming attacks due to strategic reasons

Balakote training camp is in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, which means India has struck inside Pakistani territory, and not just occupied areas of Jammu and Kashmir. This may account for the absence of official confirmation from the Defence Ministry as India has no wish to push Pakistan into a corner from where it has to hit back on Jaish-e-Mohammad’s behalf. Reuters is reporting that the Defence Ministry is saying it has no knowledge of violations of Pakistani airspace.

09:40 AM | Pakistan Army spokesperson claim IAF operation failed to cause any damage

Pakistan Army spokesperson, Major General Asif Ghafoor claimed that the Indian Air Force attack within the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir failed to cause any damage. He claimed that the Indian jets had to ‘hastily’ drop the payload in an ‘open area’.

Payload of hastily escaping Indian aircrafts fell in open. pic.twitter.com/8drYtNGMsm — Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor (@OfficialDGISPR) February 26, 2019

09:35 AM | India destroys Alpha 3 control rooms in Balakot: Reports

Senior journalist Megha Prasad claimed that IAF has destroyed Alpha 3 Control rooms and launch pads of Jaish-e-Muhammad in at least three locations.

09:30 AM | IAF attacks Pakistan based terror camps across LoC, drops 1000 kg explosives: Reports

Barely two weeks after the dastardly terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, killing 40 innocent CRPF personnel, Indian Air Force carried out a pre-dawn strike on a terror camp across the Line of Control. According to the reports, the strike was carried out at around 3:30 this morning by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets.

The aircraft dropped 1,000 kg laser-guided bombs on a major terror camp across the Line of Control, completely destroying it.

In the terrifying Pulwama attack, a suicide bomber of the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed exploded a car full of bombs next to a security convoy in which in which over 40 soldiers of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were killed

Soon after the Pulwama terror attack, India had appealed to the international community to back the naming of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a “UN designated terrorist”.
