With pre-dawn airstrike on Pakistan, India avenges Pulwama martyrs: A blow-by-blow account

Pakistan military's spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor tweeted early Tuesday morning, "Indian Air Force violated Line of Control. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircrafts gone back. Details to follow."

Ghafoor then tweeted at 7 am, "Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzafarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage."

Reports then came in of Pakistan violating ceasefire at Line of Control in Rajouri and Poonch districts. Sources said that Pakistani troops fired at Indian posts several times during the night and that the Army was giving a befitting reply.

Indian Air Force sources then said that a group of Mirage 2000 Indian fighter jets struck major terrorist camps across the Line of Control and completely destroyed it at 0330 hours on February 26.

The sources added that 10 Air Force Mirage jets dropped 1000 kg bombs on terror camps across the LoC. The targets were terror camps and launch pads of Jaish-e-Mohammad among other terrorist groups, the source said.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah said in a tweet, "As reports of air strikes across the LoC by IAF planes gather steam looks like our defences are in the air including this airborne early warning aircraft. Appears to be patrolling the international border."

According to sources, Balakot, Chakoti, and Muzaffarabad pads destroyed. Alpha-3 control rooms of Jaish also destroyed.

Abhishek Singhvi, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, also tweeted, "Indian Air Force Strikes at Balakot don't have official word yet but the Helter skelter by Pakistan seems like something big has happened. The IAF has gone beyond POK & into Pakistan near their capital while they were busy counting alms received from Saudi & China."

Rahul Gandhi tweeted, "I salute the pilots of the IAF."

As per an initial estimate, around 300 terrorists are believed to be killed in the airstrike, sources have said.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal saluted the Indian Air Force pilots in his tweet.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee congratulated the Indian Air Force for carrying out airstrikes in Pakistan.

Sources have said that a Pakistan drone have down on Kutch border on Tuesday at 6.30am.

Pakistani F16s were scrambled to retaliate against IAF Mirage 2000s but were turned back due to size of Indian formation, said ANI quoting sources.

According to sources, the airstrike operation by the Indian Air Force was based on intelligence inputs provided by deep assets inside PoK.

Read | India strikes back after Pulwama LIVE: IAF destroys terror camps across LoC, Rahul Gandhi salutes pilots

Also Read | 1000 kg bombs, Mirage 2000 jets: India attacks Pakistan, what we know so far

Also Watch | Indian air strike across LoC: Pakistan journo tweets video
