IAF strikes: Imran says will respond, India successfully test fires Quick Reaction Surface-to-Air Missiles | Highlights

Indian Air Force strikes across LoC Updates:

(Stay tuned with India TV for live updates on IAF strike on Balakot here)

06:30 pm: Punjab on high-alert, CM to visit border areas tomorrow:

Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh: State is on alert, I will be touring bordering areas tomorrow. We are ready for any eventuality. I told the Union Home Minister that if there is anything that Punjab can do we are there to for the defence of our country.

06:20 pm: Residents in Pakistan's Balakot thought earthquake jolted them from sleep

Residents in the quake-prone Balakot town in Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province Tuesday said they were woken by "loud explosions" and thought a fresh tremor must have hit the region when Indian Air Force jets pounded a large terror training camp. Residents in the mountainous area town told BBC Urdu they were woken by loud explosions. Residents in several towns near Balakot reported hearing explosions early on Tuesday.

06:10 pm: Pakistan violates ceasefire:

Pakistan violated ceasefire in Nowshera, Akhnoor and Krishna Ghati sectors today in the evening hours.

06:00 pm: Quick Reaction Surface-to-Air Missiles test fired:

India has successfully test-fired two indigenously developed Quick Reaction Surface-to-Air missiles (QRSAM) from a test range off Odisha coast, officials said. The state-of-the-art missile with a strike range of 30 km is capable of engaging multiple targets. The all-weather weapon system is capable of tracking and firing with precision.

Also read | All you need to know about IAF Mirage 2000 - fighter jets used for Surgical Strike 2.0

05:30 pm: PM Modi on IAF strike on terror camps:

The God is always with us to wipe out the enemies of humanity from the face of this earth. This is the message we are trying communicate to the evil souls and demons, with proof: Prime Minister Narendra Modi at Delhi's ISKCON temple. The PM had taken metro from Khan market on his way to ISKON temple in Kalkaji.

05:12 pm: All party meeting called by MEA begins in New Delhi,

Ministry of External Affairs called an all-party meeting in New Delhi's Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium today after the Indian Air Force struck the JeM terror camps in Pakistan. Sushma Swaraj and Rajnath Singh present.

Also read | India celebrates IAF's 'preemptive' attack on JeM camp inside Pakistan | See pics

05:10 pm: Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne urges restrain: Australian government is concerned about relations between India and Pakistan following the horrific terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir on 14 February, which Australia has condemned. Pak must take urgent action against terrorist groups in its territory, including JeM which claimed responsibility for 14 Feb bombing and LeT. It must do everything to implement its own proscription of JeM. It can't allow extremist groups to operate from its territory. Australia urges both sides to exercise restraint, avoid any action which would endanger peace and security in the region and engage in dialogue to ensure that these issues are resolved peacefully.

Also read | Where is Balakot and why was it IAF's target for surgical strike 2.0?

05:06 pm: Up to 350 terrorists killed as Indian air strike destroys JeM camp in Pakistan, say sources

Watch live coverage:

Also read | Mirage 2000 to Heron drones: 7 things India used to destroy terror camps across LoC

05:00 pm: Ram Madhav, BJP National General Secretary: After Pulwama attack, the nation was mourning for 12 days and on the 13th day our valiant Air-force paid the real tribute to the martyred soldiers by destroying terror training camps deep inside Pakistan territory.

04:00 pm: Foreign Secretary and other Secretaries are briefing foreign envoys, including P5, during the course of the day; Sources

03:50 pm: Ajit Doval briefed CCS members that the air strike wiped out a large section of top commanders of Jaish. According to sources:

#25 top commanders have been killed in the strike

#The target demolished wasn’t an ordinary terror launch pad or base

#NSA provided details in CCS meeting that it was a virtual garrison

#The larger number of terrorists present at the facility was due to - post-Pulwama decision to move out terrorists from launch pads

#The terror facility destroyed had firing ranges, explosive test facilities, air-conditioned offices of trainers, barracks for those under terror training

#The facility demolished by Air Force had facilities like swimming pools, recreation centres.

#Facility was built with army/ISI assistance

Also read | Pakistan rejects India's claims of bombing terrorist camps; vows to respond 'at time, place of its choosing'

03:30 pm: Pakistan will take international media to the area of strikes, helicopters are being readied, right now weather is bad, will fly when weather permits: Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi

03:20 pm: The Pakistani drone in the Kutch area was shot down by a ‘Derby’ missile from Israeli air defence system SPYDER. First time system used to target enemy aircraft.

03:10 pm: Punjab has put its border districts on high alert in the wake of the Indian Air Force's (IAF) strikes across the Line of Control, undertaken by India as a retaliatory measure in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack: Punjab Chief Minister's Office

03:00 pm: Govt sources: A total of six bombs were dropped on Pakistan based terrorist camps by the Indian Air Force Mirage 2000s

#Prime Minister Imran Khan asks armed forces and the people of Pakistan to remain "prepared for all eventualities."

#India has committed uncalled for aggression to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing: Pakistan's National Security Committee (NSC) after a meeting chaired by Pakistan PM Imran Khan today (ANI)

#Chinese diplomat was also briefed by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale on the Indian Air Force strike in Balakot

#Masood Azhar's brother Talha Saif killed in the air strikes by IAF

Image

#This was an intelligence based counter terror strike not a military action for sake of war. Have demolished entire terror set up in the suicide bombing training centre in Balakot, and over 300 terrorists were eliminated in the covert operation by Indian Air Force: Sources

#Within next 10 years Rs 7.5 Lakh Crore will be deposited in the accounts of farmers. They will not have to do anything for it. They will directly get a notification on their mobile phones, saying that they have received the amount: PM Modi

#I will not let the country down: PM Modi

#The country is in safe hands: PM Modi

#Foreign diplomats from the USA, UK, Russia, Australia,Indonesia,Turkey and six Asean nations being briefed by Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale on Indian air strike across LOC in Balakot

#NSA Ajit Doval along with Indian Army Chief Bipin Rawat and IAF Chief BS Dhanoa is reviewing the security situation on the borders after IAF strikes at JeM terror camp in Balakot across LoC

#Was expecting this sort of response within 2-3 days after Pulwama blast. Welcome this. We stand with govt. Though Foreign Secy called it non-military action,it's a step I was expecting govt will take long time back. I hope govt will now go after Masood Azhar & Hafiz Saeed: Asaduddin Owaisi

#Soldiers entered Pakistan and targeted JeM camps. It was a very brave act. The entire country is feeling proud and I congratulate the forces. The entire country was with the government and the Prime Minister at this time. Strict action was needed: Arvind Kejriwal

#We've always said that whatever action the forces take for protection of this nation, all of us will support them in unity, they are taking action against the terrorists in Pakistan. I congratulate them: Mallikarjun Kharge, Congress

Shame-shame slogans rocked Pakistan parliament

Surveillance drone Heron used for targetting JeM terror camp in Pakistan

NSA Ajit Doval holds meeting with chiefs of Indian Army and Indian Air Force

External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj has called an all-party meeting at 5 pm today

India is firmly and resolutely committed to taking all measures to fight the menace of terrorism. This non-military pre-emptive action was targeted specifically at JeM camp. The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualties: Gokhale

Large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders were eliminated in largest JeM camp in Balakot. Camp was led by Maulana Yusuf Azhar alias Ustad Ghauri, brother in law of JeM Chief Masood Azhar: Gokhale

In an intelligence lead operation in the early hours today, India struck the biggest training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot. In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commander & Jihadis were eliminated: Gokhale

India struck terror camps across the LoC. The target was JeM: Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale

Credible intelligence was received that Jaish-e-Mohammed was attempting another suicide terror attack in various parts of the country & fidayeen jihadis were being trained for this purpose: Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale

PM Modi informs President about the air strikes

PM Modi monitored the entire operation: Sources

The Indian Air Force has shot down an unidentified object at Kutch border. It is not confirmed whether it's a drone

Pak PM Imran Khan to hold a meeting shortly

IAF jets penetrated up to 40 km in Pakistan: Pak media

One of the targets destroyed by IAF Mirage jets was in Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa area: Sources

Pakistani F16s were scrambled to retaliate against IAF Mirage 2000s but turned back due to size of Indian formation. Western Air Command coordinated operation: Sources

Arun Jaitley to address media shortly about CCS meet

Foreign Ministry to hold PC at 11:30 am

Govt did what it promised. Congratulations to PM Modi: Prakash Javadekar

India must not challenge Pakistan. It is a violation of LoC. The country has full right to defence: Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi

In tomorrow's meeting of the opposition parties in Delhi, Pulwama attack and India's response to it are on the agenda of discussion: Sources

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has summoned an emergency meeting in Islamabad, Pakistan. The meeting will discuss the security situation: Radio Pakistan

Indian aircrafts’ intrusion across LOC in Muzafarabad Sector within AJ&K was 3-4 miles.Under forced hasty withdrawal aircrafts released payload which had free fall in open area. No infrastructure got hit, no casualties. Technical details and other important information to follow: Ghafoor

Indian Air Force has put on high alert all air defence systems along the international border and LoC to respond to any possible action by Pakistan Air Force. High alert sounded in Gujarat.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi tweets, "I salute the pilots of the IAF": Rahul Gndhi

200 to 300 JeM operatives killed in the attack: Sources

Actually it was mostly on our own territory, which is called PoK- Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. So you can always bomb your own territory, nothing wrong: Subramanian Swamy

Ten 1000 kg bombs were dropped on terror camps across the LoC: Sources

The air strikes are reportedly carried out in Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakothi.

WATCH VIDEO:



However, according to the sources, IAF destroyed the hideout areas of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) in Pakistan. In the air strikes, JeM's alpha three control rooms were destroyed. It is pertinent to mention here that JeM took the responsibility for the Pulwama attack in which 40 CRPF personnel martyred.

The IAF is yet to respond to these claims.

It is pertinent to mention here that on Monday the Pakistan army targeted forward posts and civilian areas along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri district, violating the ceasefire in this region for six days during the last week.

A defence spokesman said Indian troops retaliated muscularly.

"At about 1830 hours, Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by firing of small arms along the LoC in Nowshera sector," he said, reported PTI.

WATCH FULL VIDEO OF THE ATTACK:



(With inputs from agencies)

Latest India News
