Surgical airstrike on Pakistan: IAF also means India's Amazing Fighters, says Mamata Banerjee as opposition goes ga-ga

Opposition leaders lauded the Indian Air Force after cross-LoC airstrikes were reported on Tuesday morning, 12 days after a terrorist attack in Pulwama killed 40 CRPF jawans.

Sources say 200 to 300 terrorists have been killed.

The government has not commented yet, but an official statement is expected soon. Prime Minister Narendra Modi chaired a meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Security this morning.

One Union Minister, Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, did announce the strike on Twitter.

, ,

Air Force carried out aerial strike early morning today at terror camps across the LoC and Completely destroyed it

! .. ...#Balakot #Surgicalstrike2 pic.twitter.com/fqYJgWxuqX Gajendra Singh Shekhawat (@gssjodhpur) February 26, 2019

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, party spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala, and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal all tweeted messages of praise for the IAF.

I salute the pilots of the IAF. Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 26, 2019

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019

So did West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who said IAF also meant "India's Amazing Fighters".

IAF also means India's Amazing Fighters. Jai Hind Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) February 26, 2019

The cross-border air attack destroyed terrorist launchpads and Jaish-e-Mohammed control rooms, sources said.

It comes just 12 days after Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based terrorist group, carried out the suicide bombing in Pulwama, which sparked widespread fury in India.

It has already killed the mastermind of the bombing in an encounter, gone on a diplomatic offensive to isolate Pakistan on the world stage, increased basic customs duty on Pakistani exports, and reiterated plans to stop its share of Indus water from flowing to its northwestern neighbour.
