Surgical Strike-II sends Sensex reeling; analysts say it could be a chance to buy

NEW DELHI: Domestic equity indices took a beating on Tuesday morning after reports that Indian Air Force jets crossed the Line of Control (LOC) and targeted terrorist camps with 1,000 kg explosives, creating jitters among investors.Pakistan's KSE100 also took a hit, plunging 464.50 points, or 1.17 per cent, to 39,142.29 in opening trade.Analysts said one should look at the fact that the strikes, as per media reports, were on terrorist camps, and not on Pakistan as a state. While a few suggested investors to adopt a wait-and-watch approach, others say any fall should be bought into.The reaction to the IAF strike reports was a kneejerk response with the BSE Sensex falling nearly 500 points and the fear gauge India VIX surging 17 per cent. The rupee, too, took a beating, falling 30 paise against the US dollar.As more details emerged, Times Now reported that while Balakot camp was demolished at 3.45 am, Muzaffarabad camp was struck at 3.48 am in the 21-minute offensive.The cabinet committee on security was meeting at 7, Lok Kalyan Marg, post the strikes, agencies reported. Foreign secretary is likely to brief media at 11.30 am.Veteran market expert Ambareesh Baliga said one should see what sort of reactions come from Pakistan and whether this strike is an one-off and is closed, or continues for long.“You can’t really go by the past. There was news in harsh tone in the past that we could have something like Kargil (war). It is very difficult to say whether this will have widespread repercussions. But for the time being, while short-term traders can utilise the volatility, investors should wait and watch,” he said.Sameer Kalra, Market Research Analyst & Founder at Target Investing, say this is time to buy into declines.“Even if there is an official confirmation by the government at a press conference and you see another 100-point fall, we still are and be buyers. If you see the response as per reports, the strikes have been carried out on particular camps, terrorist camps. It should not escalate to country-country situation. FIIs may initially panic. But as an investor, I see this as an irrational reaction and I would look at it as a buying opportunity,” Kalra said.The current situation was something the US President Donald Trump had called very dangerous earlier, noting that he could understand New Delhi's desire for something ‘very strong’ response.In September 2016, stocks had taken a similar hit after Defence Ministry said India conducted surgical strikes on Pakistan-based terrorist camps in the aftermath of the Uri attack. The Sensex plummeted 465 points to 27,827 on September 29, 2016 against 28,292 on September 28.On January 2, 2016, when six highly-armed terrorists attacked the Pathankot base of Indian Air Force and a gun battle ensued for three days, Sensex cracked over 1,300 points in four sessions, slipping to 24,851 on January 7, 2016 against 26,160 on January 1.
