Indian Air Force puts all air defence systems on high alert after air strike across LoC

New Delhi:

Hours after India reportedly destroyed the Pakistan-based terror camps in Balakot, Chakothi and Muzaffarabad across Line of Control (LoC), the Indian Air Force (IAF) has put all air defence systems on high alert. “Indian Air Force has put on high alert all air defence systems along the international border and LoC to respond to any possible action by Pakistan Air Force,” tweeted ANI. Military establishment across LoC has also been put on high alert, sources said.

According to reports, around 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets crossed Line of Control (LoC) around 3:30 this morning and dropped 1,000 kg bombs on terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed, completely destroying them.

Flight tracking websites spotted heightened activities along the border with an IAF early warning plane Emb 145 and mid-air refueller circling in the area early in the morning. According to reports, more than 10 bombs were dropped by the multi-role fighter jet Mirage 2000 at around 3:30 am on Tuesday morning.

“Pakistani F16s were scrambled to retaliate against IAF Mirage 2000s but turned back due to size of Indian formation. Western Air Command coordinated operation,” tweeted ANI.

The entire operation continued for 21 minutes, says a report. Defence experts say that Mirages would have used 500 kg laser-guided bombs. The aerial attack comes days after Union Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman held a high-level meeting with all three service chiefs.

In Islamabad, the Pakistan Army alleged that the Indian Air Force violated the Line of Control (LoC) in Muzafarabad sector.

"Indian aircraft intruded from Muzafarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage," Major General Asif Ghafoor, Director General of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), the media wing of the Pakistan Army, said in a tweet.

"Indian Air Force violated Line of Control Pakistan. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircraft gone back," he tweeted.

The extent of the damage inflicted on the ground is not immediately known but the sources claimed the Pakistani side sustained significant losses.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi was briefed by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on the operation. Hours later, he chaired a meeting of Cabinet Committee on Security which was attended by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Sitharaman.

With PTI Inputs

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
