'IAF means India's Amazing Fighters'

India's pre-emptive strikes on terror camps in Pakistan were hailed on Tuesday by leaders of various political parties, with the Bharatiya Janata Party asserting that Prime Minister Narendra Modi's political will has made the difference while Congress chief Rahul Gandhi lauded the Indian Air Force.

Here are some of the reactions to the India's reply to Pulwama attack.

IMAGE used for representational purpose only. .

It was a necessary step required for the security of the country ... it was an act of maha parakram (mightily act)

Prakash Javadekar, Union HRD minister

They say they want India to bleed with a 1000 cuts. We say that each time you attack us, be certain we will get back at you, harder and stronger. Salute the brave pilots of the @IAF_MCC that carried out the strikes. #JaiHind

VK Singh, minister of state for external affairs

Yeh Modi ka Hindustan hai, ghar me ghusega bhi aur maarega bhi, (This is Modi's India. It will enter the house and strike them too.) Air Force carried out aerial strike early morning today at terror camps across the LoC and Completely destroyed it. Ek Ek katra khoon ka hisab hoga. Yeh toh ek shuruat hai. Yeh desh nahin jhukne doonga. (This is payback for each drop of blood. This is just the beginning. This country will not bend.)

Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, minister of state for agriculture

India is believed to have carried out air strikes inside Pakistan early Tuesday and targeted terror camps, sources said.

I congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces. Today's action further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong and decisive leadership of PM Nrendra Modi

Amit Shah, Bharatiya Janata Party president

I salute the pilots of the IAF.

Rahul Gandhi, Congress president

The IAF strikes have sent the much needed signal to Pakistan and the terrorists it's harbouring - don't think you can get away with acts like the Pulwama Attack. Bravo to the IAF men and my full support for

the action

Amarinder Singh, Punjab chief minister

IAF also means India's Amazing Fighters. Jai Hind

Mamata Banerjee , West bengal chief minister

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan

Arvind Kejriwal, Delhi chief minister

Salute to #indianairforce for giving befitting reply to the terrorists operating from POK!

Sharad Pawar, Nationalist Congress Party president

Salute to the Indian Air Force. #JaiHind

Prashant Kishor, Janata Dal-United national vice president

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan.. However, until the satan JeM chief Masood Azhar is struck down, our revenge won't be complete



Sanjay Raut, senior Shiv Sena leader
