In Karnataka, India’s Air Force Battles a Different Foe: the Bandipur Fire

Bandipur: Fire fighters try to douse a fire in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka on Feb 24, 2019. (Photo: IANS)

The Indian Air Force (IAF) has released videos of fire-fighting operations being carried out at the Bandipur Tiger Reserve and National Park in Chamarajanagar, Karnataka on Monday.

The fire at the Reserve, which has been raging for the past five days, has reportedly gutted 2000 acres of land. It is thought that many animals have perished—although it is unclear whether any tigers or other large animals are among the casualties. The Bandipur Park, along with adjoining forests in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, is home to several wild elephants, leopards and tigers.

Following a request from the state government on Monday, the Indian Air Force deployed two Mi-17 helicopters to combat the inferno. The operations were carried out at Karadikal Betta range and Chammana Halla top areas of the National Park.

According to the PRO Defence Bengaluru Twitter handle, the Mi-17s carried out a total of 10 sorties and sprayed 30,000 litres of water in the two areas.

Advertisement This was a ‘Bambi Bucket’ operation. The term refers to a water-filled bucket suspended on a cable carried by a helicopter. To refill the bucket, the helicopter can hover over a water body and dip the bucket into the water. When the helicopter is over the fire, the crew opens the valves, allowing water to drop onto the affected area.

Around 1500 people, including volunteers, are fighting the fire on the ground. Even as reports of damage to the forest come in, there are also fears of large-scale animal deaths. Images of charred animals were circulated on social media, but authorities have confirmed that these are fake.

News agency IANS quoted an official as saying, "There have been no reports of casualty or injury to animals, including spotted deer, bison, antelopes, elephants, tigers and leopards so far, as they would have run into the core forest area to escape the scorching heat and the raging fire that started on Saturday.

"However, small animals like snakes and calves would have perished caught in the blaze," said the official.

Officials suspect an act of sabotage, and further investigations are on. For now, tourists and other people have been asked to stay away from the Park.
