'Salute IAF pilots': Rahul Gandhi amid reports of IAF strike on terror camps

Rahul Gandhi gives adjournment notice on giving unhindered access to pasture lands in Ladakh

'Do you work for govt?' Rahul Gandhi asks reporter; BJP calls him “entitled brat”

Word 'lynching' practically unheard of before 2014, 'Thank You Modi-Ji': Rahul Gandhi

Hindu and Hindutva are not different things: Suresh Bhaiyyaji Joshi

Even teleprompter could not take so many lies: Rahul's dig at PM Modi’s Davos speech

Rahul Gandhi attacks PM Modi over China's illegal bridge in Ladakh's Pangong Tso lake

'Salute IAF pilots': Opposition unites to back air strike

India

oi-Deepika S

New Delhi, Feb 26: Opposition leaders on Tuesday "saluted" the pilots of Indian Air Force (IAF) amid reports claimed that India launched air strikes on terror camps and launch pads across the Line of Control.

"I salute the pilots of the IAF," Rahul Gandhi tweeted.

India is believed to have carried out air strikes inside Pakistan early Tuesday and targeted terror camps.

The strikes involving several fighter jets of the Indian Air Force successfully destroyed camps belonging to Pakistan-based terror outfits in Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

No international law broken, we bombed 'our own territory': Swamy on IAF strike

The extent of the damage inflicted on the ground is not immediately known.

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019 Arvind Kejriwal salutes the bravery of IAF Delhi Chief Minister and Aam Aadmi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal tweeted congratulating the armed forces for striking terror camps in PoK. I salute the Indian Air Force and indeed all our Armed Forces. Congratulations @IAF_MCC — Akhilesh Yadav (@yadavakhilesh) February 26, 2019 Akhilesh Yadav congratulates IAF Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav has congratulated IAF for the strikes in Pakistan. Jai Hind. — Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) February 26, 2019 Congress MP Shashi Tharoor has also reacted on the strikes. Congress MP Shashi Tharoor has also reacted on the strikes saying Jai Hind IAF also means India's Amazing Fighters, says Mamata West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee Tuesday hailed the Indian Air Force (IAF) for carrying out air strikes in Pakistan. "IAF also means India's Amazing Fighters. Jai Hind," Banerjee tweeted. India carried out air strikes inside Pakistan early Tuesday and targeted terror camps, official sources said.
