Owner of the Vehicle Used In Pulwama Terrorist Attack is on the Run

The investigators of the Pulwama attack said that the vehicle used for the terrorist attack was a mini-van, and the owner of the vehicle is currently on the run. It is said that the vehicle was carrying around 20 Kilograms of explosives and was driven near the CRPF convoy that had 78 vehicles, a suicide bomber from the terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad drove the vehicle. The terrorist attack happened on February 14 and killed 40 CRPF personnel.

From what was left from the vehicle after the suicide bomber detonated the explosives, there were doubts if the experts could find the owner of the vehicle as the only parts remaining from the vehicle were pieces of metal.

The NIA (National Investigation Agency) of India was assigned to solve the terrorist attack, and today they said that they took the remains from the vehicle which they used to help identify the chassis number and registration number of the vehicle.

The van used in the terrorist attack was a Maruti Suzuki Ecco Van that was originally bought back in 2011 and has been bought for 7 times. The last buyer of the car was Sajjad Bhat, he is a resident of Anantnag Bijbehara.

The report from the NIA also said that Sajjad Bhat bought the car 10 days before the terrorist attack happened in Pulwama. The police did raid his home 3 days ago on February 23.

19-year-old Sajjad Bhat was a student of madrasa, Siraj-ul-Uloom, that is located in Shopian. The investigators say that he disappeared on February 14, which is the date of the terrorist attack. Photos of Sajjad Bhat went viral recently as he was seen holding guns, which confirms his entry to the terrorist group of Jaish-e-Mohammad.

Sajjad Bhat is the second person who has been linked to the terrorist group whose agenda has been to wipe out and launch terrorist attacks on the security forces of Jammu and Kashmir.

After the terrorist group claimed the attack and said that the suicide bomber was a 19-year-old Adil Ahmad Dar had the investigators confused.

The police said that forcing someone to become a suicide bomber can take years of work, but in this case, they had no idea and intelligence that a local teenager was preparing for the terrorist attack.
