Rahul Gandhi, Kejriwal laud IAF pilots for air strikes on Pakistan

Congress president Rahul Gandhi Tuesday lauded the pilots of the Indian Air Force after air strikes on Pakistan.

"I salute the pilots of the IAF," he tweeted.

I salute the pilots of the IAF. - Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) February 26, 2019

Gandhi also put out the Indian flag along with his tweet.

The Congress also tweeted, lauding the role of the Indian Air Force in keeping Indians safe with its consistent and determined effort.

Also read: IAF strikes across LoC LIVE: Mirage jets drop 1,000kg bombs; JeM terror camps destroyed in Surgical Strike 2.0

"We salute the @IAF_MCC for their consistent & determined effort to keep Indians safe. Jai Hind," the Congress said on its official Twitter handle.

Besides, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal Tuesday saluted the pilots of the Indian Air Force (IAF) after it carried out air strikes in Pakistan.

"I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan," Kejriwal said in a tweet.

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan - Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019

India is believed to have carried out air strikes inside Pakistan early Tuesday and targeted terror camps, sources said.

The strikes involving several fighter jets of the Indian Air Force successfully destroyed camps belonging to Pakistan-based terror outfits in Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, the sources said.

The Pakistan Army on Tuesday alleged that the Indian Air Force violated the Line of Control (LoC) in Muzaffarabad sector.

"Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzaffarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage," Major General Asif Ghafoor, Director General of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), the media wing of the army, said in a tweet in Islamabad.

"Indian Air Force violated Line of Control Pakistan. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircraft gone back," he tweeted.
