Jason Dalton pleads guilty in 2016 Kalamazoo shooting spree

KALAMAZOO - Nearly three years after a shooting rampage that killed six people and on the eve of his trial, former Uber driver Jason Dalton entered guilty pleas Monday to six counts of first-degree murder.

Dalton, 48, also pleaded guilty to two counts of assault with intent to murder and eight weapons charges.

While family members and friends of the victims watched, Dalton told Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Judge Alexander Lipsey that he had shot each of the victims on Feb. 20, 2016, at three locations in Kalamazoo County.

"I have wanted this for quite a while," Dalton told Lipsey near the beginning of the 22-minute hearing.

Three of the dead and one of the injured, a 14-year-old girl, were from Battle Creek.

Police said Dalton first shot and wounded Tiana Carruthers, 25, in a parking lot of the Meadows town home complex in Richland Township just before 6 p.m.

He then killed Rich Smith, 53, and his son, Tyler Smith, 17, in the parking lot of Seelye Ford on Stadium Drive just after 10 p.m. and then shot four more people in the parking lot of a Cracker Barrel Restaurant on 9th Street in Texas Township.

Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda and Mary Jo Nye, 60, Dorothy Brown, 74, and Barbara Hawthorne, 68, of Battle Creek were killed. Abigail Kopf, then 14, was with the women and was critically injured.

The pleas came following two days of jury selection last week and as a third was about to begin Monday. Opening statements in the trial were expected Tuesday. As Dalton entered his plea, 113 potential jurors were waiting to undergo questioning by both prosecutors and defense attorney Eusebio Solis.

As the attorneys were preparing to question prospective jurors about any bias they might have, Assistant Prosecutor Jeff Williams told the judge they wanted to offer Dalton an opportunity to plead guilty as charged.

Solis told the judge the defense was not interested but then bent down when Dalton tugged on his sleeve. After a brief conversation they were taken to a private room and a short time later Kalamazoo County Prosecutor Jeff Getting said he was informed that Dalton was ready to plead guilty.

Prosecutors notified family and victims and about 90 minutes later, with the gallery nearly full, Dalton, wearing a grey shirt and dark pants, with his arms shackled, was brought in to the courtroom and standing before the judge, admitted to the killings.

Solis told the Enquirer the decision by Dalton to plead guilty was his own and against Solis' advice. Solis also told Lipsey he had advised his client against entering guilty pleas.

"Discussions about a plea have been going on for months," Solis told the court. "I spent an hour and a half over the weekend going over the pros and cons. He understands the consequences."

Solis said Dalton made the decision to plead guilty for personal reasons.

"He doesn't want his family or victims' families to go through a trial," Solis said.

Getting told the court Dalton is pleading guilty as charged on all counts. He faces a mandatory sentence of life in prison without parole.

Later Getting said he was pleased with the outcome. "It is best for the people of the community and best for the victim's families."

With the pleas, Getting said guilty verdicts and mandatory life sentences are assured and there is less chance of appealable errors than from a trial.

"This was the best case scenario," Getting told reporters.

Getting said he can only remember a couple of cases when a defendant has entered pleas to charges of first-degree murder.

He and Williams said they were prepared to call 32 witnesses and introduce 130 exhibits during the trial, which was expected to take two weeks.

As the pleas were taken, many of the victims' families held each other, some crying. Tiana Carruthers, the first person shot, was overcome and began to weep.

She was helped from the courthouse and most families declined to comment as they left the building.

However, Bart Nye, 42, whose mother, Mary Lou Nye and aunt, Mary Jo Nye, were killed, said he was "glad we didn't have to go through the whole thing. I thought I was prepared for this in the last three years but it is still very emotional and very trying."

Nye said he was glad about the pleas but unhappy that it took so long.

"It will bring a little bit of closure even though it is not going to be a great amount of closure for this. It still hurts every day. Families will carry on and remember the ones we have lost. We will tell their stories and teach the ones who didn't know what happened at the time."

Nye said he is saddened that his mother and aunt won't know his son.

"My son will have to know about his grandmother in the past tense and his great aunt in the past tense.

"To know my aunt was everyone's great cheerleader and my mom was the perfect grandmother. She rocked babies to sleep and told kids stories at a day care center. The happiest day of her life was the day my son was born and the fact that she won't get to see him grow up really hurts."

Dalton will be sentenced on Feb. 5 and Nye said he has been thinking for three years about what he will say then.

"It is not happy," he said. "It is not pretty. It is heart wrenching."

A statement from the Dalton family was sent by email from attorney Paul Vlachos.

The statement expresses condolences to the victims and their families.

"Jason Dalton has pled guilty and acknowledged his horrific crimes. Nothing that we can say is adequate, but please know that our hearts are broken by the suffering which has resulted from the actions of our son and former husband."

It ends with praise for the first responders, law enforcement officers, prosecutors and the Kalamazoo community.

"Finally, we must acknowledge the people of Kalamazoo for the love and kindness shown to the victims and families. We live in a community which has responded to this and other recent tragedies with remarkable grace and strength."

More:Kalamazoo shooting: Recapping the entire case before Jason Dalton's murder trial

Contact Trace Christenson at 269-966-0685 or tchrist@battlecreekenquirer.com. Follow him on Twitter: @TSChristenson
