Diplomats discuss Pulwama on Kuwait Day function

ISLAMABAD: The diplomatic community posted here is extremely concerned about the rising tension between Pakistan and India on account of Pulwama suicide attack in Indian Held Kashmir (IHK) of February 14, killing 44 Indian occupying security personnel.

The senior diplomats who have interacted with the Foreign Office in recent days and sought briefing about the situation are perturbed that any act of the either sides could trigger incalculable destruction that could put the world peace at stake.

The diplomats attended the 28th anniversary of Liberation Day and 58th anniversary of Independence Day of Kuwait commemorations here on Monday evening in Serena discussed the developments with regard to the assertions being made by Islamabad and New Delhi unabatedly. The war mongering by the Indian leadership is causing disquiet among them.

Kuwait Ambassador Nassar Abdulrehman Almutairi, who had studied in Karachi and has vast circle of friends across the country hosted reception on the occasion where federal minister Umer Ayub Khan was the chief guest. Director General Foreign Affairs Rukhsana Afzaal represented the Foreign Office. She was questioned by the fellow guests about the situation regarding hostilities by India towards Pakistan. The thin presence of the representatives from the three services was a proof of engagements of the defence forces personnel. Saudi Arabia’s Ambassador Nawaf bin Said Al-Maliki is always sought after guest in diplomatic receptions. He was felicitated by the fellow guests on highly productive and successful visit of Saudi Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman (MBS) to Pakistan. Ambassador Nawaf told the media that the work has started on faster pace for implementation of the MoUs inked during the visit of the crown prince. He was of the view that it was the first phase and Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman is eager to complete the first phase as earliest possible so that the second phase should be initiated.

The ambassador assured each and every MoU will be implemented in letter and spirit. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) Ambassador Hamad Obaid Zanubi was briefing the guests about the actions being taken place by his government to bring two brotherly countries further close. The guests also discussed political situation prevailing in Pakistan and they was astonished that political harmony that is need of the hour in Pakistan doesn’t exist in exemplary manner. They were not pleased about the reports pertaining to the health of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who has been confined behind the bars and now he has been declined by the court much needed bail for his much needed treatment. It was well attended reception and Ambassador Nassar Abdulrehman Al-Mutairi was much pleased about the presence of guests in large number.
