IAF Bombarded Terror Factories Deep Inside Pakistan

According to sources, Balakot, Chakoti, and Muzaffarabad pads destroyed. Alpha-3 control rooms of Jaish also destroyed

The extent of the damage inflicted on the ground is not immediately known but the sources claimed the Pakistani side sustained significant losses

India dealt a body blow to Pakistan in the wee hours of Tuesday by bombarding ‘terror factories‘ deep inside Pakistan.

eM has been active in Pakistan for the last two decades and is led by MASOOD AZHAR with its headquarters in Bahawalpur

After the 1971 war, this is for the first time IAF jets carried out surgical operations and used laser-guided bombs to destroy targets inside Pakistan.

Confirming the reports of IAF strike inside Pakistan, Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale told reporters in New Delhi, “In an intelligence-led operation in the early hours of Tuesday, India struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot“.

“In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated. This facility at Balakot was headed by MAULANA YOUSUF AZHAR (alias USTAD GHOURI), the brother-in-law of MASOOD AZHAR, Chief of JeM”, Gokhale told reporters.

Indian Foreign Secretary said, “India has been repeatedly urging Pakistan to take action against the JeM to prevent jihadis from being trained and armed inside Pakistan. Pakistan has taken no concrete actions to dismantle the infrastructure of terrorism on its soil”.

He said, “Credible intelligence was received that JeM was attempting another suicide terror attack in various parts of the country, and the fidayeen jihadis were being trained for this purpose. In the face of imminent danger, a preemptive strike became absolutely necessary“.

Referring to Pulwama strike Gokhale said, “On 14 February 2019, a suicide terror attack was conducted by a Pak based terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammad, leading to the martyrdom of 40 brave jawans of the CRPF. JeM has been active in Pakistan for the last two decades and is led by MASOOD AZHAR with its headquarters in Bahawalpur.

He said, this organization, which is proscribed by the UN, has been responsible for a series of terrorist attacks including on the Indian Parliament in December 2001 and the Pathankot airbase in January 2016.

The targets were terror camps and launch pads of Jaish-e-Mohammad among other terrorist groups.

Information regarding the location of training camps in Pakistan and PoJK has been provided to Pakistan from time to time. Pakistan, however, denies their existence. The existence of such massive training facilities capable of training hundreds of jihadis could not have functioned without the knowledge of Pakistan authorities.

Foreign Secretary said, “The Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to taking all necessary measures to fight the menace of terrorism. Hence this non-military preemptive action was specifically targeted at the JeM camp. The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualties. The facility is located in the thick forest on a hilltop far away from any civilian presence. As the strike has taken place only a short while ago, we are awaiting further details.

The Government of Pakistan had made a solemn commitment in January 2004 not to allow its soil or territory under its control to be used for terrorism against India. We expect that Pakistan lives up to its public commitment and takes follow up actions to dismantle all JeM and other camps and hold the terrorists accountable for the actions.

After the successful strike, Prime Minister Narendra Modi chaired a meeting of Cabinet Committee on Security which was attended by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Sitharaman.

The extent of the damage inflicted on the ground is not immediately known but the sources claimed the Pakistani side sustained significant losses.

In Islamabad, the Pakistan Army alleged that the Indian Air Force violated the Line of Control (LoC) in Muzaffarabad sector.

“Indian aircraft intruded from Muzaffarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage,” Major General Asif Ghafoor, Director General of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), the media wing of the Pakistan Army, said in a tweet.

“Indian Air Force violated Line of Control Pakistan. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircraft went back,” he tweeted.

How the strike was conducted

According to official sources, “Indian Air Force jets dropped 1,000 kg bombs on Jaish bases across using multiple jets, including the IAF’s Mirage 2000.

The targets were terror camps and launch pads of Jaish-e-Mohammad among other terrorist groups.

Indian Air Force sources then said that a group of Mirage 2000 Indian fighter jets struck a major terrorist camp across the Line of Control and completely destroyed it at 0330 hours on February 26.

The sources added that 12 Air Force Mirage jets dropped 1000 kg bombs on terror camps across the LoC.

According to sources, Balakot, Chakoti, and Muzaffarabad pads destroyed. Alpha-3 control rooms of Jaish also destroyed.

Note:

1. The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent or reflect the views of PGurus.
