Indian Aircraft Cross LOC, Hit Territory Inside Pakistan

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) NEW DELHI — Days after 40 Indian paramilitary personnel were killed in a deadly militant attack in Kashmir the Indian Air Force (IAF) on Tuesday morning struck at positions across Line of Control in Pakistan.

According to initial reports, the attack was carried out at around 3:30 am on the intervening night of Monday and Tuesday.

According to details available by IAF sources, as many as 12 Mirage 2000 jets participated in the operation that dropped 1,000 kg bombs at what Indian media described as camps of Jaish, Hizbul Mujahedin and Lashkar-e-Tiba militant groups across LoC.

Indian Army sources say that jets struck training camps in Balakot at around 3.45am, Muzafarrabad at around 3.48am and Chakothi at around 3.58am.

Balakot is a town in Mansehra District in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan while Muzaffarabad is the capital city of Pakistan controlled Kashmir.

Meanwhile, the Pakistan Army on Tuesday alleged that the Indian IAF violated the Line of Control (LoC) in Muzafarabad sector.

Maj-Gen Ghafoor in his tweet said "Indian Air Force violated Line of Control", following which "Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled" and Indian aircraft went back.

He later added that the aircraft faced "timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force" and ended up releasing "payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot". Payload is the carrying capacity of an aircraft, which is usually measured in terms of weight. This could include cargo, passengers, an explosive warhead or any instruments.

No casualties or damage occurred, the military spokesperson said.

Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has called an emergency meeting in Islamabad, Pakistan. The meeting will discuss the security situation, Radio Pakistan reported.

Ties between Pakistan and India have been tense since a suicide bombing in Kashmir killed over 40 Indian soldiers, with New Delhi blaming Pakistan of being complicit in the attack — a charge Islamabad has denied vehemently and from the get-go.

In response to India's allegations, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan promised New Delhi to conduct an investigation if provided 'actionable evidence' but also warned that Pakistan will "retaliate" if attacked.

Indian Air Force has put on high alert all air defence systems along the international border and LoC to respond to any possible action by Pakistan Air Force

In Delhi meanwhile the Cabinet Committee on Security met in the national capital on Tuesday morning at the residence of Prime Minister Narendra Modi after the air strikes in Pakistan.

Finance minister Arun Jaitley, external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj, home minister Rajnath Singh and defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman were present at the meeting.

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and other top officials of the prime minister's office and the security apparatus were present at the meeting, official sources said.
