Mehbooba Mufti questions IAF strikes on Pakistan

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Mehbooba Mufti questions IAF strikes on Pakistan

26 Feb 2019

While India rejoiced the Indian Air Force's successful operation which ended in the destruction of Jaish-e-Mohammed's camp, PDP leader Mehbooba Mufti questioned it in her tweet.

The former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister said "conflicting reports" came from both sides and hoped motives of "both countries are served".

Apart from Mufti, all politicians unanimously congratulated the IAF for its pre-emptive action.

Here's more.

Backstory: IAF goes deep into Pakistan to send strong message

Context

At 3:30 am on Tuesday, 12 Mirage-2000 jets carried out the attack with precision. The hilltop camp of Jaish, the terrorist outfit which claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack, was eliminated in Balakot, Pakistan.

The camp was headed by Jaish's chief Masood Azhar's brother-in-law Yusuf.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale told media IAF was forced to act as Pakistan failed to take steps to curtail terrorism.

Apparently, Pulwama attack's mastermind got training at this camp

Camp

The action on the camp broke the back of Jaish. According to reports, Abdul Ghazi alias Kamran, who was Pulwama attack's mastermind, was trained at this particular camp.

Dozens of terrorists were trained for three months at the hilltop camp.

Caught by surprise, Pakistan rushed to do damage control by saying IAF jets "violated" LoC and returned after facing "timely intervention".

Balokot's police chief says "no casualties reported"

Stand

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan called an emergency meeting to discuss the future course.

Toeing the line of his country, Balakot police chief Saghir Hussain Shah said he sent teams to the area and no "casualties were reported".

"No damages on the ground because of the dropping of the bombs (sic)," he told AP, without denying that bombs were dropped.

Separately, Indian leaders congratulate IAF

Details

While Pakistan's anxiety is clearly visible, Indians are rejoicing that the dastardly attack was avenged.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi saluted the IAF, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal thanked them for their service and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said IAF also stands for Indian Amazing Forces.

Netizens too woke up to the news and couldn't stop praising the armed forces.
