Pakistan reserves right to retaliate: Pak foreign minister after India strikes again

Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has confirmed that Indian Air Force jets crossed the Line of Control (LoC) today. In the first official response from Pakistan, Shah Mahmood Qureshi said Pakistan had inkling that India would do something of this sort.

"We had been telling the world that India is likely to do something like this (airstrike in Pakistan). Today they have done it," he said.

"I could see that the clouds of danger were hovering over Pakistan. Pakistan is live and strong. We are a responsible nation and will respond in a responsible and tactical manner. Pakistan knows how to safeguard its interests."

Minister of Foreign Affairs Shah Mahmood Qureshi talks to Samaa News after the violation of LOC by Indian Air Force (26.02.19)@SMQureshiPTI



Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi warned India not to challenge Pakistan.

Pakistan is fully prepared to respond to any misadventure. pic.twitter.com/mobpNBTgtO PTI (@PTIofficial) February 26, 2019

Pakistan termed the airstrike by Indian Air Force as a breach of Line of Control (LoC) and said this was a "grave aggression".

Shah Mahmood Qureshi said after the airstrikes by the Indian Air Force, Pakistan now reserves the right to give an appropriate reply.

"We reserve the right to give an appropriate. We have the right to self defence," he said.

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has called an emergency meeting of his cabinet to take stock of the situation.

In a recent statement after the Pulwama attack, Imran Khan had said Pakistan will not think twice to retaliate if India attacks it.

In the wee hours of Tuesday (February 26), fighter jets of the Indian Air Force attacked terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakote in Pakistan.

The airstrikes come days after 40 CRPF jawans were killed in a suicide attack by Jaish in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir.

Click here for LIVE updates on air strikes

ALSO READ | Mirage jets destroy Pakistan terror camp with 1,000 kg bombs in pre-dawn strike: Sources

ALSO READ | 1000 kg bombs, Mirage 2000 jets: India attacks Pakistan, what we know so far

ALSO READ | Surgical airstrike on Pakistan: 11 day blow-by-blow account of how India planned muh tod jawab

ALSO READ | Boys played well: Twitter taken over by memes and jokes poking fun at Pakistan after India's airstrikes

ALSO READ | India airstrike in Pakistan: Virender Sehwag, Gautam Gambhir salute Indian Air Force

ALSO WATCH | Why Mirage 2000 was chosen for surgical airstrike in Pakistan
