India claims air strike on Pakistani territory killed large number of militants

India says an air strike launched on a Pakistani-controlled area of Kashmir has killed "a very large number" of militants - contradicting information from Pakistan's government.

India claims the strike, which happened in the early hours of Tuesday morning, targeted a terrorist training camp in a pre-emptive attack.

The confrontation is the latest escalation between the nuclear-armed rivals since a deadly militant attack in the disputed region earlier this month killed more than 40 Indian soldiers. The attack is believed to be the worst against India's military since a rise in insurgency in 1989.

Responsibility for the attack was claimed by Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad. Pakistan's government denies it was involved, adding it will retaliate against any military action against it.

India’s foreign secretary, Vijay Gokhale, told reporters in New Delhi on Tuesday Indian fighter aircraft targeted camps belonging to the organisation following intelligence another attack was in the planning.

He said: "In this operation a very large number of Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and jihadis being trained were eliminated."

The attack targeted an area on the disputed border, around the village of Balakot. Pakistani military say Indian fighter jets were "forced" to retreat from their area, dropping their payload over a deserted area.

Pakistan's military spokesman, Major General Asif Ghafoor, said the Indian "aircrafts" crossed into the Muzafarabad sector of Kashmir, which is split between the two countries but claimed by each in its entirety.

The local police chief, Saghir Hussain Shah, said a team sent to the area found no damage and no casualties.

Insurgents have been demanding either outright independence or union with Pakistan. India routinely accuses Pakistan of arming and training militants who cross the mountainous Himalayan region. In the last year an increasingly bloody crackdown on insurgents in Indian-ruled Kashmir has escalated tensions in the troubled region.
