Our New India will not spare any acts of terror, says Amit Shah after IAF airstrike in Pakistan

BJP chief Amit Shah congratulated the Indian Air Force (IAF)'s team who carried out the airstrike across the Line of Control (LoC).

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) BJP chief Amit Shah on Tuesday congratulated the Indian Air Force (IAF)'s team who carried out the airstrike across the Line of Control (LoC).

"I congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces.

Today’s action further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong and decisive leadership of PM Narendra Modi," Amit Shah said on Twitter.

I congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces.

Today’s action further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong & decisive leadership of PM @narendramodi. Amit Shah (@AmitShah) February 26, 2019

Amit Shah said the "New India" under the prime leadership of Narendra Modi "will not spare any acts of terror, their perpetrators and patrons".

"Today's strong action shows the will and resolve of a New India. Our New India will not spare any acts of terror and their perpetrators and patrons," Shah said.

Today's strong action shows the will and resolve of a New India.

Our New India will not spare any acts of terror and their perpetrators and patrons. Amit Shah (@AmitShah) February 26, 2019

On Tuesday, the Indian Air Force (IAF) jets crossed the Line of Control (LoC) and destroyed major terrorist camps in Balakot sector. Several Mirage 2000 aircraft dropped 1,000 kg bombs on terrorist camps across the LoC.

India's airstrikes come days after Jaish, the Pakistan-based terrorist group, carried out a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir, killing 40 CRPF soldiers.

Sources said terrorist launchpads in Balakot, Chakothi and Muzaffarabad were completely destroyed in the IAF air strikes, and that Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) control rooms were also destroyed.

Foreign Secretary VK Gokhale on Tuesday described India's strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) biggest training camp in Balakot, Pakistan, 12 days after the terroist group killed 40 Indian soldiers in a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir.
