They returned safely, says Anand Mahindra after IAF bombs Pakistan, WATCH Vijay Shekhar Sharma’s proud gesture

The Indian Air Force fighter jets have dropped 1,000 kilogrammes of bombs at Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp across the Line of Control (LoC) at around 3:30 am on Tuesday morning. | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: The Indian Air Force (IAF) in a befitting reply against the terrorist group, which were responsible for Pulwama attack, on early Tuesday, February 26, 2019, bombed Jaish-e-Mohammed camp in Pakistan. According to news reports, about 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets of the Indian Air Force were used in the operation to strike terrorist camps in Balakot, Muzaffarabad region of Pakistan.

Following the resilient counter by Indian Air Force, several celebrities along with few eminent business personalities have expressed their proud gestures and have supported IAF’s action with strong words.

“And they returned safely... which is a feat in itself. Let us pray for the continued safety of those who protect us…,” Anand Mahindra, Chairman, Mahindra Group said in a tweet this morning. Vijay Shekhar Sharma of Paytm had placed a proud gesture reacting to the development.

And they returned safely... which is a feat in itself. Let us pray for the continued safety of those who protect us... https://t.co/DU4iq1hc36 — anand mahindra (@anandmahindra) February 26, 2019

Sanjay Dutt, Anupam Kher, Ajay Devgn, Akshay Kumar, Abhishek Bachchan, Taapsee Pannu, Raveena Tandon and Sonakshi Sinha were among the notable actors and actresses from Bollywood who have reacted towards the air strike by the Indian Air Force.

The Indian Air Force fighter jets have dropped 1,000 kilogrammes of bombs at Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp across the Line of Control (LoC) at around 3:30 am on Tuesday morning.

Confirming the attacks on terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed, Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Keshav Gokhale, in a press briefing, has said that India on Tuesday carried out a non-military, pre-emptive air strike on Balakot, Pakistan as there was credible intelligence that Jaish-e-Mohammed, which claimed the responsibility of attack on CRPF convoy, was planning another round of strikes in various parts of India.
