India strikes back: 'Not only 300 but all terrorists in Pakistan should be eliminated': CRPF martyr's wife

Father of a CRPF jawan Ajay Kumar, who lost his life in Pulwama attack that the feeling was really good, how long will we continue to sacrifice? | Photo Credit: Getty

New Delhi: After the Indian Air Force carried out airstrikes on terrorist camps across the Line of control on Tuesday morning, brother of a CRPF jawan, Vijay Maurya- who lost his life in Pulwama terror attack expressed his happiness. Family members of the martyrs have conveyed their wishes to soldiers who are fighting on the borders.

News agency ANI reported, Vijay Maurya's brother said, "we are very happy that this (IAF strikes on JeM camp across LoC) happened. But we want pressure on Pakistan to be kept up so that no terror organisation like JeM dares to attack us again."

Brother of CRPF jawan Vijay Maurya(who lost his life in #PulwamaTerrorAttack): We are very happy that this(IAF strikes on JeM camp across LoC) happened, but we want pressure on Pakistan be kept up so that no terror org like JeM dares to attack us again pic.twitter.com/XHuLzmUCNy — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 26, 2019

Meanwhile, sources reported, wife of a CRPF martyr named, Gandhimathi said that the Army should decimate the terrorists, our families have given up their life for the country. Not only 300 terrorist but all the terrorists in Pakistan should be eliminated. Only then the souls of Pulwama Bravehearts will rest in peace, she added.

The ANI report further mentioned the father of a CRPF jawan Ajay Kumar, who lost his life in Pulwama attack that the feeling was really good, how long will we continue to sacrifice? He also mentioned that this attack on the Pakistan terror launch pads should have happened a long time ago.

Father of CRPF jawan Ajay Kumar (who lost his life in #PulwamaAttack) on IAF strike at JeM camp in Balakot, Pakistan: Feeling really good, how long will we continue to sacrifice? This should have happened a long time ago. #Meerut pic.twitter.com/6H3RiRwYw9 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) February 26, 2019

Sources mentioned, the family members of martyr Ratan Kumar Thakur have also expressed their pleasure over the strike, which was launched on the Pakistan terror launch pads. The family demanded that terrorism should be uprooted so that we do not lose our jawans.

Following the attack, the airports, especially those operating from civil enclaves (air bases) were on high alert, reported Times Now.


