Has Modi blind sided opposition with IAF strike?

That the terror attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, had the potential to dramatically alter the outlook for the coming Lok Sabha elections was not lost either on the ruling BJP or the opposition parties.

The Narendra Modi government was under pressure from the public to act against the forces responsible for the Pulwama attack even as the opposition had changed tack—from observing a ceasefire with regard to Modi and the BJP in the aftermath of the attack to questioning the ruling dispensation's seriousness about tackling terrorism.

The Modi regime had to act fast as there was tremendous anger in the public with regard to the attack in Pulwama, in which 40 CRPF men were killed. The popular sentiment was for demonstrable action against the perpetrators of the terror strike. The Modi government, with the air strikes across the Line of Control, has succeeded to place before the people demonstrable action on the perpetrators of the terrorist attack.

Hours after the strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force, an aggressive Modi declared at a public rally in Churu, Rajasthan: “I promise this that I will not let this country bow down. India is in safe hands.”

The feeling in the BJP is that after the IAF strikes across the LoC, the advantage is now with the ruling side. It is felt that the action taken against terror camps across the LoC is in line with Modi's image as a strong leader who will not desist from taking bold action against terrorism and Pakistan.

This sentiment was well evident in BJP President Amit Shah's reaction, who tweeted: “I congratulate and salute the bravery and valour of our armed forces. Today's action further demonstrates that India is safe and secure under the strong & decisive leadership of PM @narendramodi.”

The opposition, on the other hand, was cautious in its reaction, lauding the IAF for the pre-dawn operation even as it did not make any comments about the Modi government's role in it.

There is in fact concern in the opposition camp about the impact that the aftermath of Pulwama, especially the cross-LoC air strikes, will have on the political discourse for the Lok Sabha polls.

According to sources in the opposition camp, the situation arising out of the air strikes will be on top of the agenda of a meeting of the anti-Modi grouping to be held tomorrow to chalk out a common minimum programme and a pre-poll alliance for the general elections.

The leaders will discuss how to tackle the unfolding post-Pulwama scenario, in which issues such as unemployment, agrarian crisis and Rafale have receded to the background. A challenge before the opposition will be to bring the focus back on these issues and also counter the nationalistic pitch of the BJP, which is expected to play up the air strikes as a decisive action taken by Modi against Pakistan and terrorism.
