India strikes Pakistan: Airstrike a result of precise planning, says S Nanodkar, former Air Vice Marshal

The camp was allegedly led by Maulana Yousuf Azhar (Representative Image).

New Delhi: The Indian Air Force (IAF) dropped 1,000 kg bombs in Balakot, Muzaffarabad, Chakothi and destroyed terror camps belonging to the terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammad. The air strike was executed at 3.30 am by aircraft belonging to the Indian Air Force.

Days after a suicide bomber of the Jaish-e-Mohammad attacked a CRPF convoy in Pulwama and took the lives of 40 CRPF jawans in Pulwama, the Indian Air Force crossed the Line of Control (LoC) and targeted the terror camps of Jaish-e-Mohammad. Though the air strike continued for 21 minutes, there were hours of planning that went into formulating an efficient plan like this.

Air Vice Marshal, S Nanodkar (Retd): Best part, we have a Chief who's taken part in Kargil himself, hence he is the best man to read intelligence reports from sources & find the best way to employ air power in today's scenario#IndiaStrikesBack pic.twitter.com/OH1chbbP1I — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 26, 2019

Also Read: India strikes back: 'Not only 300 but all terrorists in Pakistan should be eliminated': CRPF martyr's wife

While talking to Mirror Now, the Air Vice Marshal, S Nanodkar (Retd.) stated that the air strike was a result of precise planning and understanding of the area targeted. The demography and the kind of infrastructure were studied properly before executing the air strike.

India's Foreign Secretary, Vijay Gokhale stated that the air strike targeted the biggest training camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammad. He also added that the target had been selected to avoid civilian casualties. The camp was allegedly led by Maulana Yousuf Azhar who is the brother-in-law of Masood Azhar.

The air strike was the second instance where the Indian forces crossed the Line of Control (LoC) to attack Pakistan. Even during the Kargil War in 1999, special attention was paid to stay within the LoC. The last time when the Indian forces crossed the LoC was in the 1971 war.
