Pakistan says it has right to respond to aggression by India

A handout photo made available by the Pakistani military Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) shows shows trees damaged after Indian Air Force dropped their payloads near Balakot, Pakistan, Feb. 26, 2019. EPA-EFE/ISPR/HANDOUT EDITORIAL USE ONLY/NO SALES

Pakistani Army soldier stands guard at the Line of Control, the de facto border between Pakistani and Indian administered Kashmir in Chakothi, Azad Kashmir, Pakistan, Feb. 23, 2019. EPA-EFE FILE/AMIRUDDIN MUGHAL

Pakistan has the right to respond to an incursion by Indian fighter planes in its territory, the foreign minister said Tuesday.

Shah Mahmood Qureshi was speaking to reporters hours after Indian fighter jets allegedly violated Pakistan's airspace.

"Pakistan has the right to reasonable response and self defence," Shah Mahmood Qureshi told reporters in Islamabad after a meeting with other senior officials at the foreign ministry to assess the situation.

Qureshi described the Indian action as a "grave aggression" and violation of the Line of Control, the de-facto border between the two sides in the disputed Kashmir region over which the two countries have competing claims and fought two wars.

Earlier on Tuesday, the Pakistani army accused India of dropping bombs on its territory without causing any damage or casualties.

"Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force, (the Indian jets) released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot" in the Pakistan-administered Kashmir, Pakistan Armed Forces spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor wrote on Twitter.

Tensions between the two nuclear neighbours have soared since Feb. 14, when a suicide attack killed 42 Indian security personnel, the deadliest attack in India-administered Kashmir in 30 years.

Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad, JeM, which wants Kashmir to separate from India and merge with Pakistan, claimed the attack.

New Delhi, which accused Pakistan of supporting terrorism after the attack, announced its intention to diplomatically isolate Islamabad, and raised taxes on Pakistani imports by 200 percent.

At a press conference in New Delhi, the Indian foreign ministry said that "in the early hours of today, India struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot."

"In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated," India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Keshav Gokhale said.

India has repeatedly accused Pakistan of supporting cross-border terrorism and of allowing and sponsoring the operation of terrorist groups in its territory to attack Indian targets and to provoke separatist protests among the Kashmiri population.
