Joint sitting of Parliament convened after India violates Pakistan airspace

ISLAMABAD: Government has convened a joint sitting of the parliament to discuss the situation that has emerged after India violated Pakistan's airspace by sending warplanes across the Line of Control (LoC).

The joitn sitting, according to Parliamentary Affairs Minister ALi Muhammad Khan , has been convened on Wednesday.

Earlier, Opposition parties in the National Assembly unanimously condemned Indian intrusion of Pakistan airspace demanded government call a joint sitting of both house of the parliament.

The demand was first made by PPP leader Syed Khurshid Shah which Khawaja Asif of the PMLN endorsed.

Shah said "we are in a state of war. Now parliament should make decision," he said urging the lawmakers to show unity to India and the entire world. "Do not say things that can show our differences".

Khawaja Asif said the joint sitting should be called today because it was a matter of national security which calls for unanimity. "Our janwans and army should know that the nation stands by them," he said.

Opposition leader in the National Assembly Shehbaz Sharif also condemned the Indian intrusion and warned that If India starts a war it will end up with Pakistan's flag flying in New Delhi.

He urged Indian leadership to refrain from pushing South Asia's peace into fire with its own hands".

"Narendra Modu should not push poor people of South Asia into inferno of war," he said.

PPP's Sherry Rehman said Pakistan's armed forces were prepared to respond to Indian aggression and will immoderately retaliate in case of any attack.

She also called for convening a joint sitting of the parliament and sending a message to the world that Pakistan does't not want war.

"But we are fully prepared if any war is imposed on us".

Azad Kashmir Prime Minister Raja Farooq Haider condemned the Indian intrusion and demanded international community to take notice of New Delhi's war hysteria.

He said Indian was fanning war hysteria in order to divert attention from situation in Kashmir. The prime minister said Kashmirs are determined to get rid of India.

Meanwhile, the Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz has convened an emergency meeting of the party that would be presided over by former prime minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi to discuss the situation after Indian airstrikes.

Sindh Chief Minister Muurad Ali Shah said in a statement that Pakistan's armed forces were best in the word and are capable of giving a befitting response to Indian aggression.
