India air strikes in Pakistan kill 300 militants

NEW DELHI/ISLAMABAD, Feb 26, 2019 (BSS) – India today said its warplanes

launched a strike on militant camps in Pakistani territory that eliminated a

“very large” number of jihadis amid media reports of 300 deaths in the

assault while Islamabad rejected the casualty claims.

Indian foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale told a media conference that their

preemptive strikes were carried out targeting militant camps when “a very

large number of Jen Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists, trainers, senior commanders

and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen (suicide) action

were eliminated”.

“Credible intelligence was received that JeM was planning more suicide

attacks in India. In the face of imminent danger, a pre-emptive strike became

absolutely necessary,” he said.

The top Indian foreign office bureaucrat added that the existence of such

training facilities, “capable of training hundreds of jihadis could not have

functioned without the knowledge of the Pakistani authorities”.

Gokhale did not quote any figure but international media quoting Indian

government sources said it 300 militants were killed.

India’s premier PTI news agency said the French-made India’s Mirage 2000

fighter jets pounded JeM terror camps in Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakoti of

Pakistan in the well-planned predawn strike, carried out between 3:50 AM and

4:05 AM (IST).

It said defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman briefed Prime Minister Narendra

Modi on the operation and hours later, the Indian premier chaired a meeting

of Cabinet Committee on Security, joined by finance minister Arun Jaitley,

external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj, home minister Rajnath Singh.

Jem had claimed to have carried out a recent suicide attack in Indian-

controlled Kashmir territory killing 40 paramilitaries earlier this month

when New Delhi vowed to retaliate.

Islamabad rejected the Indian claim that it killed many militants in an air

strike, branding it “self serving, reckless and fictitious” but admitted

Indian warplanes breached its airspace and drop a payload over Balakot in the

country’s northwest bordering India.

Pakistan claimed that its own warplanes had chased off the Indian aircraft,

which had released their “payload” in a forested area, causing no casualties

and no serious material damage.

“Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzaffarabad sector,” Pakistani military

spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor said in a early today twitter, referring

to an area in the Pakistan-held part of Kashmir.

Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi at a press conference later

in Islamabad called the violation an “uncalled for aggression to which

Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing”.

Pakistan’s National Security Committee (NSC), comprising top officials

including Prime Minister Imran Khan and army chief Qamar Javed Bajwa, said in

a statement that it “strongly rejected Indian claim of targeting an alleged

terrorist camp near Balakot and the claim of heavy casualties”.

The statement said Khan would engage with global leadership to “expose

irresponsible Indian policy” and warned that Islamabad shall respond at the

time and place of its choosing” to Indian aggression.

International media reports and analysts said the Indian air assaults were

the first launched across the line of control – the de facto border that

divides India-administered Kashmir from Pakistan-administered Kashmir – since

1971 war.

Balakot is in Pakistan’s north-western Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province which is

about 50 km (30 miles) from LoC, the ceasefire line that is the de facto

border in Kashmir, a Himalayan region that has been the cause of two of the

three wars India and Pakistan have fought since the end of British colonial

rule in 1947.

The strike came in less than two weeks after 46 Indian paramilitary police

were killed in a militant operation there which appeared as the deadliest

attack on Indian forces in Kashmir for decades while India said its neighbour

had had a “direct hand” in the attack and accused it of providing sanctuary

to the militants.

Pakistan denied involvement.

New Delhi had threatened to retaliate after the February 14 bombing with

premier Modi threatening a “jaw-breaking” response announcing that Indian

armed forces were given full freedom to respond to the strike.

China, meanwhile, called on the nuclear-armed neighbours to “exercise

restraint” saying it expected both India and Pakistan could “adopt actions

that will help stabilise the situation in the region and improve mutual

relations”.

“Not the other way around,” China’s foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang

said.
