India-Pakistan tension: Pakistan will not retaliate against India immediately

Dubai: Pakistan has decided not to immediately retaliate to the Indian Air Force’s violation of the Line of Control (LoC) and bombing of Balakot village in the Pakistani-Administered Kashmir.

The decision was taken during a special meeting of the National Security Committee (NSC) chaired by Prime Minister Imran Khan. The committee rejected the Indian claim that they have attacked and destroyed an alleged terrorist camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad—the banned outfit which claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack in India.

NSC said Khan will "engage with global leadership to expose irresponsible Indian policy". It also warned that "Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing" to Indian aggression.

The Pakistani leadership has also decided to give a befitting reply to India when the time comes. The meeting has decided to raise the issue of India's violation of the Line of Control (LoC) at international forums. The meeting was attended by the top civil and military leadership, including Army Chief General Qamar Jawed Bajwa and chiefs of other forces.

It was decided that the matter of the Indian LoC violation be immediately raised at the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), United Nations and with friendly countries. The foreign minister will make contact to raise the issue.

It was also decided in the meeting that a joint session of Parliament would also be called to discuss the issue and take all political parties into confidence.

"Once again Indian government has resorted to a self-serving, reckless and fictitious claim," the post meeting statement said. "This action has been done for domestic consumption being in election environment, putting regional peace and stability at grave risk."

"The claimed area of strike is open for the world to see the facts on the ground. For this domestic and international media is being taken to the impact site. The forum concluded that India has committed uncalled for aggression to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing."

Pakistan's action plan

Engage with global leadership 'to expose irresponsible Indian policy' Local, international media to be taken to the site of Indian violation Summons special meeting of the National Command Authority on Wednesday Armed forces to remain prepared for all eventualities

Statement of the National Security Committee (NSC) after meeting Chaired by Prime Minister Imran Khan on Tuesday

“The Committee strongly rejects Indian claim of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot as well as the claim of heavy casualties.

"Once again Indian government has resorted to a self-serving, reckless and fictitious claim. This action has been done for domestic consumption being in election environment, putting regional peace and stability at grave risk.

"The claimed area of strike is open for the world to see the facts on ground. For this domestic and international media is being taken to the impact site. Forum concluded that India has committed uncalled for aggression to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing.

"The prime minister, as per the NSC statement, has directed that elements of national power — including the armed forces — and the people of Pakistan remain prepared for all eventualities.

He [Prime Minister Khan] decided to engage with global leadership to expose irresponsible Indian policy in the region.
