21 minutes, 3 targets, India avenges Pulwama attack

Indian Air Force’s fighters crossing the Line of Control, on Tuesday dropped 1000 kg bombs destroying a Jaish-e-Mohammad’s major terrorist camp in Pakistan. The attack was launched by 12 Mirage fighters that reached Balakot, a town in Mansehra district in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, eliminating a large number of JeM terrorists and their trainers.

On 14 February 2019, a suicide terror attack was conducted by a Pak based terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammad, led by Masood Azhar with its headquarters in Bahawalpur, leading to the martyrdom of 40 brave jawans of the CRPF.

Pakistan has been several times informed of the locations of training camps in Pakistan and PoJK but has always denied their existence. The existence of such massive training facilities capable of training hundreds of jihadis is impossible without the knowledge of Pakistan authorities.

India has been repeatedly urging Pakistan to take action against the JeM to prevent jihadis from being trained and armed inside Pakistan, to which no concrete actions were taken.

Intelligence was received that JeM was planning another strike for which fidayeen jihadis were being trained. So, a pre-emptive strike became absolute necessity.

India, early Tuesday struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot, eliminating a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis trained for fidayeen action.

This facility at Balakot was headed by Maulana Yousuf Azhar (alias Ustad Ghouri), the brother-in-law of Masood Azhar, Chief of JeM.

The Government of India is firmly and resolutely committed to taking all necessary measures to fight the menace of terrorism.

The selection of the target was also conditioned by our desire to avoid civilian casualties.

The Government of Pakistan had made a solemn commitment in January 2004 not to allow its soil or territory under its control to be used for terrorism against India.

Now expecting, Pakistan to live up to its public commitment and take follow up actions to dismantle all JeM and other camps and hold the terrorists accountable for the actions, said India’s Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale.

Like this: Like Loading...
