BJP withdrew support as I remained firm to party agenda: Mehbooba - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

‘PDP free of garbage’

Fayaz Bukhari

SRINAGAR, Jan 7: Former Chief Minister and People’s Democratic Party president, Mehbooba Mufti, today said that Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) withdrew support to her Government as she remained firm on her party’s agenda and described those who recently resigned from the party as “garbage”.

Addressing workers at Bijbehara on the death anniversary of her father and former Chief Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, Mehbooba said that the Government would have continued for six years if she had not strongly defended the interests of the State and its people. She said if she had signed on dotted line like in the case of Afzal Guru, the PDP Government wouldn’t have been toppled by the BJP.

She said that since she remained consistently firm on PDP’s agenda which was included in ‘Agenda of Alliance’, the BJP had to run away. “Otherwise, there wasn’t any other reason for the BJP to withdraw its support. Inspite of the problems that we faced, we didn’t compromise on progress and development”, she added.

Click here to watch video

“However, the political agenda of the PDP and party’s firm belief on its principles led the BJP to turn its back. Being in the Government, PDP kept insisting for the withdrawal of the FIRs, amnesty for the stone pelters and return of the power projects from the NHPC,” the PDP president said.

Mehbooba apologized to people for toffee remark and said that she was concerned like a mother about the young people who were getting killed and injured. “If my comments, as a mother, have agonized mothers, sisters and brothers, I apologise. I am being criticised that she has said toffee etc but I said it as a mother. Mothers get angry when her kids don’t listen to her,” she said.

“That remark was made out of the motherly concern as I was outraged over the way in which children were being pushed into the danger zones. The precious lives that were lost during that year is a loss to me and to the families of those kids. I have fought with army and Ikhwan only for the people and to make their lives safe and secure,” she said.

She was widely criticised for her comment during 2016 unrest that the “youth were not going to Army camps and police stations to buy toffee and milk”. She made the comment while addressing a press conference in Srinagar along with Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh at the peak of the unrest triggered by July 8 killing of militant commander Burhan Wani.

The PDP president said that whether in power or not, PDP’s main aim has always been to resolve problems of Kashmir. “And the best model for that is the period between 2002 and 2005. After the 2014 polls, the PDP didn’t get a clear mandate and out of the compulsion had to join hands with the BJP. The party was hopeful that Modi would behave like Vajpayee but he didn’t and that was a let down. When in November 2015, a rally was organized by the PDP for Modi, people had come on Mufti Sahib’s call to listen. However, Modi didn’t rise to the occasion and things started falling apart,” she said.

She took a dig at PM Narendra Modi saying he has wasted his mandate in India as well in Kashmir.

Mehbooba said that after the death of PDP founder Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, she tried to bargain with the BJP for four long months, demanding the return of power projects, peace initiatives, and Confidence-Building Measures. “When things were taking the final shape, our own people went to Nagpur and told the BJP that the Government could be formed even without Mehbooba Mufti. With a sole aim to save the party and stop them from handing over everything to BJP, I reluctantly had to make a coalition with the BJP in the State. Otherwise, I wasn’t willing to form the coalition with the party which had reneged on the promises made to Mufti Mohammad Sayeed,” she said.

Mehbooba invited the youth to join the PDP, saying that her party was “free of garbage now”. “From this platform, I want to invite the youth of Jammu and Kashmir who are educated and interested in resolution of the Kashmir issue to come and join us,” she said.

“…all the garbage in the party has gone out with the wind,” she said while referring to a spree of resignations of her party leaders. She asked the youth to help her to take the State “out of this misery”.

Mehbooba said that she didn’t visit the family of the militant on her own but was asked by them to do so. “I visited few places in the past few days and I was heavily criticized that why did not I go earlier. I did not go on my own. Few days back some people from a family came to me. Where I live (in Srinagar), two other former Chief Ministers also live – Farooq Abdullah and Omar Abdullah. They did not go to them but to me. What can I do? They told me that one of their wards is a militant but security forces have arrested his sister, brother-in-law and another brother. I assured them that I will speak to the DGP about it. But I also thought what will happen to other people (suffering the same fate). They said you should visit our home and it will send a message to entire Kashmir”, she said.

She said that she went to the village as she feels pain. “Otherwise, which former Chief Minister will go from village to village. If Farooq and Omar do not go, what was the need for me? I feel the pain. I do not want anyone to outrage the modesty of my sisters and daughters. I went there and two people were released. The Governor ordered an inquiry into the matter. Then Safanagari people heard about it and they called me. They told me that their militant son has been killed but the security forces have arrested his brother”, she said.

“I did not go on my own, I went as I was called by these people. If anyone has problem with my such visits, I will not go but doors of Mehbooba Mufti are open for all Kashmiris who are in trouble or facing any problems,” she said.

Mehbooba said that she was allowed to work for only two months as the Chief Minister. “Out of 2 years and 2 months (as Chief Minister), I was allowed to work for only two months. You know the situation in 2014 and the devastation unleashed by floods. Today, you are able to travel between Islamabad (Anantnag) and Srinagar within minutes. Today there is a Medical College in Islamabad (Anantnag) and another one in Baramulla. Today there is a passport office in Anantnag”, she said.

While highlighting the achievements of her Government, she said that 10,000 youth were recruited in Police and services of 60,000 daily wagers were regularized. “We restored the infrastructure damaged by the floods. We regularized the services of 60,000 daily wagers but what can I do if the orders to this effect are not being issued now (by the Governor’s administration). 10,000 youth were recruited in police”, she said.

The former Chief Minister said that she had 12, 000 FIRs withdrawn, registered since 2008. “I did whatever I could but one thing I must tell you that I did not compromise. I had promised that if we come to power, we will withdraw the FIRs and 12,000 youth had FIRs against them withdrawn.. These FIRs were there since 2008. The NC-Congress Government was there for six years (from 2008 to 2014) but they did not do that”, she said.

Mehbooba said that she made BJP Government at Centre to announce one month ceasefire but militants didn’t respond. “I made the BJP Government (at Centre) to announce ceasefire for one month. Everyone was home comfortably. There was no shot fired from this side (security forces) but firing came from the other side (militants). If I had another opportunity, I would got the ceasefire for six months”, she said.

The former Chief Minister said that she didn’t compromise on Kathua rape and murder of a minor case and got two BJP Ministers dropped. “I did not compromise on Kathua case. I got two (BJP) Ministers dropped and did not hand the case to CBI as I had apprehensions that it (Kathua case) will meet the same fate as the Shopian case (alleged rape and murder of two women in 2009)”, she said.

Mehbooba said that she got FIRs registered against Army and security forces. “I had FIRs registered against the Army and security forces wherever they erred and BJP could not bear it”, she said.

“I repeatedly told the Prime Minister that the situation in Kashmir will not improve unless you hold dialogue with Pakistan and separatists. I convinced the Union Home Minister on this and he stated this in the Parliament few days ago. The Home Minister said he was ready for unconditional talks with Hurriyat Conference. What else could I have done? We can only take a horse to the water but we cannot force it to drink it”, she said.

“Today there is an uncertainty in entire Jammu and Kashmir but you should not be scared of it. There are some people who join the parties for being in power but your party (PDP) is a movement. Power is nothing, it has come and it will keep coming but the most important thing is to take out Jammu and Kashmir from its problems”, she said.
