42 trained Jaish suicide bombers lived at Balakot terror camp that IAF destroyed

Visuals from the Balakot terror camp which was destroyed by IAF in an airstrike. (Photo: ANI)

At least 42 trained suicide bombers lived in the Balakot terror camp which was destroyed by Indian Air Force in a swift operation carried out on Tuesday at 3:30 am across the Line of Control (LoC).

Sources told India Today TV that most of the terrorists were waiting to raid India from the launch pad.

Jaish-e-Mohammed's Mohammad Salim alias Ustad Ghauri, the brother-in-law of Masood Azhar, was the operational head of the Markaz Syed Ahmed Saheed Training Camp, which was wiped out by the bombs dropped by multiple Indian Air Force (IAF) Mirage 2000 aircraft.

IAF airstrike in Pakistan LIVE Updates

The terror camp was hit hard at between 3:45 am and 3:53 am while the entire operation lasted around 21 minutes. At least three Jaish control rooms were also destroyed in the airstrikes launched by the IAF.

Find out the exact point where the JeM training camp was located

However, the hit on Jaish terror camp was the biggest achievement for the forces as it was a major operational terror pad.

Intel Sources: Picture of JeM facility destroyed by Indian Ar Force strikes in Balakot, Pakistan pic.twitter.com/th1JWbVrHw ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Intel Sources: Ammunition dump blown up today in Balakot,Pakistan by IAF Mirages. The dump had more than 200 AK rifles, uncountable rounds hand grenades, explosives and detonators pic.twitter.com/b7ENbKgYaH February 26, 2019

At least 200-300 Jiash cadres have been reportedly killed in the attack; 25 top commanders who were present at the camp at the time of the airstrike have also been neutralised, suggest sources.

India Today TV has accessed an exclusive list which has the name of at least 42 Jaish cadres training in the camp in a hilltop called Jaba Top near Balakot.

Abu Bakkar, Shabbir Hussain, Nisar Akhtar, Bilal Ameer, Abdul Hafeez, Shahid Iqbal and many more have been named. Key Jaish operatives including Maulana Ammar, Mufti Azhar Khan Kashmiri, Ibrahim Azhar, and Maulana Talha Saif were main targets of the Indian Air Force.

Key Jaish e Mohammed operatives targeted in today’s air strikes: Maulana Ammar(in pic 1, associated with Afghanistan and Kashmir ops) and Maulana Talha Saif(pic 2), brother of Maulana Masood Azhar and head of preparation wing pic.twitter.com/rkEyCqvMJg ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

All about the Balakot terror camp

An intel dossier accessed by India Today TV said the training camp was built on an area spanning six acres in a forest near Balakot. It contained large halls and dormitories with accommodation capacity of more than 600 people.

It also contained facilities like swimming pool, gymnasium and firing range for the cadres who were training at the site. The dossier also showed that flags of USA, UK, and Israel were painted on staircases of the JeM facility destroyed by IAF fighter jets.

Intel Sources: Flags of USA, UK and Israel painted on staircases seen in Jaish e Mohammed facility destroyed by Indian Air Force jets in Balakot pic.twitter.com/266CEI0hGR ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

Commenting on the operation, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said it was an intelligence-based counter terror strike and a non-military action to eliminate Pakistan-based terror camps.

Gokhale confirmed that the JeM terror facility on Jaba top was destroyed in the operation along with some control centres and an ammunition dump. The ammunition dump reportedly had more than 200 AK series rifles, hand grenades, explosives, and detonators.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi while addressing a rally lauded the Indian Air Force for carrying out the operation successfully and warned Pakistan yet again.

Meanwhile, his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan said the attack was "uncalled for" and that Pakistan will respond to the airstrike by Indian Air Force across the LoC.

The operation was launched by IAF just 12 days after the Pulwama terror attack which claimed the life of at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force paramilitary troopers.
