After IAF airstrikes in Pakistan, Arvind Kejriwal postpones Delhi statehood hunger strike

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal said we all stand as one nation today. (Photo: PTI)

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal informed in a tweet today that in the wake of of the prevailing India-Pakistan situation, he will be postponing his indefinite hunger strike for his full statehood of Delhi demand.

"In view of the prevailing Indo-Pak situation, I am postponing my upwas for full statehood of Delhi. We all stand as one nation today," Arvind Kejriwal said in a tweet.

In view of prevailing Indo Pak situation, I am postponing my upwas for full statehood of Delhi. We all stand as one nation today. Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019

Earlier today, Arvind Kejriwal saluted the pilots of the Indian Air Force (IAF) after it carried out air strikes in Pakistan.

"I salute the bravery of IAF pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan," Kejriwal said in a tweet.

I salute the bravery of Indian Air Force pilots who have made us proud by striking terror targets in Pakistan Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 26, 2019

Arvind Kejriwal was scheduled to sit on indefinite hunger strike from March 1 to garner support for his demand of full statehood for Delhi, party convenor Gopal Rai said on Monday.

Rai said he will write letters to Delhi Congress president Sheila Dikshit and Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari asking them about their stand on the issue. He said the venue of Kejriwal's hunger strike is yet to be decided.

The BJP and the Congress have questioned Kejriwal's decision to go on fast, saying it is a move targeted to gain political mileage weeks ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.

Fighter jets of the IAF crossed the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir and bombed a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist camp in the first such strike since 1971.

Sources said that Mirage 2000 fighter jets of the Indian Air Force launched pre-dawn raids in Balakot, Pakistan, completely destroying the terrorist facility.

Officially, the government acknowledged the cross-border IAF airstrike in a carefully worded statement.

India carried out an intelligence-led, non-military, pre-emptive action targeting the biggest training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad, the Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement.

Large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis were killed in the attack, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said. Sources put the number of casualities to 300.

The cross-border airstrike by the Indian Air Force comes 11 days after the Pulwama terror attack, in which 40 Central Reserve Police jawans were martyred.

-With inputs from PTI
