Joydeep Mukherjee Wins Sony World Photography Awards

New Delhi: Supporting the local photographic communities in 62 countries across the globe, the World Photography Organisation and Sony today announced the winners of the 2019 National Awards. Included in the list is Joydeep Mukherjee as the recipient of the 2019 India National Award.

Part of the prestigious and internationally renowned Sony World Photography Awards, the National Awards program demonstrates Sony’s commitment to supporting local photographic talent by recognising the work of local photographers and promoting it on a global scale.

Joydeep Mukherjee’s image was selected as the single best image taken by any photographer of Indian nationality and living in India, entered to the Open competition of the Sony World Photography Awards.

Mukherjee is a photographer from Kolkata who took this incredible action shot of a young, street-performer. Mukherjee explains that crowds of people swarmed around the boy to watch him pour flammable liquids into his mouth before setting it alight in a dramatic performance.

Mukherjee discusses his progression in photography: “From my early days, I have been interested in various kinds of sports, trekking and travelling but it was only in 2003 that I stepped into the world of photography. During a trek to the Annapurna Base Camp, Nepal, I became interested in photography. From this time forth this passion became an integral part of my life”. Mukherjee is the recipient of multiple other awards including 1st place in the ‘People’ category of the Smithsonian Magazine Photo Contest - USA.

Mukherjee is overjoyed with his achievement: “This is a great honour for me to be the winner of the India National Award at the 2019 Sony World Photography Awards. A big thanks to the organiser as well as all the honourable judges”.

As National Award winner, Mukherjee receives the latest digital imaging equipment from Sony and will be flown to London to attend the Sony World Photography Awards ceremony on April 17. The winning work will be shown at the Sony World Photography Awards Exhibition in London from April 18 – May 6 and published in the 2019 Awards’ book.

The success is announced today alongside the winners all 62 National Awards, and the 10 categories of the Awards’ Open competition. The shortlist for the Awards’ Professional and Student competitions will be revealed March 26. The overall and Professional category winners of the Awards will be announced on April 17.

Also Read: World Photography Day 2018- Keep Clicking, Keep Smiling!
