India strikes back again: This is what happened in Surgical Strike 2

This is the first time since 1971 that the Indian Air Force breached the Line of Control and entered into Pakistani territory. (Photo:GettyImages).

Indian Air Force Mirage 2000 jets crossed the Line of Control and then went into Pakistan to destroy terrorist training camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed led by Masood Azhar.

A large training camp was flattened in Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

Jaish-e-Mohammed is a United Nations-proscribed organisation. A Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber had exploded a car bomb in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14 resulting in deaths of 44 personnel of India's Central Reserve Police Force.

India had vowed revenge for the attack. The revenge came in the form of the surprise air strikes on Jaish-e-Mohammed targets in Balakot.

HERE ARE 10 SALIENT POINTS ABOUT THESE AIRSTRIKES.

1. This was the first time since 1971 that the Indian Air Force breached the Line of Control and entered into Pakistani territory. Even during the Kargil war, the Indian Air Force had not attempted crossing the border or the Line of Control.

2. 12 Mirage 2000 jets took part in the operation. They dropped 1,000-kg laser-guided bombs to destroy at least six terrorist terror camps inside Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and Balakot. The Mirage 2000 planes are quite old and have been recently upgraded at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited's facility in Bengaluru.

3. The multi-role aircraft made by French company Dassault Aviation is the backbone of the Indian Air Force. The same company makes Rafale. Mirage 2000 can also carry a 20 kilo tonne nuclear bomb.

4. The aircraft crossed over at 3 am even as Pakistani armed forces were on high alert. The Indian formation managed to avoid detection. When Pakistan Air Force noticed the bombarding, it scrambled its jets but the formation was not easy to tackle for them. By the time, more aircraft took off from Abbottabad, the operation was over and Indian jets had safely returned home. The Balakot bombing took just about 90 seconds and the entire operation was over in 21 minutes.

5. Government sources estimate the number of terrorists killed to be between 200 and 300. Yousuf Azhar, one of the hijackers of IC-814, may be one of those killed. Yousuf, is a brother-in-law of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, who was released after IC-814 hijacking and went on the form the terrorist group.

6. India said this was not a revenge attack but a pre-emptive strike led by intelligence inputs and was 'non-military' in nature. A non-military preemptive strike technically means the operation targeted no military installation. The Ministry of External Affairs statement said the intelligence inputs were precise and Indian action took extreme care to not cause civilian casualty.

7. Pakistan pre-empted India's announcement by claiming Pakistan Air Force had chased away Indian Air Force intruders who then unloaded their payload in haste, damaging some trees. Pakistan media also denied any such strike and said that only person suffered minor injuries in Balakot.

8. Pakistan has said the country will retaliate even as it denied any damage in the Indian strikes. Members of its national assembly demanded that Pakistan must force Organisation of Islamic Countries (OIC) to withdraw its summit invitation to India, accorded a guest of honour this year.

9. India launched a renewed diplomatic offensive by briefing diplomats from foreign missions in Delhi, starting with envoys of China and the United Kingdom.

10. There is political unity in India on the action against the terrorist group. Most Opposition parties have expressed support for the airstrikes and praised the Indian Air Force for a successful operation.

ALSO READ | IAF airstrike in Pakistan: India hits Jaish camps across LoC, Imran Khan says will respond

ALSO READ | Be ready for anything, Imran Khan tells Pakistanis after IAF strike on Jaish

ALSO WATCH | Mirage jets destroy Pakistan terror camps with 1,000 kg bombs
