Army leadership to decide full action at right time: Dhananjay Munde, Sharad Pawar praise Balakot airstrikes

Dhananjay Munde | Photo Credit: Twitter

Mumbai: Today's airstrike is just a glimpse into the strength of the Indian armed forces, the army leadership will decide the time of full action, said the leader of Opposition in Maharashtra state legislative Council Dhananjay Munde. He congratulated the armed forces for the brilliant pre-emptive action on terror camps. He congratulated the armed forces in the Assembly House today for the brave attack on terror camps. He moved a resolution to this effect in the House.

The nation was in pain after the Pulwama attack. Everyone was standing by the armed forces. The incident was beyond politics. All the political parties too were in solidarity with the armed forces, Munde said.

Today Indian Air Force attacked the terror camps in PoK and eliminated around 300 terrorists. All our soldiers returned unhurt. The attack has broken the back of Jaish-E-Mohammed, Hizbul Mujaheedin, Lashkar-e-Tayyaba. Munde said that in future also, everyone will stand firmly by the armed forces in the times of crisis.

The nation stands with the armed forces: Sharad Pawar

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar has come out in solidarity with the Air Force for giving a befitting reply to the terror groups operating from PoK. In a tweet, Pawar has praised the Air Force and saluted their courage. Speaking to the media, Pawar said that External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj informed him about the strike over the telephone. He said the nation stands with the armed forces.

Pawar said Swaraj had called him to invite him to an all-party meeting convened by the central government on Tuesday. "...But I informed her that the Mumbai airport was closed for a day today. During the conversation, Swaraj gave the details of the air strike, time of the strike and the overall conditions during the strike. The main objective of the strike was to destroy terror camps and around 250 terrorists were eliminated during the strike. The entire nation stands with the armed forces at testing times," Pawar said.

He added that armed forces must be given complete freedom in such situations. Decisive action needs to be taken after ascertaining the right place and right time. The armed forces enjoyed such freedom in the past as well, he added.
