J&K: At least five jawans injured as Pakistani forces allegedly violate ceasefire along LoC

Pakistani forces allegedly violated the ceasefire in at least three sectors along the Line of Control on Tuesday, according to Hindustan Times. At least five Indian jawans were injured in heavy shelling in Akhnoor Sector, PTI reported.

The three sectors fall in Jammu, Rajouri and Poonch districts of Jammu and Kashmir. This is reportedly the fourth straight day of shelling and firing on Indian posts. Mortar shelling was reported in at least 55 forward areas, reported PTI.

The cross-border firing took place even as Indian Air Force jets carried out a “preemptive strike” targeted at Jaish-e-Mohammed training camps across the border.

“There are ceasefire violations by Pakistan along LoC in Akhnoor, Nowshera and Krishna Ghati sectors on Tuesday,” Defence spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand said. “At about 17.30 hours, Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by resorting to heavy shelling with mortars and firing of small arms in Akhnoor, Nowshera and Krishna Ghati sectors,” Anand said, adding that the India Army retaliated to the mortar shelling.

An unidentified Army officer said Pakistan Army used heavy weaponry and fired 120 mm mortar targetting villages and forward posts, PTI reported. Pakistan Army reported fired using small arms, automatic and heavy weaponry at Krishna Gati, Balakote, Khari Karmara, Mankote and Tarkundi in Poonch district, Kalal, Baba Khori, Kalsian, Laam and Jhangar areas in Rajouri and Pallanwala and Laleali in Jammu district.

The Pakistani Army shelled forward posts in Nowshera sector using small arms, but were repelled, PTI reported, citing unidentified police officers.

The Pakistan Army had also used heavy mortar shelling on forward posts along the Line of Control on Monday night, the official said. The first ceasefire violation in the Nowshera sector happened around 6.30 pm on Monday, when Pakistani forces opened fire, officials said.

The air strikes

There have been no reports of any loss of life during the Indian air strikes in Balakot on Tuesday, Greater Kashmir reported. Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said “very large number of terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis being trained for fidayeen action” were killed in the attack”. India’s response came over a week after Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist murdered 40 Central Reserve Police Force jawans in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir on February 14. Pakistan has warned of a response.
