Pakistani Drone Shot Down Near Gujarat Border

Bhuj: A Pakistani unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) was on Tuesday shot down near the International Border in Kutch district of Gujarat, police sources said.

Debris of the UAV was seen near Nanghatad village in Abdasa taluka of Kutch, they said.

On hearing a loud sound around 6 am, villagers went to the spot and found the debris of the UAV, the sources said.

Asked if a Pakistani UAV had been shot down by the Indian armed forces, a police official, on condition of anonymity, said, “Such an incident has happened, we are investigating the matter.”

The official, however, refused to elaborate further.

Also read: India’s ‘Non-Military Pre-Emptive’ Strike on Pakistan: What We Know, What We Don’t Know

Earlier, government sources said that in a pre-dawn strike, combat jets of Indian Air Force bombed terror camps at multiple locations across the Line of Control on the Pakistani side, 12 days after Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed terror group carried out the dastardly Pulwama attack in Kashmir.

They said the IAF’s Mirage 2000 fighter jets pounded the terror camps in Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakoti in the well-planned strike destroying Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camps.

Defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman briefed Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the operation.

The Gujarat police also issued a “high alert” across the state following India’s preemptive strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s (JeM) biggest terror camp in Pakistan.

Gujarat’s director general of police Shivanand Jha cancelled a conference on crime-related issues scheduled at the Police Bhavan in Gandhinagar and asked all officers who reached there to attend it to return to their respective headquarters in view of the alert issued in the state.

“In view of the action on terrorists across the border by IAF, all establishments have been put on high alert,” a message from DGP’s office to the district headquarters said.

“The conference scheduled for today here at this office stands cancelled and all officials are requested to return to their headquarters,” it added.
