Man who shot clip of doctor beating staff held

RAJKOT: Police on Monday arrested the person, who had shot the video in which Dr Shyam Rajani is seen thrashing his employee Mayur Mori. The doctor was arrested on Sunday itself. Mori has been missing for the past three weeks.The accused, identified as Rahul Padhiyar, had shot the video in which Rajani, who runs Lifecare Hospital on Kuvadva Road, is seen beating up his staffer Mayur Mori in his SUV.The video, which went viral, triggered widespread protest among members of the Rajput community to which Mori belongs. Around 10 people from the community went and vandalized Rajani’s hospital and house. They then went to the house of Raju Makwana, who is also seen beating up Mori in the video, and vandalized his house.“As Makwana was not present, the accused threatened his wife Kailash that they would kill him, if he did not surrender to police. They also allegedly slapped Kailash. We have booked the accused for the crime on the complaint Rajani’s father Hemant Rajani,” said an official from Rajkot B-Division police station.Police also suspect that Rajani holds bogus medical degrees. “We have seized his MBBS and MD degree certificates and sent them to the Medical Council of India for verification, the report of which is being awaited,” said Dr Pankaj Rathod, health officer of Rajkot Municipal Corporation Meanwhile, police are looking for Mori, who has been missing ever since he was beaten up. He had been working at Lifecare Hospital for past four to five years and was in charge of making case papers.Preliminary investigation and conversation in the video suggest that Rajani suspected Mori of revealing some of this secret exploits to his wife Karishma Gandhi that later led to their divorce.An audio clip also went viral in which Gandhi is purportedly heard making serious allegations about Rajani’s personal and professional life. She is heard saying that she knows about his “loose character” and fake degrees.She also alleged that Rajani had studied Bachelors of Homoeopathic Medicine (BHMS) for just two years but continued practising with a fake MD (medicine) degree.
