High on Josh! Here's how Indian Air Force annihilated JeM's terror factory

A National Akali Dal leader shouts slogans in support of India and against Pakistan as he celebrates reports of Indian aircrafts bombing Pakistan territory | Photo Credit: AP

New Delhi: On Tuesday, in the wee hours of the morning, the Indian Air Force (IAF) initiated its masterstroke and caught Pakistan by surprise with series of aerial strikes across the Line of Control (LoC), neutralizing several camps of terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM). The IAF strikes have come in the aftermath of the dastardly suicide bomb attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama - orchestrated by the recruits of Jaish-e-Mohammed in which 40 personnel from the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) were martyred.

With Pakistan's refusal to sanitize and dismantle terrorism on its home soil, the Indian government took the matter of regional turbulence in their own hands by fighting global terrorism as a responsible nation. The Indian Airforce with 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets eliminated JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders, group of jihadis in Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakoti. Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman briefed Prime Minister Narendra Modi about the preempted non-military strike that was carried out between 3 AM to 4 AM IST.

Here's how the bombing carried out by IAF against Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) unfolded in Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakoti:

1) Arch-rivals caught napping by the Indian Air Force

While Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan was busy welcoming Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman to his debt-ridden state in the wake of the cowardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, Indian agencies pin-pointed the safe heavens of the terrorists in Pakistan that later turned to be Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest camp destroyed till date.

Till the time Pakistan issued their response by addressing the Pulwama attack in India followed by Imran Khan's assurance of ending terror in and outside of the state, India had carved out Balakot as the epicentre of Pak-sponsored terrorism. As a result, it took 1,000 kilogrammes of heavy bombing sponsored by the 12 Mirage 2000 fighter aircrafts to eliminate the terror camps representing the JeM outfit.

Also read: JeM terrorists were ‘sleeping’ at Balakot camp, Pakistan authorities were 'clueless' about IAF strike: Sources

2) 21-minute of powerplay decimated JeM terrorists as Indian pilots returned home safely

After 'embarrassing' Pakistan with the surgical strikes previously, India this time took only 21 minutes to decimate JeM funded terror camps located in the Balakot, Muzaffarabad and Chakoti sectors. To put JeM terror groups out of their misery, the Indian Air Force cleaned the biggest terror camp representing the JeM organization in just 8 minutes which began at 3:45 AM.

With the pinpoint accuracy of the phenomenal Mirage 2000 aircraft, the AIF pilots ran riots in Muzaffarabad at around 3:48 am to 3:55 am. According to sources, India's 12 Mirage 2000 aircrafts 'terrorised' the terror camps located in Chakothi from 3:58 AM to 4:04 AM. With zero casualties and a well-planned air-strike to expose Imran Khan's 'Naya' Pakistan, Indian fighter jets returned home by successfully completing second surgical strike mission in PM Modi's reign as Prime Minister after 21 minutes.

3) Why Mirage 2000 fighter jets were chosen to carry out the 'Second Surgical strike'

Coming from the household name of France's Dassault Aviation, the lethal Mirage 2000 is one of the topmost fighter aircraft in the modern era. The French manufacturer fighter jet has a lighting speed of 2,000km per hour posses 30mm revolver-type artillery guns that has 125 rounds each. The revolver-type cannons take only 60 seconds fire rounds that vary between 1,200 to 1,800 rounds.

4) Along with Pakistan, Indian Airforce took terror-based organisations to the cleaners

With Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan pledging allegiance with other Asian nations to fight terrorism and labelling in house terror group as non-state players, India was left with no choice to track and hunt down the terror groups in its neighbour's home soil that eventually came as an eye-opener. India this time took the aerial route to not only to embarrass its neighbour but also to expose Pakistan by eliminating hundreds of terrorists.

To stung Pakistan in the wake of the tragic Pulwama attack, India completed its second surgical strike in a matter of roughly 20 minutes. The killing of the brother-in-law of JeM chief Maulana Masood Azhar, Maulana Yusuf Azhar, also known as Ustad Ghauri turned out to be India's biggest success in the air strike.

5) Remember US' 2011 win in Abbottabad? India thumped terrorism by destroying several hideouts and killing 350 terrorists in one go!

Whether it was United States Navy SEALs Operation Neptune Spear that killed Al-Qaeda's founder and then leader Osama bin Laden or series of swiftly performed Surgical strikes by the Indian forces, the presence of terror based outfits in Pakistan have always acted like safe heaven to upcoming and battle-scarred terrorist organisations for many years.

Though the US ended its long due vendetta with the mastermind of 9/11 attack - Bin Laden that lasted a decade in 2011, India on Tuesday managed to kill at least 350 terrorists in its second instalment of the surgical strike against terrorism post-Pulwama attack.
