City denizens sing paeans for Indian Air Force

Bhubaneswar: The successful air strike undertaken by the Indian Air Force against the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp at Balkot in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) early Tuesday destroying the terror outfit’s training camps and killing anything between 200 to 300 ultras have left the nation upbeat. Swept by patriotic frevour and euphoria, netizens in India as well as abroad have been singing paeans for the Armed forces, especially the Indian Air Force (IAF) on the social media. The action came after 12 days after a suicide bomber killed 40 CRPF troopers in Pulwama.

Denizens in the Temple City were no exception.

Congratulating the IAF, Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik Tuesday saluted the pilots who dared the terrorists across the Line of Control (LoC) tweeting “IndianAirForce for pre-dawn air strike on terror camps in defence of our Nation. #JaiHind”.

Subrat Das, a city-based businessman, said, “The attack was necessary as Pakistan has been sponsoring terrorist organisations and nurturing them for jihad in India. The Indian Air Force demolished their camps in PoK smashing their plans to undertake fiadeen attacks in India.”

Manas Tanjan Patnaik, a comic actor, said, “Violation of the LoC by the IAF has the support of the international community. Such a strike was necessary and the way it was executed – a non-militant and pre-emptive strike on terror is always laudable.”

Pranab Prasanna Rath, a city-based Youtuber, said, “Surgical Strike 2.0 – today’s strong action against the terrorists show the will and resolve of a New India and the Army.”

Professional motorbike racer Udipta Kumar Rath said, “All I can say is that the air strike by IAF is pretty fair. No doubt, our forces are brave.”

According to Sidarth Nanda, sleeping terrorists were sitting ducks for the Indian bombing; they had no idea that Balakot would to be targeted.

Many social media users also shared funny quotes and used the term “How’s the Jaish,” a dialogue taken from the popular Hindi movie “Uri: The Surgical Strike”.
