IAF Pak Strike: Pak uses Mehbooba’s words, asks ‘if story being presented is opposite of reality’

IAF Pak Strike: Pak uses Mehbooba’s words, asks ‘if story being presented is opposite of reality’

After the IAF airstrikes were carried out at multiple terror camps in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), a defiant and flabbergasted Pakistan on Tuesday said that Islamabad will respond to any "uncalled aggression" from New Delhi and warned India to be prepared for any "events of eventualities."

Pakistan on Tuesday "strongly rejected" India's claim" of targeting terrorist camp near Balakot and causing heavy casualties even as it vowed to respond "at the time and place of its choosing" to what it called India's "uncalled for aggression".

After the IAF airstrikes were carried out at multiple terror camps in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), a defiant and flabbergasted Pakistan on Tuesday said that Islamabad will respond to any "uncalled aggression" from New Delhi and warned India to be prepared for any "events of eventualities."

India strikes back: IAF enters deep into Pak territory, 350 JeM terrorists killed while sleeping

"The situation is very grave right now. We will act, not react. We reserve the right to retaliate. Pakistan will respond to such 'uncalled aggression' from India and our armed forces are prepared for any 'events of eventualities'," said Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, after the National Security Committee (NSC) meeting chaired by Prime Minister Imran Khan.

IAF Pak Strike: Kejriwal 'postpones' upwas, gets trolled on Twitter

Quoting Mehbooba Mufti he said: "The story being presented is the opposite of reality."

#WATCH Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi says, "...Voices from within (within India) have started to emanate. The statement by Mehbooba Mufti is before you, that the story being presented is the opposite of reality." (Courtesy: Pakistan's PTV News) pic.twitter.com/y6VE7SVCaB — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti on Tuesday said there was conflict in reports confirming IAF air strikes carried out at multiple terror camps in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan, which destroyed control rooms of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and some other infrastructure.

Taking to Twitter, Mehbooba said: “Post pre dawn strikes carried out by IAF, conflicting reports coming in. Official communiqué by FS claims that terror training camps were bombed while Pak denied this & said that the planes made a hasty retreat after being spotted. Hope objective of both sides has been served.”
