'We will respond differently and surprise you,' says Pakistani army following IAF air strikes

Director General Inter-Services Public Relations (DG ISPR) of Pakistan Asif Ghafoor ( Courtesy - His twitter account) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: The Director General Inter-Services Public Relations (DG ISPR) of Pakistan Asif Ghafoor has warned: "We will respond differently and surprise you." The Major General Asif Ghafoor has denied the air attacks claim by India. Pakistan has instead challenged the Indian Air Force to try keeping its jets in the Pakistani airspace for 21 minutes and said they will see what happens after that. He also stated that there will respond differently and surprise India.

Major General Asif Ghafoor also said in a news conference, “Almighty Allah is all powerful. Let India come and stay in Pakistani airspace for 21 minutes. We will see what will happens next”. In spite of all the proofs and evidence, Major General Ghafoor tweeted "Indian aircraft intrusion across LoC in Muzaffarabad Sector within AJK was 3-4 miles. Under forced hasty withdrawal aircraft released payload which had free fall in the open area. No infrastructure got hit, no casualties. Technical details and other important information to follow".

Indian aircrafts’ intrusion across LOC in Muzafarabad Sector within AJ&K was 3-4 miles.Under forced hasty withdrawal aircrafts released payload which had free fall in open area. No infrastructure got hit, no casualties. Technical details and other important information to follow. — Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor (@OfficialDGISPR) February 26, 2019

Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi denied the air strikes done by India in Pakistan this morning. Mehmood addressing a press conference said, “Voices from within (within India) have started to emanate. The statement by Mehbooba Mufti is before you, that the story being presented is the opposite of reality.” The foreign minister of Pakistan also addressed that; Pakistan is a peaceful country and will respond to the violations of the LoC.

#WATCH Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi says, "...Voices from within (within India) have started to emanate. The statement by Mehbooba Mufti is before you, that the story being presented is the opposite of reality." (Courtesy: Pakistan's PTV News) pic.twitter.com/y6VE7SVCaB — ANI (@ANI) February 26, 2019

On denial of the air attack, Pakistan Defence Minister Pervez Khattak said, "Pakistan Air Force was already airborne and we were ready for all eventualities," Qureshi added that the Indian planes left within three minutes. "I don't want to go into details here but the timely action of Pakistan Air Force (PAF) stopped them. They diverted the Indian jets, which went back because of the alertness of our Air Force."

The foreign minister also told "our planes were not late. We were fully ready and they (PAF) are always ready to face the challenge. Do not underestimate their ability. We have our own sense of timing. We will act, not react."
