Pakistan news: India launches air strike targeting 'terror camps' following suicide attack

I ndia claims to have killed hundreds in an airstrike on a terrorist training camp in Pakistan as tensions increase between the two countries.

Indian officials said the action hit a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), the group which claimed credit for a suicide car bomb attack that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Kashmir.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale stated the strike was taken due to intelligence hinting there could be further attacks from the terrorists.

He said: “In the face of imminent danger, a preemptive strike became absolutely necessary.”

A government source in India said the number of fatalities among JeM, which has been on a UN terror list since 2001, could be as high as 300.

However, Pakistan rejects there were any casualties and also denies harbouring JeM, a primarily anti-India group with ties to al Qaeda.

A statement from Pakistan's National Security Committee, formed of top officials including Prime Minister Imran Khan and army chief Qamar Javed Bajwa, said it "strongly rejected Indian claim of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot and the claim of heavy casualties."

Pakistani authorities further condemned the Indian action and said there would be a response, though did not state what or when.

The airstrike was near the town of Balakot around 31 miles from the frontier and was the deepest cross-border attack by India since 1971.

The Indian Air Force violated the Pakistani air space to conduct the strike, before the Pakistani Air Force forced them to return

In the area where the Indian jets struck, villagers said they heard four loud bangs in the early hours of Tuesday but reported only one person was wounded.

There has been mounting impatience in India to avenge the February 14 attack, which was the most deadly seen in Kashmir during an insurgency over the last three decades.

As news broke of the raid celebrations erupted across the country.
