Surgical Strike 2.0: Here’s how politicians reacted to IAF strike on Jaish terror camp

Surgical Strike 2.0: The action came days after the February 14 Pulwama suicide attack by the Pakistan-based terror group.

Surgical Strike 2.0: In a major operation against Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) in Pakistan in wee hours of Tuesday, the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out air strikes on terror camps that killed a large number of terrorists. The action came days after the February 14 Pulwama suicide attack by the Pakistan-based terror group, that killed 40 CRPF jawans. Cutting across party lines, leaders of various parties have appreciated the IAF action.

The airstrike took place when everyone in the terror camps were sleeping and Pakistani did not have any clue about the surgical strike so deep in its territory as they had expected a surgical strike in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) near the Line of Control, PTI reported.

India had earlier received an input from intelligence that JeM shifted a number of terrorists and hardcore operatives, to the Balakot camp as a preventive measure after the Pulwama incident. The camp apparently has facilities for 500 to 700 people, including a swimming pool.

Who said what:

General VK Singh: They say they want India to bleed with a 1000 cuts. We say that each time you attack us, be certain we will get back at you, harder and stronger. Salute the brave pilots of the @IAF_MCC that carried out the strikes. #JaiHind

Omar Abdullah: JeM hit Indian forces & claimed the attack. In turn Indian forces hit JeM & owned that air strike. It’s now time for cooler heads to prevail. War is never an ideal option to resolve disputes. Let’s go back to the India-Saudi joint statement of last week.

Rahul Gandhi: I salute the pilots of the IAF.

Captain Amarinder Singh: Great job by the #IndianAirForce. The #IAFStrikes have sent the much-needed signal to Pakistan and the terrorists it’s harbouring – don’t think you can get away with acts like the #PulwamaAttack. Bravo to the #IAF men and my full support for the action.

Ram Madhav: After Pulwama attack, the nation was mourning for 12 days and on the 13th day our valiant Air-force paid the real tribute to the martyred soldiers by destroying terror training camps deep inside Pakistan territory.

Akhilesh Yadav: I salute the Indian Air Force and indeed all our Armed Forces. Congratulations.

Also read: Bandipur forest wildfire: Karnataka Government seeks IAF help to doze off blaze

Mayawati: IAF strike destroying terrorist camps across LoC is welcome action. Salute & respect to their bravery. PM Modi gave free hand to Army only after Pulwama attack. Had it been earlier Pathankot, Uri & Pulwama like tragedy & loss of precious lives of jawans could have been averted.

Mamata Banerjee: IAF also means India’s Amazing Fighters. Jai Hind

Ashok Gehlot: Congratulations to #IndianAirForce pilots. I Salute your bravery. The Nation is proud of you.
