5 jawans injured as Pakistan violates ceasefire along LoC after IAF jets strike JeM terror camp in Balakot

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Pakistan violates ceasefire along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir

At least five jawans of Indian security forces were injured as the Pakistan Army violated ceasefire and resorted to heavy mortar shelling on 55 forward areas in Jammu, Rajouri and Poonch districts of Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday. The development came after the Indian Air Force (IAF) jets struck a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp across the Line of Control (LoC), army sources said.

According to an Army officer, the Pakistan Army used heavy weaponry, firing 120 mm mortars targeting civilian hamlets and forward posts since 1730 hours on Tuesday.

They fired from small, automatic and heavy weaponry in Krishna Gati, Balakote, Khari Karmara, Mankote, Tarkundi (Poonch district), Kalal, Baba Khori, Kalsian, Laam and Jhangar areas (Rajouri) and Pallanwala and Laleali (Jammu), the officer added.

There was no injury or loss of life in the ceasefire violations, the officer said, adding that Indian troops gave a "befitting reply" to the firing.

According to officials, more than a dozen ceasefire violations took place on Tuesday-- the fourth consecutive day of Pakistan shelling and firing on Indian posts.

Earlier in the day, Pakistan violated the ceasefire in Nowshera sector along the Line of Control (LoC), the officer said, adding that locals in the border areas have been asked to not venture out.

Panic has gripped the border areas and some locals have left their homes and moved to safer areas, reports said.

Since last Wednesday, Pakistan has violated the ceasefire everyday barring Friday, the officer said.

The Nowshera sector witnessed unprovoked firing from the Pakistan side for three consecutive days on Saturday, Sunday and Monday.

The Pakistani guns remained silent on Friday but on Thursday ceasefire was violated in Poonch sector while on Wednesday, they initiated unprovoked shelling in Kalal sector of Rajouri district.

The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violations — 2,936 — by Pakistani troops in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border.

Pakistan continues to violate the ceasefire understanding of 2003 despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the agreement during flag meetings between the border guarding forces of the two countries, the officials said.

Amid mounting tensions between India and Pakistan following the Pulwama terror attack and increasing ceasefire violations, the people along the LoC and the International Border (IB) in the region are living under intense fear.

(With agency inputs)

Latest India News
