Tailor shot dead for hurling stone at pet dog that barked at him in North-East Delhi

A 30-year-old man was shot dead after he objected to a dog barking at him in North-East Delhi's Welcome area on Sunday evening. The deceased had thrown a stone at the dog as he was scared the dog might attack him. No arrests have been made in connection with the case.



The deceased has been identified as Aafak who worked as a tailor at a factory. As per Shaukat, Aafak's father-in-law he was at his house in the same area when Aafak's eldest son Altaf (10) came running to him saying that his father had passed away. "I was at my house when he came and told me. I initially thought he was joking and randomly saying something. Later on I heard others also talking about it and ran to the lane where he was killed but by then he was already taken to the hospital," said Shaukat.



Aafak's employer Jarrar stated that he had left from the factory around 4pm. When he reached home he was informed that his other son Rizwan (8) had injured himself after a cylinder fell on his fingers and was rushed to the hospital. Aafak immediately left his house and was on the way to the hospital when the dog started barking at him and even tried to bite him. Scared that the dog will attack him he picked up a stone and threw at him.



The owner of the dog Mehtab saw Aafak being hit and started having an argument with him. Mehtab fired at Aafak and the bullet hit him on the back. He was rushed to the GTB Hospital where doctors declared him dead on arrival. As per doctors the bullet pierced through the back and punctured his heart leading to his death.



The dog, Jack was on Monday seen tied in the background even though police officers did not confirm his name or breed. But as per locals the dog belonged to Mehtab who along with his family is on the run.



"The accused Mehtab has 18 criminal cases registered against him including, robbery, attempt to murder, arms act among others. The police received a PCR call from Shaukat around 7:08pm. A case has been registered and teams have been formed to trace the accused," said Atul Kumar Thakur, DCP, North-East.



As per locals the incident took place between 5:30-6pm on Sunday evening. Despite so many people present in the area no one even bothered to make a call to the police. "Not just Mehtab but his brothers and mother, all have been arrested. They sell marijuana and illicit liquor in the area," said a resident who did not wish to be named.

ANGRY OWNER
