Post Balakot Air Strikes, Indian Markets Likely To Gain: SBI

Indian Air Force on Tuesday carried out pre-dawn air strikes on terror camps across the Line of Control (LoC) in the Pakistani side, 12 days after Pulwama terrorist attack in Kashmir. While the initial response of the financial market has been negative, State Bank of India (SBI) says it believes such attacks are unlikely to have any material impact on the markets.

In a note, SBI says, "...the impact of todays’ air strikes will have no material impact on the markets as like the Kargil and Uri. For one thing in common, these conflicts are more localised in nature. Also, now that India has clearly reaffirmed that its patience cannot be taken for granted, these strikes in fact act as a positive deterrent for the markets for the decisiveness in India’s foreign policy."

For example, the Kargil War was fought between India and Pakistan in Kargil during May to July 1999. During this period, leading indices of Indian stock markets showed an initial decline but strong recovery thereafter.

The Sensex and the NIFTY declined by 286 points and 79 points in three trading initial days, respectively, but recovered strongly thereafter and ended higher by 652 points and 191 points, respectively, when the conflict ended.

During the period, the Indian rupee had depreciated by 1.2% against the dollar, while there was a minor change of 2bps (basis points) in 10-year government securities (G-Secs). It may be noted that India had a fiscal deficit of close to 6% in FY2000. Interestingly, the rupee stayed at the nearly the same level during the rest of the FY2000 indicating that the value of the rupee is more determined by external factors, the note says.

The overall impact of the Kargil War, thus, was actually market-positive, SBI says, adding that the economy grew at the same pace in 1999-2000 as the year before—a healthy 6.5%.

In a similar vein, according to SBI, post the Uri surgical strikes, Indian financial markets gained with the Sensex climbing by more than 100 points and the rupee appreciating.

On 29 September 2016, India announced that it conducted 'surgical strikes' against terrorist launch pads across the line of control in Pakistani-administered Kashmir, and inflicted significant casualties.

SBI says, "Post the surgical strike, the leading indices of Indian stock markets showed decline for couple of months but recovered thereafter. The Sensex and Nifty had declined by 1,462 points and 491 points, respectively in the post three months, but recovered thereafter and ended higher by whopping 3,456 points and 1,198 points, respectively in post one year. After one year, the rupee had appreciated by 2.36% against the US dollar, while 10-year G-secs moderated by 20 bps. Overall impact of the Uri surgical strike war was actually positive for the market."

"Indian economy is currently on a sound footing with favourable macro numbers. Clearly, for India, historical evidence shows that geopolitical risks do not translate into political risks," SBI concluded.
