This is how International media reported on 'Surgical Strike 2.0'

Gen Bipin Rawat, wife to be cremated in Delhi on Friday

IAF chopper crash: Probe report likely to be submitted to Air headquarters next week

This is how International media reported on 'Surgical Strike 2.0'

International

oi-Madhuri Adnal

New Delhi, Feb 26: India, early on Tuesday morning, struck a key terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan, eliminating JeM terrorists including fidayeen who were undergoing training. At a press briefing, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale confirmed a "non-military preemptive action" specifically targeting at a Jaish-e-Mohammed camp in Balakot. Gokhale said the target was chosen to avoid civilian casualties.

While Indian media praised the precision and success of the attack, this how the international media has largely remained neutral and wary of making assertive comments.

New York Times reported with the headline, "Indian Jets Strike in Pakistan in Revenge for Kashmir Attack".

How the IAF strike at Balakot unfolded: All the updates here

ABC reported,"India strikes inside Pakistan after deadly Kashmir attack",

CNN reported, "India says it has launched air strikes across the disputed border with Pakistan".

China, which had previously had a lukewarm response to India's accusations against Pakistan and JeM following the Pulwama attack, News agency Xinhua reported,''Pakistan army says Indian warplanes cross LoC, India confirms airstrikes on training camp.''

Guardian wrote that the attack was an 'act of extreme valour'.

Meanwhile, a majority of the Pakistan media quoted the country's Army declaring the Indian Air Force's reported strike against Jaish camps in the country was a failure while some termed it as 'intusion' and 'violation of the LoC.

Let us have a look at it:

Pakistani newspaper Dawn's website reported that 'Indian Aircraft Violate LoC, Scramble Back After PAF's Timely Response: ISPR'.

Dunya News reported that the Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Goyal for not being able to answer media queries regarding the attack during a press conference held in India after the attack.

Express Tribune in the following headline said: "Pakistan chases away Indian jets after LoC violation." It also carried another article where Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi promised 'befitting response'.

The Nation led with a quote from the foreign minister declaring that both Pakistani citizens and the country's defence forces are on alert.

Another article on the website headline was 'India 'minds' airing of ISPR briefing'.

With multiple aircraft taking off at same time, how IAF confused Pak and hit Balakot

Samaa TV's website is headlined, "Pakistan Air Force foils attempted Indian attack after it breaches Line of Control".

Pakistan Today reported, "PM Imran summons meeting after LoC invasion by Indian aircraft."

The News International paraphrased the Army's claims to headline their lead article on their website as: "PAF repulses Indian attempt of incursion into Pakistan air space."
