India and Pakistan exchange fire as war looms

INDIA and Pakistan began trading fire across the border in central Kashmir today as Pakistani President Arif Alvi said Indian “hysteria” could lead to war between the two nuclear powers.

The exchanges follow an Indian air raid on suspected militants in Pakistan. India said it killed “a very large number” of militants, while Pakistan said there were no casualties.

Bombing presumed opponents in another country’s territory without its permission is a departure for India, but the practice has been normalised by the behaviour of the US and Israeli air forces.

China deplored the move, saying: “Combating terrorism is a global challenge. It requires co-operation between countries.”

Beijing called on Islamabad and New Delhi to pull back from looming conflict.

Indian Lieutenant-Colonel Devender Anand said that Pakistani troops were firing mortar shells across the border and India was responding to the “unprovoked” violation of a 2003 ceasefire.

Tensions heightened when a February 14 suicide bombing in Kashmir killed 41 Indian soldiers. India accuses Pakistan of arming and funding separatists and of responsibility for the attack, which it denies.

Pakistan has not indicated that it will treat the Indian air raid as an act of war, but Prime Minister Imran Khan said the bombing, which he said took place in a “deserted woodland area,” was “self-serving, reckless and fictitious.”

He said India’s claim to have killed militants was “for domestic consumption” as the Hindu chauvinist BJP government of Narendra Modi gears up for elections.

“India has committed uncalled for aggression, to which Pakistan will respond at the time and place of its choosing,” he warned.

In India, Mr Modi told a veterans’ rally: “I vow that I will not let the country bow down.”

Shakir Ahmed, a resident of Poonch in Indian-controlled Kashmir, said: “People are afraid. We pray it doesn’t escalate into war.”

The Communist Party of India-Marxist called on the government to end threats to scrap article 35A of the constitution, which will be challenged in the Supreme Court this week.

The article, which dates back to the days of India’s first post-independence prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, gives the Jammu and Kashmir state government the right to determine who has permission to reside there and to give them priority in jobs and housing.

It is aimed at protecting the region’s distinct character and Muslim majority from Indianisation.
