Forget bitterness, join hands to fight elections; BJP-Shiv Sena leaders urge cadres to bridge the gap

Uddhav Thackeray and Devendra Fadnavis

Mumbai: Shiv Sena and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders seem to be finding it difficult to convince their respective cadres to accept the alliance. Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray and CM Devendra Fadnavis had to use their authority to instruct their MLAs and cadre to work jointly for the forthcoming elections. The duo met the MLAs on Monday over dinner at Varsha, the official residence of Chief Minister. Sources said that Thackeray and Fadnavis told the MLAs that everyone should overcome the bitterness of last four and a half years since the alliance has now been formed.

Devendra Fadnavis, Uddhav Thackeray and Aditya Thackeray addressed the MLAs. Almost all the Shiv Sena and BJP MLAs were present at the dinner.

Also Read : BJP-Shiv Sena alliance: Only I and Uddhav Thackeray are authorised to speak on alliance, says Fadnavis

The leaders, in an effort to convince the MLAs about the importance of the alliance, said both parties were in alliance for the last 25 years. It was necessary to come together for Lok Sabha and Assembly elections. Had the alliance not happened, the opposition would have got the benefit. It would have been the most unwise to let the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) have the last laugh when we have been fighting them for decades together now. We would have gone back for another 15 years had the alliance not happened, the leaders said.

Now that the decision on alliance has been taken, by Shiv Sena and BJP leaders, it was the responsibility of MLAs to execute it in the poll battle. Both the party cadre is happy over the alliance. Both the parties are confident of winning Lok Sabha and Assembly elections.

The leaders accept that there was a sporadic disconnect among the cadres, which would be taken care of in view of the forthcoming elections. Leaders from both the parties should start joint tours of the constituencies.

Thackeray said, "The MLAs and MPs from both the parties shared a cordial relationship. Even I had a good relationship with CM Fadnavis. Still, there were differences over some issue which were seen as a cause for tension. We have resolved all those issues now. You are also visibly happy with the alliance. Now it's time to show the strength with joint tours at all the districts,"
