Maulana Yousuf Azhar: Man who was in IAF's hitlist today

Maulana Yousuf Azhar: Man who was in IAF's hitlist today

JeM chief Masood Azhar's brother-in-law Maulana Yousuf Azhar was the main target of IAF in its counter-air strike after the Pulwama attack. Yousuf Azhar was among one of the terrorists who hijacked India Airlines flight which was on its way from Kathmandu to Lucknow (IC-814).

Launching its retaliatory action to avenge Pulwama attack, the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried 'non-military air strikes' and destroyed Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror camps operating in Balakot, Pakistan. On February 26, IAF carried out its anti-terror operation during early dawn hours using 12 Mirage 2000s fighter jets armed with laser-guided bombs. According to reports, IAF targeted JeM terror camps operating in Pakistan, killing more than 300 terrorists.

According to sources, the brother-in-law of JeM chief Masood Azhar, the terror organisation which took responsibility for the Pulwama attack, Maulana Yousuf Azhar also known as Ghauri, was the main target of the Indian Air Force.

Who is Maulana Yousuf Azhar?

Masood Azhar's brother-in-law Maulana Yousuf Azhar was the main target of IAF in its retaliation of the Pulwama attack. Yousuf Azhar was among one of the terrorists who hijacked Indian Airlines flight which was on its way from Kathmandu to Lucknow (IC-814) in 1999.

In order to ensure the release of Masood Azhar, Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh, who was in Indian custody, terrorists including Yousuf Azhar hijacked IC-814 plane. For saving 176 passengers in the flight, India decided to release Masood Azhar and two other terrorists.

Maulana Yousuf Azhar aka Ghauri, a resident of Karachi in Pakistan, is also listed on the Interpol list with cases like kidnapping, murder, hijacking, and other crimes. He is also known by the name Mohammad Salim.

India in its 'non-military' air strike after the Pulwama attack has eliminated 3 terror camps including the largest JeM terror camp in Balakot which was led by Ghauri.
