We will not let the Rohingyas live in any part of the country : Amit Shah

The BJP government is not answerable to Farooq Abdullah about what it did in its rule. We are answerable to the people of Jammu, Valley and Ladakh

Shah said BJP government has clarified it in the Supreme Court that it would “never let the Rohingyas live in any part of the country”

Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) has decided to make an issue of illegal settlement of Rohingyas-illegal immigrants from Myanmar- in different parts of India a major poll issue in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha Polls.

He said BJP government has clarified it in the Supreme Court that it would “never let the Rohingyas live in any part of the country”.

Addressing a Vijay Sankalp rally of booth-level workers in Jammu on Sunday, BJP’s National President Amit Shah, made it clear that from Kashmir to Kanyakumari and Assam to Gujarat all illegal immigrants including Rohingyas will be thrown out of the country as they continue to pose a major security threat to India.

Sounding poll bugle Shah said, “To ensure that all illegal settlers from Kashmir to Kanyakumari are thrown out, our government will launch an NRC-type exercise that was earlier launched in Assam.”

At present more than 6500 Rohingyas are camping across 39 different locations in Jammu and Kashmir.

On the directions of Union Home Ministry the CID wing of the state police has recently completed a task of collecting biometrics of these illegal immigrants, triggering panic among them that they too will be sent back to their country soon.

Taking a dig at the Congress president Rahul Gandhi Shah asked him to clarify his stand on “illegal settlement” of Rohingyas in Jammu, West Bengal and elsewhere in India.

Referring to a large population of Rohingyas camping in Jammu Shah said, “Jammu is not a ‘dharmshaala’ where every person would come and take refuge. Our government will follow the Assam model and flush out all illegal settlers from Kashmir to Kanyakumari”.

He said, people had gone to the Supreme Court and filed a petition seeking justice for those camping in India. He said BJP government has clarified it in the Supreme Court that it would “never let the Rohingyas live in any part of the country”.

Unlike the previous governments, the Narendra Modi-led government has adopted a zero-tolerance policy against militants

J&K integral part of India

Referring to attempts being made from across the border to destabilise the state of Jammu and Kashmir Amit Shah said it is the BJP’s resolve that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India and nobody can seize it from us.

Amit Shah said BJP is committed to national unity and integrity and it will not leave an inch of J&K which is an integral part of the country.

“We have led the struggle since 1947 for total integration of J&K with India under the leadership of Pt Prem Nath Dogra and Dr Shayama Prasad Mookherjee, the party ideologue laid down his life on the soil of the J&K so we will not compromise on an inch of the land of the State”, he added.

He said by killing more than 40 central reserve police force (CRPF) personnel, “Pakistan tried to leave an impression that law and order are not good in J&K”. “But we will avenge our soldiers’ killing befittingly,” the BJP chief said.

“Our soldiers were not even given a chance to fight. Had the ‘coward’ Pakistani militants given them a chance, our soldiers would have torn them (militants) into pieces. But let me assure from this stage that the sacrifice of our soldiers will not go in vain. It will be avenged. PM Modi has given a free hand to the security forces post-Pulwama attack,” Shah said.

“Unlike the previous governments, the Narendra Modi-led government has adopted a zero-tolerance policy against militants. We have also alienated Pakistan globally and achieved a huge success in tagging the neighbouring nation as a terror-breeding nation,” he said.

Shah also hit out at Farooq Abdullah for asking BJP what it has done in its five-year rule

Only Modi can give a befitting reply to Pakistan

BJP Chief Amit Shah said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the “only leader who can give a befitting reply to Pakistan and take the country forward”.

“The country is faced with various security issues. Only Modi can give security to the country, take it forward to make it a world power and has the capability and capacity to give a befitting reply to Pakistan,” Shah said.

Shah said Modi has capability and capacity to give a befitting reply to Pakistan while the Gathbandhan has leadership crisis and they are not in a position to give a stable leadership to the country at this crucial juncture. He said it is not known who is the leader of Gathbandhan or ‘Maha Milawat’. “The conglomerate which has no leader can’t be called as a Gathbandhan but they are only for promotion of dynastic rule”, he added.

He also said if Kashmir issue is still persisting, “it is only because of the wrong policies adopted by former Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru”.

“I want to make it crystal clear to the Congress president that if questions are being raised about Kashmir today, it is only because of mishandling of the Kashmir issue by the great-grandfather of Rahul Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru. When our forces were going to conquer Pak, it was Nehru who stopped them,” Shah said.

He also said that it was Nehru “who, during the 1947 partition, didn’t let Sardar Patel, then home minister of India, handle Kashmir issue the way he handled Junagadh, Hyderabad and other princely states of the country, and took the Kashmir issue to the UN”.

“I want to ask Rahul Gandhi: who took Kashmir issue to the UN? It was your great-grandfather, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru who did it. Why he didn’t let Sardar Patel handle Kashmir according to his (Patel) way? Rahul Gandhi owes answers to these questions,” Shah said. He also attacked the National Conference, Congress and PDP for “promoting family politics” by “looting the country”.

He said that in Kashmir, development was “confined to two families”.

“These two families (PDP and NC) kept on dividing the central grants for many years in J&K. Congress that ruled the country for 55 years did no justice with the people of Jammu and Ladakh. For the first time, people of Ladakh and Jammu were assured that a government (BJP government) is working for their welfare also,” he said.

Shah also hit out at Farooq Abdullah for asking BJP what it has done in its five-year rule. “Like you and your wards, we don’t run the country and states from abroad. We work 24 hours for the welfare of our people. Somebody should ask Farooq Abdullah and others on whose funds they have been staying abroad. They’re obviously using the money of people of J&K to enjoy a luxurious life abroad”.

“The BJP government is not answerable to Farooq Abdullah about what it did in its rule. We are answerable to the people of Jammu, Valley and Ladakh. They will acknowledge our works by voting hugely in BJP’s favour in the next election,” Shah said.

Note:

1. The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent or reflect the views of PGurus.
