Opposition adds air strike to meet agenda

Arvind Kerjiwal calls off fast for statehood

Even as Opposition parties lauded the role of the Indian Air Force in the Balakot strike on Tuesday, its political impact has given them cause for concern.

The agenda of the Opposition meeting here on Wednesday was changed to discuss the Pulwama attack and the air strikes. Earlier, the meeting was meant to discuss a common minimum programme. The Left parties, which were planning to skip the meeting, will now be attending.

“For all those looking at today’s air strikes through a political/electoral prism, it might be worth remembering that PM Vajpayee went to the 1999 election with nuclear tests AND victory in Kargil under his belt & still only returned to power with a coalition,” tweeted former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who had announced a fast from March 1 for full statehood for Delhi, called off his plan. “We all stand as one nation today,” he said.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Tuesday took to Twitter to praise Indian Air Force (IAF) pilots soon after news broke of air strikes on terror camps across the LoC.

“I salute the pilots of the IAF,” he tweeted, along with the Indian flag. He later spoke about the strikes at a public rally in Guwahati.

Responses from other Opposition leaders were nearly identical. While maintaining tactical silence on the role of the Narendra Modi government, all praised the IAF.

“IAF also means India’s Amazing Fighters. Jai Hind,” tweeted West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

Senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel’s response was identical. “Well done Indian Airforce, the nation is proud of you!” said his tweet.

CPI national secretary D. Raja said, “The strikes prove the IAF’s valour, capabilities and precision.”

Former Defence Minister A.K. Antony said the IAF had restored the morale and prestige of the citizens. Pakistan should realise that if it encouraged terrorists, India would not take it lying down, he said.
