No Indian movie to be released in Pakistan, says film exhibitors association

Film exhibitors say will focus on local content until normalisation of current situation in the region.

ISLAMABAD/LAHORE: The main association of film exhibitors says it will not screen any Indian content at the country's cinema houses in solidarity with the government after Indian jets violated Pakistani airspace earlier on Tuesday.



"In light of the prevailing situation, and in solidarity with the Government, the Film Exhibitors fraternity has volunteered to focus on local content till the normalization of the current situation in the region," said Zoraiz Lashari, the chairperson of the All Pakistan Exhibitors Association.

"We believe art and film is a universal language that transcends borders and brings people closer. We hope we can all play a positive role in reducing tensions, and supporting policies that bring peace and prosperity to the people of the entire region," he said.

Federal Information Minister Fawad Chaudhry reiterated the association’s announcement earlier in the day, adding that he has also instructed authorities to block airing of Indian advertisements as well on Pakistani media.

"Cinema Exhibitors Association has boycotted Indian content, no Indian Movie ll be released in Pakistan. Also have instructed PEMRA to act against Made in India Advertisements," the information minister tweeted to his 1.81 million followers.

The development comes after heightened tensions between the neighbouring nations as Indian fighter jets intruded into Pakistani territory early Tuesday in act of "uncalled-for aggression" to which Pakistan said it would "respond at the time and place of its choosing".

Some 44 Indian paramilitary personnel were killed earlier this month when an explosives-packed van rammed a convoy transporting 2,500 security forces in Pulwama—the deadliest attack in Indian-occupied Kashmir in 30 years.

Following the attack, the All Indian Cine Workers Association announced a complete ban on Pakistani actors and artists in the Indian film industry. The association said it would take strong action against anyone who works with Pakistani artists.
