Editorial: Doha progress – Afghanistan Times

Amidst growing tension in South Asia, US Special envoy Dr. Zalmay Khalilzad is engaged in peace talks with the Taliban political office at Doha Qatar. Soon after landing in Doha, Dr. Khalilzad has held first ever face to face talks with Taliban tehrik co-founder Mullah Abdul Ghani Biradar and termed first ever chat very positive and fruitful. Tehrik Taliban Afghanistan co-founder Mulla Abdul Ghani Biradar suffered a lot and is well aware about meanings of peace and reconciliation. He had got release after living behind the bars for over half a dozen years for undone sin. Mullah Biradar was earlier made agree with former President Hamid Karzai of helping in resolving of conflict and reconciliation in Afghanistan. But all of his efforts ahead with failure, when he was arrested in Karachi Pakistan and another leader of Tehrik Taliban Pakistan Latif Mehsud by US troops just close to Pak Afghan border at Nangarhar province bordering with Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. However, now the peace efforts aimed at a negotiation settlement to long standing conflict coming on right track. Almost Afghans in particular and other stake holders in general are in favour of early return of peace and reconciliations. The Afghans are attaching great hopes with ambassador Khalilzad brokered peace efforts and hopefully now it entered into a decisive phase. But amidst peace talks, tension touching its peak in South Asia whereas two neighbouring countries India and Pakistan are at verge of fighting. India has claimed and Pakistan confirmed a surgical strike against an alleged militant camp in Northern mountainous region of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Conflict claims and reports are pouring from the site, which is made restricted by Pakistan security forces since the India Air Force attack in early hours of Tuesday. The Indian fighter planes attack caused wide range unrest throughout Pakistan. Its parliament in center and provinces condemned it, terming it what it called naked aggression on the part of India against Pakistan. Almost religious-conservative politicians and parliamentarians are issuing threatening statements. Some of politicians including nationalist Asfandyar Wali Khan has suggested talks before destruction and genocide of innocent civilians. He also suggested rulers in New Delhi and Islamabad to remain patient and careful at this crucial stage as war between the two neighbouring countries would definitely affect the regional peace in particular and rest of the world in general. No one could deny the fact that both India and Pakistan are important and effective countries in the region but previous British colonial rulers inherited hostilities badly affected its economic-politico and diplomatic relations. Afghanistan having close, historical, cultural and blood relations with people of both the countries. Unfortunately certain circles of Pakistan since a long are making attempts to fight its battle against India on Afghanistan soil. Time and again the Afghan leaders are assuring Pakistan of never allowing any one to use their soil against its interests. But unfortunately they yet to be satisfied. Whatever might be root causes of hostilities between Pakistan and India but the Afghans considering it harmful also for its country. Since a long the Afghans are praying for resolving of rifts and hostilities between New Delhi and Islamabad and requesting both the sides to help in return of peace, an end to violence and terror on the soil of Afghanistan, which has badly affected its helpless and innocent people.
