IAF strike on terror camps in Pakistan hailed

Taking pride in the successful strike by the Indian Air force (IAF) fighter jets at terror camps located in Pakistan, residents in Raipur and other parts of Chhattisgarh came out and celebrated the action on Tuesday.

“This strike should have happened long back. However, today the international community is also with us so the strike has become easy. This is a good lesson for terror groups like Jaish-e-Mohammad and countries who are nurturing those rouge elements,” Major (Retired) N Tiwari said.

According to Wing Commander (veteran) GK Panda, this strike could happen because of political will of the Union government.

“The IAF was tasked with a mission and they did it. Entering into enemy territory is a very dangerous situation. It was a risky job, but it must have been a very well-coordinated and planned operation,” he said.

From the point of national pride, this operation was very much necessary. In past we have seen that after different terror attacks there were only talks of criticism and stern action, but this time it was different, opined SK Mishra, principal of the government higher secondary school, Lamgaon, Surguja.

Devashish Bhakhre an employee with the Central Bank of India in Raipur said the image of India of being a country that replies to violence with peace, required a change. “Enough is enough. They (Pakistan) have been disturbing us without reason, so at one point we will have to retaliate”, he said.

In Jagdalpur which falls in the Maoist infested region of Chhattisgarh, youths came out of home and celebrated the strike by burning crackers and distributing sweets.

Rakesh Mandavi a BA student from Kondagaon while lauding the action opined that the strike was historic. This has happened only due to a strong leader like Narendra Modi, he added.

In different parts of state like Mungeli, Bilaspur, Ambikapur Dhamtari and Jagdalpur people celebrated the strike, while proudly waving the national flag and distributing sweets.
