At least 6 Pakistani civilians dead, 11 wounded as India continues heavy shelling across LoC

SIALKOT - India 's border forces resorted to heavy fire along the Line of Control (LoC), leaving at least six civilians dead and 11 others wounded in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) on Wednesday evening.

Civilians are being ruthlessly targeted by Indian forces without any provocation while Sialkot sector on the line of control (LoC) between Pakistan and India has turned into a massive battlefield with casualties being reported from both sides.

The four deaths reported by Dawn came as a result of "intense and indiscriminate" shelling, which began at about 5:30pm simultaneously in Kotli, Bhimber and Poonch districts of the AJK.

https://twitter.com/Natsecjeff/status/1100447356770750465

At least five civilians, including three of the same family, were killed in Nakiyal Sector after the Indian troops opened unprovoked firing at the residential areas along with the LoC.

Deputy Director of international think tank ICTC, F Jeffery earlier revealed the 'breaking news' quoting Pakistani security sources in a tweet on Tuesday.

The security expert tweeted that Indian forces, including all Indian bases, in Jammu Kashmir were currently on high alert in anticipation of a possible Pakistani strike.

Pakistani border forces also retaliated after aggression by India and up till now more than five Indian soldiers have suffered injuries along with heavy damage to their military installations as confirmed by Indian media itself. Pakistan targeted Indian soldiers in Kashmir's Poonch, Rajouri and Jammu district.

The development comes hours after Indian Air Force fighter jets violated the Line of Control before being scared away by the Pakistan Air Force fighter jets.

India claims 'Surgical Strike 2' across Line of ... 11:40 AM | 26 Feb, 2019 NEW DELHI – Indian authorities have claimed to conduct an intelligence-based operation in Balakot area across the ...

Indian Air Force also claimed to have targeted the alleged Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorist camp though Pakistan denies any such attack.

The alleged strikes – which are still to be verified – have escalated tension between the two nuclear-armed neighbours as Pakistan’s armed forces have announced that Pakistan will respond against Indian aggression in a befitting and surprising manner.

Earlier today, Prime Minister Imran Khan convened a meeting of the National Security Committee in the aftermath of surgical strike reports and made it clear that Pakistan will respond to Indian aggression at time and place of its choosing.

The NSC meeting, chaired by the premier in the wake of India’s violation of the Line of Control (LoC), was attended by the top civil and military leadership, including Army Chief General Qamar Jawed Bajwa and ministers of defence and foreign affairs.

Prime Minister Imran Khan has also convened a meeting of National Command Authority (NCA) which deals with nuclear arsenals and their use.

What is National Command Authority, and why PM ... 11:53 PM | 26 Feb, 2019 ISLAMABAD - In the wake of aggression by the Indian air force, Prime Minister Imran Khan has convened the meeting of ...

The tension stemmed out from the Pulwama attack in India-occupied Kashmir in which over 40 Indian soldiers were left dead. India pinned blame on Pakistan for the attack without any evidence in this regard.

Pakistan’s armed forces have reiterated that India would be served a befitting response in case of any misadventure.
