Woman had planned husband’s murder: Thanks to water boy who spoiled the best laid plan

Bengaluru

Hulimavu

Adugodi

Woman had planned husband’s murder so that she could live with the landlord’s sonMamatha was perhaps not paying attention to thenpolice commissioner Shankar Bidari when he made an impassioned plea in 2010: “Get a divorce but don’t murder each other,” he had said advising couples in troubled marriages.Last month, Mamatha pawned off her gold, paid killers Rs 1.5 lakh and was about to get her husband bumped off when the water delivery boy poured cold water on her plans.Twenty-eight-year-old Mamatha was madly in love with her landlord’s son, Prashanth, 20. Her husband, Nagaraj, was unaware that he was being cuckolded. On December 14, when the 38-year-old was relaxing after having a quiet dinner at his rented house at BTS Layout in Arakere, a ‘gang’ barged in around 9.15 pm and snatched his 40 gram gold chain and mobile phone. Then Mamatha was ‘robbed’ of two gold rings.Just then, Mani, the water delivery boy, rang the doorbell.“Fearing that they would be caught, the accused escaped through the rear doors. Unaware of the real reason, Nagaraj filed a complaint in this regard,” said an officer who is part of the investigations.On December 18, Nagaraj returned to thepolice station to complain that his wife had not returned from work since December 15. “Then we got to know that even Prashanth had gone missing on the same day. This made us suspect that Mamatha and Prashanth could have gone together and might have some knowledge about the robbery,” said the officer.The police then managed to trace Mamatha and Prashanth and learnt about the plot to kill Nagaraj so that she could live happily ever after with Prashanth. Based on their confessions, four others have also been arrested -- Anil Biswas (21) of New Gurappanapalya, Zakir Pasha (20) of BG Road, Harish Kumar (20) of Chikkaand another juvenile delinquent. The victim is Nagaraj, 38, a resident of BTS Layout in Arakere. The gold ornaments, a rental car and a bike have been recovered.“Nagaraj narrowly escaped death that day. He didn’t know what his wife was doing behind his back,” said the officer.If only Mamatha had listened to Bidari, she wouldn’t be in jail right now.
