158th birth anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore observed

A three-day program marking the 158th birth anniversary of Nobel laureate poet Rabindranath Tagore begins at Shilaidaha in Kuthibari of Kushtia on Wednesday, May 8, 2019 Dhaka Tribune

In Kushtia, Naogaon, and Sirajganj a three-day festival began on Wednesday to celebrate his birth anniversary

The 158th birth anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore, Nobel laureate and icon of Bengali literature, was celebrated across the country yesterday.

The government and several socio-cultural organizations held elaborate programmes and seminars, award-giving ceremonies and cultural activities, to mark the birth anniversary of the poet.

Celebration programs were held throughout the country, especially at Rabindra Kuthibari in Shilaidaha of Kushtia, in Shahzadpur of Sirajganj, and in Patisar, Naogaon.

In Kushtia, a three-day festival began on Wednesday at Shilaidaha Kuthibari to celebrate the birth anniversary.

Deputy Commissioner and Celebration Committee Chairman, Md Aslam Hossain, said an elaborate programme had been chalked out by the cultural ministry, Kushtia district administration, and the government's archaeology department.

The Kuthibari has been renovated and decorated for the occasion.

Acting general secretary of ruling Bangladesh Awami League, Mahbubul Alam Hanif, inaugurated the program.

Beginning at 9am, the festival will continue until 5pm every day through Friday the 10th of this month.

A total of 13 CCTV cameras will ensure security monitoring for visitors to the festival.

The old name for Shilaidaha was Khorshed Pur. In 1807 Dwarkanath Tagore, grandfather of Rabindranath Tagore became the owner of this estate.

He built a pyramid-shaped three-story building on 11 acres there, known as Kuthibari.

Khorshedpur was renamed Shilaidaha which is a relatively recent name.

Rabindranath Tagore came to Shilaidaha in November 1889 to look after the estate and stayed in Shilaidaha Kuthibari off and on, for over a decade, between 1891 and 1901.

He wrote many memorable poems, songs, and stories when he was there. He also started translating his own poems into English, including Gitanjali, which earned him the Nobel Prize in 1913.

Thus, Shilaidaha became associated with Rabindranath Tagore.

In Naogaon, the district administration has also taken up a three-day program to celebrate the birth anniversary of the poet.

Member of Parliament from Naogaon-6, Israfil Alam, inaugurated the function around 11am, where Deputy Commissioner Mizanur Rahman was in the chair.

Among others, Member of Parliament, Aroma Dutta, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Science and Technology Vice Chancellor, Prof Dr Khondoker Nasir Uddin, and Superintendent of Police, Iqbal Hossain, were also present on the occasion.

In Sirajganj, to celebrate this year's Rabindranath birth anniversary, Sirajganj district administration has also chalked out different programmes that will continue for three days.

The three-day event will include discussions, poetry recitation, and a cultural program.

State Minister for ICT, Zunaid Ahmed Palak, attended the inauguration function as chief guest, with Deputy Commissioner Eftekhar Ahmed Shamim in the chair.

Rabindranath Tagore came to Shahzadpur several times between 1890 and 1895 to supervise the estate and wrote many of his literary pieces like Naukadubi, Sonar Tori, Bishorjon, Chitra, Choitali, Postmaster, and others during his stay there.

Records show that Prince Dwarkanath Tagore, Rabindranath Tagore's grandfather, purchased the estate of Kacharibari in Shahzadpur for Tk 13.10 at an auction in 1840.

At that time, Kacharibari was set up on an eight Bigha piece of land.

Rabindranath came to Kacharibari for the first time in 1890 at the age of 28 to supervise the estate.

In the rainy season, Tagore would move about in a bajra (boat) and in the dry season, he travelled by palanquin.

Rabindranath Tagore, born on 25 Baishakh of the Bangla calendar, was the youngest of Debendranath Tagore and Sarada Devi's 14 children.

Tagore reshaped Bangla language and literature in the 19th and 20th centuries through his works in almost all genres of literature. He also left a profound mark on Bangla music and the performing arts.

He wrote over one thousand poems, eight volumes of short stories, almost two dozen plays and playlets, eight novels, and many books and essays on philosophy, religion, education, and social issues.

He also composed over two thousand songs and set them to music. Two of them became the national anthems of India and Bangladesh respectively.

He was the first non-European poet to win the Nobel Prize for literature. He won the prize in 1913 for ‘Song Offerings,’ the English version of his collection of poems, ‘Gitanjali.’

In 1915, he was knighted by King George V, but Tagore renounced his knighthood in 1919 following the Amritsar massacre by British troops, of 400 Indian peasant demonstrators.

Tagore founded Visva Bharati University at Santiniketan in 1921 which drew scholars from all over the world.

He died on August 7, 1941, at the age of 80.
