’Every brick will be countered with a stone,’ PM Imran warns Modi against action in Kashmir

’Every brick will be countered with a stone,’ PM Imran warns Modi against action in Kashmir

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, while addressing a special session of legislative assembly of Pakistan-administered Kashmir on Wednesday, warned Indian premier Narendra Modi that any action by India in Pakistan would be countered with a stronger response.

Agreeing with the Prime Minister of Pakistan-administered Kashmir Raja Farooq Haider, who in his speech in the Kashmir parliament had said India would also look to create trouble in Pakistan after Kashmir, Prime Minister Imran said: "This will not stop in Kashmir — this hate-filled ideology will come towards Pakistan."

"We have information and we have had two National Security Committee (NSC) meetings. The Pakistan Army has full knowledge that India has made a plan to take action in Kashmir," he shared in his address during what was his first visit to the region since becoming the prime minister in 2018. "Like the action they took in Balakot after Pulwama, according to our information, they have made a more horrendous plan now.

"To shift the world's focus away from [India-administered] Kashmir, they want to take action in Pakistan-administered Kashmir."

Addressing Indian Prime Minister Modi, the premier said: "This is my message to you: you take action and every brick will be countered with a stone."

"The Army is prepared; not just the Army but the entire nation will fight alongside our military. Aggressive war is against Islam, but when Muslims have fought for the sake of freedom, they have defeated the biggest armies.

"We will be ready, we will respond to whatever you do — we will go till the end."

The prime minister reached Muzaffarabad earlier today as part of the government's decision to observe this year's Independence Day in solidarity with Kashmiris in light of India's move to annex India-administered Kashmir.

"On the day of Pakistan's independence, I am with my Kashmiri brothers and sisters," he said at the outset of his address.

The premier said that in a series of tweets, he had unveiled the "real face of Narendra Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) before the world".

"There is a terrifying ideology in front of us today — the Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) party's ideology, which Modi has been a member of from childhood.

"In this ideology, like with the Nazis, the ethnic cleansing of Muslims from India was also included. If you understand this ideology, a lot of things can be understood.

"Quaid-i-Azam rose above a person's religion; he was thinking about every person's independence after the British left.

"In the past five years, the cruelty in India-administered Kashmir was due to this ideology. This card [revoking Article 370] played by Narendra Modi was the final solution," he said, referring to India's move to downgrade Kashmir’s status.

"We are all fearful about what we will find out once the curfew is lifted in India-administered Kashmir. What are they attempting to do?

"Narendra Modi has made a strategic blunder. He has played his final card. They have internationalised Kashmir. It used to be very hard to speak about Kashmir.

"Now the world's eye is on Kashmir and on Pakistan [...] I will be the ambassador who raises Kashmir's voice."

"We need to inform the world of RSS's ideology," stressed the premier. "After 1945, the United Nations, the Geneva Convention were created. The world decided that this should never happen in the world again. The world doesn't know that the RSS ideology is as dangerous [as Nazi ideology].

"A normal person cannot make the type of statements being made about the women of Kashmir," said Prime Minister Imran.

"This [RSS] ideology has undermined the constitution of India. They [BJP government] have controlled the media. Opposition leaders are speaking with fear.

"RSS thugs do not let people attend conferences, judges are scared of them. This used to happen in Nazi Germany.

"Intellectuals are scared of speaking about the government. They [BJP] are taking India towards destruction. People are living in fear in India."

Speaking of Kashmiri leaders, he said those who used to be pro-India, such as Farooq Abdullah, are now in agreement with Quaid-i-Azam's two-nation theory.

Prime Minister Imran said that Modi had declared that his government would bring prosperity to Kashmir by revoking Article 370, likening it to how Adolf Hitler used to speak when attacking Russia.

"By sending more troops, by closing down communications, Modi is bringing 'prosperity'.

"Listen to the speeches of Jawaharlal Nehru, the promises he made to Kashmiris — they have all been rejected."

Previous Article Trump threatens to quit WTO if conditions not met Next Article MA Yusuffali of Lulu Group pledges Rs 50 million for flood-hit Kerala

Print
