India's nukes under 'Hindu Supremacist' Modi govt's control pose threat to Pak: Imran Khan

Delhi:

Frustrated over lack of any global support, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan harked back to the Nazi-RSS links as he launched an attack against the Narendra Modi government. In a series of tweets, Khan said that the India’s nuclear arsenal were not safe under Modi regime and it poses threat to Pakistan and the world at large. “India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership.This threatens 9m Kashmiris under siege in IOK for over 2 weeks which shd have sent alarm bells ringing across the world with UN Observers being sent there (sic),” Khan said.

“And the threat also extends to Pakistan, the minorities in India & in fact the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers,” he added.

The Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt poses a threat to Pakistan as well as to the minorities in India & in fact to the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. To understand the link between Nazi ideology & the ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of RSS-BJP Founding Fathers just Google — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 18, 2019

In a hint towards the ongoing NRC drive, Khan alleged that, “Already 4m Indian Muslims face detention camps & cancellation of citizenship. World must take note as this genie is out of the bottle & the doctrine of hate & genocide, with RSS goons on the rampage, will spread unless the international community acts now to stop it.”

“The World must also seriously consider the safety & security of India's nuclear arsenal in the control of the fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt. This is an issue that impacts not just the region but the world,” he further said.

“The Hindu Supremacist Modi Govt poses a threat to Pakistan as well as to the minorities in India & in fact to the very fabric of Nehru & Gandhi's India. To understand the link between Nazi ideology & the ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of RSS-BJP Founding Fathers just Google,” the Pakistani Prime Minister reiterated.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
