Two million face statelessness as India publishes controversial list

GUWAHATI: Almost two million people in northeast India were left facing statelessness on Saturday after they were excluded from a citizenship list aimed at weeding out “foreign infiltrators”, in a process the central government wants to replicate nationwide.

A large chunk of those excluded were expected to be Muslims.

A total of 31.1m people were included in a National Register of Citizens (NRC), but 1.9m were deemed ineligible, according to an official statement.

Prime Minister Imran Khan assailed the list and suggested that exclusion of millions from the list could be deemed as ethnic cleansing of members of minority communities, particularly Muslims.

In a tweet, the prime minister said reports in the Indian and international media about “the Narendra Modi government’s ethnic cleansing of Muslims” should send alarm bells ringing across the world.

He also said the illegal annexation of occupied Kashmir was part of a wider policy to target Muslims.

Imran says Modi government’s ‘ethnic cleansing’ should set off alarm bells across the world

To support his contention, Mr Khan tagged a report by NDTV to his tweet about the Modi government’s move. The NRC was issued just weeks after New Delhi revoked the special status granted under its constitution to Jammu and Kashmir, pointed out the NDTV report.

The prime minister also tagged with his tweet a report appearing in the British newspaper The Times, headlined “No papers, no rights: how Modi plans to oust millions of foreigners who have lived in India all their lives”.

Glaring omissions

Shahibul Haque Shikdar, a Muslim college teacher, was distraught after two of his children made it to the citizens’ list but he was left out.

“Even my father’s name is there in the final NRC but I have been left out,” the 39-year-old said.

Assam has long seen large influxes from elsewhere, including under British colonial rule and in 1971 when millions fled into India from neighbouring Bangladesh.

For decades this has made Assam a hotbed of inter-religious and ethnic tensions. Sporadic violence has included the 1983 massacre of around 2,000 people.

Security was beefed up in Assam ahead of the release of the NRC, with some 20,000 extra personnel brought in and gatherings banned in some locations.

There were no disturbances reported on Saturday, however.

Anxious residents had started lining up since early morning, braving rain and bad weather to check their names on the list.

Only those who can demonstrate they or their forebears were in India before 1971 could be included in the list.

But navigating the complex process is a huge challenge for many in a flood-prone poor region of high illiteracy where many lack documentation.

Modi’s Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party runs Assam, and critics say the NRC process reflects the BJP’s goal to serve only its co-religionists.

In January India’s lower house of parliament passed legislation that would grant citizenship to people who moved to India as recently as six years ago — as long as they are not Muslims.

This has stoked fears among India’s 170m Muslims for their future.

Home Minister Amit Shah, Modi’s right-hand-man, has called for the ejection of “termites” and said before the BJP’s thumping re-election victory in May that it would “run a countrywide campaign to send back the infiltrators”.

Flawed process

Those left off the NRC have 120 days to appeal at special Foreigners Tribunals, which the government says are being expanded in number.

But activists say that tribunal members are often under-qualified and are subject to “performance” targets, and that the process has been riddled with inconsistencies and errors.

Instances of people being declared foreigners because of clerical errors, such as differences in the spelling of names, are “appallingly common”, Amnesty International said on Saturday.

Local lawmaker Ananta Kumar Malo, whose name was missing from the list, said he was appalled by the process.

“There are some problems with the system, otherwise how can they exclude my name?” he asked.

The number of mistakes and the fact that those left off the NRC were expected to include large numbers of Bengali-speaking Hindus has also turned some in the BJP against the process.

With many “genuine Indians” left off, the party is mulling a “fresh strategy on how we can drive out the illegal migrants”, said Himanta Biswa Sarma, a local BJP minister.

Camps and suicides

Those rejected by the tribunals who have exhausted all other legal avenues can be declared foreigners and — in theory — be placed in one of six detention centres with a view to possible deportation, although Bangladesh is yet to signal its cooperation.

Ten new such camps have been announced. One with space for 3,000 is being constructed in Goalpara, west of Assam’s biggest city Guwahati.

The camps currently hold 1,135 people, according to the state government, and have been operating for years.

Nur Mohammad, 65, spent almost 10 years in one such camp until a Supreme Court order saw him released this month.

“I was born here and lived in Assam all my life,” he said this week. “I don’t know if my name will be in the NRC or not.”

Media reports say there have been more than 40 suicides caused by concern over the NRC.

Published in Dawn, September 1st, 2019
