Mishal Malik urges world community to pressurize India for lifting curfew in IOJ&K

ISLAMABAD: Mishal Malik, wife of Hurriyat leader Yasin Malik, Friday appealed to the international community to take notice of the worst Indian brutalities in the occupied Kashmir and pressurize New Delhi for lifting of curfew in the held valley.

Addressing a meeting on the Defence and Kashmir Day here at the headquarters of Associated Press of Pakistan (APP), she said, “The world must wake up to the worst cruelties being perpetrated by occupation authorities in the Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir (IOJ&K).

Practical steps, she said, should be taken to help the people of IOJ&K, who had been denied their basic right of freedom and held hostage by the occupation Indian forces.

The persistent curfew in the held state, she said, had created a starvation-like situation there, with acute shortage of essential items, including food and medicines.

She saidthe occupied Kashmir was bleeding as the Indian forces were killing, torturing and perpetrating grave human rights' violations there to suppress the just movement of Kashmiris for their right to self-determination.

Mishal Malik said the Indian government had deployed its heavily armed soldiers in the occupied valley in an attempt to deprive the innocent Kashmiri people of their basic rights.

She said Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s unilateral act to change the special status of the IOJ&K was against the international law and the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) resolutions.

She said the Indian forces were committing the genocide of Kashmiri people.

The sacrifices of valiant Kashmiri people, however, would not go in vain and they would succeed in attaining their right to self-determination, she added.

Mishal Malik said India was replicating the policies of Hitler to satisfy its nefarious designs.

The information blackout in the occupied Jammu and Kashmir was aimed at pursuing the ambitions of ethnic cleansing of the Kashmiri people, she added.

She said Kashmir was outstanding issue on the United Nations Security Council agenda, which would have to be settled in accordance with its resolutions and aspirations of the Kashmiri people.

For the first time in history, she said, the international media was also reporting on Indian policies and brutalities of its forces in the occupied Kashmir.
