Doctors' strike: Citizens want doctors to be accountable also, shows survey

The survey revealed that a majority of citizens want the government to impose regulations that are oriented towards citizens and enforce the laws tightly. (Photo: Pixabay/Representational image)

The pan-India doctors' agitation against an incident of assault on an intern doctor at a reputed hospital in Kolkata has triggered fear among many citizens, who want more accountability from doctors in the country.

As the healthcare crisis grows due to the ongoing pan-India protests, a survey conducted by citizen engagement social networking platform LocalCircles revealed suggestions offered by the general public to improve trust in the country's healthcare system.

It revealed that a majority of citizens want the government to implement regulatory changes that are oriented towards citizens and enforce the laws tightly.

"With many state governments in the process of enforcing the Clinical Establishment Act, it is all the more important that citizens ask are listened to," the survey said.

The survey, which received over 40,000 responses, showed that 63 per cent of the responders believe doctors' compensation should not be dependent on the revenue they generate for the hospital.

At least 45 per cent of the responders said doctors' should just take a salary and no incentives while 29 per cent said they medicos should receive a salary and incentives based on individual contribution. Meanwhile, 18 per cent said doctors should get a salary plus incentives based on hospital profitability; eight per cent could not decide on the matter.

In the survey, many citizens reported that doctors are given financial targets by hospitals and incentivised every month for achieving them. "This leads to doctors unnecessarily prescribing tests and medicines to the patients, thereby increasing their bills by many folds," the survey showed.

When asked what doctors should follow while prescribing medicines, 29 per cent of the responders said they should name the salt while 17 per cent said medicos should name the salt composition along with the medicine's name. At least 47 per cent said doctors should name the salt along with the cheapest medicine available for the disease.

Citing reports, the surveyor indicated that some pharmaceutical companies bribe doctors in form of gifts and holidays in return from promoting their medicines to the patients, even if there are cheaper alternatives in the market.

Citizens suggested that such measures should stop in order to build a trustable relation with the doctors. The survey also hinted that doctors should have better interaction with the patients rather than the hospital, which could have a preset of guidelines for treatment.

Regarding compensation for treatment, at least 83 per cent of the respondents agreed that hospitals should be charging the same amount for patients paying in cash or insurance.

"The government has made some rules to protect the patient's interest, but they are poorly enforced. Hospitals find ways to play with the rules to increase their profit margins," the survey report added.

Furthermore, at least 88 per cent of the respondents said patients should have the right to seek an independent review while nine per cent were against the move.
