Rape Survivor & Family Boycotted For Being “Impure”. Where's Our Outrage?

Sexual violence is so commonplace that most don’t bat an eyelid when confronted with news on the subject. Most survivors only get attention if there’s some sort of additional trauma associated with the incident, such as this.

In Madhya Pradesh’s Rajgarh district, a rape survivor and her family are being boycotted for being “impure” because she was raped by a man from a “lower” caste.

The survivor, who is 17 years old, was raped months ago by a man from a different caste. Per the survivor’s father’s complaint, the village’s panchayat ordered him to throw a feast with non-veg food to “purify” his daughter and become re-accepted into their caste’s social circle. Since he didn’t have the finances to be able to afford such a feast, his clan and caste from the village boycotted his daughter and the rest of the family. So, he finally went to the authorities and complained.

While we were all celebrating Father’s Day in big cities, this father in India’s hinterland had to live through the horror of his daughter being violated, and then being punished for it.

First your daughter gets raped. Then you are asked to throw a feast to purify her. What kind of macabre horror is this? https://t.co/u8gCIeZxMP — Dr. Sylvia Karpagam (@sakie339) June 15, 2019

Untouchability is constitutionally banned, yet this family were treated like untouchables

Despite what the comfort of our cushy lives might lead us to think, caste-based segregation still exists, and this case is proof. The DM of the region has denied this, saying the survivor’s family agreed to hold a “satyanarayan katha”, and there was no pressure on them. However, the victim’s father told ANI that they would be treated as outcasts till they threw a feast.



The villagers are denying this, but per a Women Development officer, Chandrasena Bhinde, the survivor’s family is being truthful: “The victim's family is being treated unfairly by society and we have to stop it. I have spoken to the district SP and he assured that he will investigate the allegations. Proceedings will be fast-tracked so that such incidents are not repeated in the future.” So, will the family get justice?





The trouble is, there’s no law banning social ostracism, and the law cannot teach people humanity. While the elite and powerful wax poetic about how caste is non-existent for them, a large section of the population is out there being treated like social pariahs. More than anything, this news proves to us that if you’re deluded enough to think casteism doesn’t exist, and that hierarchies based on that archaic system are a thing of the past, check your privilege.

Instead of being angry about reservations, shouldn’t we be more angry that caste-based discrimination still exists? Shouldn’t we be angry that a girl who has been raped also has to bear the brunt of social exclusion for no fault of her own, just because of the caste system? Where’s our outrage for things which don’t directly benefit us?
