Caught on Camera: Police assault Sikh-Man and his son in Mukherjee Nagar

A Sikh man in Mukherjee Nagar, New Delhi pulled out a sword and chased cops who confronted him after his tempo and the police vehicle got involved in an accident.

The entire incident was captured by an eye witness.

The video showed the cops confronting the man. After some time, the Sikh-man decided to pull out his sword and give the police a chase.

The police could be seen running away from the man.

There were 4 police officers, despite having 4 officers, they could not detain the man.

According to the police, 2 police officers sustained injuries from the attack.

But the Gramin Seva driver has a different story, he said that the police officers attacked him first.

The police have suspended assistant sub-inspectors Sanjay Malik and Devendra, and constable Pushpendra for handling the incident in an “unprofessional manner”.

The suspensions of the 3 police officers were announced by Anil Mittal, the spokesperson of the Delhi Police.

Arvind Kejriwal, the Chief Minister of New Delhi, also commented about the incident.

The CM said, “Delhi Police brutality in Mukherjee Nagar is highly condemnable and unjustified. I demand an impartial probe into the whole incident & strict action against the guilty. Protectors of citizens can’t be allowed to turn into uncontrolled violent mobsters.”

According to the Driver, he and his son were dragged out from their auto and were beaten by the police officers.

The Delhi police released a statement about the incident.

The official statement says, “The alleged incident was followed by an accident caused by a Gramin Sewa tempo to a police vehicle. Thereafter, a police officer was also assaulted on the head by the tempo driver with a sword.”

“Further, the tempo was driven dangerously and caused injuries to a policeman in the leg.” it added.

A group of people have gathered outside the Mukherjee Nagar Police Station and are currently protesting against the assault that the police committed on the auto driver.
