Ahead of meeting with Mamata Banerjee, doctors put forward 12 new demands

As the nationwide doctors' strike entered its seventh day on Monday, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee met protesting doctors at the auditorium adjacent to the state secretariat in Howrah.

Earlier, the doctors had put forward 13 demands to end the strike but just before the meeting, the doctors put forward 12 new demands.

Junior doctors in West Bengal are on strike since June 11 after two of their colleagues were attacked and seriously injured allegedly by relatives of a patient who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata.

In a show of solidarity, medical practitioners across the country have decided not to work, leaving patients in the lurch.

From withdrawal of false cases against doctors in West Bengal to improvement in infrastructure of hospitals and restriction of patient relatives to be implemented, here are the 12 new demands put forward by the doctors protesting at the Nil Ratan Sarkar Medical College and Hospital.

1. CM's urgent intervention regarding withdrawal of statement at SSKM hospital on June 13, 2019, followed by detailed press release.

2. Documentary evidence collected by police against the criminals involved in the incident of violence against health care personnels

3.Documentary evidence of judicial enquiry against the inactivity of police

4. Withdrawal of false cases against doctors in West Bengal

5. Written implementation of security for doctors

6. Improvement in infrastructure of hospitals

7. Patient family will need to pay for any destruction done by them

8. Restriction of patient relatives to be implemented

9. Rapid action team to be formed for any violence in hospitals

10. Government must compensate for assault of any health care personnel

11. FIR to be lodged if any kind of physical assault, threats or verbal abuses are made against any health care personnel

12. Meeting must be held within seven days in all district medical colleges regarding improvement in infrastructure

(Input from Manogya Loiwal)
