Delhi tempo driver assault: Cases registered against police, driver for beating each other up

Videos of the altercation were shared widely on social media.

After videos of police brutally beating up a Sikh tempo driver went viral on social media, cases have been registered against both the police as well as the tempo driver.

The Delhi Police has registered cross cases in regard to yesterday's incident that took place in the area of PS Mukherjee Nagar.

While a case for assault by the use of sword was filed against the tempo driver based on the statement of the policeman who sustained injuries while on duty, another case has been registered on the complaint of the auto driver Sarbjeet Singh for alleged excesses committed subsequently by the police.

Both the cases have been registered as per the complaints under provisions of law dealing with assault and use of force. For independent investigation, the cases have been transferred to the Crime Branch.

The accident between a Gramin Sewa Tempo and a police vehicle occurred Sunday evening in Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar, leading to an argument between the driver and a policeman. The argument turned violent. The officer said the tempo driver chased the officer and attacked him on the head with a sword and also drove dangerously.

Videos of the altercation were shared widely on social media.

In one of the purported videos, the driver was seen chasing policemen with a sword in his hand.

In another clip, the policemen were seen thrashing him with batons.

After a preliminary investigation into the case, three policemen, including 2 ASIs have already been placed under suspension for their unprofessional conduct in handling the situation.

The Home Ministry has also sought a report from the Delhi Police into the Mukherjee Nagar incident. Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy said he has spoken to Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik and asked him to take immediate action.

"BJP delegation led by Shri @rpsinghkhalsa ji called on me today regarding the incident under Mukherjee Nagar Police Station in New Delhi, I spoke to CP Delhi, instructed for immediate action and to submit a detailed report," Reddy tweeted.

Politicians condemn attack

Leaders of various political parties condemned the thrashing of a Sikh Gramin Sewa tempo driver by policemen in Mukherjee Nagar and demanded a fair probe into the incident.

Delhi Chief Minister and Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) supremo Arvind Kejriwal visited the tempo driver at his residence and demanded "strict punishment" for the guilty policemen.

Shiromani Akali Dal president Sukhbir Singh Badal urged Home Minister Amit Shah to award exemplary punishment to police personnel responsible for the "brutal attack" and dismiss them from the service to send a message that "atrocities by men in uniform" would not be tolerated under any circumstances.

"This is a disgraceful and unforgivable act. We will ensure that the guilty are brought to book.

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh also described the incident as "shameful" and urged the home minister to take action.

"Shameful incident of @DelhiPolice ruthlessly beating up Sarabjeet Singh & Balwant Singh over a petty issue. Request HM @AmitShah to ensure justice," he tweeted.

Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari said there was no place for violence in the society while demanding punishment for the guilty.

"Violence has no place in any Civil Society. Mukherjee Nagar incident is sad and condemnable. A free and fair enquiry should be done so that no innocent should be punished and guilty should be brought to book," he said in a tweet.
