Delhi: Police face the heat for beating up father, son

Police said an enquiry will be conducted by Deputy Commissioner of Police (northwest) Vijayanta Arya and additional DCP and ACP of the district.

A day after a brutal assault on elderly Sikh driver Sarabjeet Singh and his son, Delhi police suspended three cops even as the issue assumed political overtones on Monday.

Delhi police spokesperson Madhur Verma said that the approach of police personnel was unprofessional and hence such an action was taken against them.

"As per the direction of Delhi police commissioner Amulya Patnaik, an enquiry committee headed by joint commissioner rank officer has been setup to investigate the matter. As per preliminary enquiry, we have suspended three policemen and will take further action against other policemen following the recommendation of enquiry committee report," Verma said.

An argument between a tempo driver and policemen over parking took an ugly turn on Sunday evening after the cops were seen in a video thrashing the man who pulled out a sword on a busy street in North West Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar. The video shared on social media showed the Gramin Sewa driver chasing policemen with a sword in his hand, while others showed policemen thrashing him with sticks in an attempt to overpower him.

Hitting out at the Delhi Police over the alleged assault on the driver, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal demanded a probe and strict action against the culprits.

"The Delhi Police brutality in Mukherjee Nagar is highly condemnanble and unjustified. I demand an impartial probe into the whole incident & strict action against the guilty. Protectors of citizens can't be allowed to turn into uncontrolled violent mobsters," Kejriwal wrote in a tweet on Monday.

Police said an enquiry will be conducted by Deputy Commissioner of Police (northwest) Vijayanta Arya and additional DCP and ACP of the district. The case has been transferred to Delhi crime branch.

Spokesperson Verma said that an ACP rank officer was among the eight police personnel injured in the incident.

BJP's Delhi chief Manoj Tiwari also condemned the incident. "Violence has no place in any civil society," he said.
