Violence registry gets a push to protect defenceless doctors

Pune model, roping in a quick response team constituted by retired policemen for protection, is set to be replicated for the state — and then a national rollout



While doctors pan-India are up in arms against the repeated abuse they are subjected to from violent relatives of patients, the Indian Medical Association’s (IMA’s) Pune chapter has gotten rolling with the ‘violence registry’ announced last year, which could not take off earlier due to certain hiccups. The registry, which will work towards identifying repeat offenders, has been supplemented by setting up a quick response team constituted by retired policemen, to step in whenever an episode of violence unravels.



The brainchild of former national president of IMA, Dr Ravi Wankhedkar, who is a Pune resident, the registry was mooted in July last year, but did not get off the ground. However, since January this year, things got rolling in Pune, with the roping in of the Retired Police Welfare Association (RPWA). This decade-old body of retired police officials is working across the state, with 5,000 members on-board. In Pune alone, it has 1,000 active members.



~~69832578~~

Apart from RPWA and IMA, the collective will include the IMA Hospital Association and Core India Institute of Legal Medicine founded by Dr Santosh Kakade, a medico-legal expert.



“The register will benefit the doctors and hospitals as it is the need of the hour with the increasing attacks on doctors. Many times officials approached for support ask for statistics and case studies. Now the registry will help us provide it,” said Dr Sanjay Patil, president IMA, Pune chapter.



The registry will log details of incidents of verbal and physical abuse, including location and frequency. It will include videos, photographic evidence and CCTV footage. The data will be able to profile the specialities in which doctors are most vulnerable. It will also have information of FIRs registered and those that went unregistered. Pune itself records at least 100 cases of abuse (verbal and physical) of doctors in a year.



Most times verbal abuses go unreported, which has provoked the institution of the quick response team which will enable timely intervention. “The model has been evolved not merely as a data culling exercise but also to offer resolutions that can prevent such eventualities. RPWA will work closely and even provide solutions and make suggestions that can be adopted to avert such episodes of violence,” pointed out Dr Avinash Bhondwe, president-elect of IMA, Maharashtra. He added that once the model is stabilised in Pune, it would be adopted for the state and then referred for a national rollout.



~~69832603~~

RPWA president and retired superintendent of police, Suresh Kamlakar informed that 80 per cent of the work to get their act together is done. “We’ve already tied up with the doctors. Currently we are doing some homework, putting together data on hospitals, their staff and other details. RPWA will work as a quick response team, provide security at the time of violence breaking out in hospital premises. The team will also pitch in with its experience in legal matters working hand in hand with the medical fraternity to keep violence at bay.”



In the incensed atmosphere that has rent the country pursuant to the faceoff between doctors and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in the wake of two resident doctors at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata being grievously injured by violent relatives of a patient, Pune model can work as a salve. Dr Sushil Kamatane, an intensivist at Inamdar Multispeciality Hospital, who was attacked earlier this month, bitterly noted, ”I don’t see much hope for justice in a country where doctors are regularly harassed. Despite the support from my family and the medical fraternity, I am still shattered. It’s been more than a week and an FIR is yet to be registered. The doctors’ harassment does not end here. It continues with visits to the courts to fight their case.”


