Complainant in Oberoi rape case arrested

The police stated that she had also orchestrated an attack on herself in May to frame Oberoi.

Mumbai: Following a rap from Bombay high court over shoddy investigation, the Oshiwara police on Monday arrested the woman complainant in a rape case, involving actor Karan Oberoi, on charges of filing a fake case. The police stated that she had also orchestrated an attack on herself in May to frame Oberoi. The woman, a healer by profession, will now be questioned.

The investigators said that the plan was revealed after the woman’s “assailants” were apprehended on May 27, two days after the attack. One of the accused trio turned out to be the cousin of the complainant’s lawyer, Ali Kashif Khan.

The trio had spilt the beans to the police, stating that Rs 10,000 was paid to them to slash her with a paper cutter and drop a chit asking her to take back her complaint.

The police then apprehended the lawyer, who revealed that the complainant was part of the plan. She, however, denied this and claimed to have written to senior police officers about the allegations. The police subsequ-ently found that the allegations of sexual assault were also unfounded.

“We are probing to find the motive behind the complaint against Oberoi. The woman will be interrogated,” said an officer of the Oshiwara police station.

The woman had filed a case against Oberoi for raping her under the pretext of marriage and blackmailing her with video clips. The police had arrested Oberoi on May 5 and booked him for rape. The actor was denied bail after the court sent him to 14 days’ judicial custody. He was released from prison on June 7.

The court had earlier observed that the woman, on May 25, orchestrated a fake attack on herself and tried to make it look like she was targeted because of the complaint, she had filed against the actor.

The police was also reprimanded for the way the probe was being conducted. “Much needs to be said about the manner in which probe has been carried out. The police is yet to seize the mobile phones of the complainant. We expect the police to conduct a free, fair and impartial investigation,” Justice Revati Mohite Dere had said.
