Gang-rape survivor commits suicide in Uttar Pradesh, blames police inaction in suicide note

No arrests have been made in this regard so far (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: As per reports from the state of Uttar Pradesh, alleged police negligence may have driven a rape-survivor to take her own life in Badaun district on Sunday. The matter came to light when family members of the 24-year-old woman found her hanging from a hook at their home. Local law enforcement agencies were alerted and rushed to the spot.

Initial ivestigations suggest that a suicide note was recovered near the victim's body. However, the contents of the note are yet to be confirmed. Following the woman's death, reports asserted that she had approached Baduan police to register a complaint on June 15 but the station house officer (SHO) did not pay heed to her ordeal and failed to lodge a first information report (FIR) in this regard.

A day after the woman's body was recovered from her home, Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) of Badaun Ashok Kumar Tripathi suspended the concerned SHO. An FIR in this regard, however, was filed barely hours before the woman committed suicide. The complaint was registered on the orders of Bareilly Additional Deputy General (ADG) Avinash Chandra, reported Indian Express. The national daily also claimed that the woman met the ADG on June 12, requesting him to acknowledge her complaint. Chandra then directed the circle officer (CO) to lodge the FIR.

In her complaint to the police, the woman claimed that her husband worked as a labourer in Delhi and she was visiting her parents in Badaun when the incident took place. She was at a local market on May 15 when three of her relatives approached her, claiming that her husband was unwell and they were on their way to visit him. The victim agreed to accompany them and they took her to Secunderabad city in Telangana where they kept her captive and took turns raping her for a week.

On her way back to Badaun via train, the woman managed to borrow the cell phone of a co-passenger, without the accused catching her, to call her parents. She narrated her ordeal which prompted them to rush to the Delhi railway station in order to rescue her. Police reports suggest that the accused caught wind of the same and fled before the woman's kin could have captured them.
