Amid protests, Delhi police commissioner assures complaint against cops in auto-driver assault case

Condemning the incident, Manjinder Singh Sirsa himself staged a protest on Monday night outside the Mukherjee Nagar police station. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The Commissioner of Police in Delhi Amulya Patnaik on Monday assured that a case will be registered against all the police personnel involved in the assault of Sikh auto-driver Sarbjit Singh. The decision was announced in a delegation led by the Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee (DSGMC) president Manjinder Singh Sirsa on Monday.

Sirsa told news agency ANI that the Commissioner of Police has assured them that no guilty policeman will be spared in the case. He also mentioned that the enquiry in the incident will be conducted by the joint commissioner of police and will be entrusted to someone outside the district.

The committee has been ensured that no case has been registered against Sarbjit and his son in the matter. The victim was a part of the delegation. Meanwhile, the president of the DSGMC Sukhbir Singh Badal is also monitoring the case and he had directed to take up the matter with the police commissioner. The delegation also included members like DSGMC general secretary Harmeet Singh Kalka, senior vice-president Bibi Ranjit Kaur, junior vice-president Kulwant Singh Bath among other members.

The ANI report quoted Sirsa as saying that Prakash Singh Badal is himself monitoring the case, the DSGMC and the SAD will take steps to ensure that Sarbjit Singh and his minor son gets justice. He also emphasised that there should be no compromise on the security of the Sikhs in the whole nation.

Delhi: People continue to protest in Mukherjee Nagar against the thrashing of auto driver Sarabjeet Singh and his son by Police, yesterday. Heavy security at the spot. pic.twitter.com/rpsjKJ4hWl — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

Condemning the incident, Sirsa himself staged a protest on Monday night outside the Mukherjee Nagar police station. Authorities have suspended three cops in connection with the case. Also, the Deputy Commissioner of Police Vijyanta Arya has suspended Assistant Sub-Inspector Sanjay Malik and Devendra and constable Pushpendra in connection with the assault case.

A Sikh man and his minor son were beaten by the Delhi Police officers after the victims indulged in an altercation with the cops in northwest Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar area on Sunday.
