Woman doc assaulted in Mandi

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Mandi, June 17

A woman doctor was reportedly assaulted in Mandi, fuelling the anger among doctors protesting the attack on medicos in Kolkata a few days ago.

The victim was attacked by a person at the Primary Health Centre. The accused was in an inebriated state, it was learnt. After committing the crime, he fled.

Confirming the report, Mandi Superintendent of Police Gurdev Chand Sharma said according to the victim, the accused was not known to her.

The police said the accused asked the doctor to bandage an incision and when she entered the next room to get the bandage, the accused followed her. Finding her alone, he assaulted her.

The SP said on the complaint of the doctor, a case under Sections 54, 353 and 332 of the IPC had been registered against the unknown accused. A special investigation team (SIT) has also been constituted to nab the accused. The police are scanning the CCTV footage to zero in on the accused.

The SP said a few suspects had been rounded up, but the victim denied their involvement. Meanwhile, the doctors have threatened to go on a strike if action is not taken against the guilty. The Resident Doctors Association of Indira Gandhi Medical College and Hospital here threatened to go on a two-hour ‘pen down’ strike on Tuesday and an indefinite strike later on if the accused is not brought to book. Association general secretary Bhartendu said a probe into the assault of the woman doctor was on. “If no strict action is taken, we will go on an indefinite strike from Wednesday,” he said.

(With inputs from IANS)

Protest at Tanda medical college

Kangra: Resident doctors of Tanda Medical College today held a protest in support of the striking doctors of West Bengal. They gathered around the administrative block and took out a march in the premises of the college. However, it did not disrupt the working of the hospital as an off was observed in view of Sant Kabir Jayanti. Principal Dr Bhanu Awasthi said emergency services were available.

Doctors seek protection
