What the doctor did not order: Mamata Banerjee and the agitating doctors

Junior doctors at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata have called off the strike after seven days. (File photos)

The impasse at Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata finally ended after seven days of protest. What could have been sorted out in a couple of days was dragged on for a week, thanks to the sheer stubbornness of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

Junior doctors at NRS went on strike last Tuesday demanding better security for doctors. Their main demand is a safe working environment for doctors and other hospital staff.

What was an administrative matter was spiralled out of control with doctors from across the country striking work in support of their colleagues in Kolkata. Doctors from Assam to Goa come out in protest. As did those in Karnataka, Odisha, Kerala, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh.

Mamata Banerjee's views on the strike were bewildering. All it needed was for her to reach out to the striking junior doctors and reassure them that their safety was of primary concern to her government.

Remember junior doctors are young, idealistic people and not hardened, cynical politicians. For most of them working in hospital wards and out-patient departments (OPDs) is their first full-time job. Most still have vestiges of the romantic ideal of the role of a doctor in society.

Till they face reality: the crumbling infrastructure, cynicism of hospital administrators and the ire of mobs among others.

File photo PTI

Mamata, show some mamata

Filmmaker Aparna Sen had succinctly put it when she said that Mamata Banerjee should show some "mamata" (compassion) to the students.

Instead a belligerent Mamata refused to budge, called protesting students "outsiders" and "notorious criminals". According to The Telegraph, in a Facebook post, Trinamool Congress (TMC) secretary general Partha Chatterjee says, "...there is motive of some at play behind their cease-work".

By suggesting a political motive to what is basically a group of students demanding justice, Mamata Banerjee is losing valuable support.

By not giving dialogue a chance during the early days of the protests, Mamata pushed a localised agitation on to the national stage. With leading newspapers and news sites covering the doctors' protests, Mamata Banerjee is now seen as someone who cannot control law and order in the state.

And this is where Mamata Banerjee is playing right into the Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) hand. On the back of some gruesome post-poll violence BJP has gone to town on the lawlessness in West Bengal under Mamata Banerjee.

Playing her cards wrong

Violence against doctors is nothing new and is not limited to Kolkata. Doctors who are on patient-facing duty have repeatedly faced the ire of relatives of patients for perceived sins of omission and commission.

Recently The Indian Express published instances of violent incidents against doctors: Bangalore's TSS Hospital, Ahmedabad Civil Hospital, HB Kanwatia Hospital in Jaipur, Patna Medical College and Hospital, a doctor with a private practice in Hyderabad, Dhule Civil Hospital and Fatehgarh's Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.

Disgraceful though these acts were none of them made it to the front page of national newspapers nor to prime time news. NRS Kolkata did. And a large part of this was Mamata Banerjee's truculent attitude. All she had to do was send a senior government official and bring the protestors to the table.

Is Mamata Banerjee losing her political perspicacity? For a politician who is so savvy and for years had the public pulse right it is surprising that she dug in her heels when it came to talks with the junior doctors.

File photo: Reuters

Didi should know that in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections she had lost the scheduled castes and tribal votes. The middle class is slowly ebbing away lured by the fascination of muscular nationalism.

In the seventh and last phase of the recently held Lok Sabha elections, nine (out of the total 42) seats went to polls in West Bengal. TMC won all nine. Readers will remember that the seventh phase of polling took place just a week after a bust of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was vandalised allegedly by BJP supporters in Kolkata.

Mamata Banerjee whipped up the Bengal-and-Bengali-culture-is-in-danger hysteria. The bhadralok reacted and did not vote for the BJP. The junior doctors are all bhadraloks in the making, on the way to a well-settled middle-class existence. Should Didi alienate this cache of votes?

Losing her supporters

The signs are there and Didi has just to look in her backyard. Her nephew Dr Abesh Banerjee, Kolkata mayor Firhad Hakim's daughter Dr Shabba Hakim and TMC's Barasat MP Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar's son Dr Baidyanath Ghosh Dastidar had all come out in support of the agitating doctors.

More worrying for Mamata Banerjee is the covert communalisation of the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital incident. The junior doctor who was grievously injured is a Hindu - Paribaha Mukhopadhyay. His assailants were relatives and neighbours of Mohammad Sayeed, a Muslim.

Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, a junior doctor at the NRS Medical College, received deep injuries on his skull. (Photo: Facebook)

Mamata Banerjee's earlier refusal to come to the table is seen as siding with the minorities. Even when they are wrong. What should be a law-and-order issue has turned into a slow-boiling communal pot.

It is time Mamata Banerjee read the tea leaves right. Though successive governments have kept communal tensions under control that might not be the case in future. The (saffron) elephant is already in the room. Didi seems to have lost her mojo.
