CPM leader’s son booked for rape, cheating

Mumbai Police has booked Communist Party of India (Marxist) Kerala unit secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan’s son for rape and cheating on the complaint of a woman.

The 33-year-old woman alleged that she was sexually assaulted by the CPI (M) leader’s son, Binoy Vinodini Kodiyeri, on the pretext of marriage.

Binoy Vinodini Kodiyeri, a UAE-based businessman, met the woman in 2008 when she was working in Dubai as a bar dancer.

The woman in her complaint in Mumbai’s Oshiwara police station stated that Kodiyeri had befriended her when she was working in Dubai in 2008. She said that she had delivered a baby from the relationship on July 22, 2010. According to her complaint, Kodiyeri had promised the woman that he would marry her, following which she moved to Mumbai in 2010.

She said that her house rent and the living expenses were paid by Kodiyeri for a while, but after some time, he stopped responding to her and stopped paying her rent and living expenses.

The woman said that she later found out in 2018 that he married someone else.

He used to pay my house rent and living expenses and used to visit us in Mumbai. In 2015, he told me that his business in UAE was going through a financial crisis and that he could not afford to pay our living expenses. When I requested him to marry me, he was evasive. Later he stopped calling me and whenever I tried to call him, he did not respond to my calls. In 2018, I found that he had already married and had a family, the woman said in her complaint.

After receiving the complaint, Oshiwara police has framed charges against the accused under Sections 376, 376(2), 420, 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code.

In 2018, JASAS Tourism, a UAE-based business group owned by Hasan Ismaeel Abdullah al Marzooqi, filed a case of financial fraud against Binoy Vinodini Kodiyeri stating that he defaulted on a loan of Rs 13 crore from the firm. Based on the complaint, UAE imposed a travel ban on Kodiyeri. Later the case was settled out of court.

Binoy Vinodini Kodiyeri admitted that he knew the complainant, but denied the allegations calling them factually incorrect.

ALSO READ: Ranchi: Minor student gangraped, threatened by three men, probe on

ALSO WATCH: My take: Kathua rape-murder victim deserves justice not political war
