Woman lodges rape complaint against CPI(M) leader’s son Binoy Kodiyeri, he denies

Woman lodges rape complaint against CPI(M) leader’s son Binoy Kodiyeri, he denies

The complaint says that Binoy sexually harassed her for years after luring her with promises of marrying her and that she has a child born out of the relationship.

news Controversy

Yet another allegation has surfaced against CPI(M) state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan’s eldest son Binoy. A Mumbai-based woman has accused him of raping her for years by promising to marry her.

TNM confirmed that the Oshiwara police in Mumbai has booked Binoy under sections 376 for rape and 420 for cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. The complaint was filed on June 13 at the Oshiwara police station. The complainant is a native of Bihar and reportedly a staff at a dance bar in Mumbai.

The complaint states that Binoy sexually harassed her for years after luring her with the promise that he would marry her and that she has an eight-year-old child born out of the relationship.

The complaint, according to reports, also alleges that Binoy had rented a house for the complainant and used to take of her other expenses too. It says that she wasn’t aware that Binoy was married.

With the monsoon session of the Kerala Assembly going on, the opposition is likely to take it up against the government.

Binoy denies allegations

Binoy Kodiyeri, however, denied the allegations saying that it was an attempt to blackmail him.

“I know the woman who lodged the complaint. She had sent a notice six months ago claiming that I had married her. She demanded Rs 5 crore from me at that time. I had filed a complaint with the Kannur Range IG in that regard,” he told Asianet News.

Binoy also said that he would face the complaint legally.

In January 2018, Binoy was booked in a Rs 13 crore money laundering case in Dubai that had created ripples in state politics.

A report published by Malayala Manorama also said that the Dubai police had sought the help of Interpol to make him appear before the Dubai court. The allegations had led to a ruckus in the state Assembly, with the opposition using the case to attack the LDF government led by the CPI(M).

However, Binoy later got a certificate from the Dubai police that stated that no case had been registered against him.
