Namma Bengaluru: Growing attacks on cops reflects growing disconnect between citizens and force

Others say that the rising number of instances of cops being beaten up by the people they are trying to arrest reveals problems within the rank and file of the police

Sudhakar K.B., a 37-year-old head constable with Jeevan Bhima Nagar police station, never thought that he would be assaulted when he confronted Roopesh Singh, a 29-year-old IT professional who was allegedly creating a ruckus and attacking staff at a pub following a dispute over the bill on June 9.

When he went to the pub in response to a distress call, the customer — who was reportedly inebriated — started abusing and kicking him, all the while shouting: “You don’t know who I am. One phone call will land you in trouble. I will get you suspended...make you regret this.”

In his account to the police, Sudhakar said that when he tried to reason with Roopesh, the latter kicked him and tore his uniform. Additional police personnel soon arrived and arrested Roopesh and his friend, who were charged with assaulting a public servant.

The attack on the head constable was not a one-off incident. Going by recent reports, as many 13 policemen were assaulted by unruly citizens in the last one month alone. This has caused much embarrassment to the police. Though jurisdictional police at the station level are trying to justify the attacks as a ‘professional hazard’, many senior police officials feel that it reflects a lack of professionalism within the force.

“It is a matter of concern, especially when uniformed policemen on duty, are being beaten up. Such incidents are common in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, not here. The morale among the policemen is taking a beating. The officials concerned should take strict measures to tackle the situation at the earliest, ” said a senior police officer, echoing the view of many of his colleagues who did not want to be named.

Senior officials blame this trend on the fact that Bengaluru is a fast growing city, but the strength of the force has failed to keep up.

“One of the reasons is the lack of respect for the police. We have to send a strong message that attacks of this nature will be dealt with severely,” said another senior officer.

Others say there’s also a communication gap between police personnel and citizens.

However, many police officials believe that blaming the spate of attacks on the growing population is a flimsy excuse. “Policemen on duty should be blamed for getting attacked, as they are trained to control mobs and handle any situation. Junior level policemen are to blamed because of their conduct,” said a senior officer.

Stress among constabulary

The incidents also reveal that all is not well within the rank and file. An understaffed police force has resulted in rising stress levels among junior personnel. Many constables The Hindu spoke to felt that their seniors did not understand the situation on the ground, and that very little has been done to address the issue.

Others felt that the training needs to be improved. “It’s very complex issue,” explained a senior police officer, who is part of the police training division. “Disparity between senior and junior level policemen is higher compared to other departments, which is snowballing into rising stress levels among lower-rung policemen who, in turn, vent their ire on the general public leading to clashes.”

Police chiefs have in the past tried to address the issue with varied levels of success. Former city police commissioner N.S. Megharik, for instance, had ordered all policemen — traffic and law and order — to carry weapons as a deterrent. However, the order was not taken well by policemen on duty who cited various reasons, including fear of losing their weapon.

Traffic police commissioners had in the past also issued orders urging personnel to not confront motorists or stop them. Policemen on duty have been asked to note down the violation and registration number instead. This rule has not only brought down the number of incidents but also reduced allegations of corruption and high-handedness against policemen.

Mathews Philip, Executive Director, South India Cell for Human Rights Education and Monitoring (SICHREM), compared the attacks on police personnel to the spate of relatives of patients attacking doctors. “Both doctors and the police need to reflect on the root cause of this violent behaviour against them. Psychologically, there is a grudge against the police among a large section of society, which often is expressed violently, even in cases where the constable may not be high-handed. All over the world, they are facing the risk of violence from those who resist police action. The police should exercise restraint and only exercise reasonable force,” he said.
