Delhi tempo driver assault: I feared for safety of bystanders, cop accused of brutality narrates his story | EXCLUSIVE

In one of the clips, the man is seen chasing policemen with a sword, while in another, the policemen are seen thrashing him and his son with batons.

The Delhi police officer, who has been accused of brutally beating up the father-son duo in Mukherjee Nagar area on Sunday, says that he overpowered sword-wielding Sarabjeet Singh as he feared for the safety of bystanders.

Speaking to India Today TV, Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) Yograj Sharma said that tempo driver Sarabjeet Singh attacked him with the sword twice, resulting in serious injuries.

Saradar ji's Gramin Sewa (shared auto rickshaw) had touched ASI Devendra's police car. The ASI stopped him in front of the police station, but Sardar ji immediately took out his kripan (sword) and started to threaten the police officer, Yograj Sharma said quoting his colleague Devendra.

"ASI Devendra came rushing to me requesting additional force. I deployed several cops, but I could also not stop myself from rushing to the scene of the incident," ASI Yograj Sharma said.

Narrating the incident, ASI Yograj Sharma told India Today TV that he approached Sarabjeet Singh, who was brandishing the sword, from the back and pushed him on the ground. "I did not let go of Sardar ji even as his son continued to slap me," Yograj Sharma said.

"But as my grip loosened, he attacked me - first on my legs and then on my head. I feared that he may attack other police officers and bystanders. But I managed to overpower him again," he said.

Yograj Sharma has sustained injuries on his head in the incident.

The police officer also alleged that main accused Sarabjeet's son, who was a minor, had deliberately driven his father's Gramin Sewa into the cops and injured them.

On the other hand, Sarabajeet’s family has alleged that he took the sword to defend himself from police brutality.

"We just want strict action against the police officers involved in the incident. They have brutally beaten up Sarabjeet Singh and his minor son," Sarabjeet’s 75-year-old father Manjeet Singh told the press earlier.

Several Sikh groups have also come out demanding justice for the tempo driver and his son.

Two cross FIRs have been filed in the case. Delhi Police crime branch, which has taken over the investigation, has suspended all cops present at the time of incident, pending inquiry.

However, the top cops told home ministry in their report that the conduct of the police officer in the civilian clothes, ASI Yograj Sharma, was professional and holds highest standards.

Several videos of the incident have gone viral. While some show police brutally beating Sarabjeet Singh and his son, others show Sarabjeet chasing and charging at cops with the sword.
