27-yr-old jawan from Odisha, hit by IED in Pulwama, dies

Angul: Naik Ajit Kumar Sahoo, a jawan from the state’s Dhenkanal district, who was injured in an IED blast in Jammu & Kashmir’s Pulwama on Monday, succumbed to his injuries on Tuesday. The 27-year-old belonged to the 14 Rashtriya Rifles (RR).A pall of gloom descended over Sahoo’s village of Badasuanlo in Kamakhyanagar block after news of his death reached here. His mortal remains were scheduled to reach the village late on Tuesday evening.Nine soldiers, including Sahoo, and two civilians were injured in Pulwama’s Arihal when a group of terrorists targeted a routine Army patrol of 44 RR, with which he was associated at that time, with an IED. Another jawan, havildar Amarjeet Kumar, also succumbed to his injuries.Santosh Kumar Sahoo, father of the martyr , said, “An Army officer from Kolkata called and said my son had been hospitalised. He breathed his last at 2.50 in the morning, the officer said.”Sahoo’s father added, “My son had trained in Bengaluru for one-and-a-half years and then stayed in Kolkata for three years.” The jawan had visited home in the last week of May and left for Jammu & Kashmir on June 2.“Little did I know that it would be his last visit home. It is a great loss for all of us but I am proud that my son sacrificed his life for the country,” said the grieving father.Sahoo was born on June 4, 1992, and had joined the Army on March 20, 2015. On June 1, he was transferred to 14 RR in Jammu & Kashmir from Kolkata. He had earlier worked in the Army Service Corps in Bengaluru.Ashok Sahoo, a close friend of the deceased, told TOI, “Every villager in Badasuanlo is mourning his death. We are in shock.”“He was brave, nice and gentle. Everybody liked him. His death is a great loss for us. His soul will rest in peace when the government takes action against terrorists,” he added.The sub-collector of Kamakhyanagar, Bishnu Prasad Acharya, said Sahoo would receive a full guard of honour.Sahoo’s elder brother, Alok, (30), works in a private company in Bengaluru and his younger sister, Subhalaxmi (21), is married.
