Uttar Pradesh Police refutes allegations of woman claiming she was gang-raped in front of husband

The case is being investigated by Rampur Police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Lucknow: A day after a rape survivor in Badaun district of Uttar Pradesh committed suicide due to alleged police inaction, another case of sexual assault has come to light from the Rampur district of the state. A woman has claimed that she was gang-raped in front of her husband by four men on June 11. As per the latest reports, all four accused have been placed in police custody and an investigation into the matter is underway.

Initially hesitant to approach the police and lodge an official complaint, the couple were left with no other option after the accused posted a video of the heinous act on social media. In their complaint, the couple alleged that they were apprehended by a group of four men who harassed the woman. When her husband intervened, the accused brutally thrashed the couple before tying the husband to a tree while taking turns to rape his wife in front of him.

However, the police's version of events varies from the account furnished by the couple. According to a report by news agency ANI, investigators probing the allegations claim that the woman was not gang-raped. Sub-inspector Brijesh Kumar said that the couple themselves recorded the video which is being widely circulated on social media. The matter is under active investigation and more details in this regard are awaited.

A similar case had emerged from the state of Rajasthan earlier this year where a couple was waylaid and assaulted by six men in Alwar district. The instance sparked outrage after the woman claimed that her she was gang-raped by six men in front of her husband as a seventh man recorded a video of the heinous act and used it to scare them into not revealing the crime to anyone. A special investigative team (SIT) was then formed at the direction of the state government and led to the arrests of all seven accused who were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Information Technology Act.
