Kerala CPI(M) Leader Who Called Indian Armymen Rapists Has Own Son Booked In Rape And Cheating Case by Mumbai Police

Son of the Kerala State Secretary of the Communist Party of India(Marxist), Kodiyeri Balakrishnan is booked by the Mumbai Police under a case of rape and cheating, reports India Today.

The embarrassing development to the ruling CPI(M) happened after a 33-year-old woman from Bihar filed a complaint accusing Binoy Vinodini Balakrishnan of sexually assaulting her. She also alleged that the accused has an eight-year-old son with her and falsely promised her marriage.

Based on the woman's complaint, Binoy has been booked under Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 420 (cheating) and 376 (rape), Oshiwara police station's senior inspector Shailesh Pasalwad said in Mumbai.

Balakrishnan had previously insulted the Indian Army saying that Indian armymen can rape and abduct women, shoot people without being questioned. The statement was made in response to Kerala BJP State President Kummanam Rajasekharan's demand that the the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act (AFSPA) be imposed in Kerala's Kannur after an RSS activist was hacked to death in May 2017.

Binoy, Kodiyeri Balakrishnan’s son, got in touch with the complainant some years ago when she used to work as a bar dancer in Dubai. The accused used to frequently visit the dance bar and the woman got into a relationship with him, said the officer, adding that she was asked to quit her job as a dancer by Binoy, who had promised to marry her.

The woman, in her complaint, mentioned that in 2010, the accused had rented a flat in Mumbai's Andheri, where he used to visit her regularly, and that she had a child from the relationship. The woman also said that it was only last year that she came to know that Binoy was already married.

Binoy is serving a travel ban issued by a Dubai court in connection with a cheating case filed by the Gulf-based JAAS Tourism, which alleged that he had cheated the company of Rs 13 crore.

While the CPI(M) is trying to distance itself from the Binod and the case, the Kerala state BJP is demanding for a comprehensive probe into the development.
