Battered Tripura baby’s parents do not turn up for inquiry

Child’s injuries indicate sexual abuse and violence, say police

The parents of a seven-month-old girl, who was found to have sustained multiple physical injuries, including on her genitals, did not turn up for a police inquiry on Wednesday.

Last September, the couple from Tripura brought the girl to a private hospital in Vellore for treatment of perineal ulcer and she was found to have sustained multiple fractures, injuries on the vagina as well as subdural haemorrhage.

The Vellore All Women Police Station filed a case under section 4 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act for penetrative sexual assault and summoned the parents for an inquiry on Wednesday. The parents had left for Tripura nearly a month ago after the District Child Protection Unit (DCPU) and Child Welfare Committee (CWC) took custody of the child, officials said.

‘DNA test planned’

“They did not turn up for the inquiry. When we contacted them over phone, they said they did not have money for travel. So, we have decided to book train tickets for them. A DNA test will be conducted to confirm if they are the parents of the child following which we will conduct an inquiry,” a police official said.

Last year, the couple had taken the baby, then three months old, to a private hospital in Chennai for treatment of perineal ulcer. They later approached the Christian Medical College hospital in Vellore. The baby was advised investigations and follow-up. “However, she was rushed to the paediatric casualty the same evening in a critical condition...Two days later, an ultrasound was done and they found multiple fractures involving the ribs,” an official said.

They also spotted haemorrhagic fluid in the chest indicating fresh injury. On obtaining an opinion from an ophthalmologist, they found she had retinal haemorrhage, while a CT scan found that the brain was impacted causing subdural haemorrhage, the official said.

“There were injuries on the vagina indicating sexual abuse... She suffered from shaken baby syndrome... All these pointed to child abuse,” he added.

Following this, a complaint was lodged with the All Women Police, Vellore. “The perineal ulcer has healed, and the baby needs to undergo a surgery for closure of the diversion colostomy. Doctors can take the permission of the CWC to perform the surgery,” he said.
