Twitterati Fume as Former Miss India Harassed in Road Rage Incident

“How does 15 boys without helmet have such ease to beat up the Uber driver and break the car. In south kolkata??? What I realised that this was a way to extract money from the driver by threatening him in a mob. This is absolutely a way of extortion…” Ushoshi wrote in a Facebook post.

Fortunately for her, the post went viral on social media, and the Kolkata Police moved in and arrested seven of the gang members on various charges, including harassment and assault.

We have taken this incident very seriously and seven persons have been arrested so far. On the order of the Commissioner of Police, Kolkata, an

inquiry regarding the non-registration of F.I.R. has been initiated into this incident, at a very senior level. — Kolkata Police (@KolkataPolice) 18 June 2019

Netizens expressed their bewilderment, saying even a former “Miss India” is unsafe to travel at night in Kolkata.

Even Miss India is not safe in Bengal.@ushoshi Sengupta attacked and followed by mob. We all know who are these guys and from where they belong. It's a common scene in areas around Park Circus, Mullick Bazar, Moulali, Khiderpore where Police feels helpless in heart of Kolkata. pic.twitter.com/90BFaWHNf0 — Harsh Pansari (@iamharshpansari) 19 June 2019

Not a single daughter and lady safe in West Bengal. Safety is Big Joke, How many times that we have to ashamed in front of World, Miss Universe India Ushoshi Sengupta harassed in @MamataOfficial own constituency. Her Driver been also physically assaulted.https://t.co/YzASK5ESVa — Debasree Chaudhuri (@DebasreeBJP) 19 June 2019

former miss india universe ushoshi sengupta had to go through a harrowing time in kolkata after some boys - from a particular community, unleashed hell on her and the @uber cab she was in https://t.co/spj2siSsh5! 7 arrests have been made! pic.twitter.com/UsdFsixZhR — vivek singh (@vivekbabaji) 19 June 2019

Meanwhile some users blamed the Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for the situation of “lawlessness” prevailing in the state.

former miss india universe ushoshi sengupta had to go through a harrowing time in kolkata after some boys - from a particular community, unleashed hell on her and the @uber cab she was in https://t.co/spj2siSsh5! 7 arrests have been made! pic.twitter.com/UsdFsixZhR — vivek singh (@vivekbabaji) 19 June 2019

SHOCKING!!!



Former Miss India Universe chased and attacked in Kolkata, absolute anarchy in West Bengal under #MamathaBannerjee!!



No one is safe in WB, except the illegal Immigrants & hooligans. As a CM, HM of state #MamataBanarjee failing miserably! https://t.co/WYUuyvqgiG — Shobha Karandlaje (@ShobhaBJP) 19 June 2019

Names of those who attacked #UshoshiSengupta's car, heckeled her are out. To blame a particular community is easy, wrong, dangerous. But if a community is made to feel they are above law, their worst prejudices pandered to for votes, this happens. For that, Mamata is guilty. — Deep Halder (@deepscribble) 19 June 2019

The Indian state of West Bengal has been in news in recent months due an increase in reported violence, especially since the Indian Parliamentary Elections; some of the incidents which happened within the past moth have been due to tensions stemming from the national vote.

Kolkata also witnessed the alleged assault of junior doctors following the death of a patient, prompting statewide doctors’ protests against the administration.

Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress Party has blamed India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) for the disorder in West Bengal.

The BJP, however, has constantly refuted these charges, and accused Banerjee of spreading local violence and anarchy in West Bengal.
