Madhya Pradesh delegates study Pune's Smart City module for urban development

Impressed with Pune Smart City’s module of several projects that have been executed in the city, four towns from Madhya Pradesh will be working on similar lines to implement the same kind of projects in the state. A team of around 15 delegates was in the city for a couple of days to study the projects and were given training for the same.



The delegation included officers from four smart cities under the Smart City Mission in Madhya Pradesh, namely Ujjain, Jabalpur, Satna, and Sagar. The officers’ team visited Pune Smart City’s projects including the Lighthouse, Smart Street Redesign, Smart Placemaking sites and bicycle-sharing corridors plans, which they studied and analysed over a span of couple of days.



The Pune Smart City Development Corporation Limited’s Chief Executive Officer, Rajendra Jagtap said, “They wanted to study the projects that we have successfully completed or are in the process of completion in the city. The bicycle-sharing scheme has gained quite some popularity across the country. Several officials from Madhya Pradesh were a part of several programmes we organised for them.”



The officials got a tour of the study during their visit to the city and strolled around JM Road, FC Road, Aundh, Shivaji Nagar and others.



A spokesperson from Madhya Pradesh smart cities’ group told Mirror, “we want to develop our roads the way the city has and also want to focus on the bicycle plan, which will be a major hit in our cities. All of the cities are in its development phase and the sooner they implement such programmes, the easier it will be when the city progresses.”



The Pune Smart City, earlier in June '18 had bagged four of the nine awards under the India Smart Cities Award Contest (ISAC) conducted by the Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs with a total of 148 entries. The Pune Smart City was the joint winner in the ‘Social Aspects’ section for the Lighthouse project and ‘Urban Environment’ category for Public Bike Sharing project.


