Don’t spare Muslims accused in NRS assault, ex-Miss India attack case: Muslim citizens urge Mamata Banerjee

Mamata Banerjee, West Bengal CM | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: In what can be seen as a rejection of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s minority appeasement policies, prominent Muslim citizens of Kolkata have written to the chief minister, asking her not to spare the accused – who happen to be Muslims – in the case of a doctor getting assaulted in NRS Hospital and a model getting attacked in Kolkata on Monday night.

Eminent citizens of Bengal have requested CM Banerjee that the government should take stringent action against the accused in the case.

"We are Muslims living in Kolkata for decades. We have been deeply concerned with two events that occurred recently - the attack on doctors and the attack on actor Ushoshie Sengupta. The attackers in both cases instances were members of our community – Muslims. We are grieved and embarrassed,” the letter addressed to the chief minister read.

The citizens further suggested two measures for the West Bengal government to undertake to deal with the situation. They demanded that the “assailants should be brought to book” and should not be allowed to go “scot-free because they happened to be Muslims.” By doing so, the citizens believe the government could challenge the perception that members of one community were being “shielded or appeased.”

They also asked the state government to initiate programs to “educate and encourage” Muslim youths and families in Kolkata regarding “gender sensitization, civic consciousness and law compliance.”

The letter was signed by several prominent citizens and activists, including Mudar Patherya, Hena Nafis, Mustafa Judge, Dr. Zahid H Gangjee, Dr. Aquil Basrai, Mamoon Akhtar and Shabnam Alam.

Times Now's Mayukh Ranjan Ghosh reported that this was perhaps the first time that such a letter has been by a group of minority community citizens to the West Bengal Chief Minister. The letter assumes significance as social media had recently been abuzz with allegations that the Trinamool Congress government was "shielding" accused belonging to a particular community, the channel reported.

Last week on Monday, a group of grieving relatives of a deceased patient went on a rampage and attacked doctors at NRS Hospital, during which a junior doctor suffered head injuries. The attack prompted junior doctors across the state to launch an almost-week-long strike that ended only when CM Banerjee met the delegation of doctors and agreed to their demands of increased security at the hospital.

Meanwhile, on Monday night, seven people allegedly attacked former Miss India Universe Ushoshi Sengupta and vandalised her cab in which she was travelling after getting involved in an altercation with the cab driver.

"Seven persons - Sheikh Rahit, Fardin Khan, Sk Sabir Ali, Sk Gani, Sk Imran Ali, Sk Wasin and Atif Khan have been arrested on Tuesday for allegedly harassing the complainant, assaulting an Uber driver and vandalising the cab. A detailed inquiry is going on into the case," Praveen Tripathi, Joint Commissioner of Kolkata Police said.


