Everybody’s on Twitter

HOLLYWOOD – God bless America, and how’s everybody?

The National Retail Federation reported Americans spent a record eighteen billion dollars on Father’s Day gifts, including clothing, gifts and cards. That’s triple the amount of money spent a decade ago. In recent years Father’s Day has become a much bigger holiday, thanks to DNA testing.

The New York Post reported statistics Friday showing that two hundred million people around the world are hooked up to social media and the Internet grid. The world never seemed more connected. Bill Cosby got a Twitter account on Friday morning and that night, Argentina blacked out.

O.J. Simpson made news by opening a Twitter account Friday and posting a video. In just three days O.J. attracted more Twitter followers than the 2020 Democratic candidates combined. It just proves Americans prefer to be stabbed to death rather than have to live through another election cycle.

The London Daily Mail reported that British trans-genders are lobbying the International Olympic Committee to compete in the Olympics as women. If successful, Caitlyn Jenner could be the first to win men and women’s events in the Olympics, whether people like it or not. It takes balls to do that.

The Distilled Spirits Council reported Friday young adults are not drinking as much alcohol, wine and beer today as my generation did decades ago. I swear, this country is getting soft. Back in the early Eighties, I spent a week vacationing in the Dominican Republic and three mini-bars died.

Fox News said an entire Jimmy Buffet fan club got sick in the Dominican Republic last month and once home two of them tested positive for salmonella. That might have saved them. To illustrate why, the difference between salmonella and America’s Iran policy is, salmonella has an exit strategy.

The U.S. sent two thousand troops to the Middle East backed by British Royal Marines Monday to stand down Iran. I don’t want to say that things look grim for Iran, but Secretary of State Mike Pompeo walked into the White House Monday wearing a bracelet that read What Would Cheney Do?

The Pentagon showed video of Iranians attaching mines to oil tankers which later exploded in the Persian Gulf. There are also environmental concerns. Democrats fear the tanker attacks will cause the oil to get into our water supply and Republicans fear that water could get into our oil supply.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi expressed concern President Trump might take us into an unnecessary war with Iran Tuesday due to his breaking Obama’s Iran nuclear deal. Democrats openly worry that a war with Iran could result in the end of the world, and by that they mean Trump gets re-elected.

President Trump flew to Orlando Tuesday for a massive campaign rally in Florida. He can be himself there. Florida state officials are so used to white guys saying crazy things and doing crazy stuff that make the news that a Trump speech is handled by the state publicist in charge of continuity.

The White House told the business community that Trump will try to iron out trade disputes at the G-20 Summit. On Monday, India imposed retaliatory tariffs on the U.S., and they took effect immediately. I just phoned tech support and the guy told me to get the laptop working my damned self.
