Hyderabad: Girl accuses assistant professor of sexual harassment

The girl said relationship turned ugly on the night of January 12 when the assistant professor physically assaulted her and threatened to throw her out of his house. (Representational Image)

Hyderabad: A live-in relationship between an assistant professor with the media department at the English and Foreign Languages University (EFLU) and his student ended bitterly, with the girl filing a sexual harassment complaint against him.

The relationship between Dr Ranjith Thankappan and his student reportedly turned sour because the teacher, who is already married, had promised to marry her after his divorce but later changed his mind.

The Osmania University police has booked a case under Section 420 (cheating), 376 (charges of rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) under the Indian Penal Code.

“During the first semester of my programme, I became friends with Dr Ranjith Thankappan...,” the student said in a complaint filed with the Osmania University police station.

“Our friendship initially started with online conversations through Facebook and Instagram, and occasionally we met at the university canteen for lunch and breakfast. Many a times in our personal conversations, he had mentioned about his probable divorce from his wife, who is teaching at a college in Delhi,” she alleged.

The friendship between the two grew. “Gradually our friendship became more intimate, as I started visiting him at his residence in Sitaphalmandi. Subsequently, he expressed interest in marrying me as soon as they get divorced. I was under the impression that he was being genuine and honest when he proposed to me,” the student said in her complaint.

“In June 2018, he requested me to stay with him and support him as, he said, he was going through severe depression. From then, we started living like husband and wife. He exploited me sexually many times during my stay at his place. I consented to him, believing that he was going to marry me as promised,” the student said.

The girl said relationship turned ugly on the night of January 12 when the assistant professor physically assaulted her and threatened to throw her out of his house. A second incident took place on the night of January 16.

“He started threatening me again, saying that I’m illegally staying in his house and pressurising him to marry me,” the girl complained.

“He forced me out of the house. His colleague Dr Parthasarathy Muthukaruppan was a witness to all these events. Many of my personal belongings, including my passport and original certificates, are still with him. I feel I have been cheated and sexually exploited after false promises of marriage,” she said.

Osmania University inspector S. Rajashekhar Reddy confirmed the police had received the complaint.

“The girl is being counselled. No case has been filed so far. The accused is absconding,” said an officer.

EFLU authorities are yet to take action against the absconding professor. The accused has been absconding.
