Dalit sarpanch murdered by three in Botad village

Body of Manji Jetha Solanki in Ahmedabad civil hospital

Rajkot/ Ahmedabad: Dalit sarpanch died after allegedly being thrashed brutally by three persons from the upper caste Kathi Darbar community in Jalila village of Botad district on Wednesday.

Police said sarpanch Manji Jetha Solanki (55) was rushed to Ahmedabad Civil Hospital where he was declared dead on admission.

Solanki’s son named Bhagirathsinh, Kishansinh and Hardiksinh in his complaint lodged with the Ranpur police. Sources in police told TOI that the three accused first rammed their car into Solanki when he was going on his bike in the village. After he fell down, they thrashed him with sticks till he became unconscious.

Solanki has a bitter enmity with the upper caste members in the village and has allegedly been attacked eight times between 2010 and 2018. On November 8, 2018, he had met junior home minister Pradipsinh Jadeja and state DGP Shivananad Jha in Gandhinagar, demanding police protection.

Talking to TOI, Botad superintendent of police Harshad Mehta said, “The first message we received was that he had met with an accident. He was referred to Ahmedabad for treatment. Our team including one DySP of SC-ST cell went to Ahmedabad to register the complaint.”

“Some of the villagers found Solanki severely injured and first rushed him to Dhandhuka government hospital from where he was referred to Ahmedabad. However, he died on the way to Ahmedabad,” said a senior police official.

During primary investigation, it was revealed that Solanki had helped several members of Dalit community to fight cases of atrocities. This had irked few upper caste members who had repeatedly threatened to kill him, added the official.

Solanki had also applied for a weapon license which has been pending with the Botad district collector. Later, he sought help from the home minister and DGP apprehending that he would be killed. However, no action was taken.

In the letter to the DGP, he alleged that during Ranpur taluka panchayat election in 2010, members of Kathi Darbar community had attacked him and his supporters. Thereafter, he and his community members were assaulted thrice with swords.

Ashok Yadav, deputy inspector general (DIG), Bhavnagar range, told TOI: “We have formed 10 teams to nab the culprits. We will not tolerate any atrocities against Dalit community. This case would be investigated by a DySP rank official and a special public prosecutor will also be appointed to handle the case.”

Jignesh Mevani, independent MLA from Vadgam and Dalit rights activist, said the Dalit sarpanch had died due to callous attitude of the Gujarat government and DGP.

“Had he been given protection and authorities paid heed to his demand, Solanki would have been alive today. I wanted to address such issues in the state monitoring cell meeting today but the CM neither wanted to listen to me nor the issues of Dalits,” said Mevani.


