Mumbai Police arrest two brothers for confining and raping minor girl, assaulting kin who came to her rescue

The case is being probed by the Kurla police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Police in the state capital of Maharashtra on Wednesday arrested two brothers for allegedly sexually assaulting a minor girl and attacking her family when they rushed to her rescue. The incident took place in Kurla (West) on Tuesday after the accused lured the child to a stranded godown where they allegedly locked the door from within and attempted to rape her.

However, the girl's father and brother noticed her absence and managed to trace her all the way to the godown. Around 6.30 pm, the two managed to break into the facility in an attempt to rescue the victim. In their complaint to the police, the girl's kin alleged that they were abused and assaulted. They have also accused the two brothers of causing damage to their Royal Enfield Bullet motorbike.

The entire incident was captured on Closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras installed in the area near the godown. The report suggests that the accused broke the cameras which had footage that the girl's family had planned to use as evidence in their favour. An official with the Kurla police station told Indian Express that the matter was brought to their attention by family members of the girl.

Police reports have identified the accused as Masoom and Khulus Ansari. The Ansari brothers have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act for wrongful restraint, sexual assault and criminal intimidation. The two accused have been arrested and an investigation into the matter is underway, confirmed senior inspector Dattaray Shinde.

A similar case had come to light from Cuffe Parade in Mumbai less than a week ago where three men were accused of sexually abusing a 13-year-old girl. In their complaint to the police, the minor's parents alleged that she was dragged inside the house by a neighbour when she had stepped out of her residence to dispose of garbage. Two other men accompanied the accused neighbour who gagged the child and sexually abused her.
