Complainant woman and Binoy stayed together, says Mumbai police

Mumbai: Mumbai police said they are in possession of evidences to prove that rape accused Binoy Kodiyeri and the complainant woman had stayed together. Oshwara police said that they have evidences showing the woman and Binoy stayed together in a hotel and apartment in Mumbai.

Based on these evidences, Mumbai police had arrived in Kerala, but couldn’t find Binoy. It is reported that he is absconding. Mumbai police believe he is still in Kerala.

Police summoned the woman again and questioned her. WhatsApp messages, bank account details and other information submitted to the police by the woman were enquired in detail.

Binoy will be taken into custody, questioned in detailed and then could be arrested, police said.

Binoy Kodiyeri is reportedly absconding in connection with a rape and sexual assault case registered by Mumbai police based on a complaint from a Bihari woman. It is learnt that the son of CPM state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan went underground after a team from Mumbai police came to Kannur to take him under custody.

The Mumbai police tried to contact Binoy over phone but in vain. The officials held inquiries under the New Mahe police station limits where Binoy’s house is located.

Mumbai police had come to Kannur on Wednesday after an FIR was registered against Binoy. An inspector and constable attached to the Mumbai police station held discussions with the Kannur SP and collected Binoy’s details. The two police officers also collected evidence from New Mahe police station. They are staying in Kannur as part of the investigation.

The Bihari woman, who was working at a dance bar in Dubai, had registered the rape and sexual assault complaint against Binoy Kodiyeri at Oshiwara police station in Mumbai.

The complaint stated that Binoy cheated her on promise of marriage and that she has an eight-year-old child in the relationship. Meanwhile, Binoy alleged that the woman was trying to blackmail him.
