Kerala: Businessman commits suicide, wife blames CPM

A 48-year-old NRI businessman Sajan Parayil committed suicide in Kannur, Kerala, on Tuesday after he failed to open the convention centre, which he had built with his savings. The businessman's wife blamed the municipal chairperson PK Shyamala, who is also the wife of Communist Party of India (Marxist)'s Kannur strongman MV Govindan Master, for abetting his suicide by deliberately stalling the project.

Sajan Parayil worked in Nigeria for several years before returning to Kerala. He had spent Rs 15 crore from his savings to build the convention centre for the villagers. However, Sajan Parayil faced resistance from municipal chairperson PK Shyamala in procuring the license.

"She threatened him that he would not be able to operate the convention centre, as long as she holds the chair," the businessman's wife Beena told India Today TV.

Insiders in the CPI(M) said that Rajan's decision's to approach P Jayarajan, ten district secretary Kannur to intervene in the matter, is what earned him the wrath of Shyamala.

Later Jayrajan backed out and told the businessman to approach either state Secretary or Kodiyeri Balakrishnan or Industries Minister EP Jayarajan.

Despite his best efforts to salvage the situation, all efforts made by Sajan Parayil went in vain, leading to his suicide.

"Many leaders in CPIM do not control their families for unknown reasons. Now, the party is hit with controversies one after another. The unfortunate death of the businessman has damaged our image. We need to show more sensitivity while dealing with the problems of the people," a senior CPIM leader told India Today TV.

The Congress-led Opposition used the opportunity to attack CPI-M . Leader of Opposition Ramesh Chennithla blasted Chief Minister Pinarayi in the assembly, holding his party responsible for the businessman's suicide.

Congress had also taken out a protest march in light of the incident.

Mullappally Ramachandran, PCC chief of Kerala sympathised with the family.

"The tragic incident reveals how CPI-M is dealing with the people in misery. The absolute power has degenerated the party in power. We will resist the designs of CPI-M in Kerala and support the victim's family. I feel pity for Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan who is appealing NRIs to invest in Kerala," Mullappally told India Today TV.

ALSO READ: CPM leader’s son booked for rape, cheating

ALSO WATCH: Kerala didn't vote for us but it is as much mine as is Varanasi: PM Narendra Modi
