Ayushmann Khurrana REACTS to Article 15 being called anti brahmin: Our movie does not take any sides

Ayushmann Khurrana is one star whose ability to bring forth good content in his films cannot be underestimated. From comedies to social satires, Ayushmann has done it all. Now, he is all set to ace the role of a cop in Anubhav Sinha’s intense drama, Article 15. The film is based on a number of true events and will feature Ayushmann as an IPS in a district in UP. The trailer showcases him being caught in the caste system after a crime has been committed against girls of a minority. Amidst all the rave reviews to the trailer, Ayushmann’s film has been accused of being anti-brahmin by the community.

As per a report in DNA, the Brahmins in UP is enraged over the fact that their community has been shown in a bad light in the film’s trailer. A brahmin, Parshuram Sena has even prodded the makers about changing the facts of the Badaun rape case and presenting the culprits as Brahmins in the film. As per his claims, the facts have been changed with an intent to make the Brahmin community look bad. Ayushmann has reacted to the reports of such claims and has clarified that the film doesn’t do any of such things.

(Also Read: Article 15: Ayushmann Khurrana reacts to criticism on the films trailer: There's nothing offensive)

Requesting people not to pass judgements before the movie hits the screens, Ayushmann stated, “Our movie does not take any sides, it has no intention to showcase any community in a bad light and has been certified by the CBFC, which has its own set of guidelines.” He asserted that the film doesn’t focus on one particular incident and is based on a number of such events. The Badhaai Ho star even requested people to watch the film first and then comment on it. “Yes, it’s hard-hitting and it will make you uncomfortable, but it’s a real movie. It’s an investigative drama and a relevant film for India and its youth,” said Ayushmann in an interview with DNA.

Directed by Anubhav Sinha, the film will star actors like Isha Talwar, Kumud Mishra, M Nassar, Zeeshan Ayyub and Sayani Gupta. It has been creating a lot of buzz among the youth and Ayushmann has been busy promoting the film among the masses. Article 15 takes into account a section of the Constitution of India which states that there has to be no discrimination against anyone based on caste, creed, religion, gender or any other basis. Article 15 will be releasing on June 28, 2019.
