Mumbai bar dancer says city financier raped her

bar dancer

sexually harassing

Bengaluru

Bangalore

By Amit KumarPromised to marry her after she got pregnant, but forced her to abortA 25-year-oldhas accused a financier ofher for over two years and locking her up in his apartment.Sadhiya (name changed) had moved from Mumbai toin 2016 and was working as a dancer at Times Bar and Restaurant. Within a few weeks, Sadhiya quit her job and went back to to Mumbai. The accused, Suresh Jain (50), a financier and resident of Shantinagar, had observed Sadhiya at the bar and got her number from the bar management. He called her when she was in Mumbai and offered her a job and a house if she came back.When she returned, Jain took her to a flat in Hongasandra and asked her stay there. One night he came to her flat drunk and raped her. After the incident, Jain promised Sadhiya that he will marry her and she shouldn’t report the incident. Jain also instructed her to continue working as a bar dancer and would drop her at the bar every day. Jain kept assaulting the victim for two years and also forced her to undergo an abortion.Sadhiya toldMirror, “He harassed me every night. He also had affairs with other girls from the bar. He has lured many girls by promising them jobs and accommodation.”Earlier, the complaint was filed at Viveknagar Police Station and later transferred to the Bommanahalli Police Station. One of the officials from Viveknagar Police Station said, “The complaint was registered in May at Viveknagar Police Station, but the case was moved as she was raped in an apartment, at Hongasandara.”One of the officials from Bommanahalli police said, “The investigation is on and the accused is yet to be questioned. More inputs are needed for the inquiry and we will soon take action” added official.An FIR has been registered at Bommanahalli Police Station under the sections 376 (Punishment for rape), 342 (Punishment for wrongful confinement), 417 (Punishment for cheating), 504 (Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace), 506 (Punishment for criminal intimidation).
