Man gets life term for raping minor

RAJKOT: A sessions court in Dhoraji taluka of Rajkot on Wednesday sentenced a 23-year-old man, who is married with a two-year-old daughter, to life imprisonment for abducting and raping a minor girl for over a month in February last year.Additional sessions court judge Hemantkumar Dave while finding Gopal Vekaria, resident of Mota Gundala village in Jetpur taluka of Rajkot, guilty of kidnap and rape of minor, observed that the intention of the accused was only to have physical relation with the girl so “there cannot be lenient approach towards a person who spoiled the life of somebody’s daughter to satisfy his lust”.The court also imposed a fine of Rs 6,000 on Vekaria, whose wife and family members have left him.According to case details, Vekaria had enticed the 17-year-old girl by promising her marriage and eloped with her on February 3 last year. The girl’s parents lodged a abduction complaint with Dhoraji police station. While cops could not locate Vekaria or the girl, the duo had started living in Ahmedabad. When police inquired to Vekaria’s wife she informed that her husband has not come home since last one month.After about 40 days, Vejalpur police in Ahmedabad found Vekaria moving suspiciously near Savera hotel in Fatehvadi and nabbed him for questioning.During the interrogation it was revealed that Vekaria had eloped with a minor girl. When cops questioned the girl she accused Vekaria of raping her and threatening her since last one month. The Ahmedabad police then approached Dhoraji police united the girl with her family. Vekaria was arrested by Dhoraji police and booked for kidnapping and rape. The girl, during trial told the court that she was raped multiple times by the accused and was also threatened by him.Additional public prosecutor (APP) Kartikey Parekh also informed the court that Vekaria was also accused in a similar case lodged in Jetpur where he had eloped with a minor and taken her to Haridwar. There Vekaria had abandoned the girl after few days.Parekh further told the court that medical report also support the statement of the girl. “It was out of her helplessness that she had to have psychical relationship with the accused as she was in an unknown city and under threat,” Parekh told TOI.“The court noted that the intention of the accused was not to love the victim but only to have psychical relationship with her,” he added. Court convicted Vekaria under IPC sections 363, 366 and section 6 of POCSO Act.
