B'lore Man Jailed For Not Marrying Tinder One-Night Stand. Who's To Blame Here?

Dating apps, despite their popularity and millennial significance, have always been a problematic platform. Not only are apps like Tinder, Bumble, and Hinge untrustworthy in terms of the profiles they throw your way, but they’ve been the playground for fuckboys looking to find their next victim. Interestingly, in a case of the unheard, a Bengaluru man was jailed for refusing to marry his Tinder one-night stand. We have SO many questions.

What really happened?

Rama Reddy, 29, met his private tech firm colleague on Tinder. They both swiped right, began chatting, and the rest is a part of their one-month “relationship”. At the end of it, they decided to have sex. However, the day after, things got a little shady--while it is unclear whether said girl proposed marriage or whether it was Rama who had previously spoken about the commitment, but it ended in the 29 year old wanting out of the situation. He believed that “he wasn’t ready for commitment”.



This is when the woman began WhatsApp messaging him about her ideas of getting married considering they’d already had sex. When he blocked her number, she was forced to take action against Rama. This is when the police complaint was filed in Whitefield Police Station, Bengaluru.

What the report says

“Our relationship was just one month old. When I met him on Tinder, the accused pretended to be nice and decent but he just wanted a physical relationship with me and had no feelings for me. After we had consummated our relationship at his apartment, he said that I forced him to do so. That’s not true. It was he who forced me to sleep with him instead.”



The report goes on to say, “When I proposed marriage, he just declined my proposal by saying that he was not ready for the commitment and also told me not meet him in the future. It was literally the morning after the night before that he was breaking up with me. I felt so disgusted that I had been used. One week later when I called him and once again asked if he would marry me, he refused again and blocked my mobile number. I had no other option but to file a complaint against him at the police station. These type of incidents should not be repeated with other people using dating apps. Women should not be used as a source of physical pleasure.”





How is all of this even happening?





It’s important to state the law here. According to what is considered rape in the country, having sex on the false pretense of marriage is criminal. For this, the dubious intentions of the man have to proven in a court of law and can be jailed up to a total of 10 years.

This legal avenue has two sides. Justice Pratibha Rani of Delhi High Court said in 2017 that women may use rape laws for “vendetta” when a relationship sours. “This court had observed on a number of occasions that the number of cases where both persons, out of their own will and choice, develop consensual physical relationship, when the relationship breaks up due to some reason, the women use the law as a weapon for vengeance and personal vendetta.”

This is the reason why a clear demarcation of consensual and manufactured consent has to be closely established. In a number of rural conditions, a lot of women are duped into physical relationships on the pretext of a wedding but later left when they get pregnant.

In this case, whether Rama had never had any intention of marrying his Tinder date or not cannot be established as a bystander. Again, if it was the woman who initiated it, does this case become one of legal misuse?

The real issue here





There is one factor that seeps much deeper than the surface. It’s sex. Everything in this case that stems from the fact that sex is seen as problematic--first, why does the law consider marriage to be the ultimate communion that justifies the very act of sex while marital rape is not legally identified? Can a woman not enjoy consensual intercourse without having her morality questioned over her unmarried status?

At the end of the day, sex is a physical need for human beings. It is in cases like this that morality is dragged into the fight.

The fact that this woman felt that she was used for a cheaper purpose stems from the fact that it is ingrained in our collective thoughts that having unmarried sex is a sign of impurity. Through a law like this, the people who propagate this patriarchal construct are the ones winning. It further propagates the idea that if a man who previously promised marriage, disappears after consummation, it becomes a black mark against the woman and she needs to be compensated in some form. Can sex for a woman ever be considered just sex? Does her agreement always have to be in relevance to a third-party?

If there was a prolonged conversation, in this case, about marriage and genuine commitment, then we do agree there has been duping involved. It shouldn’t.

The social stigma attached to a single woman enjoying consensual sex often leads to this feeling of “being used” and “feeling cheap”. In an ideal world devoid of the patriarchy and its conditioning, women would not need marriage to validate their physical needs. We wish social mindsets could be changed, with our laws reflecting the same. The problem in this case should be the malintentions of the man, if there were any, and not the sex.

For sex, as long as it is enjoyed and consensual, should be just that: Sex.
