18-year-old private tutor held for girl’s rape, murder in Ghaziabad

GHAZIABAD: An 18-year-old private tutor was arrested on Wednesday for the alleged rape and murder of his six-year-old student in Loni . The girl’s body was found on a vacant plot near her home on Tuesday morning, a day after she went missing.Police said Faizul Islam lured the girl out of her residence on the pretext of buying her an eraser on Monday night, took her to his house in the same locality and then raped and strangulated her. He had initially hid the girl’s body on the terrace of his uncle’s house where he was living, before dumping it on a vacant plot the next morning.According to cops, the girl, a student of class I, had gone missing from outside her home around 7.45pm on Monday just after returning from her tuition classes. In fact, after putting her bag down, she had told her mother that she was coming back in five minutes as one ‘bhaiya’ was calling her outside.However, when she did not return after half an hour, the family members started looking for her. After the family raised suspicion on Faizul, police detained him for questioning on Tuesday itself. He subsequently broke down during interrogation and confessed to having raped and killing the girl, police said.“While looking for the girl, her father and other family members had gone to Faizul's house on Monday night, but he feigned ignorance. He had even offered them to search his house. Notably, all that while the body was lying on the rooftop of the house in which he was staying,” said SP (rural) Arvind Kumar Maurya.The accused lived with his maternal uncle’s family. For the past few months, he had been giving tuitions to eight children, including three girls, on the first floor of the house.“During interrogation, he said he had been looking for a chance to sexually assault the girl for the past few days. And on Monday night, he got the opportunity as his uncle had gone to Rajasthan for some business-related work and his aunt and cousin left for a relative’s place,” the SP (rural) added.Police have added Section 376 (rape) of IPC and sections 5 and 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences ( POCSO ) Act in the FIR, which was earlier registered for murder.
