Kerala Police arrest children's home warden after escaped inmates accuse him of physical torture

The children were found after an eight-hour long search operation (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kochi: The warden of a children's home in Ernakulam district of Kerala was arrested on Friday after a group of minors who managed to escape the institution accused him of physical torture of inmates. Officials with the Ernakulam Rural Police confirmed the arrest of 48-year-old PK Subran on the basis of an official complaint registered at the Kothamangalam police station by the parents of children who ran away from the Pragathi Children's home in Thrikariyoor.

Going by reports, four inmates of the children's home near Kothamangalam aged between 9 and 12 managed to flee the facility on Thursday. In the wake of their escape, the matter was brought to the attention of local police officials who traced the children. However, the minor inmates claimed that they ran away due to regular physical torture by the warden of the children's home.

Parents of some of the children who gathered outside the Kothamangalam police station on Friday said that they did not wish to send their wards back to the Pragathi Children's home. The minors also expressed their wish to not return to the institution after the summer vacations, reported New Indian Express. Police officials familiar with the matter said that a complaint was made against the warden which led to his arrest on the same day. In their statements to the police, the children alleged that Subran frequently thrashed them with a cane.

A case has been registered against the accused warden under Section 323 and 324 of the Indian Penal Code which correspond to allegations of voluntarily causing hurt and causing hurt by dangerous weapon or means. In addition, Section 7 of the Juvenile Justice Act has also been invoked against Subran. It has been reported that the children's home in question houses minors who are born into broken or financially weakened families.

According to a report by Times of India, police traced the missing children to a deserted house where they were hiding following a search operation which lasted for nearly eight hours. After they were found, the children were given food and water. They were later presented before a magistrate for the recording of their statement. An officer also told the national daily that the minor inmates who escaped the children's home also said that they do not like the syllabus at the English medium school they were studying.
