Binoy Kodiyeri refutes rape charges, seeks bail

‘Case built on trumped-up charges’

Binoy Kodiyeri, son of the CPI(M) Kerala secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, has refuted the charge of rape levelled against him by a Mumbai resident.

Binoy, a Dubai-based businessman, on Friday moved the Dindoshi district court in Mumbai seeking anticipatory bail in the case registered by the Oshiwara police.

His counsel told television journalists that the local police had built the case on trumped-up charges. The woman’s complaint would not stand legal scrutiny.

DNA matching test

The defence rejected the demand by the prosecution to put Binoy through a DNA matching test to verify the woman’s claim that the accused had fathered her child. He said the court would hear Binoy’s plea again on Monday.

State police officers privy to the development said the Mumbai police had objected to the bail appeal. They said the prosecutor had argued that Binoy was incommunicado and was not cooperating with the investigation. A Mumbai police team had searched his address in Kannur to no avail.

The prosecutor also raised the possibility that the accused could intimidate the complainant or try to influence witness.

Meanwhile, the City police denied reports that law enforcers from Mumbai had searched premises owned by Binoy’s family in Thiruvananthapuram.

The woman had accused Binoy of having cheated her into a long-term conjugal relationship on the promise of marriage. She claimed she had an eight-year-old son from the affair, which commenced when she was working in a bar hotel in Dubai in 2009.

The complainant alleged that Binoy had courted her for years and paid for her maintenance when she shifted her residence from Dubai to Mumbai.

‘Last straw’

Their relationship had soured after Binoy stopped paying her stipend and house rent and repeatedly rebuffed her attempts to legalise their union.

Her discovery of Binoy’s Facebook page, which showed him with his wife, children and parents, was the last straw, the woman said in her statement.

The issue had snowballed into a political controversy with KPCC president Mullapally Ramachandran challenging the CPI(M) to investigate the actions of Binoy.

The political scandal continued to dominate news headlines and has triggered a tide of online criticism that overwhelmingly targeted the State CPI(M) leadership.
