Following rape allegations against son, Kerala CPM chief Kodiyeri Balakrishnan offers resignation: Reports

Kerala CPM chief Kodiyeri Balakrishnan. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Kannur: The chief of Kerala’s Communist Party of India (Marxist) unit, Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, is in a soup after reports of his son being entagled in rape charges emerged. Though there is no official confirmation regarding this, Balakrishnan has reportedly offered to step down from the post over the allegations.

The top leadership of the party, state as well as central, has, however, made their stand clear over the issue and said that he needn’t resign from the post since it is known that he has not attempted to shield his son.

The CPM cadre cannot afford to lose a top leader like Balakrishnan, especially at this juncture when they are reeling under the humiliating defeat the partyfaced in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. The cadre feels his exit could shake the pillars of the party, more so since they have won only one seat in the general elections, that to in a state where they are the government.

The opposition party in Kerala, the Congress, has sought a through inquiry into the case and has asked the CPM to probe the matter. In 2018, he was embroiled in another controversy after he was banned from entering Dubai for some time following the involvement in a financial fraud case, the Indian Express reported.

Balakrishnan’s son Binoy, who runs a business in Dubai, was accused by a woman of rape and a case in this matter was filed in Mumbai. The woman, who hails from Bihar, accused Binoy of sexually abusing her for several years, so much so that she even claimed her eight-year-old child is fathered by him.

The complainant, who worked as a bar dancer in Dubai, claimed that she was abused on the pretext of marriage to Binoy and said she is even ready to undergo paternity tests to validate her claim of Binoy fathering her child. She added that she came to know her was married through his Facebook post.

He, however, rebuffed the accusations and said that it was an attempt to blackmail and frame him. Binoy has also moved the local court in Mumbai for anticipatory bail.

Balakrishnan is pitted as the second-in-command in Kerala after Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan. The 65-year-old politician also held the post of state finance minister in the previous VS Achuthanandan government.

He took over as the state party chief after Vijayan took over as the CM in 2016.
