Punjab: Assaulted by husband for attending sister’s wedding party, woman commits suicide

PATIALA: The police have booked three persons under sections of abetment to suicide after a 32-year-old woman committed suicide. The case was registered on the complaint of the father of the deceased woman who claimed that his daughter was assaulted by her husband and other in-laws following which she committed suicide.The deceased woman has been identified as Kuldip Kaur, 32, of Lalru village of Mohali district. Kuldip was married to the accused Harbans Singh of Banur town and the couple had two sons aged 4 years and 7 months old. The case was registered at Banur police station of Patiala district as the village falls under the jurisdiction of Banur police.The police in its primary investigations had found that Kuldip had gone to attend the marriage reception of her younger sister on the night of June 16 but on return to home, the accused Harbans Singh landed in a fray with her as he did not want her to join the reception. However when the woman returned she was allegedly assaulted by her husband and father-in-law following which she consumed poison. The police revealed that Kuldip Kaur was rushed to the nearby hospital but the doctors referred her for higher institute following which she was hospitalized at government hospital in Chandigarh and later succumbed to injuries on Friday.“The accused Harbans Singh in the morning on June 16 attended the marriage ceremony but at night he got drunk and refused to attend the reception of his sister-in-law. However, Harbans’ wife Kuldip decided to attend her sister’s wedding reception but when she returned home late night, the accused Harbans along with his father Rajinder Singh assaulted her after landing in a fray over this matter. One of the accused Randhir Singh of Khalour village, who is a cousin of the accused, also joined in assaulting the woman. The accused are yet to be arrested however we have booked them under sections of murder and common intention on the complaint of deceased’s father Charan Singh of Lalru village in Mohali. The woman consumed poison after feeling humiliated and later succumbed to injuries on Friday in Chandigarh,” said the station house officer, Banur police station.
