Custodial death case: Murder accused cops face multiple inquiries

SURAT: Three of the eight murder accused cops from Khatodara police station are facing multiple inquiries, even as five are yet to get arrested in the case related to the custodial death of a theft suspect. Senior police officials have tightened the noose around the accused cops and majority of them may face dismissal once the inquiry is over.The accused cops are facing departmental inquiries ordered by city police commissioner Satish Sharma, while deputy commissioner of police, Chintan Teraiya, is himself handling three inquiries — of how the Omprakash Pandey, a theft suspect died in custody, of torture of Pandey along with his brother Ramgopal and friend Jayprakash Pandey for three days at the police station, and the criminal case in this offence.A separate inquiry has also been ordered to find out how the accused cops escaped from the police station and that too, in the presence of many other cops, on May 31 night after Pandey was taken to a private hospital in critical condition.Another inquiry has been ordered to identify involvement of the cops in the alleged thrashing of Sonu Yadav, a history sheeter, in police custody. In this case too a criminal complaint has been filed and the accused cops have been arrested.A fresh inquiry has been ordered against the murder accused cops for absconding without taking formal leave which is being handled by assistant commissioner of police F division. “Considering their seriousness of the offence the accused cops will face dismissal. Based on the inquiry report further actions will be taken,” Sharma told TOI.Meanwhile, police had submitted a report to district magistrate in custodial death as per the procedure. Based on the report a judicial inquiry has been initiated. However, police are informing the court that a FIR has been registered and investigation has been started. “In case of custodial death it is mandatory to submit a report but in inquiry is ordered when no offence is registered. There is no need of inquiry since we have already started investigation registering an offence,” Sharma added.Police booked Mohanlal Bhagwanram Khileri, police inspector, Chirag Pruthviraj Chaudhary, police sub-inspector, along with six junior cops Haresh Chaudhary, Kanaksinh Diyol, Paresh Bhukan, Aashish Dihora, Kalpesh Garmabha and Dilu Sangani for murder as well after death of the victim. The accused were booked under various sections of Indian Penal Code including 302 – murder, 330 - voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, 342 – wrongful confinement, 324 - voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons, 348 - wrongful confinement to extort confession and others.Of them Chirag, Haresh and Kalpesh have surrendered and after their police interrogation they were sent to judicial custody. The complainant Ramgopal and witness Jayprakash has identified all three during an identification parade. Other accused are still on run.
