Key operative of NSCN-K Myanmar faction apprehended in Nagaland

GUWAHATI: In a major breakthrough, Yanghang alias Mopa, the highest ranking cadre of the NSCN (Khaplang-Yung Aung) operating in India, was apprehended by security forces on Friday morning, less than a month after two Assam Rifles jawans were killed in an ambush Yanghang is believed to have planned.Yanghang, a most wanted militant, was was apprehended by troops of the Army, Special Forces and Assam Rifles at Aboi in Nagaland 's Mon district , about 75 km from the site of the May 25 ambush. "It is a major breakthrough ... The most wanted and dreaded insurgent of the NSCN (K- Yung Aung), who was instrumental in many brutal crimes including the killing of two Assam Rifles soldiers about a month ago, has been nabbed. He has been handed over to local police," defence PRO colonel C Konwer said.The Indian faction of NSCN (K), led by Khango Konyak, had joined peace talks with the Centre last year. The Myanmar faction of NSCN (K) is led by Yung Aung, nephew of the outfit's founder SS Khaplang. And Yanghang was its key operative in India. "He was controlling all operations of the faction in all of Nagaland, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh ," Konwer added.After the May 25 ambush, in which four other Assam Rifles personnel were injured, the security forces drew up a multi-layered strategy to track down the perpetrators of the attack."Lt Gen MM Naravane, general officer commanding in charge of Eastern Command, had visited forward areas on June 5 ... and announced a cash reward of Rs 5 lakh for information about the attack and those responsible. This was widely publicized," Konwer said."Security forces, under the aegis of Spear Corps, received tremendous local support from assistance from the people ... Ground inputs were received about the presence of these insurgents in the general area of Aboi in Mon district. Additional check points were established. At 11:20 am on Friday, security forces were able to identify the vehicle they were travelling in. In a swift clinical operation, they were able to apprehend these insurgents," he added.The security forces have also recovered huge cache of arms and ammunition and Indian and Myanmarese currencies from Mopa and his two companions. Six other cadres of the Aung faction were apprehended earlier on June 19.
