Andhra Pradesh: Minor girl held captive, gang-raped for 7 days by 6 men

Police have arrested all six accused in the case. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Vijayawada: A 16-year-old girl was gang-raped by six persons after she was held hostage for seven days in Ongole area of Prakasham district of Andhra Pradesh.

Police have arrested all six accused in the case. Four boys are said to be students of diploma engineering. Three of the accused are reported to be minors.

According to a report in The Times of India, the incident occurred on Saturday night when the victim was dumped by the accused at Ongole bus stand. The victim narrated her ordeal to a home guard, who first spotted her and called the Shakti team to rescue her.

"The girl was a native of Nallapadu in Guntur district. She met a guy called Ammisetti Ramu at a Vijayawada hospital where her ailing grandfather was being treated. He was said to be a car driver from Ongole. They both exchanged phone numbers before leaving the hospital," the report quoted Suprentindent of Police, Prakasham district, Siddarth Kaushal as saying.

According to police, the girl started talking to the car driver Ramu after going back to Guntur. But her mother scolded her for talking to the guy.

The girl told the police in her statement that she left her house to meet Ramu on June 16 after her mother scolded her for talking to the man, who called her to Ongole.



The girl said Ramu did not turn up at the Ongole bus stand and neither could he be reached by phone.

As the girl waited at the bus stand, her phone battery started to drain and she went to a nearby shop to get her phone battery recharged. The man at the shop took advantage of the girl's situation and told her that he knows Ramu and told her that she could stay at his nearby room in the night.

Believing his words, the girl went to shopkeeper's room where he sexually assaulted her and held her captive. Later, the shopkeeper's friends, two polytechnic students and three other minors students arrived at the room where they raped her multiple times.

Threatening her not to tell anyone about the crime, the accused dumped the girl at Ongole bus stand.
