End torture: High number of custodial deaths in India is crying for redressal

A court in Jamnagar, Gujarat, has sentenced two policemen to life imprisonment on account of a custodial death in 1990. Suspecting political vendetta, the wife of dismissed IPS officer Sanjiv Bhatt says they will appeal to the high court for justice. However this appeal turns out, two related aspects of Thursday’s sentence need to be highlighted. It has taken an extraordinarily long time for the case to reach closure at a lower court, partly on account of the state government withholding permission for prosecution. And data shows that of the 1,557 custodial deaths between 2001 and 2016, convictions were rarely seen.

Custodial deaths are unacceptable. India is a signatory to the UN Convention against torture, which makes custodial deaths a violation of the principles the country professes. One possible reason for the incidence of custodial deaths is that 22 years after India signed the UN Convention, the legal process of its ratification hasn’t been completed. This indicates that acting against torture is a low priority for the political class. It shouldn’t be. A clampdown on custodial torture is needed for its own sake. In addition, a legislation against torture will have another important benefit. It will strengthen India’s legal case when it seeks to extradite fugitives from jurisdictions which take a dim view of custodial torture.

In 2017, the law commission recommended that India ratify its UN obligation against torture by creating a legislative framework. There has been progress since then as the Centre has asked state governments for inputs on the legislation. It should translate into a watertight law. A law is necessary to safeguard some of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. India has a plethora of harsh laws to check crime. It now needs a legislative framework to stamp out criminal behaviour in custody.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
