Jharkhand lynching: Man thrashed on suspicion of theft, made to chant 'Jai Shri Ram'; dies

'Ansari was fit when he first came to hospital'

Jharkhand man dies; mob brutally thrashed him, made him chant 'Jai Shri Ram'

JAMSHEDPUR: Seraikela police have arrested one person and launched an investigation into the death of 24-year-old Tabrej Ansari, alias Sonu, who was allegedly lynched by a mob on suspicion of theft and forced to chant Jai Shri Ram and Jai Hanuman.Pappu Mandal, the one arrested, has been charged with murder, inciting communal hatred and encouraging a mob to attack Ansari. "We are investigating the matter. The exact cause of death can only be ascertained after we get the autopsy report," Seraikela superintendent of police (SP) Kartik S, said, a day after Ansari’s death. Social activist Afzal Anis of Jharkhand Janadhikar Mahasabha raised question mark regarding the role of the police since the death occurred while Ansari was in judicial custody. The SP said jail authorities would also be questioned in this matter.The incident took place on the intervening night of June 17-18 when villagers in Dhatkidih area under Saraikela police station caught hold of Ansari on suspicion of him being a motorcycle thief. A video footage that has since gone viral shows the villagers allegedly assaulting him after tying him to an electric pole. He was then handed over to the police. In her complaint to the police, Ansari’s wife Shaista Parveen, claimed that her husband was returning from Jamshedpur when he was stopped by Pappu and 100 others for interrogation in connection with a theft.Parveen’s complaint reads, “He was beaten up by the mob and forced to chant Jai Shri Ram and Jai Hanuman. He was assaulted throughout the night and then handed over to the police in the morning.” She also alleged that the police sent her husband to jail after giving him just first aid. B Mardi, the superintendent at Seraikela sadar hospital, said that Ansari walked into the hospital on June 18. “We issued the ‘fit to travel’ certificate based on his condition and the police took him away,” Mardi said. On Saturday, Ansari was again brought to sadar hospital. “This time he was unconscious,” the hospital superintendent added.Mardi said Ansari’s condition had deteriorated and he was referred to Tata Memorial Hospital following a request from his family members. Ansari was declared brought dead at Tata Memorial Hospital. His body was sent back to sadar hospital for postmortem. Ansari was buried on Saturday night. Following the death, the Jharkhand Janadhikar Mahasabha has sent a team for a preliminary inquiry while another team from Ranchi will visit Seraikela on Tuesday to carry out a detailed investigation. The Mahasabha, in a tweet, has accused police of negligence in providing treatment to Ansari. State Congress also formed a committee with direction to file a report within 3 days.
