Blast in Pakistan's Rawalpindi hospital where 'Masood Azhar is admitted', Twitter speculates 'is he injured?'

Masood Azhar, JeM chief and designated global terrorist | Photo Credit: PTI

Rawalpindi: An explosion at a military hospital in Rawalpindi in Pakistan took place on Sunday, with netizens on Twitter claiming that 10 people were injured in the blast.

As per Ahsan Ullah MiaKhail, a human rights activist from Quetta, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) founder and UN-blacklisted terrorist Masood Azhar was also admitted at the hospital where the blast occurred.

Miakhail took to micro-blogging site Twitter to claim that the Pakistan Army had barred the media from reporting on the incident.

The Quetta-based activist also shared a video of thick smoke billowing out of a building, believed to be the military hospital in Rawalpindi.

“Huge #blast at Military Hospital in #Rawalpindi, #Pakistan. 10 injured shifted to emergency. Jaish-E-Mohammad Chief Maulana Masood Azahar is admitted here. Completely Media blackout by Army. Media asked Strictly not to cover this story," he said in a tweet.

Meanwhile, even though there was no official confirmation on the same, speculations on Twitter were rife on whether the Jaish-e-Mohammad chief had suffered injuries in the incident.

Huge #blast at Military Hospital in #Rawalpindi, #Pakistan. 10 injured shifted to emergency.

Jaish-E-Mohammad Chief Maulana Masood Azahar is admitted here.Completely Media blackout by Army. Media asked Strictly not to cover this story@a_siab @nidkirm @GulBukhari @mazdaki pic.twitter.com/sTIYrJ7sAn — Ahsan Ullah MiaKhail (@AhsanUlMiakhail) June 23, 2019

One of the Twitter users speculated that the blast could have been orchestrated as Azhar had become a “liability” for the Pakistani Army and the country was facing increased pressure from FATF, terror funding watchdog, to take concrete steps to eliminate terror groups operating from its soil.

Another Twitter user claimed that the explosion could have been an “attack”, news agency ANI reported.

Meanwhile, there were a few Twitterati who also speculated if Azhar had died in the explosion at the hospital.

However, a few of the Twitter users also alleged that it was simply a case of a boiler explosion at the hospital and not related to any conspiracy.

In a big win for India, the UN Security Council recently declared Masood Azhar as a "global terrorist." The development came after China removed its technical hold on the proposal moved by France, UK and the US at UN to designate Azhar as a global terrorist.

In the past, China had frustrated India's bid to have the UN declare the JeM chief as "global terrorist" by blocking New Delhi's efforts for four times. However, this year, following the Pulwama attack carried out by a JeM operative, China decided to back India's petition against Azhar.
