Uttar Pradesh's 'Singham' cop shoots rape accused in Rampur

Sharma is a 2011 batch IPS officer from Ludhiana and throughout his eight years of service, he has served cities in Uttar Pradesh | Photo Credit: Twitter

Lucknow: In an encounter by the specialist Ajay Sharma, a man accused of abducting, raping and murdering minor was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh police on Monday. The police got engaged in an encounter with the accused after he committed the heinous crime and went absconding.

The accused was identified as Nazil, who has allegedly killed a six-year-old girl on May 7 in the Rampur district. The police have also recovered the body of the minor victim. Meanwhile, authorities have confirmed that the civil line Rampur got engaged in the encounter.

The encounter specialist IPS Dr. Ajay Pal Sharma conducted the operation, he shot three rounds at the accused after which he was arrested with injuries on his legs. He was later admitted to a local hospital where he is still undergoing treatment. According to a report in Indiatvnews, Uttar Pradesh police have been in news for arrests and encounters of criminals and Sharma is commonly known as UP's Singham. He has gained popularity from such encounter killings in the past.

I m thankful to all for immense support of our action against the rapist and murderer. Received more than 1000 calls today from different parts of india being addressed as brother and son & congratulating. Proud to be in team of @rampurpolice @Uppolice @dgpup @myogiadityanath — Ajay Sharma (@ajaysharmaips) June 23, 2019

Sharma thanked the police department via micro-blogging site Twitter and mentioned, "I'm thankful to all for immense support of our action against the rapist and murderer. Received more than 1000 calls today from different parts of India being addressed as brother and son & congratulating."

Sharma is a 2011 batch IPS officer from Ludhiana and throughout his eight years of service, he has served cities in Uttar Pradesh and currently he has been posted in Rampur district.
