Botswana trying to kill its excess elephants, ends up poisoning 500 critically endangered vultures

Why were they poisoned? No one knows

In an official statement, the Government of Botswana admitted that 537 vultures and two tawny eagles were found dead in Northern Botswana, at a site where three poached elephants lay dead. The elephant carcasses were believed to have been laced with a poisonous chemical, possibly by hunters. There is no official word on the suspects, or why poison was used to hunt down the elephants.

The list of mortalities included 468 white backed vultures and 28 hooded vultures, both of which are critically endangered as declared by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Also found dead were 10 cape vultures, a species endemic to Southern Africa that is listed as “vulnerable” to extinction by the World Conservation Union.

The law enforcement team is currently working to decontaminate the area and samples of the carcasses have been sent for further laboratory analysis. The government has requested locals in the area to report any wildlife mortalities that may be spotted.

Why vultures are at risk (and why that matters)

A report by the IUCN indicates that the population of vultures are projected to decline by at least 80%. The study suggests that the greatest quantifiable threat to Africa's vultures is poisoning, which accounts for 61% of all reported deaths. Conservationists say poachers target birds of prey to evade detection by forest rangers. (As scavengers, vultures are attracted to freshly killed animals, and their presence alerts rangers to the presence of poachers on ground.)

While vultures may not be everyone's favourite species, scavengers such as these are essential to a healthy ecosystem. Without them, other scavengers such as dogs and jackals consume the carcasses, which can lead to an increase in diseases such as rabies even among humans, the IUCN report states. In India, vulture population has collapsed due to overuse of diclofenac, an anti-inflammatory drug among livestock. There can also be a drastic increase in the population of rodents, if the number of vultures keep dwindling.

The backstory

In May this year, the Government of Botswana lifted its five-year ban on elephant poaching, citing increasing human-elephant conflict as one of the main reasons why the ban was lifted. According to the government the controlled killing of the animals would be conducted in an “orderly and ethical manner.” But with the recent mass poisoning of vultures, it looks like there's more work to be done.
