Non refugee wanted police to arrest him

Police in Manus are waiting for the return of a non-refugee who admitted setting fire in his room to burn himself so they can charge him.

Manus police commander Chief Inspector David Yapu said the non-refugee last week went to the PIH clinic and returned to his room.

He locked himself in his room in one of the shipping containers and set fire to his room trying to commit suicide, police said.

Asylum seeker Ravinder Singh, 30, from India, set fire to his room and attempted to set himself on fire at the 70-man camp at hillside, ward 1 at Lorengau, about 12.30pm last Friday.

The non-refugee was taken to the station where he was interviewed.

He admitted setting fire in his room to burn himself. “We let him spend a night in police custody as it was late, and we were to do the charges the next day,” Mr Yapu said.

“We prepared his charges for arson and attempted suicide but he was medivaced the next day to Port Moresby for further medical treatment. We will wait for his return and lay charges but we will also seek further advice,” he said.

Mr Yapu said the fire extended to another two containers but with quick response from Paladin Security, Kingfisher and NKW, they managed to put off the fire. All non-refugees living in the 70 men camp were evacuated to a safe area and no one was hurt or injured.

Singh sustained burns to his face and right hand, was treated at the clinic and discharged .

This was the fourth time a non-refugee had set fire to the 70-man camp.

Those buldings cost government a lot of money to build to accommodate the refugees and non-refugees and they should look after them until such time they leave PNG, police said.

Mr Yapu commended the stakeholders involved in the project Paladin Security, NKW, Kingfisher Security , PIH, PNG Immigration and police for their quick response to save the life of the non-refugee and putting off the fire.

In a similar incident on June 20, a refugee from Sudan climbed up the tower at East Lorengau refugee transit centre.

Mr Yapu said he was convinced to climb down from the tower.

Those are ongoing incidents involving refugees and non-refugees on Manus Island, he said.
