Mumbai court to pronounce orders on Binoy Kodiyeri’s anticipatory bail plea on June 27

Mumbai court to pronounce orders on Binoy Kodiyeri’s anticipatory bail plea on June 27

Binoy Kodiyeri, the son of CPI(M) state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, has been booked for rape and has been absconding.

news Controversy

The Dindoshi branch of the City Civil and Sessions Court in Mumbai on Monday adjourned to June 27 the pronouncement of orders on the anticipatory bail plea filed by Binoy Kodiyeri in connection with a rape complaint filed against him. Binoy, the son of CPI(M) Kerala secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, has been booked for rape based on a complaint filed by a Mumbai-based woman and has been absconding.

A team of two police officers of the Oshiwara police in Mumbai failed to trace him though they arrived in Kannur on Wednesday and had been to his residences at Thiruvangad and Moozhikkara.

A Mumbai-based woman on June 13 had filed a rape complaint against Binoy, the eldest son of Kodiyeri. She alleged in the complaint that Binoy raped her for years on the promise of marrying her and that she has an eight-year-old child born out of the relationship. The woman is a native of Bihar. The police have booked Binoy under IPC Sections 376 (rape) and Section 420 (cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property on the complaint).

The opposition in the state has launched a scathing attack on the CPI(M)-led government since the complaint was reported, putting the CPI(M) on the defensive. Kerala Opposition Leader Ramesh Chennithala has demanded that Kodiyeri Balakrishnan should quit his post as the CPI(M) state secretary.

Kodiyeri, who met the media for the first time after the controversy erupted on Saturday, said that neither the party nor he will support Binoy.

The CPI(M) and particularly Kodiyeri have been facing criticism after Binoy absconded and for Kodiyeri’s response that he is not aware of his eldest son’s current whereabouts.

Binoy on his part on June 17, a day after the complaint was leaked, had told media that he had filed a complaint with the Kannur Range IG against the woman for blackmailing him.

In January 2018, Binoy was booked for laud money laundering case in Dubai to the tune of Rs 13 crore that had created ripples in the state politics though he later got a certificate from the Dubai police that there was no case existing against him.




