Maharashtra: Vegetable vendor stabs customer to death over Rs 10 in Dadar

The police have registered a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Irked over an argument on the cost of vegetables, a vendor stabbed a male customer to death in Dadar market area of Mumbai, Maharashtra on Monday. The local police have arrested the accused on Tuesday.

The deceased was identified as Mohammad Hanif, who had gone to purchase vegetables in the market. A dispute broke out between the victim and the vegetable vendor over payment of Rs 10 which escalated to such a level that the accused stabbed him with his vegetable knife.

The accused stabbed several times on Hanif's neck and hands after which he fled the spot. Assistant Commissioner of Police Sunil Gawker told news agency ANI that as soon as they got the information they rushed to the spot and immediately drove Hanif to a nearby hospital. But he was declared brought dead.

#UPDATE: The vegetable vendor who had allegedly stabbed a customer at vegetable market in Dadar yesterday over an argument on cost of the vegetables, has been arrested. https://t.co/6ZXaFHpVll — ANI (@ANI) June 25, 2019

However, the accused has been arrested on Tuesday and a murder case has been registered against him.

In a similar case reported Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, a sweet shop owner and his sons were booked for allegedly attacking two brothers with hot oil after they failed to pay Re 1. The incident happened in Retia market of Mathura. The police registered a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code after the victims registered a complaint.

The victims were identified as Vishnu and his brother Hemraj. They bought a samosa priced at Rs 6 per piece but gave the shopkeeper Rs 5 and claimed they did not have any other pocket change. This enraged the accused, Suresh Kumar and his sons who began abusing one of the brothers and soon attacked Vishnu with hot oil. Both the brothers were injured in the attack.

Meanwhile, the accused told police that the complainants vandalised their shop and even looted money when they were asked to pay for samosa. However, the police were trying to investigate whether the hot oil was poured intentionally or it was a mere accident.

Such incidents shed light on rising level of heinous crimes over petty issues.
