No settlement attempt made in rape case against son, says CPI(M) leader Kodiyeri

No settlement attempt made in rape case against son, says CPI(M) leader Kodiyeri

Binoy Kodiyeri, son of the Kerala CPI(M) chief, has been booked by Mumbai police on the complaint of a woman over rape charges and is presently absconding.

news Controversy

Kerala CPI(M) state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan on Monday told media that no attempts were made to arrive at a settlement in the rape case alleged against his son.

Binoy Kodiyeri, son of the CPI(M) chief of Kerala, has been booked by Mumbai police on the complaint of a woman over rape charges and is presently absconding.

Kodiyeri also accepted the fact that his wife had gone to Mumbai after coming to know about the case. “We came to know about the incident when we got a notice regarding this on January. Following this, being a mother, my wife Vinodhini went to Mumbai to enquire about the issue,” said Kodiyeri.

According to reports, the victim in the case had alleged that Kodiyeri’s wife had come to Mumbai and made attempt to resolve the issue. Two days before when Kodiyeri spoke to media regarding the issue for the first time, he did not respond to this settlement allegation against his wife saying that he cannot comment on the issue as it is sub judice.

“I have made it clear to Binoy that no aid will be given to him in the case,” Kodiyeri said while meeting media after the state committee meeting held in Thiruvananthapuram. He also affirmed that he will not involve in the case either as an individual or as part of the party.

“Binoy had denied the allegation and said that the documents against him are fabricated. It is not right for me to take a stand in the issue as it is under consideration of the court,” said Kodiyeri.

He also said that it is the responsibility of the police to find Binoy. “Media can also try to do that. The issue has also been reported in the party state committee,” added Kodiyeri.

A rape complaint was filed against Binoy on June 13 by a Mumbai-based woman and native of Bihar. She alleged in the complaint hat Binoy had promised to marry her and raped her for years. She also alleged that they have an eight-year-old child from their relationship. Police have booked Binoy under IPC Sections 376 (rape) and Section 420 (cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property on the complaint).

Meanwhile, Dindoshi branch of the City Civil and Sessions Court in Mumbai, adjourned Binoy’s anticipatory bail plea to June 27. Two police officers from Oshiwara police in Mumbai who came to Kannur on Wednesday, failed to find him at his residences in Thiruvangad and Moozhikkara.
