Can’t order CBI probe in R.K. Nagar bypoll bribery case, says High Court

Only SC can intervene in the issue, say judges

A Division Bench of the Madras High Court on Thursday wondered how it could order a CBI probe into the 2017 RK Nagar bypoll bribery case when a single judge of the court had, on March 13, quashed a first information report that had been booked by the city police on the basis of a complaint lodged by the Returning Officer.

The Bench comprising Justices M. Sathyanarayanan and P. Rajamanickam said it cannot invoke its writ jurisdiction to pass such an order since an appeal against an order passed by a single judge under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.) would lie only before the Supreme Court and not before a Division Bench.

When senior counsel P. Wilson, representing DMK candidate N. Maruthu Ganesh who had sought for CBI probe, said his client might lack locus standi to approach Supreme Court, the senior judge wanted to know how did DMK general secretary K. Anbalagan got a disproportionate wealth case against AIADMK supremo Jayalalithaa transferred from Tamil Nadu to Karnataka.

However, Mr. Wilson persisted on his demand for the Division Bench itself ordering a CBI probe considering the seriousness of the issue.

He pointed out that the Election Commission of India had rescinded the bypoll notification in April 2017 after the Income Tax department seized certain crucial documents from Health Minister C. Vijaya Baskar’s residence. The documents related to huge amounts of cash having been distributed to incumbent Chief Minister Mr. Palaniswami and other ministers.

The ministers, in turn, were expected to distribute the money to voters in RK Nagar constituency. “It is an injustice caused to people and democracy. No one will have faith in democracy if the court stands on hyper technicalities and refuses to entertain our plea. Your Lordships can order an CBI inquiry under Article 226 (writ jurisdiction) of the Constitution.

“A writ court cannot fold its hands and say it is helpless. They (police) have played a fraud upon the High Court by allowing the FIR to be quashed without informing the single judge about this Division Bench monitoring the progress in the case. They had also truncated the complaint and registered a FIR without naming any of the accused,” the senior counsel argued.

Advocate S. Doraisamy, representing another writ petitioner, also made similar submissions. After failing to convince both of them, Justice Sathyanarayanan said: “When FIR itself has been quashed, how can we order registration of a second FIR by CBI? Understand our predicament. What we are pointing out is that we are not the right forum.” “If both of you have decided not to understand and argue on the basis of emotions, we cannot help.” Later, the judges adjourned further hearing on the case to February 12 to enable the Election Commission of India to file its affidavit on the issue.
