UP's Encounter Specialist 'Singham' Hailed For Nabbing Rape Accused

Popularly known as ‘Singham’ of Uttar Pradesh, IPS Ajay Sharma and his team was hailed for nabbing a man accused of abducting, raping and murdering a minor. The incident took place on June 24, when the police got engaged in an encounter with the accused after he committed the heinous crime and absconded.

The accused, identified as Nazil, allegedly killed a six-year old girl on May 7 in the Rampur district. The police also recovered the body of the minor victim. Meanwhile, authorities have confirmed that the encounter happened at Civil Lines area in Rampur.

The encounter specialist IPS Dr Ajay Pal Sharma and his team conducted the operation and fired three rounds at the accused after which he was arrested with injuries on his legs. He was later admitted to a local hospital where he is still undergoing treatment.

According to a report in Indiatvnews, Uttar Pradesh police have been in the news for arrests and encounters of criminals and Sharma is popularly known as UP’s Singham. He has gained popularity from such encounters in the past.

Sharma also thanked the police department via Twitter and posted, 'I'm thankful to all for immense support of our action against the rapist and murderer. Received more than 1000 calls today from different parts of India being addressed as brother and son & congratulating'.

I m thankful to all for immense support of our action against the rapist and murderer. Received more than 1000 calls today from different parts of india being addressed as brother and son & congratulating. Proud to be in team of @rampurpolice @Uppolice @dgpup @myogiadityanath — Ajay Sharma (@ajaysharmaips) June 23, 2019

He is a 2011 batch IPS officer from Ludhiana and throughout his eight years of service, he has served in cities in Uttar Pradesh and is currently posted in Rampur district.

To tackle crime and be more effective as a police force, the UP cops are now trying something new to deter crime - they're busy revamping the tune of their sirens. It is not a regular siren and they have added a nostalgic element to it.

The siren now blares 'Jaagte Raho' a slogan chanted by watchmen back in the day and probably even now in some places to keep thieves at bay.

"All Dial-100 Police Response Vehicles' (PRV) sirens will play tunes of 'Jagte Raho' (stay awake) in Lucknow," Hazratganj police officer Abhay Mishra said.

#WATCH Dial-100 Police Response Vehicle (PRV)'s siren plays tune of "Jagte Raho"(stay awake) in Lucknow. Abhay Mishra,Circle Officer,Hazratganj:The tune will be played in PRVs all night to alert the public, like watchmen used to do. It has started in Hazratganj as a pilot project pic.twitter.com/ibDwMxTryh — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 24, 2019

"The tune will be played in PRVs all night to alert the public, like watchmen used to do. It has started in Hazratganj as a pilot project. Its success will be monitored and will be applied elsewhere in future," he added.

Talking about tackling crime, remember when sub-inspector Manoj Kumar shouted ‘thain thain’ to scare criminals during an encounter, after his pistol got jammed?

What was more interesting was that the Uttar Pradesh police hailed the incident as an exemplary ‘act of bravery’ and Kumar’s name was sent for a commendation disc and certificate from the director general of UP police.
