Why Most MPs Are Silent On Bihar’s Encephalitis Deaths, Child Rapes & Mob Lynchings

A spine-chilling 10-minute-long video of a man tied to a pole and thrashed mercilessly by mob is hard to watch without your heart sinking and shaking to its core.

Twenty-four-year-old Tabrez Ansari was beaten up by a group of men over accusations he had carried out burglary in Kharsawan district, Jharkhand.

Tied to a pole, Ansari was also forced to chant "Jai Shri Ram" and “Jai Hanuman,” a slogan increasingly used by far-right Hindu fringe groups and mobs for gaining social and political legitimacy. He could be seen pleading the mob to stop assaulting him.

Ansari succumbed to injuries at a local hospital on June 22.

The last two weeks have put issues pestering India back in the limelight. Apart mob lynchings,

1) Close to 150 children died of acute encephalitis, commonly known as brain fever, in Bihar. These deaths are preceded by malnutrition among children. In Muzaffarpur district alone, 131 deaths have been reported according to latest figures.

2) Child rape cases have spiked in the month of June. In Uttar Pradesh alone, several cases of rape with minors have been reported. In most of these cases, the victims were found murdered.

Child abuse is on the rise and so far, stringent laws do not seem to be a deterrent.

3) Country’s sixth largest city, Chennai, ran out of water. Millions fled their homes across the country to escape water crisis. A family from Uttar Pradesh recently wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and sought mercy killing. Reason, the father and his three daughters have no access to clean drinking water. In their letter the PM seeking euthanasia, the family mentioned even animals do not drink the water in their village.

BCCL

In a country where government should put people and their welfare first, these issues would have been paramount. However, this is a visualisation and understanding of an ideal country and we, dejectedly, are far from ideal.

On the first day of the 17th Lok Sabha, newly-elected members of the parliament (MPs) engaged in a contest of sloganeering. Jai Shri Ram, Bharat Mata ki jai, Radhe Radhe, Har Har Mahadev, Jai Ma Kali, Allahu Akbar, Insha Allah, Jai Yogi, Jai Modi, Jai Ma Durga, Constitution zindabad, Jai Hind, Jai Bangla...were chanted by politicians to assert their presence and supposed “identity.”

In Mumbai, lawmakers were found busy moral policing lingerie-clad mannequins. Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) Law Committee chairman and Shiv Sena asked shop-owners to remove illegal lingerie mannequins from shops. The corporation claimed lingerie-clad mannequin busts hanging from trees are an “embarrassment” to women. They argued there is no need to advertise lingerie as women know where to buy it from.

Then there was a celebrated Hindi TV anchor who barged into a sterile ICU at Shri Krishna Medical College Hospital in Muzaffarpur with a camera and mic while doctors were busy attending children suffering from Acute Encephalitis Syndrome.

The journalist was asking a flustered doctor the questions that were ideally meant for lawmakers and administrators. But then again, only fools believe in an ideal world. Most social media posts lampooned the journalist for violating medical and media ethics for the sake of winning television rating points (TRPs).

Reuters

Even when this piece is being written and published, the prime minister's Twitter handle is flooded with tweets on Yoga and its celebrations across the world. Not a single tweet on acute water crisis or children’s death in Bihar.

Death of these many children exposed the poor healthcare system in India and also raised questions on PM Modi’s pet project Ayushman Bharat. The project, hailed as ‘largest publicly funded health insurance scheme’, aims to provide financial coverage for primary, secondary and tertiary to poor and vulnerable families in private hospitals.

However, the responsibility of patients and their treatment fell completely on government hospitals lacking adequate facilities. Could the deaths have been prevented if these hospitals were adequately equipped to handle an outbreak? Perhaps. But again, the slanted focus and a rush to make announcements for appeasement took centrestage and the result is making headlines every day.

These facts present a pertinent question – Where is the accountability of the government? Who is answerable for these deaths, lynchings and water crisis in a nearly $3 trillion economy that claims to becoming a superpower very soon.

Well, the answer lies in wait because if someone dares to raise questions that matter, chances are they will be found behind bars the next day.
