Man assaults female neighbour over dogs, case filed against techie with Kondhwa police

By Gunwanti Paraste



34-year-old woman files case against techie with Kondhwa police after he attacked when the dogs barked, grabbed at her chest, hit her with a chappal, insulted her mother



In yet another incident of violence sparked by a hatred of animals in the city, a woman with pet canines has registered a case of assault and molestation against her techie neighbour, who she claims flew off the handle simply because her friendly dogs barked a little. As per her complaint, the man hit her with his footwear, grabbed at her chest, threatened to kill her and abused her mother as well. He allegedly barged into her home to abuse her, as well as did so out in the open.



The incident took place around 7 pm last Sunday at a rowhouse in Undri. The 34-year-old woman registered a case later that night against Redikant Sinha at Kondhwa police station. He was arrested and produced in court, which let him out on bail.



Still traumatised by the violent outburst, the woman told Mirror, “I stay at this rowhouse on rent and have four dogs in my family, from the Pug and Labrador breeds. They have a very friendly temperament and even play well with the society’s children. There is absolutely no question of them biting anyone. Despite all of this, the accused has always had a problem with my pets as well as dogs in general.”



She further narrated, “Two days ago, my mother had come home for a visit. On Sunday evening, when one of my dogs barked, Sinha barged into my house and shouted at me to ‘control the dogs’ because they were disturbing him. I apologised to him and shortly thereafter, had taken my four pets for a walk to answer nature’s call. However, here again, Sinha began shouting at me and directly said he would kill my dogs by giving them poison. I was shocked and asked what his problem is, because my dogs have never hurt anyone. As we continued to talk, he became incensed and slapped me, besides spitting on my face. He grabbed at my chest and removed his chappal, hitting me with it. My mother rushed out to calm things down, but he insulted her as well, while threatening me.” Clearly shaken, the woman said, “He has said he will kill all my dogs. After all this, he ran away from the spot. I rushed to the police to take some action against him.”



Charges were filed against Sinha under sections 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 509 (word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman), 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace), and 506 (1) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).



Speaking to Mirror, police subinspector Vivek Padvi at Kondhwa police station said, “After a case was registered on Sunday night, we arrested the accused and produced him in court on Monday, where he was granted bail. Sinha works at IT company as a software engineer. He and the complainant reside in the same society. We are investigating the case.”




