Searing image of father-daughter border drowning highlights perils at US border

From the scorching Sonoran Desert to the fast-moving Rio Grande, the 3200 kilometre US-Mexico border has long been an at times deadly crossing between ports of entry. A total of 283 migrant deaths were recorded last year; the toll so far this year has not been released. In recent weeks alone, two babies, a toddler and a woman were found dead on Sunday, overcome by the sweltering heat. Elsewhere three children and an adult from Honduras died in April after their raft capsized on the Rio Grande, and a six-year-old from India was found dead earlier this month in Arizona, where temperatures routinely soar well above 38 degrees. Tania Vanessa Ávalos of El Salvador speaks with Mexican authorities after her husband and daughter were swept away by the current while trying to cross the Rio Grande. Credit:AP The search for Martinez and his daughter was suspended on Sunday due to darkness, and their bodies were discovered the next morning near Matamoros, Mexico, across from Brownsville, Texas, several hundred metres from where they had tried to cross and just a kilometre from an international bridge. Tamaulipas immigration and civil defence officials have toured shelters beginning weeks ago to warn against attempting to cross the river, said to be swollen with water released from dams for irrigation. On the surface, the Rio Grande appears placid, but strong currents run beneath.

"It is a very deep, very dangerous river," Le Duc said. Ramirez said her son and his family left El Salvador on April 3 and spent about two months at a shelter in Tapachula, near Mexico's border with Guatemala. "I begged them not to go, but he wanted to scrape together money to build a home," Ramirez said. "They hoped to be there a few years and save up for the house." Migrant children wait for their father on the Mexican side of the Rio Bravo before crossing the US-Mexico border between Ciudad Juarez and El Paso. Credit:AP El Salvador's foreign ministry said it was working to assist the family including Avalos, who was at a border migrant shelter following the drownings. The bodies were expected to be flown to El Salvador on Thursday.

The photo recalls the 2015 image of a three-year-old Syrian boy who drowned in the Mediterranean near Turkey, though it remains to be seen whether it may have the same impact in focusing international attention on migration to the US. Military police wearing the insignia of the new National Guard run to detain Guatemalan migrants to keep them from crossing the Rio Grande from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, to El Paso, Texas. Credit:AP "Very regrettable that this would happen," Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador said Tuesday in response to a question about the photograph. "We have always denounced that as there is more rejection in the United States, there are people who lose their lives in the desert or crossing" the river. There was no immediate comment from the White House. Meanwhile, the acting head of US Customs and Border Protection resigned on Tuesday amid an uproar over the discovery of migrant children being held in filthy conditions at one of the agency's stations in Texas.

Commissioner John Sanders' departure deepened the sense of crisis and added to the rapid turnover inside the agencies responsible for enforcing Trump's hardline immigration priorities. US "metering" policy has dramatically reduced the number of migrants who are allowed to request asylum, down from dozens per day previously to sometimes just a handful at some ports of entry. The Tamaulipas government official said the family arrived in Matamoros early on Sunday and went to the US Consulate to try to get a date to request asylum. The mother is 21 years old and the father was 25, he added. Loading But waits are as long there as elsewhere along the border - last week a shelter director said only about 40 to 45 asylum interviews were being conducted in Matamoros each week, while somewhere in the neighbourhood of 800 to 1700 names were on a waiting list.

It's not clear what happened to the family at the US Consulate, but later in the day they made the decision to cross. The Tamaulipas official said the father and daughter set off from a small park that abuts the river. Civil officials arrived at the scene at 7pm on Sunday and later took the wife to the shelter. "It's a horrifying image," Maureen Meyer, a specialist on immigration at the Washington Office on Latin America, which advocates for human rights in the region, said of the photograph. "And I think it speaks so clearly to the real risks of these US programs that are either returning people back to Mexico seeking asylum or in this case limiting how many people can enter the US every day." The United States has also been expanding its program under which asylum seekers wait in Mexico while their claims are processed in US courts, a wait that could last many months or even years. This week Nuevo Laredo in Tamaulipas, the same state where Matamoros is located, said it will become the latest city to receive returnees as soon as Friday. Many migrant shelters are overflowing on the Mexican side, and cartels hold sway over much of Tamaulipas and have been known to kidnap and kill migrants.
