Salman Khan lands in legal trouble after journalist files a complaint accusing the actor of assault

Journalist accuses Salman Khan of assault

Salman Khan has landed in legal trouble yet again and this time it is a journalist named Ashok Pandey who has accused Salman of assault. Mr Pandey filed a complaint against the actor in the court of RR Khan, who is the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Andheri, under IPC sections 323 (causing hurt), 392 (robbery), and 506 (criminal intimidation).

As per the complaint, the reported incident took place in the wee hours of April 24 when the Bollywood star was riding a bicycle escorted by two of his bodyguards. As per Ashok Pandey, the incident took place when he spotted the actor on his bicycle and started recording the actor's video.

The report further claimed that Pandey started recording Salman's video, but only after seeking permission from his security guards. However, the actor got furious, and his bodyguards reportedly started assaulting and thrashing Pandey. Not just his bodyguards, Pandey claimed that even Salman assaulted him and snatched his mobile phone. The 53-year-old actor, along with his bodyguards, apparently further threatened him of dire consequences.

The alleged victim went to the court as the police dismissed his reports taking no action against Salman. As per Pandey's lawyer Neeraj Gupta's interaction with IANS, "the matter will come up for hearing on July 12. At that time, the court will decide whether the police will be directed to conduct an investigation, or issue summons to the accused".

Meanwhile, on the work front, Bharat has become Salman Khan’s sixth film to enter the Rs 200 crore club. Film trade analyst Taran Adarsh has confirmed that the Ali Abbas Zafar directed movie has earned Rs 201.86 crore at the box office as its second week concluded. The actor is currently shooting for his next, the third instalment from the Dabangg franchise, Dabangg 3, and will also be reuniting with Sanjay Leela Bhansali with Inshallah, which also stars Alia Bhatt.

Stay tuned to Zoomtv.com for more updates.
