Delhi: 20-year-old nursing attendant was stabbed 36 times in her neck, claims report

The 20-year-old nursing attendant, who was murdered along with an elderly couple in southwest Delhi's Vasant Vihar, was stabbed 36 times in her neck with two different objects, says a report,

According to The Hindustan Times, police have said that one of the objects used for stabbing the nursing attendant, Khushbu Nautiyal, appeared to be an ice-pick, while another seemed to be a screwdriver. The elderly couple – Vishnu Mathur, 79, and Shashi Mathur, 75 – had one stab wound each in their necks. A senior police told the leading daily, “While Vishnu’s injury appeared to be caused by the ice-pick, the injury Shashi sustained suggested that the killer may have used a pointed object, like a screwdriver, which did not have a sharp edge. The same weapons were used to kill Nautiyal also.”

The bodies of an elderly couple and their caretaker were found with their throats slit at a house in southwest Delhi's Vasant Vihar on Sunday morning. The deceased were identified as Vishnu Mathur (78) and Shashi Mathur (75), both retired government officials, and Khushbu Nautiyal (24). Vishnu had retired from the office of the Central Government Health Scheme and Shashi from a civic body in New Delhi. They had been living at Vasant Apartments for nearly 18 years. Nautiyal, who was their caretaker, stayed at their house and had been working with them for the last five-six months, neighbours claimed.

On reaching the spot, the police found Nautiyal lying on the floor with stab injuries. The bodies of the couple were found on the bed with their throats slit. More than 50 people have been questioned in the last two days, but officials said they have not been able to find any concrete evidence that could lead them to the killer or the motive behind the murders. They are also scanning CCTV cameras installed in the colony to identify the accused.

While scanning CCTV footages, cops found that suspects rode on bike, with their faces covered. A senior police told the Hindustan Times, “The bike is seen in six CCTV cameras installed on the route towards Rao Tula Ram Marg from the Vasant Apartments’ flat where the three murders took place. The registration number of the bike is not visible in any of the cameras. There is a possibility that the bike did not have a number plate.”

(To receive our E-paper on whatsapp daily, please click here. We permit sharing of the paper's PDF on WhatsApp and other social media platforms.)

Published on: Wednesday, June 26, 2019, 10:40 AM IST
