Why lives of NCR policemen hang in the balance

Lack of proper equipment and antiquated techniques of issuing tickets against offenders is another reason the policemen feel so vulnerable. (Photo: Reuters)

On a typically chilly winter evening on January 14, Delhi Police's special cell cop Rajpal Kasana was looking forward to finishing his duty and returning home to a warm meal. He then got word that an arms smuggler from western UP was approaching the Barapullah elevated corridor to head towards RK Puram.

Kasana and his colleague started chasing the gunrunner's car. Suddenly, a white sedan rammed into their motorbike from behind. Kasana suffered grievous head injuries as his helmet came off due to the impact.

Four days later, the 44-year-old brave cop died at the AIIMS trauma centre. The unfortunate death has put the spotlight back on spiralling cases of on-duty cops being wounded, killed, harassed and abused on Delhi's streets, often because they aren't well equipped and or are chasing near-impossible targets.

Also Read | Gurugram: Driver drags constable on bonnet, cop hangs for life on wiper

OCCUPATIONAL HAZARD?

In 2018, four of the 13 policemen who died on duty were mowed down by vehicles they had signalled to stop at check posts in Delhi late at night. These included Constable Bhoop Singh who was crushed to death allegedly by a Skoda car driver he had flagged down for checking on the high-security Nelson Mandela Road near south Delhi's Vasant Kunj.

The other three policemen were hit either by speeding trucks or unknown vehicles they had signalled to stop.

"The threat from unruly motorists is real. We have asked our officers to stay at a safe distance from the barricades so that even if a motorist decides to ram into the check post in an attempt to escape, the cop survives," says Delhi Police spokesperson Madhur Verma.

Almost every policeman Mail Today spoke with on condition of anonymity said there is a thin line separating life and death when they face up to dangerous criminals in the field.

A 52-year-old traffic constable posted in Connaught Place, for instance, was recently assaulted by a biker after he stopped him from triple riding. The constable, who received serious foot injuries after the attack, says his family has since been urging him to quit the force.

"The area where I am posted has a number of pubs. I have to deal with a number of unruly inebriated people on an everyday basis. I often face abuse, slurs and threats. My wife cannot sleep peacefully till I return home after the night shift," said the constable who lives in East Delhi's Laxmi Nagar with his wife and two children.

Is risking their lives the only resort for policemen who are left to their own devices when encountering lawless criminals in the field? Those in the traffic police say in many cases, trying to catch those fleeing after violating traffic norms is an occupational hazard.

"We don't have a choice but to risk our lives. Some motorists try to flee when we gesture to them to stop for a check. Many a time we have to chase offenders. And some times, we have to come in front of the vehicle to stop them," said a 37-year old constable posted at the Mayur Vihar check-post.

UNREALISTIC EXPECTATIONS

If you assumed that it is just the passion for their jobs that is the only factor driving these policemen to imperil their lives you thought wrong.

A number of them also end up doing it because they are given near-impossible targets to achieve by their superiors, they allege. At times, their superiors want them to issue as many as 75 tickets to traffic violators a day.

"We are under enormous pressure of meeting the target (issuing tickets). So, we often tend to forget that we are putting our lives at risk while trying to stop violators," says a constable who finds it difficult to issue even 30 tickets to errant traffic violators on certain days.

AN ILL-EQUIPPED FORCE?

Lack of proper equipment and antiquated techniques of issuing tickets against offenders is another reason the policemen feel so vulnerable. They have not received the body-worn cameras or hand-guns promised by the department, for instance.

At present, Delhi Police have more than 5,500 traffic policemen on their rolls and the traffic unit has purchased 1,000 bodyworn cameras for them. But just 700 cameras have been distributed in traffic circles to be worn by staff on duty and the remaining 300 sent to the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police (Provisioning & Logistics) to help equip patrolling motorcycles of the local police.

Senior officials say that the police department never encourages its personnel to take undue risks while chasing down criminals and asks them to note down vehicle registration numbers of errant drivers instead.

"We will implement the electronic challan system soon. That will help in the real-time integration of traffic challans with the database of repeat offenders. There will be no need to chase offenders," says Special Commissioner of Police (Traffic) Taj Hassan.

THE PRICE OF LIFE

The Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government has recently included policemen who die in the line of duty in the list of forces eligible for financial assistance amounting to Rs one crore, under their compensation policy.

On November 30, Kejriwal handed over a cheque of Rs 1 crore to the wife of traffic police constable Binesh Kumar who was killed in a mishap while on duty three years ago.

Also Read | Gurugram man charges car at traffic cop, drags him for metres on bonnet

Also Read | 4 Uber drivers arrested for robbing 15 passengers in Gurugram
