Another Class X student slashes wrist in Kolkata school loo

KOLKATA: A Class X student of a reputable south Kolkata school tried to kill herself in the school washroom on Tuesday, but was prevented by the alertness of the authorities.“Amake keu bhalobashe na (No one loves me)”, the student, who is being treated for depression, said when asked why she had tried to hurt herself.She tried to kill herself in a fashion similar to the method used by Krittika Paul, a student at GD Birla Centre for Education, who ended her life last Friday in her school’s washroom. Krittika had slashed her wrists and covered her head with a plastic bag. The autopsy revealed that she asphyxiated herself to death, as the cuts on her wrists weren’t deep enough.On Tuesday, the method used by the student was very similar: she shut herself up in the washroom and tried to slash her wrists with a blade. Unlike Krittika, however, she didn’t put a bag over her head.The student, like Krittika was, is among the top performers in her class. She suffered from depression, for which her parents had sought medical help. In fact, she was under medication, but sources said she missed Tuesday’s dose. The school authorities, however, said they had no knowledge of her medical condition. “The child is otherwise cheerful and exhibits behaviour that is completely age-appropriate and usual,” a teacher said. “We suspected nothing.”Around 3pm, a little after classes got over, the girl stepped into the washroom. She then tried to slash her left wrist with a blade. School officials, who were monitoring CCTV feed, rushed in after they saw she hadn’t emerged after six minutes. They opened the door, rescued her and took her to the infirmary for first aid.Her wounds were thankfully not severe, and she completely recovered after first aid. The school then got in touch with her father, who gave them his wife’s number, as he is out of Kolkata on work. The school promptly called the girl’s mother. She requested some time, given the distance from her office, but ensured the child’s grandfather went to the school immediately.The school’s counsellors and teachers, who were constantly with the child, said she appeared very calm and composed and said she wanted to go home. When asked why she did this, she kept repeating “Amake keu bhalobashe na (Nobody loves me)”, and “Amar jonnyo karo somaye neyi, sobai nijer kaaje byasto (No one has any time for me, everybody is busy with their own work)”.The child has working parents. Counsellors who attended to her had the impression that she longed for more attention at home. “We will share our thoughts and inputs with the family. But at this point parents will be distraught. She is a wonderful student,” a teacher said. The school is also likely to impress upon all parents to alert them if any student is being treated for any ailments, both physical and mental. “Had we known this, we could have helped the family to deal with the issue,” said a teacher.The Gariahat police said they had made inquiries and spoken to the principal. “The school authorities handled the incident promptly and well. The child has recovered and has been handed over to her family. At this moment, we can only keep a watch on the situation and hope the child recovers soon,” said a senior officer.
