Fact Check: Truth behind viral pic of Big B lending hand to stretcher to carry a body

Did Amitabh Bachchan lend a hand to the stretcher carrying the body of domestic help who worked with him for 40 years?

A viral post on social media claims, Amitabh’s servant who was working with him for the last 40 years died. Amitabh lent his shoulder to the body. Great man. Everyone has money but few people have humanity. Hats off to Amitabh.

India Today’s Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading. The viral image is true, but Bachchan did not lose his domestic help. It was his secretary and manager Sheetal Jain who passed away earlier this month.

Facebook user Ashutosh Mehta uploaded the post on June 22, claiming that Bachchan lost his servant’ the day before. A photo of Amitabh and Abhishek Bachchan holding a stretcher carrying a body was also posted along with the claim.

Some Facebook users have shared the post. The archived version can be seen here.

Another Facebook user, Kalale Purushotham shared the same photo with the same claim on June 23. The archived version can be seen here.

AFWA found that Big B had himself written a blog about his associate of 40 years passing away on June 8. Bachchan had uploaded the picture that has been going viral and eulogised his secretary and manager Sheetal Jain in the blog.

In the blog Bachchan has written that Jain planned and sorted my schedules, films and important meetings with producers. It was him that we asked to represent us when it was not possible for the family to attend an occasion.

So it is clear that it was not a domestic help, but Bachchan’s secretary and manager Sheetal Jain whose funeral the megastar attended.

Also read: Fact Check: Viral post warning Mumbai residents of robbers is a hoax

Also read: Fact Check: Truth behind the viral video of Hindu girl set ablaze in Madhya Pradesh

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Actor Amitabh Bachchan lent his shoulder to the stretcher carrying his domestic help’s body. Conclusion Actor Amitabh Bachchan lost his secretary and manager Sheetal Jain earlier this month. It was his funeral that he attended. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
