Centre denies intelligence failure in Pulwama terror attack, says 'agencies get inputs on real-time basis'

Centre denies intelligence failure in Pulwama attack | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The central government on Wednesday brushed off any intelligence failure in the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

In a written reply to a question in the Rajya Sabha, Minister of State for Home Affairs G Kishan Reddy said that the NIA has identified the perpetrators and suicide bomber who carried out the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s district.

"Owing to the policy of zero tolerance towards terrorism and sustained an action against the terrorists by the security forces, a large number of terrorists have been neutralised during the past few years," he said.

The minister further said that the state of Jammu and Kashmir has been under the grip of terrorism sponsored and supported from across the border for the last three decades.

He further said that failure of intelligence was not the reason of the Pulwama attack, adding, all agencies are working in a coordinated manner and the intelligence inputs are shared among various agencies on a real-time basis.

"The investigation by NIA into the Pulwama attack so far has resulted in identifying the conspirators, suicide attacker and the vehicle provider," the minister said.

The dastardly attack was carried out by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) suicide bomber who rammed an explosives-laden car with a convoy of vehicles carrying CRPF personnel on the Jammu Srinagar National Highway.

On February 20, the National Investigation Agency (NIA) on February 20 took over the probe into the terror attack from the Jammu and Kashmir police.

In retaliation for the attack, the Indian Air Force conducted air strikes targetting a JeM terrorist training camp in Pakistan's Balakot area on February 26.

Earlier this month, India received information regarding possible Pulwama-like terror attack in Awantipora area of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district, following which high alert was issued in the state.

Pakistan shared the Intel warning about the threat of probable terror attack to the Indian High Commission in Islamabad ahead of the recent SCO summit in Bishkek, said media reports.
