37 year old Rape Victim asked for ‘sexual favours’ by Police officer in Uttar Pradesh

Lucknow: Well, it might be shocking, but, here’s a story of a 37-year-old woman, who was raped by two men earlier this year, had gone to the investigating officer (IO) at Rampur's Ganj police station in Uttar Pradesh for help.

But, then she encountered that the investigating police officer allegedly wants to have sex with her before taking action against the accused.

When the woman refused, there was another shock waiting for her. The sub-inspector, Jai Prakash Singh, filed a closure report. Helpless and with nowhere to go, she then approached the officer again, but this time she recorded her conversations with him. Later, she went to the SP on Wednesday, who has now ordered an inquiry against the IO.

Speaking on the matter, the Additional superintendent of police Sudha Singh told the media that Ganj station officer has been asked to investigate the matter against the SI and submit a report as soon as possible.

According to earlier media reports, the helpless woman was gang-raped by two men, one of whom was known to her, on the night of February 12 when she had gone to visit a relative and was on her way back to Rampur city. The two offered her a lift, dropped her home and later gang-raped her at gunpoint when they found she was alone in the house.

Even then, police had first refused to lodge an FIR. It was only when she approached a local court a week later that a case was registered.

On February 21, two persons, identified as 55-year-old Ameer Ahmad and 45-year-old Sattar Ahmad, were booked under sections 376 (D)/323/506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Her statement has been recorded before a magistrate.

On the other hand, Rampur superintendent of police Vipin Tada said, "Prima facie, the voice in the audio clip doesn't match with that of the SI. But will investigate her charges thoroughly."

Also Read: More Child Rape Cases In Uttar Pradesh Even As Yogi Adityanath Cracks The Whip
