Water, electricity supply of Bombay Cambridge International School disconnected for violating several norms

Bombay Cambridge International School

BMC

fire safety

Maharashtra Prevention of Fire Safety Act

electricity supply

was found violating several fire, civic norms; school says theis being ‘highhanded’, alleges conspiracy.The fire department has reportedly sent a notice to the Bombay Cambridge International School in Andheri East for not having the requisite building permissions and for failing to comply withnorms.Issued under the, 2006, the notice cites illegal activities such as storing gas cylinders on the premises and not being in possession of the indemnity of disapproval (IOD) and the commencement certificate (CC) from the BMC's building proposal department. The BMC has also cut its water andon Wednesday.Interestingly, according to the school's website, the school has been operational since 1993.Prabhat Rahangdale, chief fire officer said, “The school has been inspected under Maharashtra Prevention Fire Safety Act. They were storing cylinders on the premises illegally. The school doesn’t have an IOD or CC. We have given a notice for illegal activities and it is established that it is an illegally-occupied school and doesn’t have fire prevention measures. To comply with the precautionary measures and our recommendation in a stipulated period and looking into the safety measures of the children, electricity and water supply has been is cut.”When a senior civic official was contacted, he said, “The school doesn’t have requisite permission from the BMC. The action is taken from fire department for not having a commencement certificate and other permits."On Tuesday, the school sent out a message to parents that it would remain closed on Wednesday “for maintenance work.”The school authorities did not respond to Mirror’s attempts to seek a clarification. When contacted, school trustee Mohammed Islam Khan said he would call back later but did not revert. Principal Nalini Nair did not respond to calls and messages. Savita Venkat, chief development officer of the school said she was not in a position to comment as she was no longer the principal. The school’s public relations representative said she would try and seek inputs from the school.An official associated with the school said on the condition of anonymity that the BMC was displaying “highhandedness” and had discontinued the power and water supply without any notice.As per the 1991draft DP, the plot of reserved for the school. However, when it was finalised, the reservation was for a dispensary. The school authorities then approached the DP officials and sought a 10 per cent reservation for a dispensary and 90 per cent for a school. “They cleared the area of the encroached slums. They sought CC, but the BMC denied it at the time. There was pressure from parents to develop a school. The school authorities developed a school and handed over an approach road to BMC. In 2003, the civic body put up a proposal for regularisation of the school building and the proposal was approved. However, boundaries of the plot overlap and the school had written to the BMC several times to resolve the issue. The trustees have been seeking an audience with the additional municipal commissioner in vain. BMC has suddenly sprung into action and they want to shut the school. The one mistake the school did was to construct without CC, but there is a court order that constructions can be regularised after paying a penalty. How can BMC take action one fine day? ” he said.
