Brahmin body demands ban on Ayushmann Khurrana starrer 'Article 15'

Mumbai: A right wing organisation, Shree Samast Gujarat Brahmsamaj is protesting against the release of Ayushmann Khurrana-starrer ‘Article 15’. The protestors have called for a ban on its release in Ahmedabad and other cities of Gujarat. The Anubhav Sinha directorial is scheduled for release this Friday.

Also Read | Article 15 leaves audience stunned, moved and questioning

According to report in The Indian Express, Chaitanya Shambhu Maharaj, acting president of the organisation alleged that the makers have twisted the facts in the film. He said, “Although the movie claims to be based on a real incident, they have twisted the facts to create a discord between Brahmin and Dalit communities and further wedge the gap between them.”

In the same report, Yagnesh Dave, convener of the organisation said, “After the protest, we submitted a memorandum to the director of the Gujarat Multiplex Association, demanding for an immediate ban on the film across the state. Our protest will continue if the movie is released this Friday.”

Also Read | Article 15 movie review: A topical, intelligent and compelling affair

Recently, Anubhav Sinha had reassured Hindu outfit Karni Sena that his film does not ‘disrespect’ the Brahmin community. He penned a long open letter addressed to ‘all offended from my film’s trailer’ and shared it on Twitter.

An open letter to all offended from my film's trailer #ARTICLE15 pic.twitter.com/LE8QTjpkLx — Anubhav Sinha (@anubhavsinha) June 26, 2019

Hindu fringe outfit Parshuram Sena also alleged that Article 15 shows Brahmins in a bad light, reports of the director's effigies being burnt have surfaced. The Karni Sena too has threatened to stall the release of Article 15.

The film is based on Article 15 of the Indian Constitution, which prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Article 15 takes inspiration from true life events, including 2014 Badaun gang rape allegations and 2016 Una flogging incident.

Article 15 hits the screens on June 28.
