Swedish national claims she was drugged and sexually harassed by tattoo parlour owner in Goa

The incident took place at a tattoo shop in North-Goa (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Goa: A Swedish national visiting India has alleged that she was sexually harassed by the owner of a tattoo parlour in North-Goa when she visited his establishment to get a tattoo on her back. The matter came to light on Thursday when the woman took to Facebook and wrote an extensive post about her ordeal and how she was harassed by the accused.

In her post, the foreign national claims that she was asked to strip by the accused despite the fact that she wanted a tattoo only on her back. "I was feeling anxiety and informed him which is when he gave me a drug," she wrote. The Swedish national goes further to claim that while she was under the influence of the drug given to her by the tattoo shop owner, he sexually assaulted her.

The woman has also expressed her desire to approach the police and register an official complaint against the accused. However, no case has been lodged in this regard until the time this report is being drafted.

More details in this matter are awaited as this is a developing story.

What is shocking is that this incident comes almost a year after Goa tourism minister at that time, Manohar Ajgaonkar told the state Legislative Assembly that the number of tourists visiting Goa has not taken a plunge owing to the crimes against women of foreign origin. Ajgaonkar was responding to a question posed by MLA Aleixo Reginaldo Lourenco.

A similar incident has come to light in January of last year when a foreign national took to social networking website Facebook to share her horrific experience in Goa. In her post, the woman claimed that she was sexually assaulted by her motorcycle driver after she hired him to ferry her from Arpora night market to Baga.

In fact, the mother of a Finnish tourist who was murdered under mysterious circumstances and found dead on a Goa beach in 2015, told media outlets in January of this year that corrupt police and crimes against tourists are causing the decline in Goa's tourism industry. Minna Pirhonen, the mother of Felix Dahl even filed a petition with the Panaji bench of the Bombay High Court seeking an investigation into the death of her daughter. However, the case was ruled out as one of accidental death. Despite repeated incidents of crimes against foreign nationals in India's party capital, the government in the state seems to be moving at a snail's pace in ensuring the safety of tourists.
