Mumbai Police files FIR against Aditya Pancholi for rape

Rape case filed against Aditya Pancholi | Photo Credit: Instagram

The Versova Police station has registered a rape case against actor-producer Aditya Pancholi after a Bollywood actress recorded her official statement today. For those unaware, this certain actress in 2017 had gone on record accusing Aditya Pancholi of harrassing her physically and mentally. Following which, Aditya Pancholi had filed a defamation case against the actress stating that she is trying to malign his image. He had also filed a reminder complaint against the actress earlier this month following which, the actress was issued 4 summons by the court. However, the latest update suggests that the Versova police has filed an FIR of rape case against Aditya and will be investigating the same hereafter.

It can be noted here that although the rape case has been registered against Aditya Pancholi as of now but the police feels it will be difficult to prove the charges considering the allegations are made on the basis of what happened 10 years back. Now it's left to see how will Aditya Pancholi take this case further. The last time he had spoken about the same, he had mentioned how he will be framed in a 'fake rape case' if he doesn't withdraw his defamation case against the actress. He expressed this in his official complaint.

#Breaking | FIR filed against Aditya Pancholi in rape case. More details by @siddhantvm. pic.twitter.com/w105pQEmN7 — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) June 27, 2019

However, the actress' lawyer, Rizwan Siddiquee, had tweeted on May 17 that Pancholi filed the case only after his client spoke about him on a public platform. “Pancholi can prove his innocence in court and not by misusing our silence or my misrepresenting facts to the media. The investigation is on by the police, he should have respected that,” said Siddiquee. He also pointed out that he was making a sincere effort to mediate in the matter, but it failed and “twisting facts for public sympathy may not help” Pancholi.

Keep watching this space as we bring you latest updates on this case.
