Kolkata School To Monitor Students' Washroom Time After Class X Student Found Dead

A few days ago a class X student was found dead under mysterious circumstances in a washroom in G D Birla Centre For Education in Kolkata. She was found around 2 pm by some students; her wrist were slit and a plastic bag was wrapped around her head.

A suicide note was also discovered at the scene but there is no certainty as to it being written in her handwriting yet. Just a few hours ago, another girl in a Kolkata school tried to slit her wrists in the washroom but she was rescued in time.

Kolkata: A girl student tried to slit her wrist with a blade in Ballygunge Shiksha Sadan School’s washroom. School staff rescued & handed her over to parents after primary treatment. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/TsASC0exue — ANI (@ANI) June 26, 2019

A few days after the first incident the news is that a school in Kolkata has formulated a rule to track the time each student spends in the washroom. The rule is to be reportedly implemented from July 1.

According to The Telegraph, the rule is going to be implements in the South City International school in south Kolkata.

The Principal of the school John Bagul said they would require a fair number of hands outside the school washroom to keep registers so that if anything amiss happens, the school is aware where the child is.

The school does know that the rule would need extensive monitoring but it is supposed to keep the children safe.

Last year there was a case of a class 2 student being murdered in one of Delhi’s reputed schools.

Washrooms also act as a sort of escape room for students in school but they also might become sites of untoward activities.

The Telegraph

Reportedly a teacher said to The Telegraph that the rule would help to monitor students at all time and would stop ‘these things.’ The school also realises that the move cannot wholly take care of the bullying that takes place at school or cannot guarantee 100% safety of its students.

Apart from this the school has also reportedly started an 'extra-mile programme.’ The teachers will visit students’ home to assess their living environment. Parents have been informed about the move but as reported by The Telegraph 30% of the parents have refused to be a part of this initiative.

BCCL

Here are my two thoughts about it. If the suicide note is actually true, it says that the girl, who was a topper, felt immense mental pressure and had not slept for three months. Schools need to pay more attention to the mental health condition of its students, making a psychiatric and a counsellor readily available to them. The stigma around mental health should be taken down.

Monitoring washrooms can accomplish just so much. It still does not help a child who is having mental and emotional problems.

School is supposed to be the next best safe place for a child after home. If it is true that 30% parents refused to cooperate with the school policy of letting the teachers assess a child’s environment at home then it is alarming. Parents are as much responsible for a child’s education as a school.
