Shop worker sexually assaulted 11-year-old girl who was sent by her mum to get frozen food

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss a Mansfield story by signing up for our free email updates

Deportation papers have been served on a Nottingham shop worker who has been jailed after a sex attack on an 11-year-old girl.

Sewa Singh had overstayed his permitted time in the UK and he is now awaiting deportation to India following his shocking crime in the city.

His illegal status was discovered after he thrust himself into the back of his victim. He was on his tip toes as she leaned into a frozen food freezer last September.

Judge John Burgess sent Singh to prison for 30 weeks, saying: "I understand deportation papers have been served. I hope that when the custodial element has been served, that you will be returned to India".

And he described what Singh did as being "unpleasant and dirty".

No Sexual Harm Prevention Order was made as Singh is not going to be at liberty in the UK again.

He was ordered to sign the sex offenders' register but the judge said "that may be academic".

CCTV was shown at Nottingham Crown Court of Singh working in a newsagent when the girl arrived to buy frozen food on her mum's instructions.

(Image: Nottinghamshire Police)

She left, but returned with the items after she bought the wrong ones, explaining her error at the shop counter and being allowed to swap the goods.

Singh went to the frozen chests in the shop and brushed past the girl once.

Then, as the CCTV was played in slow motion, he could be seen carrying out the sexual assault he pleaded guilty to at court on Thursday, June 27.

There had been an element of grooming on previous occasions where he had given her sweets and been friendly, the court heard.

Jonathan Straw, prosecuting, said the girl was very upset.

"She goes to the counter to finish her purchase," he told the judge. "She reports matters to her mum and family.

"Her mum comes into the shop to remonstrate, because of what her daughter has told has happened".

The girl said in a video recorded statement how she was now scared to trust people and go near people anymore.

"I sometimes dream about what happened to me," she told a policewoman.

Singh, 32, had been living in Mansfield Road, Nottingham, and had no previous convictions. He has been in the UK since 2016 but stayed when he should have left.

After the offence, police could not find him until May when he was arrested.

Matthew Smith, mitigating, said: "He is at a loss to explain why he did what he did.

"He is anxiously waiting to return to India. His father is 55. The anticipation is he is to return home to look after his father.

"He has been living at friend's addresses and working cash in hand for some years now. It eventually caught up with him in May this year".
