A disconcerting reminder of bias

Sinha's take on the reality of caste may not be biting but it's effectual enough to highlight the unfairness of it all.

Anubhav Sinha's Article 15, like his last film Mulk, is a social drama that feels relevant to the times we live in, a disconcerting reminder of the prejudice that has become rule of law in the hinterland.

Its uninhibited talk and depiction of caste hierarchy - a topic mainstream Hindi cinema is rather wary of - is much welcomed.

It's this aspect of Sinha and Gaurav Solanki's script that drew Ayushmann Khurrana to the project.

"We are very sanitised staying in urban India and have no idea about these things," Khurrana told Mail Today. "We are quite open here with inter-caste marriages and inter-religious marriages. That doesn't happen in rural India."

For Khurrana doing the film is another exercise in following his gut. "I used to listen to the opinions of a lot of people, but the day I started listening to my intuition, things started going well. You don't have to be a big name or have a legendary status to come up with a good idea or script. It can emanate out of anywhere and anybody. I hunt out good scripts."

Ayan Ranjan (Khurrana) is a newly posted police chief of Lalgaon, a village in Uttar Pradesh. Sinha introduces him with a copy of Nehru's Discovery of India. He exchanges amusing texts with his 'activist' girlfriend about his first impressions of the place and stops over at a tea stall in a lower caste neighbourhood much to the shock of his colleagues.

Ranjan immediately gets to work trying to get to the bottom of the death of two girls whose bodies are found hanging from a tree.

The crime will remind vigilant citizens of the 2014 Badaun gang rape case, but there is also a reference to the flogging in Una of dalits and the subsequent rebellion of the community.

In its visual treatment the film has already drawn comparisons to the popular US TV series True Detective but the film also takes inspiration from Korean investigative thriller Memories of Murder.

As much as Article 15 is a story of brahmin hero seeking justice for the impoverished and powerless dalits by following Constitutional protocol, it fares better as an eye-opener for the city-bred Ranjan on the nexus between powerful, casteist politicians and corrupt cops.

What makes Sinha's drama engaging is the tension between the upper caste and subsequently higher-placed officer Brahmdatt Singh (Manoj Pahwa) and the lower caste and his junior Jatav (Kumud Mishra).

Pahwa disguises his character's moral compass so well it's hard to take your eyes off him even in the presence of Khurrana's taskmaster of a chief.

Pahwa is not the only actor to make his presence felt. Sayani Gupta as the headstrong sibling of one of the victims, Mohammed Zeeshan Ayyub as Nishaat, a firebrand dalit leader on the run, all make most of their screen time.

Sinha crams in many issues to outrage but struggles to address them with much depth. Ranjan is the hero India needs but how many of him can succeed in the 'Wild Wild West' as he calls it? Sinha's take on the reality of caste may not be biting but it's effectual enough to highlight the unfairness of it all.
