Top actor files rape case against Aditya Pancholi

Aditya Pancholi

Mumbai police

Indian Penal Code

IPC

Mumbai

Mumbai Police issues statement on FIR filed against Aditya Pancholi 01:01

Complainant says she was abused from 2004-09; he claims he is being ‘falsely implicated’.After a top Bollywood actor accusedof raping and blackmailing her for years, the 54-year-old actor was booked by theon Thursday.In her complaint, the 36-year-old woman told the police that Pancholi sexually assaulted her several times between 2004 and 2009, said police spokesperson DCP Manjunath Singte.The Versova police have registered a case against Pancholi under Sections 376 (rape), 328 (causing hurt by means of poison), 384 (extortion), 341(wrongful restraint), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the).The complainant has alleged that Pancholi sedated her on multiple occasions and took obscene photos and videos of her.Pancholi also beat her up and confined her to his house whenever she tried to approach police during this period, the complaint said.She also alleged that Pancholi demanded Rs 1 crore from her for not showing her private photographs to her family and friends, and claimed she paid him Rs 50 lakh.Pancholi has not been questioned yet, a police official said.Pancholi claimed he has been implicated in a false case, adding the law will take its course.“It is not a small allegation, the law will take its course, I will fight out... the truth will come out,” he said.“I am being falsely implicated in this case. I have all the evidence and videos in this case. I am ready to cooperate with thePolice. If they will call me for my statement, then I will cooperate. I am ready for investigation. I knew that a case will be registered against me. I am not going anywhere. The police have not approached me after the FIR was registered,” Pancholi said.The actor had recorded her statement before the Versova Police earlier this week in support of her previous complaint against Pancholi. Her sister had filed a complaint in April this year, alleging that the actor had been exploited by Pancholi a decade ago.According to the police, proving the case might turn out to be difficult as gathering evidence from a 10-yearold case would not be easy.Pancholi, an actor-producer, was last seen in Bajirao Mastani in 2015, which was directed by Sanjay Leela Bhansali.
