Rajasthan: 17-year-old girl raped by two in Bundi district

KOTA: A 17-year-old girl of Dugari village under Nainwa police station of Bundi district was abducted on Saturday evening and held captive in an isolated place near the village on the intervening nights of Saturday and Sunday. She was repeatedly raped by two youths of her village. The minor girl, a school dropout, was later Sunday evening dropped near police station in Nainwa town. The accused youths also filmed the act on mobile and threatened to make it viral on social media if she disclosed the matter to anyone in the family. But the survivor on Wednesday evening gathered courage and narrated the entire matter to her father who approached Nainwa police station with the victim to lodge a case of rape against the accused. The two are absconding and are yet to be nabbed.The girl on Saturday had left home to travel by bus to her aunt’s place in a village near Nainwa town. The two accused youths of her village were also sitting beside her in the bus and began talking to her and offered her juice.In her report, the girl stated that she felt dizzy after having juice that was offered to her by Arvind Daroga and Rajkumar Mali. The youths, later on the pretext of dropping her at aunt’s house on a friend’s motorbike, took her to an isolated place near local crematorium and took turns to rape her throughout the night. They later dropped her near police station in Nainwa town, the SHO said. The victim also alleged that the two accused filmed the act on their mobiles and threatened to upload it on social media if she disclosed the matter to anyone.On the report by the minor, submitted on Wednesday evening, police lodged a case of abduction and rape under Sections of 363 and 376 (D) against Arvind Daroga and Rajkumar Mali, both around 20 years old and residents of Dugari village. However, the two are yet to be nabbed as they have been absconding.The medical examination of the survivor was carried out and her statements under Section 164 before the magistrate are yet to be recorded, he said, claiming the efforts are underway to nab the two accused.
