‘I live in fear’: Madrasa teacher pushed off train for not chanting ‘Jai Shri Ram’

Hafij Mohammed Shahrukh Halder

Hindu right wing activists

Jai Shri Ram

Park Circus station

Violence in WB’s Gurap

Hooghly district

BJP worker

20-year-old Hafij Halder suffered severe injuries to the head and right eye.“I am scared of travelling in trains now,” says 20-year-old, a Madrasa teacher who was pushed off a running train by allegedlast week after he refused to say ‘’. Halder suffered severe injuries to the head and will also need surgery on his right eye.“I was thrown off a running train just because I didn’t say ‘Jai Sri Ram’. I live in constant fear. I am anxious about my safety all the time. I can’t even leave the house,” Halder told Mirror. A resident of Basanti in South 24 Parganas district, Halder used to take the train to Hooghly every day to go to the madrasa where he works as a school teacher.“After the train left Ballygunge station, some activists of the Hindu Sanhati started asking me weird questions. They wanted to know why I was wearing a long kurta, why I had a long beard, and about my cap. I did not entertain them and kept silent.“Then they told me to chant ‘Jai Shri Ram’ and I again stayed quiet. Then they began beating me. As the train approached, they kicked me from the running train and I fell on the platform,” Halder told Mirror.Hindu Sanhati is a right-wing organisation quite active in various parts of West Bengal.“After I fell, the locals took me to the police station. I filed a complaint after which I was taken to the hospital. Halder, who lives with his two siblings – a brother and a sister – apart from his parents, said, “My entire family is scared after the incident.”-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Gurap village inturned into a warzone on Thursday morning when awas injured in police firing in the wake of a scuffle between TMC and BJP workers over the chanting of ‘Jai Shri Ram’.Trouble started when some BJP workers chanted ‘Jai Sri Ram’ and TMC activists allegedly attacked them with sharp weapons. “Two BJP workers were injured,” a villager said.When police reached the village Wednesday night, they fired a shot, which accidentally hit Joy Chand Malik, a BJP worker. He was admitted to a local hospital.In protest, BJP workers gheraoed the Gurap police station on Thursday and started pelting stones, forcing the cops to take refuge inside the police station. They also set ablaze two police vehicles.
