Family of five found bludgeoned to death in Hamirpur district of Uttar Pradesh, say police

The crime scene has been cordoned off by investigators (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Shutterstock

Lucknow: The bodies of five people, including four of the same family were found at their house in Rani Lakhsmi Bai Nagar area of Hamirpur city in Uttar Pradesh on Thursday. Police have identified the victims as 28-year-old Rais, a truck driver by profession, his mother (85), wife Roshni (25), niece Roshni (15) and four-year-old daughter Aliya. The motive behind this heinous crime is yet to be established pending a thorough investigation into the matter.

Noorbaksh, the head of the family was out to attend a wedding ceremony at the time of the incident. He returned home on Thursday night only to find the bodies of his family members and immediately alerted the police. Prima facie the victims were likely bludgeoned to death over an old enmity, said Hamirpur superintendent of police (SP) Hemraj Meena. Meena added that the bodies of the victims have been sent for post-mortem and the case is being actively investigated.

Deputy Inspector General of police, Anil Roy told the Business Standard that Noorbaksh was previously employed in the Hamirpur collectorate and lived in the house with his two sons and their family members. The eldest son has not been seen since the incident, added the DIG. More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.

Hamirpur: Bodies of 5 members of a family including 2 children were found at their residence yesterday. They were allegedly beaten to death with a stone. Police investigation underway. pic.twitter.com/PreXG3rnMq — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 27, 2019

Reports by sections of the media provide conflicting details about whether the victims were attacked with a hammer or a stone. The post-mortem report is likely to clear the picture about the weapon which was used by the culprits to murder five members, including two minors in cold blood. Investigators have not identified any evidence which may lead them to believe that the victims were killed as the result of an attempted robbery or burglary as of yet.

Less than a hundred kilometres from Hamirpur, police in Unnao district of the state are investigating a similar crime where a minor girl was bludgeoned to death with bricks on the night of June 21. Preliminary inputs at the time indicated that the girl was raped and murdered after being abducted from right outside her house where she was sleeping. Her body was discovered the next morning in an orchard by her father who went out looking for her after she did not return home the previous night.

Officials familiar with the matter also told media outlets that injury marks were found around the neck and private parts. Her body was sent for post-mortem and the police were waiting for a report in order to further the investigation into the matter.
