Violence, weapons and mobiles common in Ludhiana jail, but no probe could nail officials yet

LUDHIANA: The viral videos of Ludhiana jail inmates after violence on the jail premises, in which they are seen carrying rods and sharpedged weapons, is a stark reminder of the state of affairs in the jail, which has witnessed seizure of drugs, mobile phones and weapons in the past as well.The incidents of violence and scuffles too have been common in the high security jail. While sources admit that such recoveries only point towards a nexus between the jail personnel and the inmates, it’s only surprising that none of probes so far have pointed towards the involvement of any of them. In all cases under the NDPS and mobile phone recoveries and scuffles in which sharpedged weapons were used, FIRs were lodged in division number 7 police stations. However, the local police in the investigation of these cases have never be able to identify how mobiles, drugs/intoxicating powder or pills and sharpedged weapons entered the jail premises, despite frisking of inmates.In fact, Ludhiana Central Jail, Tajpur road, has been in the limelight mostly for wrong reasons. Till June, as many as 15 FIRs of scuffle and 12 of NDPS recovery have been registered from the jail from where more than 104 mobile phones have been seized. In 2018 too, a total 96 mobile phones were seized and 19 FIRs of scuffles and 20 FIRs of NDPS Act were lodged.Former DGP, D R Bhatti said that, “The videos captured by inmates in which they are seen carrying sharpedged weapons shows how jail administration has failed in its job. There are loopholes in the security system, which should now be given attention. Besides, inmates should be made to practise yoga and meditation.”Controversies galoreThe high security jail has witnessed one controversy after the other. On April 10, undertrial Livtar Singh was found dead inside a bathroom with a draw-string around his neck.A special investigating team was formed to probe the matter after which the police arrested three inmates Sunny Khullar, Shakri and Pritam for killing Livtar over drugs. SIT investigation also revealed that Livtar and many other inmates are known by the name of ‘dikki’, who bring intoxicating pills and drugs hiding in their anus. However, little seemed to have been done to keep a check over the practice.On June 23, 2018, a post from the profile of Davinder Bambiha group accused the jail authority of torturing undertrials who had thrashed sacrilege accused. On June 22, 2018, a group of five gangsters attacked another inmate Jagjeet Singh — a dera follower, with iron rod, accused in sacrilege case of Guru Granth Sahib in Nawanshahr . Both legs of the inmate were fractured and he even received injuries on both arms. Importantly, the supporters of Bambiha gang had taken the responsibility of the attack through a Facebook post.On June 11, 2018, Parkash Chand (18) was strangulated to death inside a bathroom of central jail by another inmate Deepak Daliya. It came to light that the accused killed Parkash following a dispute over a bidi. Parkash had asked fellow inmates to not give bidi to Deepak, which fumed him and he killed the former.Drug controversyOn September 12, 2017, a controversy was triggered when medical officer at Ludhiana Jail Swarandeep Singh was attacked by a group of inmates. He at that time had alleged that he was being forced to inject drugs into inmates and on refusing it, he was attacked. Not only this, Singh made several allegations against Ludhiana jail authorities for certain malpractices.Later in 2018, Singh filed a writ petition in the Punjab and High high court, levelling several allegations against former jail superintendent S P Khanna. He accused the latter of helping inmates in getting drugs, syringes, women and weapons on the jail premises. Khanna was also accused of making jail inmates attack Singh when he refused to give favour to a few inmates.Singh also alleged that, “Serious patients are not sent to hospital even when they are referred by the jail doctor, on the ground that guards are not available. However, when money is given, even a normal prisoner is referred to hospital and immediately taken there. Besides, the inmates who are not sick are shifted to hospital by charging them Rs 15,000 each,” the plea added. The petitioner said he was being pressurised to admit jail inmates who were not ill, and when he refused, he was attacked.He had also alleged that inmates who dared to speak up against the atrocities were tortured and given odd jobs. Drugs, liquor and women were easily available in the state jails, he said. He added that when district sessions judge visits, prisoners are warned to maintain discipline or face action.Activity on FacebookOn March 14, 2017, undertrials in the case of attack on Sikh preacher Rajit Singh Dhadrianwala — Gurpeet Singh, Sukhwinder Singh , Manveer Singh and Sukhpreet Singh — had thrashed an inmate, Sahil, who is an accused in an extortion case. They also video-graphed it and uploaded it on Facebook from inside the Ludhiana Central Jail.
