FIR Filed Against Actor Aditya Pancholi For Rape And Assault

The Me Too movement is not dying down anytime soon. Decade-old sexual misconducts in Bollywood surfacing to our news feeds have become a regular thing now. Recently, actor and producer Aditya Pancholi landed in trouble AGAIN, this time for rape and assault.



A leading Bollywood actress has filed a police complaint against the actor for rape, assault, and extortion. The case has been registered at the Versova police station and the investigation has begun.

The charges

The actor has been charged under Sections 376 (rape), 328 (causing hurt by means of poison), 384 (extortion), 341 (wrongful restraint), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), and 506 (criminal intimidation) under the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Mumbai Police files an FIR of rape against actor-producer Aditya Pancholi. pic.twitter.com/oE5XtAnNKd — ANI (@ANI) June 27, 2019

Mumbai Police spokesperson DCP Manjunath Singe said: “We have registered an offence of rape, wrongful restraint, assault and criminal intimidation under the Indian Penal Code. We have recorded a detailed statement from the victim. As the offence occurred several years ago, we will have to visit the locations named by the victim and get in touch with those she has named. Based on her statement, we have also added sections for causing harm by poisonous substance and extortion to the complaint (sic).”



Aditya on being falsely implicated

Aditya in his defence said: “I am being falsely implicated in this case. I have all the evidence and video in this case. I am ready to cooperate with the Mumbai Police. If they will call me for my statement, then I will cooperate. I am ready for investigation. I knew that a case will be registered against me. I am not going anywhere. The police have not approached me after the FIR was registered (sic).”

What happened?

The actress has revealed in the past that she was in a relationship with Aditya back in the year 2005, where she was constantly abused and sexually exploited. The actress also said that she was kept under house arrest by him. In her recent police complaint, the actress has mentioned that Pancholi used to give her intoxicants and took pictures of sexual acts without her knowledge to blackmail her later.

Kangana’s sister has also accused Aditya of extorting Rs 1 Crore

In the meantime, Kangana’s sister Rangoli Chandel has also accused Aditya of extorting Rs 1 crore from Kangana. Rangoli took to Twitter and wrote: “Whoever it may concern, complain against Pancholi had been lodged in 2007 for physical abuse harassment and extortion, he has taken more than 1cr from Kangana saying he has fed her for 3 months when she was homeless ( grocery bill of three months ?).... but he wanted more money after that, last message of extortion I myself received from him was in 2016 which has been submitted to cops and now FIR has been lodged, she had absolutely no time for all this (sic).”

Whoever it may concern, complain against Pancholi had been lodged in 2007 for physical abuse harassment and extortion, he has taken more than 1cr from Kangana saying he has fed her for 3 months when she was homeless ( grocery bill of three months ?)...(contd) — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) June 28, 2019

(Contd)... but he wanted more money after that, last message of extortion I myslef received from him was in 2016 which has been submitted to cops and now FIR has been lodged, she had absolutely no time for all this...(contd) — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) June 28, 2019

She further wrote: “But everyday cases from him and his wife needs to be fought as they are finding a lot of strength in the fact that Kangana is very busy so I have revived this case on her behalf, so her work isn’t disturbed ?”

The investigation has begun and as per the officials it is hard to gather evidence as the case is more than a decade old. However, we are yet to get an official statement from Kangana on this.
