Kolkata school to time students' bathroom breaks after shocking suicide

The measure was taken in wake of the suicide at another school last week, where a class 10 girl was found dead in a bathroom.(File photo: Getty Images)

Just a few days after a student was found dead at a school in Kolkata, another school in the city has decided to keep tabs on the time spent by students in bathrooms.

The principal of South City International School announced during an assembly on Monday that students will have to mention their 'in and out time' whenever they need to use toilets, said a report in The Telegraph.

The new rule, which will be implemented from Monday (July 1), is a measure that the school has taken to know where each student is, in case anything goes wrong.

"We will implement the rule from next Monday because we need more hands outside the washrooms [both boys and girls] to maintain the register. If anything goes wrong, the school should know where the child is," principal John Bagul said.

The measure was taken in wake of the suicide at another school last week, where a class 10 girl was found dead in a bathroom with a plastic bag wrapped around her face and injury marks on one of her wrists.

"These things would stop and the children would be watched all the time," a teacher said.

The school believes the move would help safeguard the institution's interest and show a greater accountability on its part.

However, authorities admit that the rule itself would not be enough for preventing children from harming themselves if they wanted to.

According to the report, the school has also proposed to launch an extra mile programme where teachers will visit the homes of students from several classes to check their environment and help them further.

The school sent a mail to all the parents asking them to give their approval or disapproval for the initiative.



"The greatest benefit of such visits is a better understanding of the child's environment. It would also help develop mutual trust and faith among parents, students and teachers," the email signed by the principal said.

"We know there are dysfunctional families and we intend to pay a visit to see the family set-up and the home environment so that we can help students better," principal Bagul added.

Although, as many as 30 per cent of the parents have refused to be part of the programme, the report said.
