Delhi Police ignoring animal rapes, don't register many cases: Animal rights activist

According to a Delhi High Court order on December 2017, cases of cruelty against animals should be registered. (image for representation)

To protect animals, Wildlife Protection Act is taken very seriously across the country, however, the 'new trend' against animals is now raping them.

Last year in Delhi-NCR, two cases of animals being raped were registered. One of the cases has showed a suspect from Ghaziabad, where a bitch was recovered from a road after the suspected person tied the animal to his bike and drove the vehicle.

India Today TV has an exclusive copy of the FIR in which Sourabh Gupta, complainant officer or the raiding officer of the People for Animals (PFA) India, noted that it was an attempt to rape the female dog alleging that there were bruises near the vaginal area of the bitch.

The PFA is the country's largest animal welfare organisation, which was founded by Maneka Gandhi in 1992, who is also the chairperson of the organisation.

In account of the alleged rape case, Sahibabad Circle Officer Dr Rakesh Mishra said, "We are investigating the case and the 'rape angle' cannot be ruled out. It will be clear after we receive the postmortem report which is still pending."

In July 2018, NCR remained shocked after a pregnant goat had died after being gang-raped by eight men in Haryana's Mewat district.

The goat's owner had registered a police complaint on July 26 after he discovered that the goat was missing, and on searching he reached the site of the incident.

A case is under trial in a court. Also for the first time in west Delhi's Naraina Area in August 2018, Naresh, a local cab driver had allegedly raped and killed a female puppy.

A case is under trial in a court. Recently Delhi Police have also registered some 25 to 30 cases of animal smuggling.

Member of a wildlife NGO, Gaurav Gupta, has alleged that the Delhi Police have been ignoring such incidents and did not register many such cases.

According to Delhi High Court order on December 2017, cases of cruelty against animals should be registered.

India Today TV
