Delhi: Man rapes niece, calls her mother and says she is 'unwell'; arrested

The minor's mother and aunt were away at work when the incident took place (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The three-year-old was playing outside the accused's house with her cousins. The accused took the minor inside and raped her. The accused called the minor's mother and told her that her daughter was 'unwell'. The mother reached home and took her bleeding daughter to a local medical practitioner.. The condition of the minor worsened and she was taken to a hospital. The doctors said that the minor had been sexually assaulted and referred her to Delhi's LNJP Hopsital. Delhi Commission of Women chief Swati Maliwal met the survivor in the hospital.

New Delhi: A man who had allegedly raped his niece in Paschim Vihar, Delhi, was arrested by the police four days after the incident. Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) said that the accused approached the minor when she was playing with his daughter outside his residence.

The survivor's mother works as domestic help. The minor's mother and aunt were away at work when the incident took place. DCW chief Swati Maliwal visited the minor at the hospital.

A panel of DCW said, "The little girl was subjected to utmost cruelty by her own uncle and remained in the operation theatre for more than six hours. She had recently come to Delhi with her mother and her 10-year-old brother from Madhya Pradesh. Her father was going to join them in a few days after selling off his cattle."

Allegedly, the accused called the minor's mother after raping her and told her that the minor was 'unwell'. When the minor's mother came home, she found her bleeding profusely. The woman then took her daughter to a local medical practitioner who prescribed medicine to the minor.

However, when the condition of the minor deteriorated, she was rushed to a hospital. The doctors informed the minor's mother that her daughter had been sexually assaulted and referred her to the LNJP Hospital.

The panel told PTI, "The girl was kept in the operation theatre for more than six hours. When the girl regained consciousness, she told her father in the presence of the DCW team that her uncle had made her bleed."

Agra: Maternal uncle rapes minor at wedding

A similar incident came to light from Uttar Pradesh's Agra in the month of May where a minor was allegedly raped by her uncle at a wedding. The incident took place under the limits of the Khandauli police station. The toddler was found lying unconscious around 400 metres away from the venue of the wedding.

An investigation revealed that the minor had allegedly been raped by her maternal uncle who was also attending the wedding. The 18-month-old minor's mother began searching for her daughter when the accused did not return for around 2 hours. The minor's abdomen was bleeding when she was found.

Station House Officer (SHO) Khandauli, Prashant Tyagi said that the accused was booked under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
