Delhi: Man stabs woman for not leaving husband, lays her on bed and then slits his throat

A 26-year-old man on Friday stabbed to death a woman he was having an affair with after she rejected his pleas to leave her husband. After killing the woman by stabbing her half a dozen times, the man, who has been identified as Sunny, also slit his own throat.

The incident was discovered when the landlord of the victim, identified as Pinky, was alerted by the commotion and sent his wife to check on her. His wife found both Pinky and Sunny in a pool of blood after which the landlord informed the police, reported The Times of India.

Both Pinky and Sunny were rushed to the hospital. While Pinky was declared brought dead, Sunny is in a critical condition and has been admitted in the ICU for treatment.

Pinki was married at the age of 19 to a man of her family's choice and had a son the very next year of her marriage.

According to initial information, Pinki's life became monotonous as her husband was busy working to manage the finances of the family. Pinky also worked at a beauty parlour for extra money.

An apparently frustrated Pinki met Sunny on Valentine's Day this year and started having an affair.

However, soon Pinki realised that she was not right in having an affair outside her marriage and started avoiding Sunny. Sunny was not ready to accept this. He started calling Pinki repeatedly, asking her to get a divorce, but in vain. Pinki also threatened Sunny with a police complaint if he did not stop.

However, Sunny did what Pinky could never imagine. Armed with a knife he reached Pinki's house on Friday morning. He asked her to elope with her, but after Pinki rejected his pleas repeatedly, an enraged Sunny stabbed her in her chest and belly several times, leading to her death. He then slit his own throat after laying next to her on the bed.

ALSO READ: Noida: 28-year-old rape survivor assaulted by three men ahead of court date

ALSO WATCH: Decoding chilling conspiracy behind Shailza Dwivedi murder
