Delhi: Man stabs woman during robbery attempt, alert daughter-in-law calls cops

A resident of Etah, Uttar Pradesh, the accused has been arrested by the police (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A man allegedly stabbed a senior citizen to death in Delhi's Bindapur on Saturday, June 29. The accused, Gidesh wanted to rob the 80-year-old's house but could not succeed. The deceased was identified as Santosh Devi. The accused is a resident of Etah, Uttar Pradesh and has been arrested by the police.

When the accused entered the deceased's house, she was on the ground floor. The accused stabbed her and went to the first floor where he was trying to open an almirah.

According to ANI's report, the deceased's daughter-in-law got up when she heard the noise and locked the accused inside the room. She then called the police who arrested the accused.

Bengaluru techie stabbed

A similar incident came to light from Bengaluru in May where a group of four people allegedly stabbed a man and robbed him of his ATM card, wallet and gold ornaments. The engineer was identified as Kinkar Kumar Thakur.

Thakur was waiting for an autorickshaw near Lakshmikunte Temple when the four accused approached him. The accused were riding bikes and they forcibly took Thakur to a secluded spot. The accused then stabbed Thakur on his head, thigh and hand.

The men took Thakur to an ATM and asked him to withdraw cash. When they found out that the ATM did not have cash, they gave Thakur a spare shirt and abandoned him on Anekal Road. The accused allegedly gave a spare shirt to Thakur as he was bleeding profusely and they did not want him to attract attention.

Thakur managed to reach his residence in Janadhar Shobha Apartment Complex and was taken to the hospital by his neighbours. The police recorded Thakur's statement and booked unidentified persons under Section 394 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Delhi cab driver stabbed

Another incident of stabbing and robbery surfaced from the national capital in March where a cab driver was allegedly stabbed by his passengers. The accused allegedly robbed the vehicle, the victim's mobile phone and debit card.

The accused asked the victim to drop them to Bakkarwala village. When they reached the destination, the accused asked the victim, Rohit to drive them to a nearby ATM. When Rohit stopped at the ATM, the accused allegedly overpowered him and robbed him of his valuables.

When Rohit refused to tell them the PIN of his ATM, the accused beat him up and stabbed him on the neck. The accused then pushed the victim out of the car and drove away with the vehicle.
