Delhi man stabs lover for refusing to leave husband, slits own throat

The accused, Sunny, stabbed Pinki (in pic) several times after she repeatedly rejected his marriage proposal

NEW DELHI: Five years ago, when Pinki was all of 19, she was married off to a man her family had found for her. A year later, she had a son and soon her life became focused on bringing up the child while her husband strived towards securing the family financially. Pinki also started working at a beauty parlour to make an extra buck.

Pinki's apparent monotonous life got a twist this Valentine's Day. A common friend introduced her to 26-year-old Sunny, a resident of Devli in south Delhi. The two became friends and soon started having a steamy love affair. Sunny would take her on bike rides, buy her chocolates and she would spend most of her time with him.

However, the affair didn't remain a secret for long. The two were spotted at several places and her husband got to know about it. This was the beginning of Pinki's troubles.

The couple shifted from Devli to Chirag Dilli last month and Pinki was asked to stay at home and take care of the family. Sunny, on the other hand, was not ready to accept these restrictions. He started to visit her when her husband was out for work. However, Pinki realised that she had made a mistake by having an illicit relationship and started avoiding Sunny.

Outraged with the change in Pinki's attitude, Sunny started calling her repeatedly asking her to get a divorce. Pinki refused and asked him to end the relationship. Sunny then decided to woo her again at any cost.

Last week, Pinki threatened to lodge a complaint against Sunny and he did the unthinkable. Armed with a knife, he landed at Pinki's house around 10am on Friday and asked her to elope with him. When she asked him to go back, a quarrel ensued.

Sunny begged her to come back into his life, which he claimed would end without her. When she repeatedly rejected his pleas, he took out the knife and stabbed her half a dozen times in the chest and belly. He then laid her body on the bed. He didn't run away and, instead, slit his throat and fell down bleeding.

The commotion alerted the landlord, Mahipal Singh, who asked his wife to check what was happening. "My wife went to their flat and found the two in a pool of blood. She shrieked and asked me to call the police," he said.

Police rushed the two to AIIMS Trauma Centre. While Pinki was declared brought dead, Sunny was admitted in the ICU for treatment. He is stated to be in a critical condition. Doctors said that they will observe his condition for the next 24 hours before making any comments.


