#MeToo: Aditya Pancholi accused of rape by Bollywood actress

LAHORE- Indian actor Aditya Pancholi was booked for rape on Thursday after a complaint was registered with the Mumbai police by an unnamed Indian cinema star, reported The Hindu.

According to the police, the alleged victim recorded her statement on Thursday afternoon. The allegations range from intoxicating her, raping her and then taking photos of the actress while she was unconscious. Later he used those pictures to blackmail her into submission and extort money from her.

“We have registered an offence of rape, wrongful restraint, assault and criminal intimidation under the Indian Penal Code,” said Mumbai Police spokesperson DCP Manjunath Singh.

“We have recorded a detailed statement from the victim. As the offence occurred several years ago, we will have to visit the locations named by the victim and get in touch with those she has named,” an officer with the Versova police station said.

“Based on her statement, we have also added sections for causing harm by poisonous substance and extortion to the complaint,” an officer said. “We will decide on the further course of action once preliminary inquiries are over.”

According to Pancholi, he is being “falsely implicated in the case.”

“I have all the evidence and video in this case. I am ready to cooperate with the Mumbai police. If they will call me for my statement, then I will cooperate. I am ready for investigation. I knew that a case will be registered against me. I am not going anywhere. The police have not approached me after the FIR was registered,” claimed Pancholi.

Reportedly, the actress said that her and Pancholi were together between 2005 and 2008, during which he physically abused her. She did reach out to the police for help but Pancholi was let off with just a warning.

Previously, Pancholi and his actor-wife Zarina Wahab publicly denied allegations of abuse by the actor. They also filed a defamation suit against the starlet.

The actress is scheduled for a court hearing on July 26th.

Stay tuned to Daily Pakistan Global for further updates!
