'Violence triggered to let inmates escape'

One inmate still missing

183 rounds fired

Inmates who helped to be rewarded

LUDHIANA: Contradictory to the claims made by the jail inmates and their family members, jail authorities alleged that the violence was not triggered after the death of inmate Sunny Sood, but was a conspiracy hatched by two gangsters with an intent to escape from the jail.According to jail officials, two gangsters, Harinder Singh alias Hinda and Bhupinder Singh alias Bhinda, who attempted to escape from Gurdaspur jail last year, were the mastermind of this violence. Taking advantage of Sunny's death, they instigated riots in jail premises. They wanted to escape from jail, however, claim the officials, the duo failed when they opened fire.S L Jakhar, deputy inspector general (DIG), prison, said, "Harinder and Bhupinder tried to escape from Gurdaspur jail last year. After that incident they were sent to Ludhiana Central Jail. A month ago, the duo was shifted to high security zone of Ludhiana jail. On Thursday, when another inmate of high security zone was being taken for hearing, Harinder and Bhupinder, along with four inmates, overpowered three guards deployed there.""They also broke open the CCTVs installed there and started creating ruckus. Following them, other members of high security zone also rushed out. The duo started instigating other inmates that Sunny Sood has been killed. Several more inmates joined them and started pelting stones and bricks at security personnel and caused riots."Shamsher Singh Boparai, jail superintendent, said, "Several inmates attempted to scale the walls to escape, some were pelting stones, some were bursting LPG cylinders. There could have been loss of lives and property if we had not opened fire."According to officials, four cops, including two deputy superintendent of police, Subhash Arora and Rajinder Singh, were going in a car when inmates started pelting stones. Before officials could react, a group of inmates put a cylinder under their car. The officials immediately rushed out of the car and had a narrow escape, as the car was completely burnt. The car was set on fire near an electricity pole, which also caught fire. This also interrupted electricity supply and then water supply, which was restored late last night.Counting of inmates started at 2.30pm on Thursday and continued till 9pm. After which the jail officials have ascertained that one inmate, Amandeep of Gobindgarh, lodged in jail for two theft cases, has managed to escape during the violence.DIG prison Jhakhar said that five self-loading rifles were used, four from the main door and one at the back side. In total, 183 rounds were fired.When some inmates tried to enter the jail kitchen and factory area, other inmates present there locked the doors. In factory, where there is a flour mill, sacks of wheat were kept at the main door to stop other inmates. Jail minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa announced an award of Rs 5,000 to each officers who took initiative to get situation under control, besides commendation certificates and promotion. He also announced special concessions to inmates who cooperated with jail staff and helped in bringing situation under control. The officials have withdrawn perks like extra snacks and such for the inmates of high security zone. The earthen oven built in their zone was also demolished on Thursday.
