Bihar: Newborn goes missing from hospital, furious relatives resort to violence

It is being alleged that the child was stolen by another woman, from the hospital. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The woman was brought to the hospital at 3.24 am on Saturday, June 29. She gave birth to the infant at around 9 am. The infant was allegedly stolen by another woman from the hospital. Outraged, the relatives of the woman resorted to violence.

Patna: Healthcare in Bihar has been put under scrutiny over the past few months owing to its poor services and inefficient management. Another example of medical negligence surfaced from a hospital in Bihar on Saturday, June 28. An infant has allegedly stolen from a hospital in Bihar.

A woman who had been brought to the Primary Health Centre in Islampur, Nalanda at around lost her newborn from the hospital after she gave birth. Furious relatives of the woman resorted to violence and pelted stones outside the hospital.

#WATCH Bihar: Relatives of a woman, who had come to Primary Health Centre in Islampur of Nalanda for delivery of her child last night, pelted stones at & vandalised the property after the child was allegedly stolen by another woman, from the hospital. pic.twitter.com/MDlSUmjNzl — ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

It is being alleged that the child was stolen by another woman, from the hospital. The video of angry relatives of the woman is doing rounds on social media. Men can be seen pelting stones at an ambulance that was parked outside the hospital.

Bihar: Relatives of a woman, who had come to Primary Health Centre in Islampur of Nalanda for delivery of her child last night, pelted stones at & vandalised the property after the child was allegedly stolen by another woman, from the hospital. pic.twitter.com/X5QV3zaj13 — ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

Vaibhav Chaudhary, SDO, Hilsa, Nalanda told news agency ANI that the police has brought the situation under control and that they are investigating the matter. Chaudhary added that the woman was brought to the hospital at around 3.24 am on Saturday and gave birth to the newborn at 9 am.

Newborn stolen from Mumbai's Nair Hospital

A similar incident came to light from Mumbai's BYL Nair Hospital in June where a newborn was stolen by a woman. The incident was caught on the CCTV camera installed in the hospital. The woman could be seen escaping from the hospital with the five-day-old baby. The baby was reunited with his family a day after the incident.

According to an investigation, the 37-year-old woman had been married twice and had two children from her first marriage. The custody of the children was with the first husband. After she escaped from the Nair Hospital, the woman got herself admitted to the VN Desai Hospital and told the staff that she had delivered the baby at home.

The accused said that she wanted to undergo a medical check-up. The medical report of the accused did not suggest that she had given birth. The doctors then informed the Vakola police who took the infant into custody and reunited the newborn with his family.
