Indian cinema on ground realities

Indian cinema on ground realities ‘Article 15’ View(s): View(s):

An Indian movie made based on one of the most compelling true stories in the recent history in India, rape and murder of three young girls in 2014, ‘Article 15’ is now being screened in theatres in Colombo and suburbs.

Different from most of the stereotyped Bollywood movies filled with glamour and colour, ‘Article 15’ is a thought provoking film on one of the most disturbing social realities, caste differences and rape of young girls. The film was selected to be screened as the opening film of the 10th edition of London Indian Film Festival.

Imported and distributed by Movie Works Private Limited, the film was released on June 28, simultaneously to the Indian sector. It is now being shown at Liberty Lite Kollupitiya and a number of other Lite theatres in Colombo and the suburbs.

Directed by Anubhav Sinha and produced by Zee Studios and Benaras Media Works, the film stars award winning actor Ayushmann Khurrana and others including Isha Talwar, Sayani Gupta, Kumud Mishra and Manoj Pahwa.

Written by Gaurav Solanki and Anubhav Sinha, the film title is based on Article 15 of the Indian Constitution, which prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. ‘Article 15’ takes inspiration from true life events, including 2014 Badaun gang rape allegations and 2016 Una flogging incident.

Ayushmann Khurrana, the protagonist, is playing the role of a police officer in the film. A young IPS officer’s new posting in rural India has him confronting caste disparities and uncomfortable truths in the face of a gruesome crime. When three girls go missing in the fictional village of Lalgaon, two of them are found dead and there is no trace of the third one. Where is she and who is responsible for this heinous act?

When Ayan Ranjan (Ayushmann Khurana), a city bred IPS officer is given charge of the Lalgaon Police Station in the heartland of India, he realises soon enough that he will have to tackle far more than meets the eye. Having studied in Delhi’s St. Stephens and lived in Europe prior to this, Ayan is clearly at odds with the mindsets that accost him right from the word go at Lalgaon.

Even as he is grappling with the strong presence of caste discrimination and societal inequalities looming over, he stumbles upon the news of three girls employed in a local factory who have gone missing for the last two days.
