Minor abducted, raped on her way back from school in Bihar's Chhapra

In their complaint, the family mentioned a man named Rana Pratap Singh (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Patna: A minor girl was allegedly abducted and raped in a moving car in Bihar's Chhapra district on Saturday, June 29. The alleged incident is said to have taken place within the limits of Bheldi police station. After raping the girl, the accused allegedly pushed her out of the vehicle.

Sub-inspector Shiv Nath Ram, Bheldi police station said that the survivor has been sent for a medical examination. The accused allegedly abandoned the survivor near Garkha village. Reportedly, the minor was returning from school in Jhaua Patti village when the incident took place.

Chhapra: A minor girl was allegedly gang-raped by four men after being abducted by them in a car when she was returning from school in Jhaua Patti village yesterday. Case registered. Police investigation underway, no arrests made yet. #Bihar pic.twitter.com/hJpBHiyYhk — ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

After she was thrown out of the vehicle, the survivor called her family from her mobile phone and narrated her ordeal to them. According to ANI's report, the survivor's family took her to the Derni police station and lodged a complaint.

In their complaint, the family mentioned a man named Rana Pratap Singh. Singh is a resident of Piraridih village. After the complaint was filed, a police team went to the area of the incident for investigation and another team conducted a raid at Singh's residence. Singh was not at home during the raid. Further investigation is underway. This is a developing story.

Gurugram minor raped at daycare centre

In another incident reported on the same day, a 4-year-old was allegedly raped at a daycare centre in Sector 7, Gurugram by a 14-year-old boy. The daycare centre is run by the accused's mother. The teenager has been booked under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

It was alleged that the accused raped the minor on multiple occasions. The survivor opened up to her mother when she was teaching her about 'good-touch and bad-touch'. The minor said that the accused used to ask her to remove her clothes and then used to sexually assault her. The parents of the survivor went to the Section 9A police station and lodged a complaint against the accused.

Shimla woman gang-raped in moving car

A similar incident came to light from Shimla in April where a girl was allegedly gang-raped in a moving car. The 19-year-old girl alleged that when she was on her way to Mall Road from Dhalli, a car blocked her way. The survivor alleged that a few men stepped out of the vehicle and dragged her into the car.

The survivor was allegedly sexually assaulted by the accused in the car. She filed a complaint through the Gudiya helpline. The 19-year-old was sent for a medical examination after an FIR was lodged. Reportedly, the police registered a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
