Tabrez Ansari, the cheer-leaders and a new India

Tabrez Ansari, the cheer-leaders and a new India

MARGINALIA

More than three years ago, an outstanding research scholar, Rohith Vemula, ended his life, leaving behind a letter with words like 'My birth is a fatal accident…' that continue to haunt many. "The value of a man was reduced to his immediate identity and nearest possibility. To a vote. To a number. To a thing. Never was a man treated as a mind. As a glorious thing made up of star dust. In every field, in studies, in streets, in politics, and in dying and living," he wrote and summed up India's caste, colour and race conscious society so aptly. Even more now, in 2019, as we stand face to face with events and policies that continue to guide the country into a realm of deeper prejudices based on deeper consciousness of the minutest identities.

Last week, a 24 year old man in Jharkhand was beaten to pulp, forced to chant "Jai Shri Ram" and "Jai Hanuman" repeatedly before he was thrown into jail without adequate health-care and finally succumbed to his injuries on the fourth day. A video, showing him being tied to a pole and being beaten with sticks by a mob amidst a huge cheering, laughing and jeering crowd, his hauntingly horrified expression as he is thrashed and forced to chant the religious incantation, has gone viral. After his 18-hour ordeal, the man was handed over to the police which unquestioningly registered a case against him without holding anybody responsible for the mauling of the man. The man was beaten up by the mob on the pretext of stealing a motor-cycle, a charge that his family and activists in his village maintain is false. For a moment, if one were to assume that this theft charge was an absolute truth, is the mob-justice sanctioned by the constitution or is it punishable under law? If one were also to assume that the man was beaten up, not over beef, love-jehad politics and not for his religious identity, but purely for the alleged theft, how do the forced religious chants square up? The man's name was Tabrez Ansari, which the mob made him blurt out as they beat him. Is the name insignificant or the prime motivating factor that allowed a set of fellow human beings to become self-proclaimed lords and masters and thrash him while many more fellow human beings looked on - either in sheer helplessness or in resplendent joy. The noisy cheering and crackle of laughter in the background suggests that the latter was the dominating theme.

Within days of this incident, a Muslim man on a train was attacked and thrown off a moving train. Soon after the BJP was voted to power for the second time with much bigger majority, several similar incidents of Muslims being attacked and hounded were reported. There is a definite pattern of a sharp increase and also of the mob-lynchings getting mainstreamed. One no longer needs to catch a Muslim, or perhaps a Dalit or any other minority with a cow or accuse him of love-jehad or terrorism. He can just be caught, as Rohith Vemula wrote, "by reducing him to his nearest identity".

The racial prejudice is fast expanding vertically and horizontally because of a government that stealthily and sometimes brazenly pursues this long-cherished project. While leaders of the ruling party are often found sharing dais with lynching-accused and a saffron-terror accused enters the parliament, the government is going all hammer and tongs against minorities with its National Register of Citizens project in the name of sifting out illegal immigrants, bull-dozing the rights of many who have lived here for decades, even centuries, only because they did not have requisite papers to prove their statehood. Indications are that the Assam project would be extended to other parts of the country by rulers who firmly believe that any Hindu in any part of the world is a natural citizen of India and the rest living here are simply "outsiders". The officially patronized pattern of exclusion is poisoning minds.

The communal prejudices are also penetrating deeper and spreading in all directions within the society and also evoking an increasing appetite for deep-rooted biases that can be used to legitimize violence. The level of brutality in the Tabrez Ansari video is haunting. How would his family cope with the loss and the memory of his video-graphed ordeal before he died - all for his accidental birth? Even more haunting is the ability of humans to laugh at the gory spectacle and be participants as witnesses and cheer-leaders as one human was hunted and mauled like a sport in a gladiator arena from ancient times. Equally shocking is the silence of the teeming majority of the educated class of the country who may not approve of such violence but are neither appalled by it. The incident is deemed as an aberration and passes by like a fleeting memory. "They were asking for it" and "Sad but serves them right" would be some of the phrases in their minds as the memory passes by. Sections of media talked about the issue and others treated it with disdain to focus on non-issues. The opposition made some whimpers but some may even tacitly approve of it to compete in this race for promoting racism, a sign one gets from the case of Pehlu Khan, victim mob lynching two years ago, who has been chargesheeted after his death for cow smuggling by the Congress government in power in Rajasthan. Silence and passivity is graduating into sheepish defence and finally celebration at a frightening speed.

Forget the multiple reasons the analysts offer to explain the BJP's impressive victory in recent elections. Narendra Modi, the man in lead, in whom the entire BJP campaign was vested, offered nothing in his election speeches but divisive politics and hatred. It is difficult to say with exact precision how many of the 48 percent people who voted for BJP were appealed by that discourse but the rest, whatever that percent bigger or smaller, were fine with it. The silence over deaths like Tabrez's, the normalization of such violence by deeming them as aberrations and any issue under the sun can be singled out given a communal spin to vilify the minorities, particularly Muslims, as happened in the recent incident of beating up of doctors by a dead patient's attendants, a phenomenon that is no doubt condemnable but almost a routine in over-crowded hospitals across the country. A patient alleging negligence, a doctor being roughed up or beaten up. Depending on identities, however, a patient-doctor issue and an issue of the country's starved health-care system can no longer just be that: It will turn into a Hindu-Muslim divide¸ "a Muslim perpetrator" and a "Hindu victim".

A new India is being built at an alarming speed, one that we may have no control over in due course of time.
