Violent Protests Against Article 15 Continue, Anubhav Sinha Asks ‘Will Somebody Do Anything’

After Mulk, Anubhav Sinha is back with another sensitive yet powerful tale of caste dynamics in India. The movie starring Ayushmann Khurrana in the lead role of a cop was released a couple of days ago, and since then it has been making headlines.

Especially for two reasons – for its references to Uttar Pradesh’s Badaun rape and murder case of two girls in 2014 and flogging of Dalit family by a group of self-proclaimed “gau rakshaks” in Gujarat’s Una in 2016.

Yeh le beta pic.twitter.com/IMHQVy0riP — PatRIOT DeshPreyMe (@randomaccesone) June 28, 2019

But even before the movie had released, Brahmins were protesting over the negative portrayal of the community in the film. Furthermore, Karni Sena also had a problem with the movie.

Who the FUCK are you??? I mean who the FUCK??? https://t.co/WASmj1YJZ3 — Anubhav Sinha (@anubhavsinha) June 28, 2019

After the movie has released, Brahmin outfit Antarrashtriya Brahmin Mahasangh gave the movie a green signal. On the other hand, Brahman Samaj of India moves Supreme Court to halt the release of the movie.

An open letter to all offended from my film's trailer #ARTICLE15 pic.twitter.com/LE8QTjpkLx — Anubhav Sinha (@anubhavsinha) June 26, 2019

While critics are applauding the hard-hitting drama, the hurdles are insurmountable for the makers, it seems.

Now, the screening of Article 15 was obstructed by police. Sharing the video, Anubhav Sinha wrote on Twitter, "Koi kuch karega? Koi patrakar? Koi rajneta? Koi adhikari? (Will somebody do anything? Any journalist? Some politician? An officer?)"

Also, the screening of the movie was stopped in Kanpur recently after a religious group created ruckus at Inox multiplex and Sapna Palace on Friday.

A cinema hall owner said that after Friday's trouble, all shows remained suspended on Saturday and the film will not be screened in Kanpur as things stand now. "The film started with almost full shows but we cannot risk damage to property by fringe mobs. The police has not shown any interest in giving us adequate security. We have informed the distributors and the film will not be screened in Kanpur," he told IANS.

Meanwhile, director Anubhav Sinha said that he was "tired of reasoning with the unreasonable". "They do not have one representation and how can we deal with different groups in different districts? How can only Brahmins in Kanpur be upset with the film which is running successfully at other centres? I am upset at the attitude of the district administration," he said.

The film is based on Article 15 of the Indian Constitution. Article 15 features Ayushmannn Khurrana as a police officer, with Sayani Gupta, Kumud Mishra, Isha Talwar, Mohammed Zeeshan Ayyub and Manoj Pahwa in key roles.
