Andhra Pradesh: Kidnapped minor reunited with family within 24 hours

A missing complaint was lodged by the 3-year-old's mother at the Anakapalle police station the day she went missing (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor went missing on Friday, June 28. The police rescued her on Saturday, June 29.

Vishakhapatnam: A minor who had been kidnapped from Anakpalle, Vishakhapatnam was rescued in 24 hours by the police. The incident took place on Friday, June 28 and the accused was arrested on Saturday, June 29. Following the arrest of the accused, the police rescued the minor and reunited her with her family.

A missing complaint was lodged by the 3-year-old's mother at the Anakapalle police station the day she went missing. The police scanned the CCTV footage of the area and rescued the minor. The minor has been taken to a hospital for treatment.

Visakhapatnam: Anakapalle Police yesterday rescued a 3-year-old girl who was abducted on June 28 & arrested the accused, with the help of CCTV footage. #AndhraPradesh pic.twitter.com/At3RbXLiWU — ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

Circle inspector of Anakapalle police station, Tahtarao told ANI, "We have identified the accused, Laxman Rao, after scanning the CCTV footage on Saturday morning. Rao was arrested on suspicion of kidnapping from the sidewalk of the Simhachalam hill temple."

Pune man rescued from kidnappers in one hour

A similar incident came to light from Pune in June where a man was rescued from kidnappers within an hour. The Pimpri Chinchwad police rescued 22-year-old Suraj Sanjay Koli and booked 11 people for kidnapping him. Five of the accused were identified as Aditya Kodge, Vaibhav Upade, Bala Lokhande, Supriya Avhad and Ganesh Puri.

According to the police, the kidnapping was a result of personal enmity between Koli and Puri. Puri allegedly contacted Koli through Supriya Avhad's Instagram account. While pretending to be Avhad, Puri allegedly asked Koli to meet her (Avhad) near Phase 3 of Hinjewadi.

When Koli reached the area, Puri and his allies allegedly attacked him and kidnapped him at gunpoint. After he learned about his friend's kidnapping, Koli's friend approached the Pimpri Chinchwad police and informed them about the incident.

The police launched a search operation as soon as they got the information. The police seized a country-made pistol from the accused and registered an FIR against them.

Mizoram: 11-year-old helps in rescuing minor from a kidnapper

The courage of an 11-year-old girl saved a minor from a kidnapper in Mizoram in June. The minor had allegedly been kidnapped by a woman for trafficking. Caroline Malsawmtluangi, the 11-year-old girl was playing near her residence in Zuangtui when an unknown girl joined her.

The next day, policemen showed a photograph to Caroline and asked her if she had seen the girl in the picture. Caroline recalled that the girl in the photograph was the one who had come to play with her the day before. The policemen then asked her to inform them if she sees her again.

Caroline went to the nearby areas and started searching for the minor on her own. When she finally found her, the accused, Zonunsangin Fanai tried to send her back. Caroline did not listen to her and when she sensed an opportunity, she lifted the minor on her back and rushed to her home.

The 11-year-old kept running even though the accused threatened to harm her by pelting stones. When Caroline reached home, her parents informed the police and the minor was rescued.
