Uttar Pradesh: Authorities suspend 3 police officers in connection with minor's assault in custody

She alleged that her son was beaten inside the police station. | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: Taking cognisance of a case of torture of a 14-year-old boy in the police custody, the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kalanidhi Naithani had suspended three police officers. The incident happened in Uttar Pradesh's Lucknow district.

Following the release of the medical reports of the minor, SSP Naithani suspended Telibagh police station in-charge Rajneesh Verma, Head Constable Dinesh Tripathi, Head Constable Sandeep Singh with immediate effect. Also, an official notice of departmental action has been served to Commanding Officer Cant Munshi Rajendra Patel for not taking the matter seriously.

The minor was apprehended on the suspicion of theft and was identified as Manish Gautam. News agency ANI reported, Gautam said he was beaten by a constable inside Telibagh police station and he was unaware of the constable's name who had beaten him. He added that an e-rickshaw was stolen after which the owner began torturing him saying that he should accept that he stole the e-rickshaw.

Lucknow: 14-yr-old boy apprehended on suspicion of theft allegedly tortured in police custody y'day; SP North, Sukirti Madhav, says, "a man had accused the boy of stealing his e-rickshaw that the latter used to drive for him. The case will become clear after medical tests" pic.twitter.com/aabi2OvCyT — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 29, 2019

He also alleged that the local police too forced him to confess that he stole the e-rickshaw. The victim further mentioned that since he denied accepting, the constable began beating him with stick on his legs and stood on his fingers. He claimed that there were station in charge and three other police officials present inside the police station while he was being beaten up.

Meanwhile, the victim's mother told ANI that on June 24, the e-rickshaw was stolen and three policemen came to their house and asked her son to come with them. She alleged that her son was beaten inside the police station.

Meanwhile, the Lucknow North Superintendent of Police (SP), Sukirti Madhav said, the case will become clear after medical tests of the boy which will clarify whether the victim is a minor or not. However, action will be taken against those who have hurt the victim.




