Delhi: Drunk man abuses neighbour, stabs his brother for objecting

It is being alleged that the neighbour, Sujeet was under the influence of alcohol (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Sujeet, the accused started abusing the deceased's brother, Sujinder. Shambhu raised an objection to Sujeet's language. Sujeet stabbed Shambhu and fled the spot. The police nabbed Sujeet when he was trying to flee to Bihar.

New Delhi: A man was allegedly stabbed in Delhi's Samaypur Badli on Saturday, June 29. The 27-year-old man was allegedly stabbed after he raised an objection to a man who was abusing his brother. The victim has been identified as Shambhu.

Shambhu had gone to his elder brother's house to attend the birthday party of his nephew when the incident took place. The elder brother was identified as Sujinder.

At around 10.30 pm, Sujinder's neighbour came to the house and started abusing him. It is being alleged that the neighbour, Sujeet was under the influence of alcohol.

When Shambhu raised an objection to Sujeet's language, the latter allegedly stabbed him with a knife and ran away. Shambhu was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment.

The police nabbed Shambhu on Sunday when he was trying to leave for Bihar. According to PTI's report, the knife used by Shambhu has also been recovered by the police.

Kerala man stabs wife after argument

A Kerala man allegedly stabbed his wife to death in March after the two had an argument. The deceased was identified as Rajani. The 43-year-old had been married to Sreekumar.

The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Rajani and Sreekumar allegedly had an argument over his alcoholism after which, the latter flew into a rage and stabbed her. The deceased had also taken the accused to several de-addiction centres against his will.

On the day of the incident, Rajani allegedly threatened the accused with a divorce, after which, he stabbed her on the neck and chest. Rajani's parents, Krishnan and Remadevi also suffered injuries in the incident.

Man stabs wife after argument over changing channel in Tamil Nadu

A man allegedly stabbed his wife after the two had an argument over changing the television channel. The incident took place in Ayothi Nagar, Tamil Nadu in March. The deceased was identified as Usha.

Reportedly, the two were watching television when Usha said that she wanted to watch something else. The accused, however, refused to change the channel and the two started arguing. The accused, Veeran started abusing his wife and pushed her on the floor. Usha hit a table and suffered injuries.

The accused then went to the kitchen and brought a knife. Veeran threatened to stab his wife with the knife. When Usha stayed resolute, the accused allegedly stabbed her on the chest, stomach and neck. The accused fled the spot following the incident. The police launched an investigation and arrested the accused soon after the incident. The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
