Rajasthan: Police rescue 'abducted' bride from a bus; one arrested

Police have sent the girl to women's shelter home in Kota. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kota: Police have arrested a man for allegedly abducting a 21-year-old newly-wed woman last week. The police have nabbed the man after the woman and the accused were travelling in a bus in Rajasthan's Bhilwara district on Sunday.

The victim's family alleged that a man named Monu alias Imran kidnapped the girl on June 25 after her wedding.

According to a report in PTI, the accused lived in the same locality as the girl in Kota town. "Meghwal and Imran were travelling to Jaipur in a state roadways bus when it was intercepted at a toll plaza on the Bhilwara-Jaipur highway near Bhilwara town, the report quoted Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP) Ghanshyam Verma as saying.

Police have sent the girl to women's shelter home in the city. According to police, the accused is being questioned over his alleged involvement in the case.

Meanwhile, the girl's father died on Saturday, with the family alleging that he died due to shock over the alleged kidnapping

"The victim Shobha Meghwal, her friend and her brother were returning from the Kota district court after submitting necessary documents for the marriage certificate on Tuesday. Imran met the three on the way near Vallabh Nagar and took them on his motorcycle to Landmark City area. Imran then took Meghwal away on the pretext of having a personal conversation with her and allegedly kidnapped her," stated a police complaint by the family.

Police have filed a case against the accused under the SC/ST Act and Sections 365 and 366 of the Indian Penal Code.

In another case, police rescued a 17-year-old girl from Rajasthan after she was allegedly abducted by two men on the pretext of marriage. The girl was kidnapped from Akot in Maharashtra's Akola district. The minor was also sexually exploited by the accused.

Police have arrested one of the accused, while another one, who is a minor, has been detained. The police launched the hunt to recover the girl after the victim's family lodged a missing person's complaint on June 16.
