Minor raped by two youths in UP's Bareilly; police probe on

Allegedly, the accused stuffed the survivor's mouth with a cloth to suppress her screams (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor had gone to the fields when the accused approached her. The accused stuffed a piece of cloth in the victim's mouth to suppress her screams and took turns to rape her. A farmer saw them and the accused escaped. The minor's father lodged a complaint with the police.

Bareilly: In an incident reported on June 30, a minor was allegedly raped by two men in Bareilly's Sambhal district. The accused and the 12-year-old are residents of the same village. The incident took place within the limits of the Gunnaur police station.

Station House Officer (SHO) Ravindra Pratap Singh said, "On the basis of a complaint filed by the girl's father, we have registered an FIR under IPC Section 376D (gang-rape) and provisions of POCSO Act. The girl was sent for a medical examination. Besides, a team has been formed to conduct raids to nab the accused youths."

The minor had gone to the fields when the accused allegedly raped her. Allegedly, the accused stuffed the survivor's mouth with a cloth to suppress her screams. The accused have been identified as Kallu and Adesh.

The incident came to light when a farmer saw the accused. According to Times of India's report, the youths escaped from the spot. The police have formed teams to arrest the accused. Further investigation is underway.

Video of man thrashing and molesting minor in UP goes viral

A similar incident came to light from Zafarabad, Jaunpur on Sunday, June 30 where a minor was brutally beaten and molested by a man. The video of the incident went viral on social media. The police said that the incident took place around three days ago.

The police said that a case was registered by them after the video surfaced. Jaunpur Superintendent of Police VK Mishra said, "A video has been made viral in which a boy is beating up and molesting a minor girl, we have taken cognizance of it and have registered a case. A team has been constituted to arrest the culprit. "

Minor gang-raped by two youths in Haryana's Kalka

A minor was allegedly raped by two youths in Panchkula's Kalka area in the month of June. The incident came to light after the medical examination of the minor stated that she was pregnant. The minor did not share the incident with her parents initially because the accused had threatened her with dire consequences.

The prime accused was arrested and was booked under relevant sections of the Protections of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The victim said that she had been raped by the accused on multiple occasions for over a month.
