Girl, eight, is raped 'by her teacher' at school in latest sex attack to shock India

An eight-year-old girl was left with bloodied clothes after she was allegedly raped by her teacher in an empty classroom in India.

The primary school teacher, 42, reportedly took the young girl into an empty room and sexually assaulted her in Andhra Pradesh in the Krishna district on Tuesday.

She then arrived home in tears, with blood on her clothes and injuries which reportedly required four stitches.

The girl was taken to hospital after she told her mother what happened. Here, doctors confirmed she had been sexually assaulted, NDTV reported.

An eight-year-old girl was left with blood on her clothes after she was allegedly raped by her teacher in an empty classroom (file photo)

Her parents did not initially report the attack to authorities as they feared their daughter would face repercussions.

But the eight-year-old's mother eventually filed a police report and a teacher has since been suspended.

'The accused has been suspended from service with immediate effect. A departmental inquiry into the incident has also been ordered,' education officer Rajya Lakshmi said.

This latest incident is just one in a series of sex attacks to have recently plagued India.

In July, a teenage girl was left fighting for her life after she was raped, doused with kerosene and set on fire in the Pakur district of eastern India's Jharkhand state.

Young girl was allegedly raped in Andhra Pradesh in the Krishna district of India on Tuesday

The teenager, 17, was left with 70 per cent burns after the brutal attack and a 19-year-old living in the same neighbourhood was arrested.

In the same state on the same day, a village chief was arrested over the gang-rape murder of a 16-year-old.

Dhanu Bhuiyan was the main suspect in the murder of the teenager, who was torched to death after being subjected to a sex attack in Chatra district.

Police said Bhuiyan became enraged after the local village council ordered him to do 100 sit-ups and pay a 50,000 rupee (£550) fine following the rape.

In July, a teenager was left fighting for life after she was raped, doused with kerosene and set on fire in the latest shocking sex attack in India. Police were later seen parading a suspect with his head covered (pictured)

Bhuiyan and his accomplices then allegedly attacked the girl's parents before setting their house on fire with the girl inside.

The local village chief, who was found hiding at a relative's house, was also among 15 people detained in the case while the victim's family were given special police protection.

Earlier in the year, five men held on suspicion of raping and murdering two teenage girls who were found hanging from a mango tree were told they would not be charged with any offences.

A village chief was arrested over the gang-rape murder of a 16-year-old in the same state and on the same day. Pictures have emerged of the building where the crime was carried out in Raja Kundra Village

Young cousins, Murti and Pushpa, aged 14 and 15, were found dead in the village of Katra in northern Uttar Pradesh state in May 2017.

Their killings provoked national outrage after it emerged that police in the village initially refused to investigate due to the girls' low-caste status.

Indian authorities faced renewed pressure to act over sexual assault after the recent gang rape and murder of an eight-year-old Muslim girl by a group of Hindus in Jammu and Kashmir state.

Amid mounting outrage, the government changed the law to allow execution for child rapists.
