Lucknow Police arrests Krishna Nagar resident for repeatedly raping minor relative

Police have arrested the accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: Police in the state capital of Uttar Pradesh have arrested a man for allegedly raping a minor girl multiple times over a period of time. The accused is a relative of the victim and both of them live in Krishna Nagar locality of Lucknow, said an official familiar with the investigation. Going by the latest reports, the man was arrested on the basis of a complaint by the victim's father.

While confirming that an investigation into the matter is underway, the concerned circle officer (CO) said that a case has been registered against the accused under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Police are yet to reveal the identity of the accused and his defence over the allegations levelled against him by the victim's parents who are the complainants in this case.

More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.

Lucknow: A minor girl was allegedly repeatedly raped by a relative over a period of time in Krishna Nagar, Lucknow. Circle Officer says, "Complaint was received from father of the victim, case registered under POCSO act, accused has been arrested. Further investigation underway." pic.twitter.com/sGDjZGNYQI — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 1, 2019

This appalling case has come to light less than 48 hours after parents of a 16-year-old girl in Uttar Pradesh's city of Sitapur claimed that their 16-year-old daughter was sedated and raped by four of her cousins accompanied by her teacher. The horrific crime which took place in Maholi thana area was recorded and the video was shared among family members on a WhatsApp group, revealed additional superintendent of police (ASP) Madhuvan Kumar.

An investigation into the matter revealed that the accused minors invited her to the staff room during recess and fed her sedative-laced food. They then raped her allegedly for excelling in studies. In her statement to the police, the minor girl seconded this theory and said that she was sexually assaulted simply because her cousins could not see her gathering praise owing to her exceptional academic performance. One of the accused in this regard was arrested by police on the basis of the complaint and a search is underway for the remaining accused at the time of this report.

In a similar incident which was reported from Sikriganj area of Gorakhpur in UP, a 45-year-old man was accused of raping his eight-year-old relative. Police reports had suggested that the accused came to the girl's house on the pretext of some work when he stuffed her mouth with a cloth and tied her legs and hands before raping her. The girl was found by her family on June 26 and rushed to a local hospital where she is currently undergoing treatment.
