Docs Got Talents! Doctors & their Kids Unleash Hidden Talents at IMA-Mluru ‘Doctor’s Day’ Celebration

Docs Got Talents! Doctors & their Kids Unleash Hidden Talents at IMA-Mluru ‘Doctor’s Day’ Celebration

Docs Got Talents! Doctors & their Kids Unleash Hidden Talents at Indian Medical Association (IMA)- Mangaluru ‘Doctor’s Day’ Celebration held at IMA Hall, Mangaluru

Mangaluru : Doctor’s Day 2019 is being celebrated for acknowledging services of doctors and their huge contribution to the medical advancement in India. This year the Doctor’s Day 2019 Theme is “Zero Tolerance To Violence Against Doctors and Clinical Establishment”, and Indian Medical Association announces the theme every year. The theme will raise awareness about the violence happening with the doctors across India. Recently, violence against doctors in different parts of India was making headlines. Keeping in mind the safety and security of doctors during their working hours this theme was announced. And locally here in Mangaluru, the Indian Medical Association-Mangaluru along with Association of Medical Consultants-Mangaluru; National Medicos, celebrated ‘Doctor’s Day 2019’ at IMA Hall, Hampankatta-Mangaluru on 30 June at 6 pm.

Prior to this programme, a Mangaluru Green Plantation Drive was held in the morning to observe Doctor’s Day by planting over 100 saplings near Bajal Road/Railway Bridge, Padil-Mangaluru. Before going further into this report, since the Doctor’s Day theme for 2019 is “Zero Tolerance To Violence Against Doctors and Clinical Establishment”, let me start with a joke pertaining to assault on doctors these days by Dr. Jagdish Chaturvedi from Bengaluru, a ENT Surgeon, Medical Device Innovator, Author and Stand-up Comedian, who during last night’s IMA evening function said, “Here is a advise for all you doctors here, next time a stranger enters your office and tries to attack/assault start reciting the National Anthem “Jana Gana Mana”, and the attacker will respect the anthem, and stand in attention, and rest is history”?. That was on lighter side of vein, before going further with the celebration report.

Prior to the formal function, a drawing and collage competition was held for the children of IMA members at 4 pm- and the formal function started at 6 pm. Following the IMA prayer by Dr K R Kamath, the president of IMA- Mangaluru Dr Sachidanand Rai delivered the welcome address. The programme was inaugurated by lighting of the lamp by chief guest Dr K V Devadiga- Founder president of IMA-Mangaluru and a senior Neurosurgeon, along with other dignitaries on the dais, namely Dr B Sachidananda Rai-President-IMA-Mangaluru; Dr Habeeb Rehman- President, IMA Trust; Dr Sandeep Rai- President AMC; Dr Geetha Doppa- President, IMA Sullia; Dr Ganesh- President, IMA Puttur; Dr Pradeep- President, IMA Bantwal; Dr Annayya Kulal- President Elect IMA-Mangaluru; Dr Sudhindra Rao- Secretary, IMA; Dr K R Kamath- Secretary IMA Trust; and Dr Vinay Kumar- Treasurer-IMA Mangaluru.

Dr Habeeb Rahman giving a brief description of Doctor’s Day and Dr B C Roy said, “National Doctors’ Day is celebrated on July 1 all across India to honour the legendary physician and the second Chief Minister of West Bengal, Dr. Bidhan Chandra Roy. Dr Roy was honoured with the country’s highest civilian award, Bharat Ratna on February 4, 1961. The celebration of the Doctors’ Day is an attempt to emphasize on the value of doctors in our lives and to offer them our respects by commemorating one of their greatest representatives. India has shown remarkable improvements in the medical field and July 1 pays a tribute to all the doctors who have made relentless efforts towards achieving this goal irrespective of the odds. It is celebrated to value doctors and their role in country’s development. National Doctors day in India is a big awareness campaign offering great opportunities to all to get aware about the roles, importance and responsibilities of the doctors as well as promote medical professionals to come closer and follow the responsibilities of their profession through dedication”.

On the occasion six senior doctors were felicitated for their enormous service to the community- they were Dr Yashwanth P R- General Practitioner at a Govt Hospital; Dr Shubhakar Bhandary- Surgeon; Dr Mohammed Ismail H- Physician; Dr Amritha Bhandary- Gynecologist; Dr Raveendra K- General & Internal Medicine; and Dr M M Sherief- General and Internal Medicine. After being felicitated, all six doctors in their acceptance speech thanked the young doctors of IMA for recognizing their service to the community and their efforts in the medical field, by graciously felicitating them. Also on the occasion, the IMA bulletin “Medilore” was released by Dr Devdas Rai- Surgeon A J Hospital and Dr K V Devadiga.

A special felicitation was done to a young and genius student/scientist Amogha Narayana of Alva’s English Medium School-Moodbidri, (son of Dr Rajaram and Dr Sudha of Puttur and IMA members), for his project on “Evaluation of Novel Eco-Friendly Bio-Weedicide prepared from kokum fruit extract (Garnia Indica) and soap nut. ( A special article on Amogha will appear in Mangalorean.com during this week, on his achievements). Winners in the children drawing and collage competitions were presented with prizes by the chief guest. A two-minute silence was observed to pay respect to the departed soul of Dr Rajesh Bhat, who died of heart attack during a badminton competition recently.

In his inaugural address Dr K V Devadiga said, “Today the doctors profession is not a safe one. We survived all these years without any attacks from the kith and kin of the patients. Time has change, where doctors are assaulted or abused badly. The recent attack on a young doctor was in Kolkota, and that attack brought all doctors in the country together to fight for justice. The government should provide security to doctors, if not the doctors job is in risk. Due to the recent attacks on doctors, parents are reluctant to send their children into medical field. In order for doctors to do their duties with care and dedication and without fear, govt should bring a strict laws to severely punish those who attack doctors and all those in health care field”.

As part of the talents show, doctors and their children unleashed their hidden talents in the form of singing, dancing and magic show. The vote of thanks was proposed by Dr Dr Vinay Kumar- the treasurer of IMA Mangaluru, and the entire proceedings of the celebration was compered by Dr Raghavendra U- the Joint secretary of IMA-Mangaluru and Dr Sudhindra Rao- Secretary of IMA-Mangaluru. The function came to an end with a stand-up comedy by Dr. Jagdish Chaturvedi from Bengaluru, a ENT Surgeon, Medical Device Innovator, Author and Stand-up Comedian, who took the audience into a world of laughter through his witty punchlines, some of them hinting at the doctors. Frankly speaking, “This Doctor/Stand-Up Comic’s Life-Saving Devices Are No Laughing Matter” ?
