Delhi: Man facing 30 years in jail on rape and kidnapping charges set free by high court

The judge punched many holes in the woman's story. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Delhi High Court raps police and trail court for gaping holes Court says woman's story can't be believed Accused has already spent 5 years in jail

New Delhi: In a major verdict, the Delhi High Court has acquitted a man sentenced to 30 years in prison for allegedly kidnapping and raping a married woman. The court found no evidence of forcible sexual intercourse and set the man free.

The man was convicted on charges of rape by a lower court in 2014. The court also rejected woman's contention that she was kidnapped by the accused and raped repeatedly for nine months in a flat.

According to a report in Times of India, the court in its judgment said that it might be a case consensual sexual relations given the fact that arrears of the rent for the flat where she stayed was paid by her husband.

The court also said that even the husband of the woman did not file a complaint with the police even after she was kidnapped from a moving train in 2012.

The court also expressed its surprise that during her alleged confinement, the woman went to the market along with the accused to buy a Television set of her choice and even visited a doctor for some unknown ailment.

Justice C Hari Shankar in its judgment also rapped the police and the trial court for not filling the obvious gaps in the woman's complaint which led to the man spending five years in jail on flimsy charges.

The court in its verdict observed, "The allegations of the woman being raped for over nine months between June 15, 2012 to March 22, 2013 can not be believed."

The judge punched many holes in the woman's story and expressed surprise as to how she was kidnapped by the accused from an overcrowded general class compartment of a train between Kanpur and Raebareli.

The court also said it is also surprising that the woman was made unconscious by the accused in the train's toilet with so many people outside and managed to transport her to his house in Delhi and locked her in a room.

The court said many things remain unexplained in the case and contrary to the woman's version. The high court bench reversed the trial court's verdict and acquitted the man.
