Uttar Pradesh: Dial 100 team saves newlywed from being burnt

BAREILLY: A Dial 100 team rescued a 21-year-old newlywed woman at Salaimpur village in Sambhal district, who was about to be set on fire by her husband and in-laws. The latter had poured kerosene over her when the team intervened and saved her.In her police complaint, the woman said she was married on April 4 this year and soon after her marriage, her in-laws started harassing her physically as well as mentally.Narrating her ordeal to police, the woman claimed, “I was repeatedly raped by my brother-in-law, father-in-law and another of their close relative after the marriage. They threatened to kill me if I dared to open my month. In addition, my husband threatened to kill me if my father did not give him a car.”She went on to add, “My father had given Rs 3 lakh cash and two motorcycles at the time of my marriage as wedding gifts. I somehow managed to record on my mobile phone threats issued by my husband and in-laws.”Her father could not fulfill her husband’s dowry demands, she said. A few years ago, she said, her mother had succumbed to cancer.“On June 27, I was brutally beaten up by my husband, his brother, father and sister. They had snatched my mobile phone. On Sunday evening, they poured kerosene on me and were about to set me afire when I managed to run for cover and locked myself in my room. Then, I informed police using my other mobile phone,” she continued. All the accused managed to flee the scene before the police arrived.Police brought the woman to Asmauli police station, where her father was called. An FIR under IPC section 498A (dowry harassment), section 376 (rape) and section 307 (attempt to murder) has been registered against six people, including the woman’s husband, his two brothers, sister and brother-in-law.Ravindra Kumar, SHO of Asmauli police station, said that on Monday, the woman’s father-in-law and another relative who had allegedly raped her were arrested and sent to jail.“Rape survivor has been sent hospital for a medical examination. After registering an FIR, we have arrested two persons. We are conducting raids to nab the other accused who are still on the run,” the SHO added.
