Entry & Exit points in Meghalaya

Editor,

The KSU has repeatedly demanded for immediate construction and completion of the Entry and Exit points in Meghalaya. It is learnt that as many as 41 Entry and Exit points will be constructed in various points in the state. This will take a lot of time and in fact it will take many years and incur huge expenditure which the state can ill afford. Moreover, what purpose will these points serve? These E&E points are ill conceived and will in no way help in checking Influx. In fact these points will serve as money minting rackets for the government and others manning the check points. In fact introduction of the Inner Line Permit (ILP) will be more useful and effective than putting in place E&E points and the cost for introduction of ILP is many times cheaper. However, the ILP is not a panacea for influx as this is difficult to tackle. Even in those states where ILP was introduced, influx cannot be completely contained. Hence, in spite of some setbacks it is advisable that the Government should put on hold the introduction of E&E points and in its place bring in ILP.

Yours etc.,

Philip Marwein,

Via-email

Politicians don’t change ideologies

Editor,

Apropos “Saffron cadres little care for PM’s warning”, by Arun Srivastava, (ST June 29, 2019), I believe that the writer was greatly misled by the confession of the Prime Minister that he has changed after winning a thumping victory. Changing an ideology which is firmly embedded is not only easy but practically impossible for it is embedded in our DNA. Now, that the exclusion zone Bay of Bengal is free from ASAT debris, as India Today has reported that debris which is meant to come to earth and most likely land at the Bay of Bengal would now remain in space near the International space station, the excursionists would have a fairly good time. Hence we cannot trust politicians. They shake hands with you today and tomorrow they shake your confidence and may shock you till you are dumbfounded.

Yours etc.

Khyriem,

Via email

Kerala keeps BJP at bay

Editor,

After the landslide victory of the BJP in the recent general elections, there is an inexorable exodus from different national and regional parties to jump on the bandwagon of the BJP. Exodus from N. Chandrababu Naidu-led TDP continues as three of its leaders from Telangana joined the BJP on Thursday. In Kerala, AP Abdullakutty, who was a CPI(M) MP and former Congress MLA joined the BJP giving impetus to the otherwise depressed BJP in the state following its dismal performance in the recent general election.

In West Bengal massive exodus from TMC and other parties is continuing as the BJP stands to gain more and more in the coming days. But the million dollar question is what has the BJP done to attract so many leaders to its fold? As everyone knows, BJP was a run-of -the -mill party and had nothing to boast about for a long time. But with Narendra Modi taking its rein, the party started shaking off its jinxes and victory started smiling on it.

Yes, Modi is the real mascot of the party, and he has taken and promoted the party to every nook and corner of India like the Congress party of yore. If he continues to provide an exemplary dispensation, more of India will undoubtedly join his party. But the lid of mystery is still kept closed as to why the Keralites regard the BJP as a pariah. It may be recalled that while a lion’s share of states was captured by the Modi magic, Kerala was not ready to swim with the saffron current. Why? The party must introspect and find the solution to break into the fortress of Kerala. If Modi can come back to the Prime Ministerial seat for the second time with good workable strategies, he should also be able to read the minds of the Keralites and come to them with new ideas to woo them to the BJP.

Yours etc.,

TK Nandanan,

Kochi – 15
