‘Strict action against policemen found guilty of custodial torture’: Kerala CM

‘Strict action against policemen found guilty of custodial torture’: Kerala CM

The Opposition walked out of the Assembly session in protest against the government’s refusal to order a judicial inquiry into the custodial death of Rajkumar.

news Custodial Death

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Monday stated that policemen who are involved in custodial torture or death will not remain in the force and will be subjected to strict action, if proven guilty. The CM was speaking during an Assembly session regarding the custodial torture and death of 49-year-old Rajkumar at Nedukandam in Kerala's Idukki district.

According to a report by Deccan Chronicle, Pinarayi Vijayan was quoted to have said that “the government will not protect anyone who kills or assaults people in custody. Such people will naturally be out of service.” He went on to add that such criminal behaviour from the police is out of service. Pinarayi Vijayan was responding to an adjournment notice given by the Opposition regarding the death of Rajkumar, a financier who died on June 21.

The deceased, Rajkumar, was arrested by the Nedumkandam police on June 16 in a loan fraud case. According to the police, Rajkumar had cheated 34 self-help groups (SHGs) after taking money from them.

‘Only judicial probe can bring out truth’: Opposition

The ruling Left Democratic Front (LDF) government, led by Pinarayi Vijayan, has been facing the ire of the Opposition after the death of Rajkumar. Following the state government’s refusal to order a judicial inquiry into the custodial death of Rajkumar, members of the Opposition walked out of the Assembly on Monday to mark their protest. This comes after the Kerala CM assured that strict action would be taken against the guilty officials.

Rejecting the Opposition’s demand to suspend the proceedings in the Assembly to discuss the issue, the Kerala CM stated that the probe will be completed in a time-bound manner. This forced the Opposition to walk out in protest.

As per a report by the Times of India, Congress MLA VD Satheesan said that Pinarayai Vijayan was pleading guilty by accepting the fact that Rajkumar was a victim of custodial torture. He went on to add that the police will not do justice in investigating this case.

Opposition leader Ramesh Chennithala also voiced out the same concern and said that the police probe against police officials will turn out to be a farce. “Only a judicial investigation can bring out the truth,” he said.
