Family's despair for imprisoned Jagtar 600 days after his incarceration

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest top news stories sent straight to your inbox with our daily newsletter

A Dumbarton prisoner’s family have told of their despair on the 600th day of his incarceration amid claims the Foreign Office have failed to support him.

Jagtar Singh Johal, who lived in Oxhill Road, has been held in an Indian jail since November 2017 following his wedding in the Punjab region.

The 32-year-old, known as Jaggi, denies involvement in the assassination of right-wing Hindu figures but after more than 18 months no conviction has been made and no independent investigation has been held over allegations that he was tortured in custody.

His wife Mandip Kaur and brother Gurpreet hit out at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), claiming they have failed to apply any political or diplomatic pressure which chiefs deny.

Gurpreet Singh Johal said: “Our family is beyond frustrated and angry with the total lack of diplomatic support and absence of political leadership regarding the unlawful and arbitrary detention of a UK citizen.

“It is clear that whilst the present and former foreign secretaries battle it out to win the Conservative party leadership, the lives of British citizens that they have both repeatedly failed are put more at risk.

“My brother’s life is at risk.

“He is being kept in inhumane and degrading conditions for a crime he did not commit.

“The way his case has been handled is outrageous and the UK should feel ashamed.”

Mrs Kaur added: “Despite the Foreign Secretary’s reassurances, it is clear to me that he has not actually done anything for my husband.

“Mr Hunt appears to be more focused about becoming the Prime Minister.

“He confirmed in the last meeting I had with him that Mark Field was the “best man” for the my husband’s case but now that he has been suspended, Mr Hunt should intervene himself and have my husband released.”

Their comments follow a meeting they had with Jeremy Hunt in April, which, at the time, they said was positive and encouraging.

Earlier this month, the Supreme Court agreed to transfer Jagtar from Punjab to maximum security Tihar jail in Delhi.

His family say the judge gave Jagtar’s defence team only 30 seconds to make their case and he is now 250 miles away from his wife and legal team.

They say the FCO has raised no objections to this, despite requests from the family and his legal team.

They also claim Dominic Asquith, the British High Commissioner in Delhi, who was in the UK last month, has refused to meet them.

The Sikh Federation, which is campaigning on behalf of the family, also say the FCO admitted Jagtar could be detained for several years and privately informed his family and MP, Martin Docherty-Hughes, that he will not get a fair trial.

Responding to a statement from the Sikh Federation, a spokesman for FCO said: “We do not recognise the account provided by the Sikh Federation as an accurate reflection of the assistance provided to Mr Johal and his family during his detention in India.

“Our staff visit him regularly, and raise concerns with the government of India about his case, including allegations of torture and mistreatment and his right to a fair trial.”

He added:“The Prime Minister has raised his case with Prime Minister Modi, and the Foreign Secretary and Minister for Asia have met his family and MP to discuss his case.”



For more news from West Dunbartonshire click here
