This Hand Pump In Lucknow Is Named 'Anarkali Hand Pump' Because It's Half Buried In A Wall!

There are unusual places in India with weird names like there is a ‘Visa Temple’ in Hyderabad which fulfills your wish of getting a visa on your passport, a ‘Whiskey Devi’ in Ujjain where devotees offer liquor to the deity.

In the list of weird names, this hand pump has also been added now. A hand pump in a residential housing society in Lucknow has gone viral on social media for a very peculiar reason - its name! Unlike the other hand pumps that serve water to thousands of people, this one is half buried inside a boundary wall and has a ‘historic’ name too.

Locals have named the handpump ‘Anarkali’ which is attached to the boundary wall of the Housing and Development Board Complex. "This land belongs to the housing development. Whey they built the boundary wall, they built it over the hand pump. Now, half the hand pump is in the wall and the other half is out. The construction workers didn't see it," Deepu, a local resident, told ANI.

ANI

Interestingly, the boundary wall of the housing development board was built exactly where the hand pump was situated. Instead of removing the wall, workers decided to build a wall above the hand pump.

The locals told ANI that they named handpump ‘Anarkali Pump’ as it reminded them of the Anarkali also known as Nadira Begum, who was a courtesan from Lahore and was buried alive in a wall by Mughal emperor Akbar because of her illicit relationship with the prince Salim.

Actress Madhubala played the role of Anarkali in the 1960 Bollywood film Mughal-E-Azam. However, scholars have debated the authenticity of Anarkali’s existence and story over the years.

But are you sure this hand pump has water? The country is struggling with water crisis and it has become so severe that people are not even getting water for their daily needs.

While most of Bundelkhand is struggling with water crisis, this village in the drought-hit Banda district of Uttar Pradesh has gone back to traditional conservation techniques to revive its water bodies.

While villages in that area are reeling under severe crisis, Jakhni village which is 20 km away from Banda has managed to find its way out of this. Popularly known as ‘Galgram’ (water village) has its own ponds, wells and other water bodies brimming with water.

INDIAN WATER PORTAL

Eight years ago, the residents of this village were facing water shortage, this is when they decided to adopt traditional techniques and revived the ponds, wells.

The rate at which we are using or in fact, misusing water, we are going to run out of it very soon. And, then what? How do we plan to survive?
