Kota: Three men stab youth after he fails to repay loan of Rs 500

At around 9 pm on Monday, Kalu went to the 22-year-old's stall and asked him for the money (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Kota: A loan of Rs 500 turned out to be fatal for a 22-year-old man from Rajasthan's Kota district. The victim, Banti Bairwa was admitted to SRG Hospital in Jhalawar on Monday night and succumbed to his injuries on Tuesday, July 2. Bairwa had a stall of household items. The accused have not been arrested yet.

The prime accused has been identified as Ramesh Bairwa. Bairwa's sons Kalu, Pankaj and Golu also attacked the deceased. The deceased and the accused hail from Satalkhedi village.

Station House Officer (SHO) Kaithun police station, Mohan Singh said that the deceased had allegedly borrowed Rs 500 from Kalu over a year ago. Singh added that the 22-year-old did not return the money even though Kalu constantly demanded it back.

At around 9 pm on Monday, Kalu went to the 22-year-old's stall and asked him for the money. This led to a fight between the two after which, Golu, Pankaj and Bairwa also started thrashing the youth.

According to PTI's report, one of the accused allegedly stabbed the 22-year-old. Following this, the youth was taken to Jhalawar hospital where he died under treatment. The body has been handed over to the deceased's family.

Bengaluru woman tied to pole for not repaying loan

In an incident reported on June 14, a woman was tied to a pole in Bengaluru's Kodigehalli district for not repaying a loan. The video of the woman tied to a pole was also uploaded on social media. In the video, the woman could be seen confined to the pole while locals stood there as silent spectators. The police arrested seven people in relation to the incident.

Delhi man shot dead for not repaying loan

A similar incident surfaced from the national capital in January where a man was allegedly shot dead after he failed to repay a loan. Shripal, the deceased had allegedly borrowed Rs 12 lakh from the accused. The accused were identified as Mangesh and Dharmendra. An investigation revealed that the accused resorted to shooting Shripal after he failed to repay the loan.

Mumbai man kills friend for not repaying loan

In January this year, a man allegedly chopped off his friend's body after he did not repay Rs 1 lakh that he had taken from the former. The incident came to light when chopped body parts of a human were found in a septic tank in Mumbai's Virar.

After the fingers of a person were found in the tank, the police started checking the empty flats in the building. When the police found substantial evidence in one of the flats, they called the owner. The 42-year-old man allegedly confessed to committing the crime during interrogation.
