Violence in Jaipur over rape of 7-year-old girl, 160 vehicles torched

Violence erupted in Jaipur over the rape of a seven-year-old girl. The protesters torched 160 vehicles. They are demanding the accused to be arrested and punished.



Police force has been deployed for maintaining law and order in the city. The Internet has also been suspended in several areas.

Commissioner of police, Jaipur Anand Shrivastava told India Today TV that the situation is under control. He appealed to the people to not believe rumours. "We hope to crack the case soon,'' he said.

The Rajasthan government also gave a compensation of Rs 5 lakh to the family of the seven-year-old girl.

Congress leader Mahesh Joshi and party MLA Amin Kagzi met the family members and handed a cheque of Rs 5 lakh to the victim's father.

They also assured the family of proper action in the matter.

District collector Jagroop Singh Yadav said the compensation was sanctioned from the chief minister's relief fund.

The seven-year-old girl was allegedly abducted and raped by an unknown person in Shastri Nagar area in Jaipur, police said on Tuesday.



The girl was found near her house on Monday night and was taken to a local hospital where the doctors referred her to JK Lone hospital. Her condition is stated to be stable, they said.



"The girl was abducted by a motorcycle-borne man and taken to a nearby place where she was raped," police said.



After the incident came to light, a large number of people assembled outside the Kanwatia hospital, where the girl was initially taken, following which additional policemen were deployed in the area to maintain law and order.



"We have deployed additional policemen in the area to maintain law and order. The situation is under control and efforts are being made to arrest the accused," DCP North Manoj Kumar said.



State Transport Minister Pratap Singh Khachariawas visited the JK Lone Hospital on Tuesday and inquired about the girl's health.



"This is a heinous crime... The culprit should be hanged. The police are making all efforts to nab the accused...," he said.

(With inputs from Rohit Parihar)

Also read: Jealousy drives cousins to rape girl in UP school

ALSO WATCH| In The Heart Of Darkness: Child rape statistics in India
