Teen pregnancy row rocks House

Bhubaneswar: The State Assembly Tuesday witnessed uproar over the issue of teenage pregnancy of tribal students studying at a government hostel in the state capital. Opposition parties fired salvos against the government, citing a series of such unfortunate incidents in the state.

Raking up the issue during Zero Hour, legislative party leader of the Congress Narasingha Mishra cited a media report on the issue. In a scathing attack on treasury benches, Mishra castigated the government for failing to put a stop to such atrocities against tribal teenagers at government hostels.

“If such an incident had occurred in Delhi or Mumbai it could have spread nation-wise outrage. The incident speaks volumes about the reality of the slogan of welfare and respect of women that the ruling party speaks of. Abortions, rapes and harassment of teenagers at government hostels in the state continue unabated now,” Mishra told the house.

Mishra also complained how the families of victims have been allegedly harassed by the authorities. He expressed surprise that how four teenage pregnancy cases found during routine medical examinations ended up with just one in the course of time.

Other opposition parties also fired salvos at the government for the deteriorating law and order situation in the state. Speaking on behalf of the BJP, its leader Bishnu Charan Sethi attacked Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik for the fiasco.

“If the credit for all the good work could go to one man. Why he should not be blamed for such bad things happening in the state. The ruling party bursts into arrogance. Odisha has some of the worst crime indicators nationally,” Sethi said. He wondered how four teenage pregnancy cases were reduced to one within days and alleged that the government is interfering in the matter.

While the opposition demanded an independent inquiry onto the case, Speaker Surya Narayan Patro said, “I direct the government to take note of media reports in this regard and make a statement on the issue.”
