Fact Check: No, this woman with a kid was not thrashed by police in UP

No, this woman with a kid was not thrashed by police in UP

Two pictures of a woman smeared in blood and standing on a street next to policemen have gone viral on Facebook with the claim that she was brutally beaten up by cops in UP.

India Today’s Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be misleading.

The claim

On June 25, Facebook page Jagat Express posted two photos showing a woman with a blood-smeared face and claimed in Hindi, This is Modi-Yogi’s slogan of Beti Bachao. What would you say about police torture on our daughters? The same police who are brutally thrashing up our daughters. Modi-Yogi shame shame.

The post was shared by scores of Facebook users.

In one of the images, two policemen can be seen standing next to the woman, and in the other image, three cops can be seen beside her. In one picture, the woman is seen pointing towards something that cannot be seen in the frame, while in both photos, a small girl standing next to her is seen crying.

The archive version of the post is here.

The actual incident

India Today did a reverse search of the photos and found that they are from 2016. We found several media reports as well which were published on December 22, 2016. According to these reports, two men groped a woman in a crowded marketplace and then beat her up when she resisted.

The incident took place in Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh. NDTV.com reports, The mother of two was beaten mercilessly, allegedly after she lashed out at two men for groping her when she asked for directions. The incident took place on Monday at a town in Mainpuri, around 200 km from Lucknow.

Several other news media also reported the incident.

A video of the incident was uploaded by several TV channels on YouTube.

Therefore, we can say that there is no truth in the claim that the woman was beaten up by police. After the video went viral, the two attackers were arrested.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Woman beaten up by police in Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh. Conclusion The woman was not beaten up by police but by two men. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
