Violence as a tool of justice delivery

Vikash Narain Rai

Vikash Narain Rai

Former Director, National Police Academy, Hyderabad

MOB violence carrying political message has started mirroring the State violence. Recently, the Delhi Police attacked a middle-aged Sikh driver of a three-wheeler taxi in full public view over 'payment' dispute in the National Capital. Same week, the Eastern state of Jharkhand witnessed the latest occurrence of mob lynching of one Tabrez Ansari, a Muslim youth apprehended in the act of stealing, amidst the forced chanting of 'Jai Shri Ram' and 'Jai Hanuman' by him, thus once again confirming an inevitable build-up around politically tinted religious logo. The periodical crowd killings with political overtones have seeped into the profiling of the state, quite like the long patronised police violence. Both patterns follow a common characteristic feature of the Indian state, ie impunity.

The Delhi Police were alarmed by the fury of the resultant community protests but only to the extent to order an internal enquiry against three suspended policemen, a time-tested routine in order to settle down in the old groove. Tabrez was kept tied to an electric pole for hours with no police intervention; he was brutally beaten and the sequence was video-graphed for propaganda purposes. The injured was escorted to the police station by the same mob, where a criminal case was registered against Tabrez only, before producing him to the jurisdiction of a magistrate and transporting him to the hospital for medical attention. The magistrate was legally bound to enquire into the circumstances of his injuries but did not. Tabrez succumbed after four days.

Earlier instances have shown that in the absence of a deterrent penal law to effectively deal with the phenomenon of mob justice, the jurisprudential void could not be filled later by invoking the writ jurisdiction of higher constitutional courts. In another much-publicised case of lynching of members of Muslim community in Jharkhand itself, the trial court had swiftly sentenced the culprits to life imprisonment.

However, the intimidatory impact was negated as they were set free on bail pending disposal of their appeal, and a junior minister in the Modi cabinet facilitated them under full media glare. In a UP case (Hapur, June, 2018), the gory communal killing with Hindutva overtones was deliberately registered by the police of the BJP-governed state as a road accident, facing eventually intervention by the Supreme Court, leading to further investigation under proper penal sections of the law, but the process has lingered on.

The violence of 'mob justice' is not new to the Indian society. Nor the issues permeating the violent 'police justice'. Their prevalence in popular perception as a tool of justice delivery in social, criminal and communal practices is too well known to the Indian legal system, which has often failed to impose salutary deterrence. While the concern for justice has normally remained at the root of country's criminal justice system, the mob justice and the police justice get their nourishment from a turf that would not support emphatic channelisation of 'access to justice' for targeted sections. In this scenario, the brazen advent of violent mobs dispensing 'political' justice assumes an unfathomable dimension; it has actually left the stakeholders clueless, most tragically.

A democratic society does not deserve a situation where law would be a tool of violence and not justice. The Constitution was consciously drafted to a fault, safeguarding against state violence by those who had closely encountered the repressive British Raj policing. Now, it is vulnerable to assaults in towns and villages and needs to be defended there. The Delhi episode presented a regular scenario the law enforcement machinery enacted against the very people it was supposed to defend, and the Jharkhand one unveiled a picture, again not too uncommon, of a typical indulgence of the police in the denial of access to justice to the victim.

In the remedial context, one debate in jurisprudential academics is to prioritise between institutional reforms and state accountability. The Prime Minister seemed to be addressing a political dilemma only when he, after a long prodding, chose to condemn the Tabrez lynching in Parliament but preferred to sidestep the issue of accountability of his party-run state government. The crux is that the strong expression of justice has not been matched by the required access to justice mechanism.

The violence in the state set-up hits the society consistently; and the usual apathy hidden under many social, administrative and political layers can cause havoc, irrespective of communal politics too. A suppressed gang-rape, for instance, would prove to be as much devastating in perpetuating violent submission of the target section in particular and society in general, as any publicised mob lynching with political overtones. These days the CAW (crime against women) tops any law and order monitoring chart and yet the 'one stop crisis centres', the most showcased vehicle of 'access to justice' for CAW victims, are proving of little value to them. It is the nature of the state playing a key role here, even though funds are overflowing via the Nirbhaya coffers.

This June, I met a minor victim of gang-rape in a theatre therapy workshop at a far-flung makeshift shelter home within a renowned library premises in an eastern UP village. Awaiting filing of the chargesheet against the named culprits, she had already undertaken half a dozen journeys to panchayats, police offices, hospitals, courts, dharna sites and, ironically, the officially designated one-stop crisis centre for the area. That is the 'State' for her!

Any amount of chanting of 'one-stop' access to justice is a meaningless sound. The case had a political mix also. She belonged to the weak Chamar community and the culprits came from the powerful Muslim landlord families of her village. It was March 2019 and the SP (backed by Muslims) and BSP (backed by Chamar community) had entered into an electoral alliance for coming Lok Sabha elections. However, the Muslim Sarpanch, even though accountable under POCSO Act, pressured against approaching police and to go for a monetary settlement to preserve family honour. The political alliance kept mum. The police too watched from a distance before she was lodged in the library by a public-spirited initiative; and only aggressive protests forced the crime to be registered after a gap of one month.

Not only is the violence multi-layered, it is also well entrenched in the state set-up as a crooked tool of justice delivery. What the unleashing of political mobs on this scenario must underline is the urgency to look at the structure of the state and not just limiting to questioning the legal treatment meted out in the context of individual violations.
