Delhi: Man strangles his two wives after they refused to divorce him

Alam's first marriage turned bitter after he married his second wife. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Alam married second time despite objections from his first wife Accused managed to convince Zabeena to kill his first wife Later Zabeena was also strangled to death

New Delhi: Upset with his two wives for not divorcing him, a Bihar resident living in Delhi strangled the two and fled with his minor son. The incident occurred on June 26 in Southeast Delhi's Jaitpur area.

The accused has been identified as Jamshed Alam, who had his first marriage when he was just 18 in the year 2000. However, in 2009 Jamshed started liking another woman and married her despite objections from his first wife Ismat Parveen.

Alam's first marriage turned bitter after he married his second wife Zabeena, who also started living with him at his home in Bihar's Araria.

According to a report in Times of India, Alam migrated to New Delhi in 2016 in search of a better life and started working as a mason at construction sites in Noida and Delhi. Alam convinced both his wives to co-exist peacefully and shifted to Delhi with both of them. He took home on rent in Jaitpur area and started to live his two wives and a minor son from the first wife.

After shifting to Delhi, things became difficult for Alam as his income started to shrink. His wives started fighting with him, especially over financial matters. However, the accused managed to find odd jobs, but it was barely enough to feed the family. There were regular fights between Alam and his wives over household finances prompting him to seek a divorce from both of them in 2018.

However, the two wives rejected his divorce demand and it was when Alam decided to kill his spouses. The report suggested that Alam watched various crime videos and read newspaper reports before getting rid of his spouses.

According to the report, the accused managed to convince his second wife Zabeena to kill Ismat Parveen. After the dinner on the night of June 26, a fight ensued between Alam and his first wife in which the accused strangled her with a chunni. Later, he also caught Zabeena unawares and strangled her too and fled the spot with his son.

The next day neighbours called PCR complaining of foul smell from the house. A police team led by DCP (southeast) Chinmoy Biswal, reached the spot and broke open the door and found the two bodies. A special team was formed to probe the matter.

During the course of the investigation, police scanned the CCTV footage in the area and found Alam fleeing the house with a heavy bag and his minor son. Police mounted surveillance and Alam was arrested when he tried to meet one of his relatives in Bara Hindu Rao.
