Actress says Aditya Pancholi spiked her drink, got forcefully physical with her when she was 17

Aditya Pancholi

Last week, the Mumbai Police filed a case against actor Aditya Pancholi when an actress recorded her statement and claimed that she was raped by him 10 years ago. Aditya has now been granted interim relief in the case by the Dindoshi sessions court till July 19. But the actress’ statement to the police, that has reportedly been accessed by Mid-Day, throws up shocking claims.

According to this report, in the statement that was recorded by the A-lister actress with the Versova police on June 26, she cites details of "how Pancholi drugged, raped and blackmailed her from the time she was trying to break into the film industry" when she was a minor (17 years of age).

Mid-Day reported that in her statement, the actress claimed that in 2004 she had accompanied Aditya Pancholi to a party where he “spiked” her drink and thereafter got “forcefully physical” with her in his luxury car. She further alleged that Aditya also took photos of her and started blackmailing her, threatening her that he would make the photos public if she did not comply.

In the statement, the actress also claimed, “Once, I was going to file a complaint against him, but he stopped my autorickshaw and beat me up; I was rescued by a pedestrian who (saw) me getting thrashed. At the time, I met and informed senior police officer Bipin Bihari about the incident.” However, she alleges that no action was taken against Aditya at that point in time, despite having approached Bipin Bihari who was the additional commissioner (west region) of Mumbai police in the 2004-06 period.

Mid-Day reports that its repeated efforts to contact Bihari drew a nought as Bihari remained unavailable for comment. As per the Mumbai daily, Bihari is currently a DG-rank officer of the Maharashtra police and posted as the managing director of the Housing and Welfare Corporation for the state's police.



The statement also mentions that besides her, Aditya also assaulted her sister. The actress claimed, “Between 2008 and 2009, I shifted to Bandra. My sister, who was unwell then, came to my house and we were living together. When I was away at a shoot, he came to my house and beat up my sister. When I returned home, I saw my sister was shivering and completely scared. I asked her what happened and she told me about how Pancholi had beaten her up.”

The actress claims that she had approached the wife of the accused but she refused to step in and even backed Pancholi. The accused also threatened the other sibling of the victim - a brother - into silence.

Pancholi, on his part, has denied all charges and his lawyer says it is a case of framing of an innocent person. Meanwhile, Pancholi must be present at the Versova police station every Wednesday and co-operate with the interrogation. Aditya Pancholi has been granted interim relief from arrest till July 19 in this case of the alleged rape. He has executed a personal bond of Rs 30,000, a precondition to the interim bail granted by the Dindoshi session court on Tuesday 2 July 2019.
