MHA reviews security in six Naxal-affected states, says there is ‘consistent’ decline in incidents of LWE violence since 2014-India News , Firstpost

The Centre on Tuesday reviewed the security situation in Naxal-affected states where the extremists continue to carry out subversive activities very often, officials said.

New Delhi: The Centre on Tuesday reviewed the security situation in Naxal-affected states where the extremists continue to carry out subversive activities very often, officials said.

The meeting, chaired by Union home secretary Rajiv Gauba, was attended by officials from the governments of the Naxal-hit states of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Andhra Pradesh.

The meeting took stock of the prevailing situation in the Maoist-affected states and the ongoing operations against the rebels, an official said. Officials from central paramilitary forces also attended the meeting.

A home ministry spokesperson, however, said it was noted in the meeting that there has been a consistent decline in violence and considerable shrinkage in the geographical spread of Left Wing Extremism (LWE) in the last five years.

A review of LWE-affected districts in 2018 resulted in the reduction of security-related expenditure (SRE) districts from 126 to 82. "A detailed exchange of views took place. Useful suggestions and security concerns by the states were taken note of," the spokesperson said.

Making mobile communication more effective and improvement in the working conditions of the security forces deployed in the LWE theatre were also discussed. It was decided to carry forward the resolute implementation of the National Policy and Action Plan 2015 to address Left Wing Extremism. The Union home secretary appreciated the efforts of states and the central forces.

Gauba also mentioned the need for continued operations and stressed upon filling up of areas of security vacuum. He assured that resources required in the endeavour shall be provided to the states and paramilitary forces.

Among the major incidents in the recent past, 15 policemen and a civilian were killed in a Naxal attack in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli district in May. Last Friday, in Chhattisgarh's Bijapur district, three CRPF personnel died in an encounter with Naxals while a girl was killed after being caught in the crossfire.

Two vehicles and a machine were set ablaze by Naxals at a road construction site in Sukma district of Chhattisgarh on Sunday.
