India Had 11 Internet Shutdowns Just In June 2019, And What We Learned From Them All

It's very easy to offend someone or the other in India, simply by the virtue of it being a melting pot of religions, political beliefs, and ethnic origins. A country with over 1.3 billion people can quickly become a tinderbox ready to explode.

So more often than not, the various Indian state governments feel it necessary to shutdown Internet access in order to "preserve law and order" and prevent the spread of rumour or fake news.

Take just this year, for example, which has already seen 59 incidents of Internet shutdowns so far. And 11 of those were just in June. These include:

June 3

Internet services were suspended in the Shopian district of Jammu and Kashmir after an encounter between the army and militants.

June 5

Odisha suspended Internet services in Kendrapara for two days as a preventive measure following a skirmish between two local groups on the eve the Eid-ul-Fitr, as well as communally-charged messages circulating on WhatsApp.

June 8

Mobile Internet was shut down in parts of Anantnag after a security forces operation that killed a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) militant.

June 9

After graphic images of BJP and TMC party workers killed in the clashes began circulating on social media, internet services were shut down in the Basirhat area of West Bengal.

June 10

Internet services were suspended in the Khair area of Uttar Pradesh, after fake videos of the supposed murder of a two-year-old girl began circulating on WhatsApp.

June 12

Clashes between local youth and security forces in Kashmir's Anantnag forced an Internet shutdown.

Reuters

June 14

Internet services were cut off after two Lashkar militants were killed in an army encounter in Pulwama.

June 19

Authorities suspended internet services in Anantnag as a precaution on the 25th death anniversary of UeL founder Mirwaiz Qazi Nissar Ahmad.

June 20

Internet was cut off in parts of West Bengal's Parganas district after clashes between BJP and TMC workers killed 3 and left 10 injured.

June 23

Kashmir's Shopian district was cut off from the Internet after a gunfight between militants and counter- insurgent forces in the region.

June 30

Mobile internet services were suspended in Budgam after a terrorist was killed in an encounter.

July

Then, in the first couple of days of this month, two more shutdowns occurred, this time in Meerut and Jaipur. Both were to prevent local tensions from escalating in the wake of protests. From all of this, you can very well see a pattern emerge.

Reuters

Is there a better way?

Now, it's easy to say that this looks a lot like censorship. Indeed, that's a very straightforward case to make. But perhaps there's no better solution in at least some of these incidents. After all, we've seen in the past just what kind of violence can be incited over inciting rumours spreading on social media.

In June last year, two men were hacked to death by a mob in Tripura, because there had been WhatsApp forwards going around that they were kidnappers preying in children. And that was just one of 11 similar violent incidents over just two months.

So what do you do when the options are to either allow people freedom online or to cut off the spread of hoaxes and dangerous fake news? Maybe sometimes the cutting off access to the Internet is the lesser of two evils, especially in a country where people make the time and effort to form violent mobs rather than spend a few minutes verifying what they receive in their inboxes.

It is a slippery slope of course, and something we need to be vigilant of. Better would be to educate people on Internet etiquette, like verifying the claims of random netizens, refraining from encouraging online abuse and harassment, and the like. But that's the sort of thing that demands a dedicated effort, cooperation, and so much time.

Reuters

Then again, we're not the only country to make use of Internet shutdowns as a tool to safeguard public order. Ethiopia has just begun restoring its own Internet access, 10 days after it was cut following the assassinations of six top government officials. Similarly, Sri Lanka blocked Internet access in an effort to avoid conflict following the Easter Sunday bombings in the country. And though (at least in some cases) the intentions may be good, experts worry that shut downs may cause more harm than good.

In an increasingly Internet-powered society, maybe all authorities can truly do to contain fires is to cut off the oxygen supply itself?
