Woman abducted by family in UP's Bareilly for getting married without approval

The woman was allegedly kidnapped by her own family after the assault (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The incident took place on Monday, July 1 The couple was beaten by the woman's family The woman was abducted by her family

Bareilly: The video of a couple being beaten by a group of people has been doing the rounds on social media. The couple was allegedly being assaulted by the woman's family. Allegedly, the family members of the woman thrashed her and her husband as the two got married without consent.

The woman was allegedly kidnapped by her own family after the assault. The incident took place on Monday, July 1 in Bareilly's Bhojpura. Superintendent of Police (rural), Sansar Singh said, "We registered a case against the woman's family on the day of the incident. Our investigation is underway and strictest possible action will be taken."

Bareilly: A woman & her husband were thrashed allegedly by her family & she was then abducted by her family, for marrying the man without their consent. The couple had fled the district after their marriage an year ago & had returned recently. They were later admitted to hospital pic.twitter.com/D2IawMRF06 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 3, 2019

While talking to news agency ANI, Singh said, "As of now, we are not aware of any such video. If there is any video of the incident, we will inspect it and verify if we can use it to strengthen our case."

Allegedly, the victims have been married for over a year. The couple had allegedly left the village after they got married and had come back recently.

Woman's family stabs husband in Hyderabad for getting married without permission

In June, a man was allegedly stabbed by his wife's kin in Hyderabad. Allegedly, the woman moved out of her house after she got married to the man. The woman's family approached the police and lodged a missing complaint.

The couple told the police that they got married without the consent of the woman's family. On learning this, the police counselled the family. The incident took place after the family left the police station. Reportedly, the accused dragged the man out of his car and stabbed him. The victim's mother and wife were allegedly beaten by two other women.

Girl's family sets boy's house on fire in Uttar Pradesh after the two elope

The family of a girl in Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh set a boy's house on fire after the two eloped. The incident came to light from Rasulpur Ghari village in May. The agitated family set ablaze the youth's family home and a house owned by his uncle.

A team of the police and fire tenders reached the spot and doused the fire. Following the incident, security personnel were deployed to tackle violence. The couple had allegedly been in a romantic relationship for a few months before they eloped. The police registered a case under Section 436 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against 10 people, four of which, were women.
