Mumbai court grants Binoy Kodiyeri anticipatory bail in rape case

Mumbai court grants Binoy Kodiyeri anticipatory bail in rape case

The court has granted bail against a personal bond of Rs 25,000 and on the condition that Binoy has to appear before the police once a week for a month.

news Crime

The Dindoshi branch of the City, Civil and Sessions Court in Mumbai on Wednesday granted anticipatory bail to Binoy Kodiyeri in connection with a rape case filed against him. A Mumbai-based woman had last month filed a case at Oshiwara police station alleging that Binoy, the eldest son of CPI(M) Kerala secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan, raped her for years under the pretext of marrying her.

The Dindoshi court, which has been hearing arguments from both sides since Monday, granted the bail on two conditions – that Binoy must submit a personal bond of Rs 25,000 and that he appear before the police between 10 am and 1 pm every Monday for a month. He also will have to appear for medical examination as and when asked by the investigating officers.

Binoy has been booked under IPC Sections 376 (rape) and Section 420 (cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property on the complaint) and has been absconding since the police began an investigation into the case.

The Mumbai-based woman, a native of Bihar, had filed a rape complaint against Binoy on June 13. She also alleged in the complaint that she has an eight-year-old child born out of the relationship.

The allegations put the CPI(M) and Kodiyeri on the defensive, with the Congress-led opposition unleashing a scathing attack against the party and Kodiyeri Balakrishnan. Kodiyeri, on his part, had stated that neither he nor his party will protect Binoy.

Kodiyeri also said that he did not approach the complainant for any settlement in the case. Kodiyeri, however, accepted that his wife had gone to Mumbai after the news of the case broke.

“We came to know about the incident when we got a notice regarding this in January. Following this, being a mother, my wife Vinodhini went to Mumbai to inquire about the issue,” Kodiyeri had said.
