Actress Shares Horrific Details Of 'Rape' By Aditya Pancholi, But The Reactions Break Our Heart

India's #MeToo movement came in a bit delayed but it arrived with a cascade of allegations against the bigwigs of Bollywood. Names like Alok Nath, Rajkumar Hirani came into the spotlight and couldn't escape the wave of this strong movement across the country, as several women shared their horrific experiences of how they were sexually harassed.

Well, the recent case of Aditya Pancholi being accused of rape by a Bollywood actress has shaken up the industry again. She shared the horrific details of how she was allegedly raped for years and how Aditya even allegedly blackmailed her when she wasn't ready to succumb to his whims and fancies.

The victim, who is a popular Bollywood actress, has alleged that Pancholi first raped her inside a car on the pretext of dropping her home from a party. She told Mid-Day, "I suspected then that he had spiked my drink. After the party got over, Pancholi said he will drop me home. He stopped it in the middle of Yari road and started getting forcefully physical with me. He also took photographs of, which I wasn't aware of."

She even said that Pancholi forced her to be his mistress, which, obviously, she didn't agree to, and when she retaliated, she was allegedly beaten for the same.

“I told him he was my father's age and I want to marry someone who is as old as me. Then, he showed me all the photographs he'd taken of me inside his car and started blackmailing me. He threatened to show these pictures to others. At the time, I was quite young, I had no one in Mumbai and he took advantage of that," she added.

The ordeal of the actress didn't stop here. Even after she shifted her residence, Pancholi allegedly managed to track her down and raped her, again and again, leaving her deserted and locked her in own home.

She further claimed that Pancholi also beat up her sister. "Between 2008 and 2009, I shifted to Bandra. My sister, who was unwell then, came to my house and we were living together. When I was away at a shoot, he came to my house and beat up my sister. When I returned home, I saw my sister was shivering and completely scared. I asked her what happened and she told me about how Pancholi had beaten her up. Then, I called him up to ask why he was troubling us, to which he started demanding money from me, saying that [I should pay] whatever he has spent on me. He asked for Rs 1 crore. In fact, I paid Rs 50 lakh and he stopped troubling us for a bit."

The Versova Police has registered an FIR against Pancholi under sections 376 (rape), 328 (causing hurt by means of poison, etc. with intent to commit an offence), 384 (extortion), 341 (wrongful restraint), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC on Friday (June 28).

Meanwhile, Pancholi has flatly denied all the allegations against him.

Natually, Twitter is flooded with reactions over this development, as people are condemning Pancholi over the charges he is facing and want to see him behind bars.

Many people are trying to figure out the identity of the mystery actress and interestingly, the common guess is Bollywood actress Kangana Ranaut.

I want to see #AdityaPancholi in jail for a lifetime.

He tried to kill her

He raped her several times.

His son is accused of killing his gf.

It is disheartening that no one frm Bolywd is supporting her but IDC she is an alone warrior. It would help in building pressure on him — Vaibhav salonia (@vaibhavsalonia) June 28, 2019

However, some people are questioning as to why was the actress was quiet for all these years.

“The allegations are for the period between 2004-2006. What she was doing since last 15 yrs? #AdityaPancholi,” read a tweet.

The allegations are for the period between 2004-2006,



What she was doing since last 15 yrs?#AdityaPancholi



Aditya Pancholi drugged and raped me inside car, took photos to blackmail me: Bollywood actress https://t.co/dHrHfJlTsQ via @indiatoday — cskkanu (@cskkanu) July 3, 2019

#AdityaPancholi termed Rapist ......

Woman's word gospel truth .....

Question is how is consensual sex RAPE ??? https://t.co/xeoOxg90m0 — Barkha Trehan (@trehan_barkha) June 27, 2019

#kanganaranaut i want to file rape case. against #adityapancholi for raping me

Court :- But you dated him So how It could be rape ?#KanganaRanaut You bloody Gang of nepo Court cant trust a outsider woman ?

judge:-#MentalHaiKya — Kingkongana (@Kangaruallout) July 2, 2019

Mumbai crime police files rape case against #AdityaPancholi.

Unbelievable !! Now after 13 years #KanganaRanaut is saying that she has been raped.

Woman's word always gospel truth.

No one will be spared !!

Wait for your turn...#MenToo#FakeCases https://t.co/unbce3qmR8 — SIF Chandigarh (@sifchandigarh) June 28, 2019

Why is nobody naming renowned Bollywood actress who has filed the complaint?#AdityaPancholi — Deepak Pawar (@dsp1808) June 27, 2019

"in 2017 had gone on record accusing Aditya Pancholi of harrassing her physically and mentally" after he files defamation, she suddenly remembers that he raped her 10 years ago. Good job ladies keep going this way and completely discredit yourselves https://t.co/quMO52rw7M — LB Dads (@dads_4kids) June 28, 2019

What are your thoughts on this matter? Let us know in the comments section below.
