Teen Girl Dies After She Was Raped and Forced to Abort Her Baby

A teenage girl in India died Monday after police say a neighbor raped her repeatedly and then forced her to abort her unborn baby.

India Today reports police are investigating the horrific allegations in the Kannauj district of India after someone found the girl abandoned and dying after the forced abortion.

Police said the neighbor allegedly raped the teenager several times before she became pregnant. When he found out about the pregnancy, he repeatedly pressured the girl to have an abortion, according to police.

Here’s more from the report:

On the pretext of an outing, he allegedly took the teenage girl to Kamalganj in Kannauj where he forcibly gave her a pill to abort the foetus, Chhibramau Kotwali inspector Balram Mishra was quoted as saying by the daily. Soon after the girl consumed the pill, her condition started deteriorating, following which she collapsed. Police said the accused panicked, abandoned the girl near Kamalganj crossing and ran away. Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow @LifeNewsHQ The news report said the teenager was found by locals at the crossing who then informed her parents. She was rushed to a hospital where she died during treatment.

Police said the neighbor is on the run, and they are still searching for him.

Sexual abuse is a huge problem in India, with 20,000 cases of sexual assaults reported in 2015, according to government data reported by AFP. In 2018, a similar case occurred in the Satna district of Madhya Pradesh when police said another young rape victim walked into their police station carrying her aborted baby in a bag. The 16-year-old told police that she had been raped repeatedly and then forced to abort her unborn child.

Another recent case involved a young woman whose Punjabi teacher allegedly raped her and then forced her to abort her unborn child in an attempt to cover up the abuse.

Forced abortion is a horrific abuse that brutally destroys an unborn baby’s life and violently damages a mother’s. Forced and coerced abortions happen more frequently than abortion activists would like to acknowledge. As LifeNews previously reported, one study found that as many as 64 percent of post-abortive women say they felt pressured to have an abortion.

LifeNews Note: File photo.
