BJP likely to showcause Akash Vijayvargiya

BHOPAL: A day after Prime Minister Narendra Modi cracked the whip on BJP stalwart Kailash Vijayvargiya ’s MLA son Akash for assaulting a municipal official in Indore, all eyes are on the state leadership to see what action it takes.Sources told TOI that the party may begin with a showcause notice to Akash for “misbehaviour in public”, and that tougher action at the prodding of the national leadership cannot be ruled out.On Wednesday, senior BJP leaders — including state party president Rakesh Singh, national general secretary Ramlal, organising general secretary Suhas Bhagat and former chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan — met to discuss possible action against the leaders who had supported Akash and celebrated his release from jail. Sources say the state unit is waiting for follow-up orders from the national leadership.“After Akash’s release on bail, BJP held a meeting in Indore to protest his arrest. Senior party leaders, including member of BJP state disciplinary committee Babusingh Raghuvanshi, district president Gopi Krishna Nema, former MLA Jitu Jirati and MLA Ramesh Mendola participated. Will the party suspend all these leaders after the PM’s remarks? This is the dilemma facing state leaders,” said a senior state BJP functionary.While Akash’s fate hangs in the balance, former BJP communication in-charge Anil Soumitra, who was suspended towards the end of Lok Sabha polls for calling Mahatma Gandhi ‘Father of Pakistan’, has pleaded with the party leadership to revoke his suspension. “Soumitra was suspended on May 17 this year. The state unit sent him a showcause notice and immediately announced his suspension from primary membership for six years. Similar statements were given by some more leaders, including Pragya Singh Thakur, but action wasn’t taken against them. In the case of Akash and sons of Prahlad, Jalim Singh and Kamal Patel, too, the state unit remained a mute spectator,” alleged a senior BJP functionary.But Soumitra is in no mood to fight against the state unit. “I am requesting the leadership to revoke my suspension. I have apologized for what I said, and promised to follow party rules and instructions,” he told TOI on Wednesday.Congress leaders took a dig at BJP, with Congress state spokesperson Narendra Singh Saluja saying: “This is high profile matter. We are watching how much BJP cares about PM Modi’s reaction. The party is likely to bury the case, like it did in Pragya Thakur’s matter.”
