Delhi: Upset over police inaction, man sets self ablaze in Nihal Vihar Police Station

Reportedly, the complaint was being handled by the Assistant Sub Inspectors (ASI) of Nihal Vihar Police Station. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: A 37-year-old Nangloi resident allegedly tried committing suicide by setting himself on fire inside the Nihal Vihar Police Station on Wednesday. He was allegedly upset over police inaction in the complaint he filed last year.

The man was identified as Rahul who alleged that in December last year he had filed a complaint against a person after he had a fight with him over Rs 60,000. Reportedly, the complaint was being handled by the Assistant Sub Inspectors (ASI) of Nihal Vihar Police Station.

News agency PTI reported, upset over inaction and delay in the matter victim went to the police station at around 2.30 PM with a bottle of petrol and set himself ablaze in front of police personnel and others present at the station. Reportedly, the police acted on time and managed to save him after covering him with a blanket.

The man was immediately rushed to a nearby hospital where he is still under treatment. The PTI reported stated that the man has sustained burn injuries on his chest and face. However, the police have registered a case in the matter, And the ASI, who was handling the complaint filed by Rahul has been suspended by the authorities.

In another case reported from the national capital, a man had allegedly set himself ablaze outside the Delhi Police headquarters in January 2019. After the cops managed to control the fire by putting a blanket around him, he was shifted to a hospital in a critical condition. His family was informed by the police after his identification papers were found in a bag he was carrying.

Although a huge crowd was gathered around him but no one came forward to save him. He was saved only after the police rushed along with the fire brigade came. Reportedly, people were seen taking photographs and making videos of the incident. Once the police were able to extinguish the fire, he was rushed to the JPN hospital.

He had reportedly suffered about 80 per cent burns and was admitted to the intensive care unit. However, the police had not received any complaint from him and they were investigating if the police had reduced to filing a case.




