Plea seeks to make marital rape a ground for divorce

Who is Saurabh Kirpal? India’s likely to get its first openly gay judge of Delhi high court

Plea seeks to make marital rape a ground for divorce

India

oi-Oneindia Staff

By Anuj Cariappa

New Delhi, July 04: A plea was filed in the Delhi High Court seeking direction to the Centre to frame guidelines for registration of FIR for marital rape as also laws for making it a ground for divorce.

The PIL sought that there should be a clear guideline for registration of cases related to marital rape under framed guidelines and laws, so that accountability, responsibility and liability of the authorities concerned can be fixed.

The plea, likely to be listed next week, was filed after the Supreme Court on Monday refused to entertain it and asked the petitioner, advocate Anuja Kapur, to approach the high court for relief.

She also sought direction to the government for fixing appropriate punishment/ penalties for violation of the guidelines and laws to be framed and enacted respectively.

Suspended Air India pilot granted anticipatory bail

"Marital rape is no less an offence than murder, culpable homicide or rape per se. It denigrates the honour and dignity of a human being, and reduces her to a chattel to be utilised for one's self convenience and comfort. It reduces a woman to a corpse, living under the constant fear of hurt or injury. Medical evidence proves that rape has severe and long-lasting consequences for women," the plea said.

Kapur said in her plea that at present there is an ambiguity in the implementation of the context of marital rape as a ground of punishment or penalty during the registration of such a case in ambit of law.

"There is a lot of confusion with the concerned authorities that under which law they should register an FIR / case related to marital rape. There should be a clear guideline for registration of the case of marital rape under framed guidelines and laws, so that accountability, responsibility and liability of the concerned authorities can be assigned and, penalties and punishments be awarded to safeguard the fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution and dignity of the woman in marriage," the plea said.

Since marital rape at present is not a crime, there is no FIR registered by a wife against her husband in any police station, it said.

For enforcement of mental health care law, plea filed in Delhi HC

Rather, it is being compromised by the police authorities to maintain the sanctity of the marriage between the victim and the husband, it added.

"As marital rape is not a ground for a divorce in Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 and Special Marriage Act, 1954, it cannot be used as a ground for divorce and cruelty against husband," it said.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Thursday, July 4, 2019, 10:28 [IST]
