Politician Announces £1,000 Reward For Anyone Who Kills Sex Attackers After Two Sisters Were Gang-Raped By Seven Youths

An Indian politician has offered to reward anyone who kills a sex offender, with £1,000, following the rapid rise of sex attacks in the state of Bihar, India.



Rajesh Ranjan, also known as Pappu Yadav, pledged the bounty of Rs100,000 in cash after an official report revealed that more than 7,300 incidents of rape have taken place over the past six years in the eastern state.



The former parliamentarian who in 2015 founded the Jan Adhikar Party, made the announcement shortly after meeting two sisters who were gang-raped by seven youths in Bihar's northern Sitamarhi district last week.



According to Daily Mail, the girls were waiting for their mother near their home when the boys abducted them. They were taken to an isolated place in the district, which is a Holy place for Hindus because it is the birthplace of Sita, wife of the God Ram.



The boys also filmed themselves raping the two sisters and then shared the videos on social media.



'I will give Rs100,000 for killing one rapist. If a person kills two rapists, he will be given Rs200,000 and so on,' Yadav said on Wednesday, according to Gulf News.



'Rape fills poison in the life of victims who are left to die a slow death every day.



'While no-one would want to marry such girls, even if their weddings had been finalised, maximum chances are that [the marriage] would get broken once the husbands get aware of these incidents,' he said.



Yadav who blamed the successive national Indian governments for their failure to protect women, demanded that perpetrators should be given a death sentence within three months of being found guilty.

Source: dailymail.co.uk









Disclaimer : Opinions expressed here are those of the writers and do not reflect those of Peacefmonline.com. Peacefmonline.com accepts no responsibility legal or otherwise for their accuracy of content. Please report any inappropriate content to us, and we will evaluate it as a matter of priority.

Featured Video
