Delhi: 5-year-old girl gang-raped in Kapashera park; accused held

The fact that the child was gang-raped in a public park again brings forth the issue of women safety in the national capital. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused are 11 and 14-year-old respectively. The mother of the survivor came looking for her when the accused were raping her.

New Delhi: In another case of crime against women being reported from Delhi, a five-year-old girl was gang-raped by two boys in a park in Kapashera area near Delhi border. The accused were neighbours of the girl and are themselves minors too, aged 11 and 10 years.

The fact that the child was gang-raped in a public park again brings forth the issue of women safety in the national capital. The girl was playing in the park on Monday night when she was violated by the accused. According to initial reports, they took turns to ravage her and fled the scene of crime when the mother of the survivor came looking for her.

The woman called the police who then rushed the child to a hospital where a medical examination confirmed sexual assault. The doctors then kept her in the hospital for a day to ensure that she was out of danger and had received the proper medical aid.

A police officer told IANS that the children were in the park when the two boys overpowered her and then gang-raped her. After the medical examination confirmed the rape, a case was filed under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Immediately springing into action, police launched a manhunt and caught the accused within 24 hours. They have been sent to a juvenile correction home and further investigation is underway. Both the accused are being questioned about the incident.

4-year-old raped at daycare centre in Gurugram

In last week of June, it was reported that a four-year-old child was raped at a daycare centre by the owner’s son in Gurugram’s Sector 7. The accused in this case was also a minor (14-year-old) and was subsequently charged under the POCSO Act of the IPC.

Moreover, it was reported that the accused had repeatedly raped the girl on a number of occasions and it was only when her mother taught her about ‘good touch, bad touch’ that she got to know of the horrific crime.

The survivor was left at the daycare as her mother was working and the accused, son of the woman who owned the centre, lured the child and raped her repeatedly. Upon learning about the same, the parents of the survivor approached the police who then swiftly acted on the complaint.
