[EXCLUSIVE] Kashmiri separatists incite kids to pelt stones but send their children abroad, MHA papers reveal

MHA document reveals names of Kashmiri separatists who have sent their kids abroad | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights MHA documents reveal lavish lifestyle led by Kashmiri separarists 21 children of 14 prominent separatists are studying abroad

New Delhi: Kashmiri separatists may encourage the youth of the Valley to pick up stones and arms against security forces, but they seem to have no qualms in shielding their own family from the strife in the region, revealed MHA documents.

As per crucial documents of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), accessed by Times Now, 21 children of 14 prominent separatist leaders were studying in foreign countries, away from the conflict in Kashmir.

The list contains the name of separatist leaders such as Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani and Dukhtaran-e-Millat founder Asiya Andrabi.

The MHA documents establish how the separatists lead a lavish lifestyle even as their ideologies and policies spread unrest in the Valley.

According to the list, 210 relatives of Kashmiri separatist leaders currently live abroad. The documents also mention that 112 children of the separatists study in foreign lands, out of which 21 belong to 14 well-known separatists.

The separatists purportedly utilise the funds received to fuel unrest in the valley in sending their children to foreign schools and universities, the documents reveal.

Meanwhile, former IAS officer turned Politician Shah Faesal has said that Hurriyat leaders have every right to send their children abroad for Education.

"When others can send their children to study outside why not children of Hurriyat leaders," he said.

On a separate note, the National Investigation Agency (NIA) has summoned Geelani's grandson for questioning in connection with the 2017 terror financing case. A notice was sent to Anees-ul-Islam, who is the son of Geelani's daughter on Tuesday.

The notice asked Anees to appear at NIA's Delhi office on July 9. Geelani's grandson works as a researcher with the Sher-i-Kashmir International Convention in Jammu and Kashmir’s Srinagar.

Previously, the NIA had also summoned Geelani's sons and Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq for questioning. The probe agency had also carried out searches at premises of several separatist leaders, including those of Mirwaiz in February. The searches had been conducted in connection with cases of funding of terror groups and separatist organisations in the Valley.


