Congress MLA Nitesh Rane, supporters arrested for throwing mud on engineer

New Delhi:

Congress MLA Nitesh Rane and two of his supporters have been arrested for throwing mud on an engineer at Mumbai-Goa Highway in Kankavali. According to reports, search for other accused in the matter is on. They will be produced in court tomorrow. An FIR has been registered against him and his supporters under Sections 353, 342, 332, 324, 323, 120(A), 147, 143, 504, 506 of Indian Penal Code (IPC). Earlier, Rane, accompanied by Kankavli Municipal Council President and activists of the NDA-affiliated Maharashtra Swabhiman Party (MSP), had gone to inspect the repair work of the road on the Gad River near Kankavli. He was irked over the poor condition of the highway and vented his ire on a road sub-engineer by bathing him with wet mud and slime. He can be also seen apparently trying to tie the engineer to a bridge.

As per reports, the construction work on the Mumbai-Goa highway has been undergoing for 4 years. Minister for Road Transport & Highways Nitin Gadkari had earlier promised that the work will be over in 2 years but the ground reality is something different.

"People are bearing it daily... Now, you also experience it..." they said and threw a couple of buckets full of slime on sub-engineer Prakash Shedekar, roughed him up and pushed him around.

Videos of the incident went viral on social media evoking mixed reactions, with many condemning the incident.

Rane is the son of MSP president and former Chief Minister Narayan Rane.

One such incident took place when BJP MLA Akash Vijayvargiya thrashed a municipal corporation officer in Indore.

Akash, who was accompanied with his supporters, started hitting the officer while a police official standing near remained blind-eyed. The civic officer was also thrashed by his supporters in the presence of police.

In the viral video, the police officer who was present during the attack, was later seen trying to stop the BJP MLA but failed as Akash and his supporters continue to hit the man. Following the hooliganism of the BJP leader, police personnel from three nearby stations along with the area SSP arrived at the spot to control the situation.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
