Challenge for police to tackle obscene posts on social media

Spreading awareness

From MMS to WhatsApp

Not just celebrities, but even ordinary people from small towns are not spared from obscene posts on social media . In less than a week, Dakshina Kannada district police were forced to issue two public warnings, after obscene videos went viral. In a case reported in Bantwal police station limits, three people were booked for sharing videos, and shockingly, all of them were of minors.On Wednesday, the police managed to control to a great extent, the sharing of two videos related to a pornography case involving students. Soon after a case was registered, press statements warning against the circulation of the said videos were made. By evening, instances of screenshots being circulated were reported.Dakshina Kannada district superintendent of police B M Laxmi Prasad told TOI, "Whenever we find that a girl is involved, our first priority is to safeguard the interest of the woman. We consider her as the victim, and hence suo-motu cases are registered. This is to prevent the victim from being victimised further. It might be with consent that the video was recorded, but the transmission may not be with consent, which is not legal."On tracing the source of the video, the SP said, "Right now there is no way, except for catching hold of a person and tracing the video back to its source from there, which takes a long time. Sometimes suspects are not truthful in revealing the source. These days, as soon as suspects get to know the police are after them, many of them start deleting messages. In the student pornography case reported on Wednesday, we found a lot of people whose names came up, but a bunch of them had deleted the message, and nothing was found on their phones."After cracking the student pornography case, SP B M Laxmi Prasad said awareness on the provisions of the IT Act have to be spread on a bigger scale. "When students receive a message, the immediate reaction is to forward it to the groups they are part of. We are appealing to all schools to have awareness programmes within their schools to prevent sensitive messages from being circulated," he said. "Meanwhile, since inspectors are already part of transportation drives in schools, they will now be asked to address the cyber crime issues. A campaign to create awareness on cyber crimes will be taken up from next month, where the police will list out all the offences that students may be subjected to, and ask people to be cautious about their activities online," he added.More than a decade ago, a 7-minute MMS sex clip was converted into a CD of half-an-hour duration, named Mangalooru Mungaru Male. In a case reported in 2011, a student was ostracised after a sex tape was morphed, named after her, and released as an MMS.Police arrested her college mate for making the fake sex clip. On December 18, 2013, a 22-year-old student and her friend were forced to make out in front of mobile phone cameras, and a gang demanded ransom for not uploading the compromising clips. While they held the boy hostage, the girl was released the next morning to arrange for the ransom. The Mangaluru city police swung into action, and were able to nab all the eight accused from a house at Surathkal, within 48 hours of the case being reported.Several cases of honeytraps being laid were also reported in the district, and the Target Gang was involved in such cases, who would identify businessmen or landlords, trap them using honeytraps, and take pictures in compromising positions with them, and blackmail them for money. A rowdy-sheeter from the infamous Target Gang, Eliyas, was stabbed to death last year.
