Amroha Police in Uttar Pradesh arrest three for alleged gang-rape of nurse

The matter is under investigation (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Amroha Police are investigating the matter The survivor's condition is now stable

Lucknow: Police officials in Amroha district of Uttar Pradesh have arrested three men for the alleged gang-rape of a female nurse. Inputs suggest that police are on the lookout for another accused who is yet to be taken into police custody. Meanwhile, the survivor is undergoing treatment at a local hospital where her condition is now said to be stable.

Superintendent of police (SP), Amroha, Vipin Tanda told media outlets that local police were informed about the woman's rape on Thursday night. An investigation was launched and three arrests have been made as of yet even as a third accused is on the run. In her complaint, the woman who works as a nurse at a local hospital claimed that she was gang-raped by four men. She identified the accused by name which enabled police to make the arrests speedily.

Amroha: A woman was allegedly gangraped in Hasanpur area, last night. SP says,'The woman was sent for a medical check-up immediately. Her condition is stable, 3 men have been arrested. The woman used to work at an illegal hospital, she wasn't a trained nurse. Probe on.' pic.twitter.com/9i9vw9Hi6C — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 5, 2019

The woman does not possess any professional nurse training but worked at a hospital, said Tanda. Since she is still recuperating, her statement is yet to be recorded and is expected to establish the sequence of events that night. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is currently underway.

A similar incident has emerged from Sitapur in Uttar Pradesh where an 18-year-old boy was arrested in connection with the alleged gang-rape of a 15-year-old girl. In her statement to the police, the minor claimed that she was sedated and gang-raped by the accused and four others for over a period of four years. The horrific instance which has come to light from Maholi in Sitapur is being actively investigated. Among others named in the complaint is a female teacher.

Also Read: Gorakhpur: Minor girl consumes poison after being raped by man

Addressing mediapersons, SP LR Kumar said that the survivor is a student of a high school in Rajwapur village and that more arrests are likely in the coming days on the basis of evidence being accumulated by local police personnel investigating the matter. The incident comes less than a month after a seven-year-old girl was raped by her neighbour in Sakran area of Sitapur. The child was attending a wedding ceremony when she was abducted by the accused who lured her by offering her candies. Upon his arrest, the accused confessed to taking the child to a secluded place where he sexually exploited her. The accused was booked under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Reports later stated that the minor girl was admitted to a local hospital where her condition is stable.
