Agra: BJP MP's security beat toll staff shots fired

(MENAFN- NewsBytes) Agra: BJP MP's security beat toll staff; shots fired

06 Jul 2019

Days after PM Modi called violent behavior by members of the BJP "unacceptable" following Indore MLA Akash Vijayvargiya's assault on a civic official, reports of party MP Ram Shankar Katheria's security personnel thrashing toll plaza employees in Agra have emerged. The incident was captured on video.

Katheria, who represents the Etawah constituency, however, claimed his bodyguards acted in "self-defense."

Here's what went down.

Katheria, wife present at scene during altercation

Details

The incident occurred at 3:52 am on Saturday as Katheria's convoy- comprising five cars and a bus behind his car- made its way to Etawah from Agra.

CCTV footage from the scene shows the Etawah's MP security personnel thrashing toll plaza employees. One of Katheria's bodyguards even fired shots in the air.

Both Katheria and his wife were present during the altercation.

Case registered; two people arrested

Fact

According to ANI, two people have been arrested in connection with the incident. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Agra, Bablu Kumar said, "A case has been registered in the case and strict action will be taken against the people involved in the incident."

If anything happens to me, Katheria responsible: Toll staff

Quote

"One of the employees came to me and asked for help. When I came to the spot, they also thrashed me with sticks and threatened to shoot with a gun," the toll staff member said.

"If anything happens to me in future, Katheria will be responsible as I am now getting pressure to quit the job," the employee added.

Appealed convoy to move cars one-by-one; they didn't listen: Staff

Fact

Further, one of the toll employees told ANI, "One of our colleagues appealed to Katheria's convoy to move their cars one-by-one through the toll plaza to avoid any damage to the vehicles. But the security personnel didn't listen and started thrashing the employee on duty."

They first attacked my people, says Katheria

Response

However, Katheria, who is also the Chairman of National Commission for Scheduled Castes, claimed the security personnel was attacked first.

He said, "My security didn't attack toll plaza employees, they first attacked my people."

"Toll employees didn't know other cars were part of my convoy; they thought some other car is slipping through behind mine. My security guard only fired in self-defense," he added.

Earlier, UP police filed FIR against Katheria for cop's assault

Fact

Notably, this is not the first time Katheria is in news, for wrong reasons. Earlier, in April, Uttar Pradesh police had filed a complaint against him, along with two BJP MLAs and 17 others, for assaulting a police officer at a meeting in Etawah.

PM Modi criticized Vijayvargiya for assault on civil official

Recent events

To recall, PM Modi had recently criticized BJP MLA Akash Vijayvargiya's assault of an Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC) official, deeming it unacceptable.

"The PM in BJP parliamentary party meeting today said any kind of misbehavior that brings down party's name is unacceptable," BJP MP Rajiv Pratap Rudy said on Tuesday.

Vijayvargiya was arrested and released on bail four days later on June 30.
