American Sikhs protest pro-Khalistani group's bid to burn Indian flag in Washington

While New Delhi has time and again raised the issue of anti-India protests in the past, it was met with the same response by the US administration that these fall under the 'freedom of speech' enshrined in the constitution.

The Sikh community in the United States has denounced and condemned the decision by a fringe group to burn the Indian national flag in a park just across the road from the Indian embassy in Washington.

The Indian Embassy hosted the 70th Republic Day on January 26 at the embassy where Ambassador Harsh Shringla hoisted the Indian Tricolour.

The demonstration by Sikh For Justice outside the Indian Embassy in Washington was a flop show attended by around 15-20 people.

They were completely outnumbered by flag waving, enthusiastic and patriotic Indians.

An official said, "A record and unprecedented turnout of around 800 in a very small space. Function went well with no attempts at disruption."

It was much after the flag was hoisted that a small group turned up at the park across the road but were kept away by Indian students and community members present there.

The flag-burning plan comes at a time that pro-Khalistan group Sikhs for Justice planned a 'Burning of Indian Flag' protest in the US capital and has also acquired necessary permission to do so.

Community group Sikhs of America has called the act detrimental to peace and harmony.

"The Sikhs of America condemns and denounces in the strongest terms the planned burning of the Indian flag on the occasion of India’s Republic Day outside the Indian embassy in Washington DC. Sikhs reside and have businesses not only all over India but also boast a global presence. Such theatrical protests like flag burning are detrimental to the peace loving and harmony enhancing Sikh community everywhere," the joint statement issued by Kamaljit Singh Soni, President along with Jesse Singh, Chairman of Sikhs of America, said.

"We urge Sikhs for Justice to have dialogue with the Indian government regarding any issues and desist from such petty actions," the statement added.

The American Hindu Coalition also strongly condemned the plan to burn the Indian flag. The association’s president Harsh Sethi in a statement said, "The intent of flag burning is also an immense affront to the largest democracy on the earth and causing huge grief to the American Hindus."

The statement also said that the entire AHC membership urged Sikhs for Justice to stop this act.

Speaking to India Today from DC, local Republican leader and Sikh American Puneet Ahluwalia expressed concern over the developments.

"I am disturbed and concerned that a chosen few can build a narrative about the Sikh community in USA which will be viewed by the whole world," he said.

Suresh K Gupta, Chairman, National Council of Asian Indian Association (NCAIA) and president of Asian-American Inter Community Service said, "I denounce this strongly and am outraged, at such behavior of others, in our community."

This comes at a time when the Indian mission in DC received letters from Sikh organisations appreciating the efforts made by the Modi administration for delivering justice to the aggrieved families of the 1984 Sikh riots.

Kanwaljit Singh Soni, president of Sikhs of America, in a letter said the recent court verdicts have restored millions of Sikhs' faith in the Indian judicial system.

Speaking against these separatist organisations, Puneet Ahluwalia said, "No democracy is perfect but it is the conscience of liberty loving citizens who should stand to protect and fight for it here and elsewhere. I am committed to support strong secular united India."

"I understand that our nations constitution provides them with the freedom of speech. But I strongly believe that Sikhs, Muslims, Christians, and other minority communities are an integral part of India," he added.
