How tracking a serial rapist helped solve IED case

Experience gained from scanning CCTV feed crucial in cracking case in 20 days

The Navi Mumbai police were able to crack the IED case within 20 days because they deployed the same team that nabbed serial rapist Rehan Qureshi last year.

After finding an improvised explosive device (IED) outside a school in Kalamboli on June 17, the Navi Mumbai police formed a 75-member Special Investigating Team to scan footage from 294 CCTV cameras. The case started with no leads, but after scanning the footage and call data records, the police on July 3 arrested three people.

Putting in long hours

The accused, identified as Sushila Prabhakar Sathe (35), Manish Lakshman Bhagat (45) and Deepak Narayan Dandekar (55), were debt ridden and wanted to make quick money. The IED had been placed in a hand cart close to the house of a builder from whom the trio planned to extort money. Mr. Sathe had pushed the hand cart to the school and fled on his bike.

The CCTV footage procured from the night of June 16 showed Mr. Sathe’s bike with a fake number plate. When the bike’s movements were tracked, a Honda City was seen following it. The car was found to be registered in the name of Mr. Dandekar’s son. The police then traced Mr. Sathe from Pune and Mr. Dandekar and Mr. Bhagat from Ulwe.

Tushar Doshi, deputy commissioner of police, Crime Branch, said, “We retained the same team that solved the serial rape case. During that case, our officers learnt how to observe minute movements even in footage captured at night.” The police claimed the same footage was provided to the Anti Terrorism Squad and the Intelligence Bureau, but the Navi Mumbai police team was able to crack the case first because it engaged the same officers who had cracked the serial rape case.

An officer, who was part of the team, said the officers learnt to sit in one place for hours without getting distracted even for a minute. He said, “Every time an officer felt tired, he was replaced by someone else so that not a minute of footage went unscrutinised.”

Pradeep Kannalu, assistant commissioner of police, control room, led the command centre at Belapur railway station, and senior police inspector Shirish Pawar led the team that went through the footage obtained from housing societies and shops. Projectors were set up at the office of the vehicle theft unit to watch about 16 TB of footage from private cameras.

When suspicious activity was noticed in the footage, the team procured footage of the same spot from a different angle from nearby shops or housing societies. Then another team assigned under Mr. Pawar would scan it. A team lead by senior inspector Nivrutti Kolhatakar looked into the call data record. The other teams were led by inspectors Sandeepan Shinde, Ajay Landge, Vijay Kadbane and Kondiram Pophere. They were assisted by officers Rahul Rakh, Yogesh Waghmare, Rajesh Gajjal, Bhushan Kapadnis, Yogesh Waghmare, Nitin Shinde and Rani Kale.

Background checks

‘Before nabbing the culprits, the police did a background check on about 40 suspects. In the footage, they saw a suspect pushing the hand cart and another man stopping by the cart after a few hours. The second man was nabbed within a day, and the police believed they had solved the case. However, they realised the man was just a hungry Uber driver who thought the package was a box of ice cream. He left the box when he saw there was nothing to eat in it.

An officer, who was part of the investigation, said, “We then tracked the suspect who pushed the cart. We zeroed in on 40 suspicious vehicles and tracked the accused from where they had started their journey.”
