Mangaluru University to launch awareness drive on cyber crimes

MANGALURU: Following the arrest of five undergraduate students aged 19, in connection with a gang rape case, a video of which was taken by the accused on Wednesday, Mangaluru University has decided to take up awareness programmes on cyber crimes in all its constituent undergraduate colleges. Mangalore University vice-chancellor P Subrahmanya Yadapadithaya told TOI, “Once the admission process is complete, probably in the second or third week of this month, we will request the Dakshina Kannada district police, counsellors and experts to spread awareness about drug mafia, ragging, cyber crimes and sexual abuse.”The university will also insist on strict implementation of the ban of mobile phones inside classrooms.Advocate bats for strict cyber laws Former child welfare committee chairperson and advocate Asha Nayak has urged the government to include cyber laws in the curriculum, beginning from schools. She said, “Counselling and propagation of the consequences such acts is necessary by the police. At least once a week, schools and colleges must teach students about cyber laws and cyber crimes.”Asha Nayak, who was instrumental in bringing to light a pornography case in Mangaluru on 2013, said many cases go unidentified or unreported. “One reason for the increase in such cases is poverty, and when students see their peers having a better lifestyle, and there is an opportunity before them, they just grab it, forgetting the consequences in the long run,” she said. “Even a visit to a restaurant or a ride in a car is difficult to refuse,” she said.“As a teacher and advocate, we come across several such incidents. Boys cannot be blamed always. There are also groups of girls whose job is just to identify innocent girls and introduce them to boys in return for some perks. Many students come to us only when they get to know about the conspiracy they are trapped in, and don’t know what to do next. They are caught in a mental and social block, and refuse to lodge a complaint fearing society, the prestige of the institute and their own future. When it comes to cyber crime cases, we have observed that there are two sections, those who know nothing and those who know too much about social media,” she said.
