In yet another clash, 4 Central Jail inmates injured

Ludhiana: Less than 10 days after major violence had broken out at Central Jail, which left one inmate dead and 12 others, including seven cops, injured, four jail inmates were injured after they clashed with each other during dinner at the same jail late on Friday. The injured were identified as Sandeep Kumar, Ravi Kumar, Karan and Kulwinder Singh.

Police officials said that on Friday evening, a group of around 130 prisoners housed in Bhartiya Kisan Union (BKU) barrack number six were having dinner. They added that as dinner was being served to the prisoners, there was an exchange of some hot words between two inmates. Cops said that as the heated arguments started between two prisoners, their accomplices joined in. They added that soon members of the two warring groups started hitting each other with dal bowls and meal plates.

Police officials said that in the clash the four inmates received injuries on their head. They added that the injured were rushed to the jail hospital for treatment and from there to the civil hospital, where they were treated further. The cops further said that after necessary treatment the four inmates were sent back to the jail. They added that the jail authorities taking cognizance of the matter have written to division number 7 police for further action against the four persons.

Jail superintendent Shamsher Singh Boparai said that they had recommended that the police registered a cross FIR in the matter. He added that the accused persons were fine after undergoing treatment. He added that the four were having dinner when suddenly they started fighting with each other.

Jail officials said while Karan was in jail in a murder case, Ravi was there in an attempt to murder case. They added that Kulwinder had been jailed in a drug peddling case and Sandeep was facing a charge of attempt to murder. Jail sources further said that the accused didn’t have any previous enmity with each other and the fight broke out spontaneously.

Meanwhile, police officials said that division number 7 police was in the process of registering assault cases in the matter.

Chronology of events

June 27: One person was killed and 12 others, including five prisoners and six to seven cops, were injured after a clash between the police and jail inmates inside Central Jail in the morning. The clashes were triggered by death of a jail inmate, Sunny Sood of Haryana, who had been housed in the jail in a drug peddling case, at Rajindra Hospital Patiala a day before after he developed health complications at the jail.

On June 26, a day ahead of the Ludhiana jail violence, the ministry of home affairs had sanctioned three Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) companies for Ludhiana, Amritsar and Bathinda jails with immediate effect. By sanctioning the companies, the Centre had responded to the Punjab government’s request for the deployment of CRPF in its jails made last year for breaking the nexus between the jail officials and prisoners.

On July 5, Following the murder of main accused in the Bargari sacrilege case in Nabha jail and rioting in Ludhiana Central Jail, the Punjab government had decided to beef up security in all prisons across the state by equipping these with CCTV cameras and drones.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
