Neta-Naxals link exposed: Local NCP leader helped Maoists in planning Gadchiroli attack in Maharashtra

Site of the explosion in Gadchiroli | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Times Now has learnt that a local NCP leader was involved in the Gadchiroli attack by Naxals NCP leader Kailash Ramchandani has confessed to passing the information regarding the police convoy to Naxals

Mumbai: Two months after 15 policemen and a civilian were killed in a Naxal attack in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli district, Times Now has learnt that a local Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leader is suspected to have been involved in the planning of the attack. According to sources, local NCP leader, identified as Kailash Ramchandani, who was arrested on June 30 by the police in connection with the blasts has allegedly confessed to helping Maoists during interrogation.

Highly placed sources in the police have confirmed to Times Now that Ramchandani was arrested after two Naxals arrested in connection with the case testified against his involvement in the case. Ramchandani used to supply raw materials for violent activities in the area. According to the top police officials, Ramchandani has confessed to passing the information regarding the police convoy that was attacked to the Naxals.

Kailash Ramchandani, who last held the post of Tehsil unit president for NCP, is among the eight people arrested so far for their alleged involvement in the attack. Meanwhile, the NCP district president Ravindra Wasekar has announced that Ramchandani will be sacked from the party.

"He has been with us since the time of the inception of the party. He worked on several posts in the party. Currently, he does not hold any post," Wasekar said. The accused leader will reportedly stay in police custody till July 12.

This revelation has come only a day after the National Investigation Agency (NIA) took over the probe. In the dastardly attack, 15 police personnel and a civilian driver had lost their lives in a landmine blast triggered by the Naxals.

On May 1, a private vehicle carrying 15 policemen, who were part of Quick Reaction Team (QRT) and the driver, were en-route from Kurkheda Police Station in Gadchiroli to PS Burada in north Gadchiroli when they were ambushed on their way at around 12:30 pm.
