Another jail inmate dies, relatives accuse cops of torture, authorities deny

Ludhiana: A few days after two inmates of Ludhiana central jail died at different hospitals, another inmate of Chaunta village, who was an accused in a case of drug peddling, died at PGI Chandigarh on Friday night. The relatives of the deceased alleged that he died following torture by the police. The deceased Sunny Kumar (25) was a labourer.

Police said that Koom Kalan police had arrested Sunny on June 25 after 25 grams of smack was recovered from him. He was produced in the court and later sent to judicial custody. Jail officials claimed that during his stay in the jail, he developed some medical problem following which he was taken to Rajindra Hospital in Patiala. Later he was taken to PGI Chandigarh.

Jail Superintendent, Shamsher Singh Boparai said he got got information that Sunny died at PGI on Friday night after he was shifted there from Rajindra Hospital two days ago. Quoting doctors of Rajindra hospital, he mentioned that Sunny have been taking one gram intoxicant powder daily for last many years and had had tuberculosis of brain. He ruled out that the deceased was subjected to torture by the police.

Sunny’s relatives however alleged that he was tortured by the police.

His cousin said that he had gone to meet him at Rajindra Hospital and had found that the police did not even give him proper meal. He claimed that Sunny had told him that the cops beat him up brutally and were forcing him to name his brother for drug peddling. His relatives also claimed that though Sunny was on drugs he was not a peddler. The relatives also demanded that strict action should be taken against police personnel who were responsible for his death. Koom Kalan police has meanwhile refuted allegations of torture of the deceased.

SHO Koom Kalan police Devinderpal Singh said that ASI Randhir Singh had arrested Sunny and another accused with drugs. After medical examination and following court’s order he had left him in the central jail. “The Jail authorities do not accept any accused who show any signs of “torture” so there is no question of subjecting him to any sort of torture,” he said.

July 1: Two inmates of the central jail had died at various hospitals. The deceased were identified as Gursewak Singh of Sidhwan Bet area, who was booked by Ludhiana rural police in a drug peddling case, and Balwinder Singh of Rahon Khurd in Khanna, an accused in a cheque bounce case.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
