Rajasthan: Woman found hanging inside well, kin allege torture by husband for dowry

the woman was identified as Kallibai Tanwar, who was found hanging inside a well at Durjanpura village on Saturday morning. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Family of the deceased has accused husband of torturing for dowry. The woman's body was handed over to family and probe is underway.

Jaipur: In a case reported from Rajasthan, a 21-year-old woman was found hanging inside a well at a village in the Jhalawar district of the state. The police confirmed the incident on Sunday.

The victim's husband was identified as Nanuram Tanwar, who has been accused of torturing his wife. The police complaint mentioned that Tanwar had been torturing her for dowry ever since they were married two years ago. Ghatoli police station in-charge Nainuram Meena told news agency PTI that the woman was identified as Kallibai Tanwar, who was found hanging inside a well at Durjanpura village on Saturday morning.

Police officer Meena added that prima facie it looks like the woman had committed suicide. She was reportedly a resident of Bijaypur village in Madhya Pradesh's Rajgarh district. Meanwhile, the deceased's father alleged that his daughter's husband strangulated her to death and then hanged her in the well as the dowry demands made by the family were not met.

However, the accused has been booked for dowry death under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code and is yet to be arrested. The woman's body was handed over to her family and an investigation in the case is underway. The deputy superintendent of police of Eklera circle told PTI that the probe in the case is on and the accused is yet to be arrested.

The National Crime Records Bureau, 2016 report revealed that across India 7,628 dowry deaths were reported, a shocking fact for this day and age. While Uttar Pradesh reported the highest number of cases at 2,473, the lowest number was reported from Arunachal Pradesh - 1 case.

Also Read: UP: Man strangles wife to death for refusing sex, cuts his own genitals

In a similar case reported from Rajasthan in June, local police recovered bodies of a 27-year-old woman and her two-year-old daughter from inside a water tank. The deceased woman was identified as Prerna Swami, who was allegedly killed for dowry, said victim's father.

The woman's father has registered a dowry case against his son-in-law and his family members. The police probe in the case is underway and the woman's in-laws were interrogated in connection with the case. However, no arrests were made when the case was reported.
