Madrasa teacher held for raping 8 minors in Bangladesh; citizens demand stringent punishment

Reportedly, the incident came to light on Friday after a Class 2 student cried for help as the accused tried to rape her. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In a case reported from Bangladesh, a madrasa teacher was arrested for allegedly raping eight students aged between 8 and 11. The incident happened within the premises of an educational institution in north Bangladesh. The police confirmed the incident on Sunday.

The accused was identified as 33-year-old, Abul Khayer Belali who reportedly joined Maa Hawa Qawmi girls' madrasa in Netrokona district a year ago. News agency PTI reported that the accused has confessed to the crime after he was arrested. He was booked for attempt to rape on a girl student, bdnews24.com reported. Belali was also a cleric at a local mosque and after the local residents were informed about the incident, they caught him and thrashed him before handing him over to the police.

Reportedly, the incident came to light on Friday after a Class 2 student cried for help as the accused tried to rape her. The victim was one of the 15 residential students at the madrasa whose mother worked as a domestic helper. PTI reported, the madrasa's dormitory houses 15 girls from the nearby villages, who come to attend the school.

Meanwhile, in this case, the official complaint was lodged by the victim's uncle along with the father of another girl who also filed a case against the teacher on similar charges.

Also Read: Pollachi Police arrest nine members of alleged gang for sexually abusing 16-year-old girl

Meanwhile, during the preliminary investigation, the accused told police that he has raped eight out of the 35 students enrolled with the institution. Netrokona Additional Superintendent of Police Shahjahan Mia told media although initial charges were about attempted rape but when the police interrogated the student they found that she was raped by the teacher.

However, the accused has confessed to the police that he has raped eight students, all minors in the past one year. The PTI report claimed that the accused used to call the students into his room and would ask them to massage his hands and feet before raping them.

However, the incident has ignited protests, where hundreds of people are agitating against the teacher and the heinous crime he committed while they are also demanding stringent punishment for the accused teacher.
