3 injured, vehicles torched after clash between BJP, CPI(M) workers in Tripura

Dharmanagar: Police personnel inspect the vehicles which were set ablaze in a clash between the BJP and CPI(M) supporters | Photo Credit: PTI

Tripura: One car and around 20 motorcycles of BJP Yuva Morcha members, who had gone for Panchayat Polls campaigning in Paschim Chandrapur in Dharmanagar, were set on fire. As per the reports, three BJP supporters were injured after which they were sent to the hospital. The saffron party has blamed the CPI(M) for the incident.

The incident took place during the nomination filing for Panchayat elections, in Dharmanagar today.

Last year in December, at least five people received grievous injuries during a clash between the BJP and the CPI(M) cadres. The attack took place in northern Tripura’s Dhalai district.

As per the media inputs, around 50 CPI(M) workers armed with sticks and sharp weapons opened the party office at Salema and when the few BJP workers including supporters passed from the area they were attacked, claimed BJP district secretary Paritosh Pal.

However, rejecting his allegation, CPI(M) subdivision secretary Anjan Das said that BJP workers attacked the party office and assaulted the cadres.

The state, which was once a Communist bastion, also witnessed violence after results of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections were declared.

While the Congress pinned the blame on the BJP, the saffron party accused the CPI(M) for the political violence.

In the attack which broke out in West Tripura, two persons were killed while several others were injured. Reports of violence were also received from other parts of the state.

Though the BJP claims the two victims were party activists but the cops said that they had no information about their political affiliations.

The Left Front which includes CPI(M), CPI, Revolutionary Socialist Party and the All India Forward Bloc ruled Tripura from 1978 to 1988, and then again from 1993 to 2018.

However, the front was voted out of power in 2018 Legislative Assembly election by the Bharatiya Janata Party-Indigenous People's Front of Tripura coalition which garnered 43 out of 59 seats.
