Shopkeepers’ cellphone safekeeping a headache for institutions

MANGALURU: Some of the shops located in and around educational institutions in Dakshina Kannada earn an additional income, other than from selling condiments, stationery or food items to students. The shops charge students to keep their mobile phones , as students are not allowed to carry them inside school and college campuses.Carrying mobile phones is not allowed on campuses of schools , pre-university colleges and some undergraduate colleges in Dakshina Kannada. If phones are found on students at the campuses of these educational institutions, they are confiscated and the students fined heavily. “In order to save mobile phones from being confiscated and to avoid being fined, we usually keep mobile phones at shops situated close to our college. The shop charges a paltry amount for the same, or wants us to give them good business in return. This practice of keeping mobile phones in shops was started by students themselves, and is happening from several years,” says a student, who studies at a college near Bendoor. The shopkeeper issues a token while depositing the gadget. “We collect our phones whenever we have free time or while going home. In this way, there is no fear of getting caught by institution heads,” a student told TOI.After the gang rape of a student in Puttur, the issue has been taken seriously by the heads of educational institutions. The management of various colleges has raised this issue with the district administration and police department, that some shops are encouraging students to carry phones to colleges. “Once students are out of campus, most of them are seen glued to their mobile phones, which is leading to a lack of interest in studies, and paving the way for illegal activities (referring to the recording of the gang rape of a student by using a smart phone and circulating the same),” said the management of educational institutions to the district administration and police.“We have received a complaint from education institutions and will take necessary action if shops are found to be in violation of rules. We will also warn them not to keep the mobile phones of students, as it encourages them to bring mobile phones on campus, when the rules restrict the same,” said a police officer, referring to a complaint filed in Puttur.Harsher rulesWith the use of mobile phones turning into a menace at PU colleges in the educational hub of Karnataka, the management of educational institutions have made harsher rules to curb their use by students on campuses. The management of colleges blame parents for encouraging their children to use mobile phones on the premises of educational institutions. As per the department of pre-university education (DPUE) rules, no student is allowed to carry a mobile phone inside the campus of educational institutions. The college management has the right to take action against students in violation of this rule.While some confiscate and return mobile phones only after completion of the course, if the same is repeated, the offender gets expelled from the educational institution.
