Rajasthan: Rapes cannot be stopped but the number of rapes happening are worrisome, believes this BJP leader

BJP leader Kali Charan Saraf | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Saraf said rapes cannot be stopped but showed concern for rising number of rape incidents Rajasthan government and police continue to receive widespread criticism for failing to curb such incidents

Jaipur: Rajasthan administration has been in dire straits due to increasing incidents of rape in the state, however, a former minister of the state government is of the firm belief that rapes are something that cannot be stopped. Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Kali Charan Saraf on Sunday said the 87 per cent rise in rape incidents in Rajasthan is worrisome but asserted that rape is something that cannot be stopped.

Kali Charan Saraf, who has held several ministerial positions in Rajasthan government in the past, was asked by reporters about his opinion on the rampant rapes that are happening in the state. He responded by saying, "Incidents of rape cannot stop, but an 87 per cent increase in these cases is worrisome".

Former Rajasthan Minister & BJP leader Kali Charan Saraf in Bharatpur: Dushkarm ek aisi chiiz hai jo ruk nahi sakti, parantu 87% badhotri jo rape cases mein hui hai vo chintajanak hai. (Incidents of rape can't stop, but 87% increase in these cases is worrisome). (07.07.2019) pic.twitter.com/uHGSDFyqdU — ANI (@ANI) July 8, 2019

Saraf's comments have come in the wake of the rape of a 7-year-old girl that has caused much tension in Jaipur. The 35-year-old accused was nabbed from Kota and was sent to police custody. The victim is still in critical condition.

According to police, the accused had only come out of jail in 2015 after serving 11 years for sodomising and killing an 11-year-old bob in 2004. He was 21-year-old when he committed the horrific crime and has more than 10 serious cases registered against him.

Earlier in June, a man was arrested in Jaipur's Pratap Nagar area for allegedly raping his 17-year-old niece. As per police, the accused was blackmailing the girl on the basis of a video clip and had demanded money from her.

Earlier in April, a Dalit woman was gang-raped by five men in Rajasthan's Lalwadi while her husband was beaten up and tied and made to watch the entire act. One of the accused also shot a video of the heinous act and reportedly circulated it on social media. The accused also demanded money from the victims before releasing the video online.

The increasing incidents of rape have left the state police in a fix while the Rajasthan government continues to receive widespread criticism for failing to curb such incidents. Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot is yet to make a comment on the issue of rapes or give any order pertaining to the crackdown of perpetrators.
