Doctors at LNJP hospital go on strike; meet Delhi Health Secy over their demands

Doctors at the Delhi government-run LNJP hospital went on strike Monday over an alleged assault on a postgraduate medical student by a patient's attendant, demanding adequate security.

Resident doctors are not working in both regular and emergency wards, affecting patients at the biggest Delhi government-run hospital, Medical Superintendent Dr Kishore Singh said.

The Resident Doctors' Association of the Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan (LNJP) Hospital claimed the stir was triggered by an alleged assault on a third-year postgraduate student of Maulana Azad Medical College, who was on duty last night in the emergency department, around 11 pm.

"A patient was brought to the ER department and later died of some complications. An attendant then assaulted a person on duty, who is a third-year student of MD at the college," RDA president Saiket Jena alleged.

"In the last few days, several such incidents of attack on doctors have taken place in the hospital premises. So, we have gone on a strike," he said.

The protesting doctors demanded adequate security deployment, including marshalls in the emergency department, the medical superintendent said.

Resident doctors of AIIMS and Safdarjung Hospital have expressed solidarity with their colleagues at LNJP Hospital.

The AIIMS Resident Doctors' Association (RDA) urged Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and the health minister to intervene in the matter and address the security concerns of the doctors.

Meanwhile, RDA representatives and hospital authorities met Delhi Health Secretary Sanjeev Khirwar in the afternoon, he said.

The RDA president claimed that "the immediate demand of deploying marshall in emergency department of the hospital has been agreed upon by authorities," adding, "they will deployed today".

"But, we have other demands as well, like installation of CCTV cameras in regular wards as well, so the strike is still on," Jena said.

The incident comes days after two junior doctors at NRS Hospital in Kolkata were assaulted allegedly by the relatives of a patient who died at the hospital.

Junior doctors in West Bengal went on a strike following the incident over lack of security at the workplace.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
