Gang abducts a bizman, takes him on a long drive

Bengaluru

.

NIA officials recover crude bombs in Chikkabanavara

Man from Kerala had come to city with Rs 1.1 lakh to bail his friend outA 36-year-old businessman from Kerala, who had come to the city to help out a friend, got entangled in a whole new mess of his own. K Prashanth had come down to help a friend get bail in a cheating case. But when he came here with the money, a gang got wind of this and decided to make money out of him. They abducted him and his friend, N Noble, and took them on a drive to extract money from them, but Prashanth and Noble escaped and the accused were arrested.The victim’s friend, Sharath Kumar, against whom cheating cases have been registered in Tumakuru andRural district is lodged in Mangaluru jail and is alleged to have cheated people to the tune of lakhs of rupees. Prashanth had arranged Rs 1.1 lakh in cash for the bail. Since he was new to the city, he had handed over the money to a friend, Riyaz, who is also from Kerala and has been staying here for the last few years. When Prashanth was handing over the money to Riyaz, 10 other people were around. These people came to know of this money and also about what it was for. They thought as the money was being arranged to bail a person who had cheated people of lakhs of rupees, Prashanth would have a lot money with him.Last Monday around 1.30 am, a gang armed with weapons barged into a house at Chokkanahalli Layout in Hegadenagar, where Prashanth and Noble were staying. They took mobile phones and ATM cards of all the other room mates. They demanded money from Prashanth and when he said he didn’t have any, they put both Noble and Prashanth in their own car and drove them around for almost three hours, threatening and demanding money.The victims claim they got a chance to escape when the car ran out of fuel and they had to go to a petrol bunk. At the petrol bunk near the Hunasamaranahalli Bridge, the two came out of the car and drew the attention of the petrol bunk staff. But the accused managed to escape with the car.A complaint was filed in the Sampigehalli police station on Monday. Five of the accused were arrested by Thursday.The gang had taken the victims to Bellary Road, Yelahanka, Hunasamaranahalli and other places. In all, they had escaped with the car, cash, mobile phones, ATM cards -- all together worth around Rs 9 lakh. “The accused, who got to know about Sharath Kumar’s cheating cases assumed that Prashanth would have the money that Kumar had got from his victims. They hatched a plot to extract money from him. Five persons have been arrested,” MH Nagathe, assistant commissioner of police, Sampigehalli sub-division, said.The arrested are identified as Faizal Khan alias Faizal, 25, M Abbas, 40, S Razak, 36, Abdul Ajij alias Addu, 28, all residents of Yeshwanthapura and B Riyaz, 35, of DJ Halli. The car and other valuables have been recovered from the gang. A case of kidnapping for ransom (IPC 364A) and dacoity (IPC 395) was registered.*****The National Investigation Agency (NIA) investigating the 2014 Burdwan blast have recovered 10 crude bombs from a house in Chikkabanavara in the outskirts of Bengaluru. The accused, Habibur Rehman who was arrested on June 25 from Doddaballapur, had rented out a house near Chikkabanavara railway station. The officials who raided the house on Sundayfound 10 crude bombs in his possesion. Following his arrest in Doddaballapur, the officials had recovered two improvised explosive devises from under a bridge near a stormwater drain in Ramanagara. NIA officials had taken him to several places in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and other states where he had stayed earlier while he was on the run.
