On tantrik's advice, jobless graduate sets house on fire, killed in police firing

New Delhi:

In a shocking case, a young man in Assam set his house and vehicles on fire to complete a bizarre ritual that was advised by a family ‘guru’. According to a report by The Indian Express, the man has been identified as one Pulakesh Saharia. The 28-year-old was a graduate in computer application. On the fateful day, the jobless man forced his family to take part in the black magic ritual. Stripped naked, the Saharias set their home and vehicles on fire. When the neighbours informed the police about the blaze, the family attacked the cops with swords. An altercation broke out between the cops and the family and later Pulakesh Saharia was killed in the police firing, the Indian Express report said.

The father of the man admitted to a local hospital says that it was the tantrik who is to be blamed for this bizarre ritual. “He and his associate Bhuyan had told us that if this puja was held, a hidden treasure would be found, and Pulakesh would get a job. They tried to convince us that our daughter had committed suicide because she became a victim of sexual assault and this puja would ensure that the assaulters get punished,” The Indian Express quoted Jadab Saharia as saying.

Black magic or suspicion of black magic has been reason behind many crimes, especially in rural India. Recently, a 30-year-old man had murdered his mother because he suspected that she was 'doing black magic on him.' According to news agency ANI, the incident took place on December 23 in a village in Telangana. Boinpalle Police of Rajanna Sircilla District said that, "On December 23, a person by the name of Srinivas, killed his mother by strangulating her to death. He suspected that his mother practiced black magic on him, from which he was falling ill often. So the accused decided to murder his 52-year-old mother at her residence." The man has been booked under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.

But it was the Burari case in the National Capital that rocked the nation. In this case, 11 members of a family allegedly committed suicide. Many reports suggested that the Chandawat family of Delhi's Burari area were under some influence and they were preforming some black magic ritual. However, the probe by the Delhi Police has pointed out the ritual gone wrong theory. According to the police, the family members never intended to end their lives. They were performing a ritual also known as 'badh pooja', in which, members tied themselves with the iron mesh in the house. But it was not a mass suicide. The probe has also ruled out any foul play or the theory that Lalit, one of the sons , killed everyone and then committed suicide.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
