UP: Woman approaches police as husband films intimate moments, performs ‘unnatural sex’

The woman said when she objected to her husband's act, he promised to delete the videos. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused recorded intimate moments with wife on wedding night Victim says she was beaten up by husband when she objected to the act

Bareilly: A woman in Uttar Pradesh has approached the police against her husband for allegedly filming their intimate moments and performing 'unnatural sex' with her. The incident is reported from Baradari police station area in Bareilly district. The woman in her complaint has accused her husband of 'Breach of Privacy'.

According to the victim, her husband threatened her to upload the video on social media after she protested the immoral act by her spouse. Meanwhile, the police have booked the accused husband under Section 377 (unnatural offences) 506 (criminal intimidation) and other provisions of the Information Technology Act.

Police say they have filed the FIR and are probing the matter. The accused husband is yet to be arrested. According to a report, the victim's husband allegedly recorded their intimate moments on his mobile phone during their wedding night in October 2018.

The woman said when she objected to her husband's act, he promised to delete the videos. But days later, she found out the videos were still present on his phones. The complainant also claimed that when she attempted to delete the videos by herself, the husband sexually assaulted her in an unnatural way and filmed the heinous act.

When the woman approached her in-laws telling them about the abuse, they did not listen to the woman and reportedly sided with their son. The victim said she was abused repeatedly by her husband.

According to the woman, she remained quiet about the incident and didn't inform her parents when the accused threatened her that he will upload the videos on social media.

The victim said she returned to her parents' home after the accused thrashed her on June 30 this year. On July 7, the woman reached Baradari police station and filed an FIR against her husband.

"The complaint seems genuine, so we filed the FIR against her husband. The case is being probed," the report quoted Sub-Inspector Ved Prakash, acting in-charge of Baradari police station.

In a similar case in January this year, a middle-aged man was arrested by police for allegedly assaulting and sodomising his wife in Patiala district. The wife had to be admitted to the hospital after she was physically and sexually assaulted by the husband. The woman alleged that her husband used to force her to make unnatural contact and when she refused, he used to torture her physically.

Similarly, a 25-year-old man was allegedly asked to perform a sexual act on a group of six traffic policemen in north Delhi's Sabzi Mandi in April 2016 and was beaten up brutally when he refused. The officer was arrested by the police.
