Marital Rape Can’t Be Ground For Divorce According To The Delhi High Court

If you are a woman who has been sexually assaulted by her husband, you cannot cite the abuse as reasons for divorce. Yes, you read that right.

In a move that has been branded “anti-women” by many on social media, the Delhi High Court turned down a plea to provide direction to the Centre to make marital rape ground for divorce.

The plea was filed by Anuja Kapur, a lawyer who also sought direction from the court for framing guidelines for the registration of marital rape cases. Kapur had earlier approached the Supreme Court which refused to entertain her plea.

Presently, marital rape is not a ground for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Muslim Personal Law Application Act, 1937, or the Special Marriage Act, 1954.

The demand to criminalise marital rape has gained strength over the past few years but it is very clear that neither the judiciary, nor the Centre is interested in providing protection to women from sexual assault within marriages.

In 2016, the then Union Minister of Woman and Child Development, Maneka Gandhi had made this statement: “It is considered that the concept of marital rape, as understood internationally, cannot be suitably applied in the Indian context due to various factors like level of education/illiteracy, poverty".

The laws which condone marital rape

Currently, Section 375 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) “sanctions sexual intercourse, even if forced, between a married couple, if the wife is over 15 years of age". This is the archaic law condoning statutory rape, which needs to be amended on an urgent basis. But our lawmakers would much rather maintain the status quo, where women are forced to give up all sexual agency once they enter the marital contract.

The Justice Verma Committee report of 2013 on sexual violence laws had also said that the exemption for marital rape “stems from a long outdated notion of marriage which regarded wives as no more than the property of their husbands" and had recommended removing the marital rape exception.

In 2018, the Central government took a stand against criminalising marital rape, stating that it would “destabilise the institution of marriage” and could become an easy tool to “harass husbands”.

With the judiciary’s latest decision to dismiss the plea filed by Anuja Kapur, it is clear that the odds are stacked against the women who want legal recourse against sexual coercion in marriages.






