Trudeau roundly mocked for political, fashion blunders during disaster trip to India

avro24 said: So you guys care about cultural appropriation?



Odd. Click to expand...

While varying somewhat, national opinion polls consistently indicate that a majority of the general public do not advocate a name change.

Blackleaf said: Imagine if a Prime Minister visited Canada and dressed up as a Mountie.



I can't way to see him dressed up as a Pearly King when visiting Britain, or wearing a beret with onions round his neck when visiting France. Click to expand...

No they are throwing YOUR fakenews BS right back in your face.Which is only to be expected, considering your hypoctritical behavior on the subject ...what's odd about that?Polls of the general public Opinions regarding name change (redskins)In an April 2013 poll by AP-GfK, 79 percent responded that the name should not change, 11 percent said it should change, 8 percent had no opinion and 2 percent did not answer.[2]A June 2014 poll by the Rasmussen Reports, a polling company criticized by some as having a conservative bias, found 60 percent agreed that the name should not change, 26 percent that it should change, and 14 percent were undecided.[3]A poll conducted by Langer Research for ESPN's "Outside the Lines" in September 2014 found 71 percent in favor of keeping the name, and 23 percent thinking the name should be changed. While finding no difference based upon race or gender, this poll found a significant political difference, with 88 percent of people who consider themselves conservative say the team should keep its name, compared to 53 percent for liberals.[4]The 2016 annual NFL poll found significant difference of opinion based upon age and race. Older respondents are opposed to a name change, but those between 18 and 29 are strongly (70%) in favor of a change. While 77% of all white fans believe the name should not be changed, only 38% of African-American and 33% of Latino fans agree, which is a change since the 2014 poll in which there was little difference between white and non-white opinion.[5]While not specific to the Redskins, a survey conducted in 2002 by The Harris Poll for Sports Illustrated (SI) found that 81 percent of Native Americans who live outside traditional Indian reservations and 53 percent of Indians on reservations did not find the names or images used by sports team to be discriminatoryYa fakenews Undemocratic commienaziglobalist nutbars are highlarious!the facts kill you every time you open that desperate gaping slathering yap!Funny you picked a shot where we can't see what SHRUB the globalist superpower leader, was wearing...while Harper ( no matter how much I didn't like him) is plainly wearing something they gave him OVER HIS NORMAL CLOTHES!At least he had some actual Indians to hang out with.Yeah British royalty has set more than their share of style modes here, even the beaver hat was worn by the kings and court at the time to get people to follow suit, and that's what paid for the colonization of this country.I would have thought Trudeau would have learned from that example of how ( right or wrong)a ruler does things. It is in the text books, but maybe not at drama school.Even his dad ( right or wrong) set style many times, and at least provided an example of canadian style internationally.
