Telangana: Armed with guns, Maoists kidnap TRS leader from his residence

Telangana Rashtra Samithi leader N Srinivas Rao | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights TRS leader N Srinivas Rao was kidnapped and "taken away" from Kothur village around Monday midnight The wife of TRS neta alleged that Maoists thrashed her husband before taking him away CPI(Maoist) militia commander Sodi Jogaiah could be behind the incident

Hyderabad: Around 10-15 suspected cadre of the Communist Party of India-Maoist thrashed and then abducted a Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) leader from his house in Bhadradri Kothagudem district of Telangana, which is close to Chhattisgarh. As per a police official, N Srinivas Rao (45), a local TRS leader, was kidnapped and "taken away" from Kothur village around Monday midnight.

Around 10-15 suspected Maoists, some of them wielding guns and sticks, dragged Rao, the former Mandal Parishad Territorial Constituency (MTPC) member, out of his house, said Durga, who is the wife of the TRS leader.

She told police that only three men entered the house while the rest stood guard outside. Durga alleged that they did not only thrash her husband before taking him away but also beat her with sticks and her son Praveen.

She said that the men, who were carrying firearms, did not pay any attention to her and her son's repeated pleadings.

"When we tried to stop them, they also pointed a gun at me. We were not allowed to step out of our house," she claimed.

According to a report, CPI(Maoist) militia commander Sodi Jogaiah could be behind the incident.

Police have said that around 200 villagers and family members of Rao have left for Chhattisgarh to trace the TRS neta. Rao's wife has, meanwhile, urged the kidnappers to release her husband.

"Srinivas Rao was having land issues with tribals and he had some payment dues with them. He has been taken to Chhattisgarh after being abducted," said Superintendent of Polices Sunil Dutt.

He added: "We suspect that Naxals are behind this. A group of villagers has also gone to Chhattisgarh to initiate talks with the kidnappers."

The Telangana Police have constituted special teams to locate the leader. They are also coordinating with cops in Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh.

In November 2015, Maoists had abducted six local TRS leaders from Khammam district’s Cherla mandal. They were released in January 2016.

Six leaders, including TRS Bhadrachalam constituency in-charge M Ramakrishna, were 'detained' when they went to meet Maoists at Pusuguppa village located on the Telangana-Chhattisgarh border. They were called by Maoists for a discussion on some issues.

However, the Maoists had asked the Telangana government to initiate action against cops involved in the killings of two Maoists in Warangal district. The letter had also called for the suspension of police's combing operations from Khammam to Adilabad districts.
