‘Purification’, protests and a death: What happened in 24 hours since 2 women entered Sabarimala

Thiruvananthapuram: A policeman chases away protesters during a protest against the entry of two women to the Sabarimala temple, in Thiruvananthapuram, Wednesday, Jan 2, 2019. (PTI Photo) (PTI1_2_2019_000187B)

Draped in black veils, two women -- Bindu (42) and Kanakadurga (44) -- created history on January 2 as they entered the Sabarimala temple in Kerala, defying threats from the Hindu right wing outfits.

The women entered the Lord Ayyappa temple three months after the Supreme Court of India (SC), lifted the ban on entry of girls and women between 10 and 50 years of age into the shrine.

Following the top court’s verdict allowing women of all ages to offer prayers at the shrine, the Communist Party of India (Marxist)-led Left Democratic Front (LDF) government decided to implement the verdict. This was opposed by the state’s main opposition party Congress, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and Hindu right wing groups.

The women’s entry sparked violent protests across Kerala, leading to the death of one person.

Here’s what happened in the 24 hours that followed the women’s entry:

‘Purification’ rituals

After the video of Bindu and Kanakdurga’s entry in the hilltop shrine went viral, the chief priest decided to close the temple’s sanctum sanctorum and perform a 'purification' ceremony.

Devotees were asked to move out of the shrine during the ceremony and the temple only reopened after completion of the ritual.

Violent protests

Following the conformation of the women’s entry from Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan and the police, protests erupted in several places in the state, with Hindu right-wing activists blocking highways and forcing closure of shops and markets.

BJP and CPI (M) workers clashed in front of the Secretariat for over five hours. Police used water cannons and used teargas shells to bring the situation under control.

The ruling CPI (M)'s offices were vandalised at multiple locations causing tension, police said.

State-owned KSRTC buses were damaged at Konni and Kozhencherry in Pathanamthitta district where the temple is located, besides several other places.

Activist’s death

A 55-year-old Sabarimala Karma Samithi activist who was injured on January 2 in a clash between BJP and CPI (M) workers in Pandalam, succumbed to his injuries on January 3, according to reports. Police ordered an investigation into the matter.

Ministers face protesters’ wrath

BJP workers waved black flags at Devaswom minister Kadakampally Surendran in Guruvayur where he had gone to attend a function.

Health minister KK Shylaja had to face the ire of activists of the Yuva Morcha, the party's youth wing at Kannur, who showed him black flags.

Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan's effigy was burnt at Malappuram and four activists of the BJP's Mahila Morcha were arrested when they forced their way close to the chief minister's office in the secretariat complex.

Bandh

Sabarimala Karma Samithi, an umbrella organisation of various pro-Hindutva groups, spearheading protests against the SC's September 28 verdict, and Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP), called for a state-wide bandh on January 3. The Congress-led United Democratic Front (UDF) said it would observe a "black day".

(With inputs from PTI)
