Married man murders live-in partner in Delhi, tries to bury body in Bijnor to avoid Republic Day security

The carpenter drove to a village in Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh to bury his partner's body where the residents caught him and informed the police (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A 32-year-old married man was arrested for allegedly killing his live-in partner in Usmanpur, Delhi and for trying to bury her body in Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. The 32-year-old was arrested by the Delhi Police for allegedly killing his 28-year-old live-in partner and burying her body in Bijnor, a village which is around 160 km away from Delhi.

The accused, who works as a carpenter is married and is a father of a 3-year-old. Reportedly, the accused told the police that his live-in partner was also married. He also confessed to having repeated spats with his wife as well as his 28-year-old live-in partner.

Also Read: Delhi air pollution today: AQI at 'poor' 218, to deteriorate further as impact of rainfall wash out flattens

Allegedly, there were constant arguments between the carpenter's wife and his live-in partner over staying with the accused in his house. The police also stated that the deceased was pressurizing the carpenter for marrying him, which was increasing differences between them.

A police officer told the Times of India that after a heated argument on January 22, the carpenter strangled her to death. He also added that after she passed away, the accused wrapped the dead body in a cloth and decided on dumping it in a drain. A major hindrance in the execution of his plan was the special security deployed in Delhi on account of Republic Day.

Undeterred in his intentions, the accused hired a car and went to his village, Khatriyan, situated in Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. The accused was eventually caught when he grabbed the attention of the residents while burying the body of his partner. On being informed, UP Police took the body in police custody as they questioned the man. The car, however, has not been found yet.
