Flood Situation Worsens In Assam, Wifi On Delhi Metro + More Top News

Dhemaji district is affected the most in Assam with more than 22,00 people affected. Other districts that have been marred by rain are Lakhimpur, Biswanath, Golaghat, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Chirang and Barpeta. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Binge Watch On The Move: Delhi Metro Will Soon Offer Free WiFi With Download Speed Of 300 Mbps

Soon, commuters travelling by Delhi Metro will be able to enjoy free Wi-Fi not only at the stations, but even on moving trains. The six stations of the Airport Express Line were the first to provide the facility in 2016, and fittingly, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation will start free Wi-Fi services in moving trains on the same corridor around end-2019. Read more

2) While India Aims To Become A $5 Trillion Economy, There's No Plan To Stop Encephalitis Deaths

Muzaffarpur was the epicentre of Encephalitis outbreak that caused the death of more than 100 children in Bihar in the month of June. Initial reports suggested that encephalitis, also known as brain fever or chamki bukhaar, was caused due to consumption of infected lychees. Read more

3) Dalit Man Killed For Marrying Upper Caste Woman In Gujarat

India’s most marginalised communities remain threatened by the upper caste community for reasons as petty as fetching water from well and also for marrying outside their castes. Read more

4) As India’s Water Crisis Deepens, NITI Aayog Plans To Desalinise Water Along 7,800-Km Coastline

India’s sixth largest city, Chennai, ran out of water recently. A delayed monsoon has caused severe shortage of water in parts of India, with villagers in parched areas leaving their lands in search of clean water. Reports suggested multiple incidents of violence taking place over water. Read more

5) Finally, Govt Seems Serious About Bringing Law On Doctors' Security. Better Late Than Never!

Recently, there has been a spate of attacks from various parts of the country, where doctors and other medical staff were assaulted by relatives of patients accusing them of negligence. Read more
