After Spending Three Years In Jail Accused Of Raping A Schoolgirl, Three Teachers Acquitted For Lack Of Evidence To Prove Sexual Assault

They say that justice delayed is justice denied. This could not be any far from the truth in the case of three school teachers from Maharashtra.

After being in a jail for three years as undertrials accused of rape, a court in Thane acquitted the three male teachers and the female attendant in the case. The acquittal came after the medical examination failed to establish any sexual assault on the girl who was nine years old at the time of the complaint.

AP/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

The three men, Sanjay Patil Nilesh Bhoir and Jitendra Jadhav, who taught at a school in Mira Road was arrested on November 2015 on charges of repeatedly raping the nine-year-old girl student. The fourth accused, attendant Usha Tupe was arrested for allegedly helping them in the assault. They were booked under sections 376, 323, 504, and 506 rw 34 of the IPC and also sections 3 and 4 of the POCSO Act 2012.

The arrests were made after the girl's mother made a police complaint against them alleging that her daughter was subjected to multiple sexual assaults over a period of one year between 2014 and 2015.

BCCL/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

Following the complaint, there were massive protests at the school by parents of other students and the four were immediately suspended, the principal stepped down and the school decided not to appoint any male teachers.

But they were acquitted by the court after it found no evidence to establish any sexual assault in the girl's medical report.

The Times of India reported that all the four accused were released from jail a day after they were acquitted.

The report, quoting one of the defence lawyers added that CCTV footages from the school also failed to establish any kind of sexual assault.

Another defence lawyer added that the attendant, Tupe was not even working in the school during the time when the alleged assaults happened.

REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

The lawyers also hinted that the teachers were implicated in the false case by a rival school to tarnish the image of the institution. They alleged that the father of the girl was working with the rival school, adding that they are filing a defamation case against the state.

While the accused have been exonerated of the charges, they have been left jobless. The school which had initially suspended them has since adopted a policy of not having any male teachers. A trustee of the school however told The Times of India that they would help the teacher to find a job.
