Half-brother of murdered schoolgirl Scarlett Keeling sold cannabis to cope with trauma

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want all the latest cases and top crime stories from Plymouth? Sign up for our new email updates on Crime & Punishment

The half-brother of murdered Devon schoolgirl Scarlett Keeling started smoking and selling cannabis over Facebook to cope with the trauma of her loss, a court heard.

Former soldier Jamie Taylor, aged 28, sought solace in the drug and then started a mail order business posting out cannabis products such as brownies.

He has also attempted suicide, his barrister said.

But Taylor and two accomplices were caught after staff at a post office smelt the drug in his parcels, Plymouth Crown Court heard.

Scarlett was only 15 when she was raped and killed on a beach at the tourist paradise of Goa in India in 2008.

The Bideford teenager was on a six-month family holiday in India in 2008 with her family including her mum, her mother's boyfriend and seven siblings and half-siblings.

(Image: Tavistock Police)

The investigation was closed only this year by the Indian authorities with nobody convicted.

Police alerted by workers at Tavistock police office raided a remote farm building near the town and uncovered a “cottage industry” selling cannabis products in May last year.

Taylor’s barrister Ed Bailey said: “His half-sister Scarlett Keeling was raped and murdered in the Goa region. That has had a long-lasting effect.

“He was dishonourably discharged from the Army and he started to use cannabis. He found it a solace and a comfort.

“He embarked upon this operation primarily to help those with similar psychological and health needs to his own.

“He continues to grieve for his half-sister. He has made various attempts on his own life. He has sought help from the community mental health team in the Launceston area and he is unfit for any unpaid work.”

The court heard that he had continued to argue with a probation officer that cannabis should be legalised.

Judge Robert Linford told him: “Possession, production and supply of cannabis, whether you like it or not, is illegal in this country. It does not matter why you are doing it.”

Suspending his prison sentence, he added: “I have to have regard to the terrible trauma which has effected your life. Nobody should have to go through what you have gone through.”

Taylor, Armie Valentine, aged 30, and 27-year-old Cleo Batchelor faced the court after police found the drugs operation at Higher Farm in Heathfield between Tavistock and South Brentor on May 31 last year.

The small growth in the hayloft had links to a Facebook drug ‘tuck shop’.

(Image: Avalon.red)

Some of the items in pictures released by police at the times bear the logo of Mr Eat Your Green's. A Facebook page of the same name, also showing the logo, shows cannabis-related food items.

Taylor, of Madford Lane, Launceston, pleaded guilty to possession of a Class B drug with intent to supply on that day.

He also admitted supplying the drug between July 1 2017 and June 1 2018.

Taylor finally pleaded guilty to producing cannabis on or before May 31 last year.

Valentine, of Bethnal Green, East London, admitted being concerned in the supply of the Class B drug between that July and June.

Batchelor, of Albert Terrace, Gunnislake, pleaded guilty to allowing premises to be used for growing cannabis.

(Image: File image)

Emily Cook, for the Crown Prosecution Service, said it was a “cottage industry” supplying cannabis.

She said police were called after regular customer Taylor gave them a parcel to send which smelt strongly of cannabis.

Officers found two “snack packs” of the drug inside and tracked Taylor, his girlfriend Batchelor and Valentine to the isolated farm.

Miss Cook said they found six plants being grown and 15 seedlings – though the growth was not described as “sophisticated”.

She added that the officers found cannabis products including fudge, brownies and cookies, plus what was described as a “pop-up stalls”. There was a price list of goods and stickers for the Cornwall Cannabis Club.

Miss Cook estimated the value of the drugs as £2,265 and calculated that Taylor made £7,431 a year through the business.

But she added Proceeds of Crime Act proceedings were not being launched as he had no money in his bank account.

Judge Linford handed Taylor a 12-month prison sentence, suspended for two years.

Valentine was handed a two-year community order with 100 hours unpaid work and 15 days Rehabilitation Activity Requirement.

Batchelor received a 12-month community order with 130 hours unpaid work.

Judge Linford warned Taylor that the prison sentence would be implemented if he was caught with drugs again - “even so much as a spliff”.
