8 Bollywood Personalities Who Died Mysteriously

Bollywood is the ultimate fantasy land. It is the place where dreams come true and people are catapulted into stardom. But behind the glamour and glitz, lies a completely different world. Bollywood is often a rollercoaster ride, with our favorite stars battling many personal and professional problems. So, it’s not rare to find Bollywood personalities dying mysteriously. These bollywood personalities died mysteriously and their departure has raised a lot of eyebrows, doubts and questions.

1. Sridevi: The death that shook the nation, Sridevi met an untimely demise on 24th February, 2018. The

“Hawa Hawaii” girl was found dead in her hotel’s bathtub in Dubai. Initial suspicion was that she suffered a cardiac arrest, but the post mortem report point out to drowning in the tub. Speculations are afloat that she was intoxicated and fell into the tub, resulting in accidental drowning.

2. Parveen Babi: The iconic Indian actress represented a free, Bohemian spirit and got tremendous success in the film industry. She was the first Bollywood star to be featured on the cover of the Time magazine. Parveen was rumored to be mentally fragile and it is believed that Parveen suffered from paranoid schizophrenia. Apparently, she was an alcoholic and her personal life was in shambles. Parveen Babi passed away in 2005 and her body was discovered a few days later. It is believed that she starved herself to death.

3. Guru Dutt: Yesteryear actor, Guru Dutt, was found dead on his bed in his rented apartment at Pedder Road in Mumbai on October 10, 1964. Guru, who was part of classics such as ‘Pyaasa’, ‘Kaagaz Ke Phool’, ‘Sahib Bibi Aur Ghulam’ and ‘Chaudhvin Ka Chand’, was only 39 when he died. He is said to have been taking alcohol mixed with sleeping pills. No one has yet ascertained if his death was suicide or accidental.

4. Jiah Khan: The 25-year-old model and starlet committed suicide on June 3, 2013 in Mumbai. It was revealed that Jiah had left behind a long note expressing how she was being harassed and tortured mentally. It was alleged that her boyfriend Sooraj Pancholi had triggered the actress to commit suicide. Sooraj was arrested and booked on the charge of abatement to suicide. Forensic reports confirmed that Jiah was under the influence of alcohol when she hanged herself. We assume that her failed relationship or a rocky career play instrumental in driving her to a tragic end.

5. Divya Bharti: Known as one of the most promising Bollywood actresses of her time, Divya died after falling from the balcony of the fifth floor of her Mumbai apartment. She was only 19 years old when she met an untimely end and had become one of the most sought-after actresses in the industry having given hits like Deewana and Vishwatma. It is reported that Divya was under the influence of alcohol when the unfortunate incident happened on April 5, 1993. The circumstances of her death still remain murky, even after the police closed the investigation in 1998. We are yet to know if her demise was an accident, a suicide or murder. Some also believe that she was married to Bollywood biggie Sajid Nadiadwala and there are many conspiracy theories doing the rounds about her demise.

6. Silk Smitha: Vijayalakshmi Vadlapati or Silk Smitha as she was known as, was found dead at her Chennai apartment on September 23, 1996. Her death shook the country as Silk Smitha was at the peak of her career at the time. It has been more than 20 years since Silk Smitha was found dead, but till date, no one knows why the actress took the extreme step. It is believed that she was battling multiple problems, including financial crunch, disillusionment in love and severe depression. It is still unclear if it was a suicide or some foul play was involved.

7. Manmohan Desai: Manmohan Desai was the mastermind behind family entertainers like Amar Akbar Anthony, Coolie, Dharam Veer. The director and producer met his tragic end on March 1st 1994 when fell to his death from the balcony of his flat when it collapsed. It remains unclear if this was accident or suicide. Many say he took his life as he could not cope up with failing health and declining career.

8. Nafeesa Joseph: Beauty queen turned VJ Nafeesa ended her life by hanging herself in her Mumbai Apartment on July 29, 2004. The winner of Femina Miss India Universe 1997 was a known face on the television and runway. She was supposed to get married to businessman Gautam Khanduja but her marriage was called off. It is rumored that she battled severe depression on discovering that her fiancé was already married and had lied to her. It is also reported that charges of abetting her death were pressed against her fiance.

Then and Now Looks of 10 Bollywood Actresses Who Have Undergone Plastic Surgery

Makeup Products That Would Make You Look Like A Bollywood Star

10 Bollywood Actresses with Beautiful Eyebrow Shapes

10 Bollywood Celebrities Who Look Beautiful Without Makeup
