Abducted TRS leader killed in Chhattisgarh, Maoists claim responsibility

Abducted TRS leader killed in Chhattisgarh, Maoists claim responsibility

CPI (Maoists) claimed that Srinivas was working as a police informer, and hence killed him.

news Crime

Forty five-year-old Nalluri Srinivas, a TRS leader from Bhadradri-Kothagudem district, was found murdered in the Sukuma district of Chhattisgarh. In a letter found next to his body, the Communist Party of India (Maoists) have claimed responsibility for the murder. Police said that the killing is believed to have taken place near Tettemadugu-Puttapadu-Chanda area in Sukuma district.

A letter signed by Sharad, secretary of the CPI (Maoist), found near the TRS leader’s body claimed that the Maoists killed him because he was acting as an informer to the police and passing on information about the Maoist movement to the intelligence from time to time.

The letter also said that Srinivas had grabbed 70 acres of land from Adivasis, and been tipping off to state intelligence units that resulted in the arrest of a few civil rights activists.

Srinivas, a local leader from Kothur village, was allegedly abducted by a group Maoists on Tuesday from his home around 10.15 pm. He was accused of grabbing lands belonging to tribals and also extending crop loans at exorbitant rates. Srinivas is a former member of the Mandal Parishad Territorial Constituency (MPTC).

Speaking to TNM, Bhadradri-Kothagudem Superintendent of police, Sunil Dutt confirmed the killing and said, "He was killed this afternoon by Maoists, we believe he was beaten to death. We suspect that they have done this to instill fear among others."

While the Maoists accused Srinvias of being a police informer, the SP denied this: "Srinivas was neither acting as an informer nor was into active politics."

Explaining the developments before the abduction of Srinivas, police said that for 6-8 months, Maoists have written letters to local politicians, contractors, and big farmers in the region demanding money as they were allegedly running short of funds.
