Locals in Gurugram thrash firemen on duty allegedly for arriving late

The attacked fire tender | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights A call was made to the fire department at 1.44 am on Friday night Two fire tenders were rushed to the spot Gurugram Police have detained one person as of yet

Gurugram: Locals in DLP Phase 3 of Gurugram allegedly misbehaved with and even assaulted three firefighters on Friday. The Fire Department personnel had arrived at the spot to douse a transformer fire which engulfed two private vehicles parked in the area. Police have detained one person in connection with the alleged assault.

Residents of the area claim that they were woken by the sound of loud explosions after midnight. They later discovered that the sounds were coming from a transformer which was engulfed in flames. A call was made to the fire department but the blaze charred two cars parked near the transformer before firemen could reach the spot, claim locals.

Gurugram: Locals attacked fire department officials allegedly over delay in reaching the spot where a fire had broken out in DLF phase-3 last night. pic.twitter.com/m01AuZ3OoH — ANI (@ANI) July 12, 2019

Responding to the claims, District Fire Officer (DFO) Isham Singh Kashyap said the fire department received a distress call regarding the fire at around 1.44 am. A tender with one driver and three staff members were immediately dispatched for the spot, said Singh, according to a report.

The DFO added that a second fire tender was later sent for assistance which is when residents of the locality misbehaved with the firemen.

Three personnel, namely Sahun, Kapil and Kuldeep suffered injuries as a result of the assault. It is believed that the men who assaulted the firemen were owners of the vehicles which caught fire but a probe into the matter is underway, said Singh. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and the matter is being investigated by Gurugram Police.

A similar instance had come to light from Pune's Tingre Nagar in March of this year when onlookers not only verbally abused a fireman on duty but also assaulted him for arriving at the spot uninvited. The fireman, Sunil Devkar who is attached with the Yerwada fire station later told mediapersons that he was attempting to douse a fire which had started in a garbage dump. The onlookers who did not want the fire to be stopped began assaulting me, said Devkar.

On the basis of a complaint by the fireman, Vishrantwadi police arrested 55-year-old Rajaram Tingre, a resident of Tingre Nagar for assaulting Devkar. Tingre was booked under section 353 of the Indian Penal Code for using physical force to deter a public servant from discharging his duty. If convicted under this section, the convict can be awarded up to two years in prison along with a fine or both. It is also a non-bailable offence.
