Congress leader slams centre, Odisha over rising cases of child rape

BHUBANESWAR: Congress legislature party leader Narasingha Mishra on Friday expressed concern over rising child rape cases while criticising the governments at the Centre and state for inaction.Citing a news report — ‘SC initiates suo motu action to curb rising cases of child rape’ — published in the TOI on Friday, Narasingha told the assembly during Zero Hour, “It seems the SC is forced to act because the governments at the Centre and in states are not doing enough. The Chief Justice of India was compelled to intervene because of government inaction.”From January 1 to June 30, Uttar Pradesh reported 3,457 incidents of child sexual abuse, the highest in the country, while Odisha reported 1005. “If on calculates the incidents in terms of percentage of population, Odisha’s situation is worse than UP,” Narasingha said. While UP’s population is above 20 crore, Odisha’s is around 4.5 crore.“It’s a matter of grave concern. While every day seven cases of rape are being reported in Odisha, the annual conviction rate is just six. This is because of shoddy investigation and improper system of appointing public prosecutors on political consideration,” Narasingha said.The veteran leader, who was the law minister from 1990-1995, suggested that the police should be bifurcated into two wings — one for law and order and the other for investigation.Earlier, ST/SC development minister Jagannath Sarka made a statement in the assembly on alleged incidents of rape of girl students in government-run residential schools. The minister said alleged incidents of sexual exploitation of one girl student in Khurda district in May, one in Dhenkanal in January and another in Mayurbhanj in February had come to light. “In all three cases, the students were sexually assaulted while going home on holidays. In all three incidents police have arrested the accused,” the minister stated.The minister said the government has initiated a process to install 1120 CCTVs to monitor the entry/exits of residential schools. Around 5.93 lakh students stay in 6500 hostels run by the ST/SC development department. A 24-hour toll free number (1800-345-3040) has been made available for those living in hostels. The ladies hostels have also been provided with a telephone and a hot line number to connect with women helplines in times of crisis.
