PhDs to fish vendors, census 2021 will capture all

New Delhi: Are you a PhD? Did you study law or languages or engineering or economics ? Did a natural disaster force you to move from your city/village? Do you suffer from neurological disorders? Were you ever a victim of an acid attack? Census attempts to capture who Indians are, what they do and where and how they live. But Census 2021 will dig deeper than any other decennial exercise and ask detailed questions aimed at getting a more finely-grained data set on citizens of the world’s second most populous country.Officials involved in this mammoth exercise told ET off record that the basic idea is to get data that helps in better policymaking and gives a sharper idea of how Indians live and work.The tentative questionnaire being finalised for the exhaustive exercise slated for February 2021 will have 28 broad questions, each divided into sub-sections. That’s not the big difference, since Census 2011had 29 broad questions. The difference, however, will be in very detailed subsections.For example, the broad question on education/skill earlier asked respondents whether they are graduates or school/college dropouts, or if they have a vocational skill or were literate.In Census 2021, this section will have two detailed subsections. Tabulating educational qualifications won’t stop at graduation. There will be 22 options for respondents, from polytechnic diploma to PhD. There will also be separate categories for different expertise, including IT, nursing, engineering, law, management, commerce, languages, agriculture, science, arts and social science.Census 2021will also ask every unemployed respondent if he/she is looking for a part time or a full time job, and if so, in what sector. Enumerators will have a list of 250 occupations they can mark the respondent as pursuing. A general practitioner and a dentist will have separate entries as will a mithaiwallah and fish vendor. The idea is to have a detailed picture of India’s jobs market. For the first time, there will be a category to capture migrations of families caused by natural calamities to better help allocation of government resources.Another major change will be more granular mapping of disability as well as changing the language of the inquiry. In 2011Census, the questionnaire had columns on physical disability and a general category termed “mental retardation”. In Census 2021, the key term will be “intellectual disability”. There will be 11different categories to classify the disabled, from acid attack victims to those suffering from severe neurological disorders, blood disorders, among others.ET reported on April 20 that Census 2021 may ask Indians to identify not just whether they belong to one of the six broad religious categories – Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Sikh , Jain, Buddhist – but also which branch/sect of these faiths they identify with.Sona Mitra, senior consultant with the Centre for Budget and Governance Accountability, said new categories in the Census form will help in better policy formulation, particularly in the areas of skill development and employment generation.The reference date for the Census 2021 is October 1, 2020 for Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand . For the rest of country it is March 1, 2021.
