A trial every day

The attitude of the police towards the LGBTQI community has dissuaded many from pressing for action despite the violence they have been subjected to

In Kochi, a young man met with another man on a dating application and set up a meeting at a hotel. What followed was an absolute nightmare.

He was gang raped, a video was shot, his mobile phone and purse were stolen, and he was threatened with exposure unless he coughed up money. This was not an isolated incident.

In the past two months, at least one more incident of a man being raped in Kochi, one in Kozhikode, and another in Thiruvananthapuram have come to the notice of Queerythm, a community-based organisation for the LGBTQI community, through its 24x7 helpline 9745545559.

Three calls of rape and extortion were received by the pan-India helpline from the north of the country too. In these instances, the men were kidnapped by those whom they met over a dating platform, moved to different places, and raped for days. Shame prevented each of them from approaching anyone. When one of them did inform the police, they refused to take any action, so insensitive were they to his plight, says Bharathan Iyer, vice president, Queerythm, and one of those handling the helpline.

Issues of concern

Prijith P.K., president of Queerythm, says instances of people filming sexual acts or rape of men and extorting money are a grave issue.

“There is a possibility that the number of such unreported cases is high. The Thiruvananthapuram case was a real shock to us as our organisation is based right here and is active.”

In the Kochi case, the police were approached but they said a case could be registered only if the complainant brought along the person who had contacted him. Not only that, the survivor was ridiculed and insulted.

Such an attitude dissuades many from pressing for action despite the violence they have been subjected to. “Remember, this is after same-sex relations have been decriminalised in the country by the Supreme Court last year,” says Prijith, who too is one of the team handling the helpline calls.

Though Queerythm wants to intervene in such cases, its hands are tied in the absence of consent of the person who has been exploited.

Forced silence

The fear of discovery – of being found a part of the LGBTQI community or using such an app or the video being circulated on social media – is enough to silence many. They claim they would rather resolve the issue among themselves, says Prijith. They are also wary of pushing too hard, in case the men break off contact with it totally. Prijith says he wishes someone does come forward so that such incidents within the community come to a stop. “Fear emboldens the perpetrators,” points out Akhil K.K., another team member.

The LGBTQI community members are being asked to be careful so that they do not land in similar situations, especially as online platforms are misused by many.

Bharathan says when they began to counsel the three men from the north of the country, they found them frustrated about what to do, and this manifested in anger.

Over days, the survivors began to open up about being raped by people in turns. “It was spine-chilling. They did not even seek medical help owing to fear.”
