Hyderabad man abuses, threatens estranged wife to 'come back'

The victim had also lodged a case against the accused at Jubilee Hills police station (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused was identified as Sai Kiran The incident took place on Saturday, July 13 The accused and his wife had been living away from each other

Hyderabad: A man named Sai Kiran was arrested by Hyderabad's Rajendranagar police on Saturday, July 13 for attempting an attack on his estranged wife. The accused allegedly showed up at his wife's residence in an inebriated state and asked her to reconcile with him. He allegedly said that if she refused to do so, he would kill her.

The police booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Section 25 of the Arms Act. The accused and his wife were allegedly neighbours and were in love with each other. The accused got married two years ago and separated after they encountered differences.

The victim had lodged a case against the accused at Jubilee Hills police station. Reportedly, the accused and the victim had also attended family counselling sessions. As a result of the counselling, the two had also submitted an undertaking on July 9 stating that they would discuss their issues.

Rajendranagar Inspector, G Suresh said, "He parked his bike in front of his wife's residence and started hurling abuses at her, asking her to come back to him. If she did not, he threatened that he would kill her."

After Sai showed up at the victim's house, her family informed the police. The police reached the spot and arrested Sai. When the police checked, they found out that the accused was hiding a sickle under his shirt.

Madhya Pradesh: Man hacks wife, parents to death

A petty argument turned brutal in Bhopal as a man hacked his parents and wife to death with an axe. The incident took place in June. Jitendra Purwa, the accused allegedly murdered his family and assaulted his son. Purwa was having an argument with his wife and when his parents tried to intervene, he flew into a fit of rage and attacked them. A case was registered against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Bengaluru man arrested for thrashing wife before going to work

The Bengaluru Police arrested a man in June for allegedly assaulting his wife and locking her at their residence. Veerabhadra, the accused allegedly used to assault his wife after consuming alcohol.

Tired of being subjected to domestic abuse, the accused's wife approached the police after which, he was arrested. According to an investigation, the accused was suspecting his wife of infidelity. Veerabhadra was under the impression that his wife had an extra-marital affair with their neighbour.


