Man gets 10-year jail for raping minor

Ludhiana: A man has been awarded 10-year rigorous imprisonment for kidnapping and raping a minor girl.

The court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma also imposed a fine of Rs 80,000 on the convict and he will have to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a year in case he fails to pay the fine. Out of the total fine, Rs 70,000 would be given as compensation, the court ordered.

Basti Jodhewal police on June 15, 2014, had booked the man for raping the Class X girl when she was 17 years old on the pretext of marriage.

On June 12, 2014, the girl had accompanied her mother to a factory where the latter worked. She said at about 12pm same day, the girl returned home, making her mother suspicious. After an hour, the mother also visited her home, but the girl was not there. Despite best efforts, she could not trace her daughter.

Later she got to know that the man had taken the girl promising to marry her. Police later apprehended the man and rescued the girl when they were about to board a bus for Delhi near Basti Jodhewal Chowk. Police later added rape section in the FIR.

During trial, the man had pleaded false implication, claiming that prosecutrix was major and she had consensual physical relations with him and she accompanied him with her own consent.

The additional public prosecutor pleaded for punishment to the man on the basis of prosecution evidence including testimony of mother of the girl, medico legal report and other documents, including school certificate.

The court said, “Once the accused himself admits his physical relations with the prosecutrix and prosecutrix is proved to be minor, the onus qua her being consenting party would automatically shift on the accused which he has failed to discharge.”

Box: Such offenders are menace to society

The court observed, “‘A murderer destroys the body, but a rapist defiles the soul’. This apt observation made by Justice Krishna Iyer in one of the path breaking judgments on rape sentencing has to serve as a lighthouse while considering the plea of leniency raised by the convict. The plea of convict being first offender with no past criminal past does not find much favour with the court considering the age of the girl. The tender year of innocent childhood, where children are taught to have faith in goodness of humanity and nurturing relationship with trust fall apart when they become prey to such lusty acts. Such offenders are menace to the civilized society and should be mercilessly and inexorably punished in severest term.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
