Rajasthan: Dalit woman raped, tortured, detained by police days after brother-in-law's custodial death

After a 22-year-old man allegedly died in police custody in Churu, Rajasthan, his family members claimed that his 35-year-old sister-in-law was illegally detained by the police for eight days in connection with a theft case for days and was gangraped.

Police officers said that the 22-year-old man was arrested on July 6 for theft and died on the same night in police custody, a matter that is being investigated. A judicial inquiry in the matter is being conducted by an additional chief judicial magistrate.

The woman's husband told media on Saturday that his brother was held by the police on June 30. He said, "On June 30, police picked my 22-year-old brother in a theft case. On July 3, they came with him but when they took him back the same day, they took my wife too. Later, on the night of July 6-7, police tortured and murdered my brother. My wife, who witnessed the torture, was gangraped by police. They also plucked her nails, hurt her eyes and fingers.

He alleged that even after the death of his brother, his wife was illegally detained by the police till July 10.

Churu SP removed

Following the allegations, the Department of Personnel issued an order late Friday night, removing Churu SP Rajendra Kumar Sharma and putting him on awaiting for posting’. The officer of the police circle concerned has also been suspended, reported the Indian Express.

The Station House Officer of the police station concerned, along with one head constable and six constables, had been suspended by the Superintendent of Police earlier, after the death of the 22-year-old man.

Family alleges torture, police denies claim

Another of the woman’s brothers-in-law told a national daily, On July 6, police briefly brought my brother to the village and told him it was the last time he will be seeing his family. After around eight days in police custody, when my sister-in-law came back home on July 10, her condition was very bad.

Prakash Kumar Sharma, Additional Superintendent of Police, Churu said, On July 3, the local police received information that a suspected thief was caught by villagers in a nearby hamlet. On reaching the spot, they found this man who had been beaten up by the villagers. He was brought to the police station, where police found that last year, he was named in an FIR for theft lodged by a man from his village. However, no chargesheet was filed in the case. He also added that the man was sent home on July 3.

Sharma said that he received information from the local police that on July 6 the man was arrested from his village. Around 1:45 am that night he felt sick and was taken to a hospital, where he died around 2:15 am.

He added that the interim report by the medical board that conducted the post-mortem procedure cited cardiac arrest as the reason of his death. He added that the post-mortem report and other matters related to the circumstances of his death are being investigated in the judicial inquiry.

Sharma even said that police came to know about the allegations of rape after the woman was admitted to a hospital in Jaipur on July 11.

After the woman was hospitalised, the family submitted a memorandum to authorities on Friday, demanding action.

Additional Director General of Police, Crime, B L Soni told The Sunday Express the woman’s statement was being recorded. He said that a case will be registered based on the claims of the woman and the matter will be investigated by the crime branch.

ALSO READ: Lucknow: Woman forced to get off UP Roadways bus with husband's body

ALSO WATCH: Bharat Bandh: Protesters turn violent, police attacked by mob in Madhya Pradesh
