SFI president VP Sanu apologises after SFI cadres stab student in Kerala

SFI president VP Sanu apologises after SFI cadres stab student in Kerala

The SFI and CPI(M) faced backlash after a student was stabbed and seriously injured at University College.

news Controversy

Students Federation of India (SFI) national president VP Sanu apologised in a Facebook post on Saturday after a college student was stabbed by SFI members in the Thiruvananthapuram University College.

“I hang my head in shame. Apologies to the people of Kerala,” the post of VP Sanu read. This comes at a time when both the SFI and CPI(M) is facing backlash after office-bearers of its unit in the college stabbed and seriously injured a student.

BA final year student Akhil and two other students were injured in a fight between SFI members and other students. Akhil was seriously injured after he was stabbed in the chest.

Sanu’s post said that wrongdoings will never be justified and the people involved will never be protected. SFI will always welcome criticism but will not allow people who spread fake news, he added.

“Those who kept those close to them from falling, those who fought for the rights of the future generations, those who stood in front to make colleges creative, those who eyes welled up for other people’s worries, those who gave life for freedom and democracy, those who carry the folk songs which Abhimanyu sang in their hearts and those who enjoy literature and arts in the most beautiful way possible are the real protectors of the organisation,” Sanu wrote.

Meanwhile, in an urgently called meeting, the SFI's Kerala unit on Saturday decided to dismiss the present SFI unit at the college.

The police have registered cases against seven members of the SFI unit of the college in the case. Among those who have been booked by the police include SFI unit president Shivarenjith, Nazeem and five others and their objective was to finish off Akhil, according to the FIR.

Hitting out at the SFI's parent organisation, Leader of Opposition and Congress leader Ramesh Chennithala said that the prime culprit for the way the SFI is going berserk is the CPI(M) which gives it "complete support".

"Due to the complete support the SFI gets from the CPI(M), they are turning college campus into blood-stained campuses. And the police have not yet been able to arrest any of those who were involved in the stabbing. The police need not waste time searching for the accused, as they might all be in hiding in the CPI(M) state headquarters and the police should show the guts to arrest them," he alleged.

With IANS inputs
