Ahmedabad amusement park ride crashes, 2 killed; probe ordered

Two people died and 15 others were injured after a joyride crashed at an amusement park near in Ahmedabad Sunday.

According to officials, the incident occurred around 4.50pm when the ‘Discovery’ joyride, in the form of a pendulum which seats 31 people, was running at the Balvatika Amusement Park. The ride was suspended on a pole-like structure that snapped and sent the pendulum crashing to the ground.

Confirming two deaths, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) commissioner, Vijay Nehra, who was supervising the rescue operations, said they were taken to a hospital. “The AMC fire department conducted swift disaster response operations. The heads of departments of paediatrics, ortho and surgery reported to the hospital and the injured are being treated,” Nehra said.

Emergency fire services and police on the spot. (Express Photo: Javed Raja) Emergency fire services and police on the spot. (Express Photo: Javed Raja)

Home Minister Pradipsinh Jadeja visited the injured, who have been admitted to the LG Hospital. “Chief Minister Vijay Rupani is in constant touch with the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) and police regarding the accident. He has offered full assistance to the affected. AMC will bear the treatment cost for the injured. A probe is on to find whether a licence and approval was given to the amusement company to operate the joyride. The maintenance of the joyride is being checked by Forensic Science Laboratory,” said Jadeja.

Rajesh Bhatt, additional chief fire officer of Ahmedabad, said that the contract of the joyride was given to Superstar Amusement Private Limited. “Superstar Amusement Private Limited was given the contract to operate five joyrides in the Amusement Park area near Kankaria riverfront. We are collecting information regarding the ride’s individual parts, how were they assembled and the sequence of assembling to understand more about the mishap,” said Bhatt.

https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js

Vijay Nehra added that the police along with the forensic team were probing the incident.

Demanding murder charges against the contractor, AMC’s leader of opposition, Dinesh Sharma, sought action against officials concerned of the corporation.

The broken joyride. (Express Photo: Javed Raja) The broken joyride. (Express Photo: Javed Raja)

He also demanded strict regulations for inspection and safety of these rides. Alleging lapse by AMC officials, Sharma said contractors allow more people than the stipulated number on the rides to increase their profit. “The AMC or the fire department have not laid down rules for these rides. The ruling BJP is responsible for this accident as these contracts are awarded as per their interests to their people,” Dinesh Sharma said in a statement.

Officials of the Superstar Amusement Private Limited could not be contacted.
