Bareilly BJP MLA's daughter Sakshi Misra, husband get police protection, allege assault in court

Sakshi and Ajitesh have asked for security, contending that there was a threat to their life from Sakshi's father who was "unhappy" with their marriage as Sakshi was a Brahmin and Ajitesh a Dalit.

High drama was witnessed on Monday when the daughter of Bareilly BJP MLA Rajesh Misra, Sakshi and her husband Ajitesh appeared before Allahabad High Court on Monday.

According to reports, the husband Ajitesh Kumar was assaulted by unknown men in the court.

The couple, who drew the MLA's ire over their inter-caste marriage had been in the news over the past week as they challenged the opposition to their marriage.

On Monday, they were all set to appear before the Allahabad High Court to seek protection as they feared for their lives. The couple filed a petition in the Allahabad High Court, seeking protection to "live a peaceful life" as a married couple. The court ordered police to provide adequate security to Ajitesh and Sakshi.

Assaulted in court



Earlier media reports had claimed that the couple had been kidnapped from outside the court premises.

However, later it was clarified that Sakshi and Ajitesh were present in court where the latter was roughed up.

Sakshi Misra and Ajitesh's lawyer claimed that Ajitesh was beaten up by unidentified men inside the Allahabad HC premises but the police have denied these claims.

So who was kidnapped?

While the police have confirmed that a couple was kidnapped from outside Allahabad HC, the couple's identity has not been confirmed. Since the couple was also appearing in a case similar to Sakshi and Ajitesh's, it was believed that the kidnapped couple was them.

The incident allegedly took place at 8.30 am, hours before Sakshi Misra and Ajitesh's case was to be taken up in the court.

According to eye-witnesses, the young couple was seen waiting outside the court gate number 3, early in the day when a black SUV came and pulled in the couple at gunpoint.

The SUV bore the registration number UP80 which belongs to Agra district. Sources said that 'Chairman' was written on the rear of the vehicle.

Police officials said that the CCTV footage was being scanned and checking of vehicles has begun.

Prayagraj ADG, SN Sabat told media, " The abductors were armed. We've issued orders of checking, suspected vehicles have been stopped at 1-2 places."

Additional Director General of Prayagraj, SN Sabat, on couple who went to seek protection from Allahabad High Court abducted from court premises today: Abductors were armed. We've issued orders of checking, suspected vehicles have been stopped at 1-2 places, I'm going there pic.twitter.com/7JtARRrBrS ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 15, 2019





Why are Sakshi and Ajitesh approaching court?

Sakshi Misra (23) had uploaded a video on a social media platform last week, making her marriage with Ajitesh Kumar (29) public.

Bareily MLA Pappu Bhartaul's daughter released a video appealing to her father to stop opposing her love marriage and call back his goons. The daughter had married a man against her families wishes and fears honour killing. @Uppolice pic.twitter.com/Z2hQcmWyJR Saurabh Trivedi (@saurabh3vedi) July 10, 2019

In another video, she alleged there was a threat to her life from her father, brother and an associate.

Another video of the couple requesting help. pic.twitter.com/S9Uc63Zqc4 Saurabh Trivedi (@saurabh3vedi) July 10, 2019

The couple asked for security, contending that there was a threat to their life from the BJP MLA Rajesh Mishra, who was "unhappy" with their marriage as Sakshi was a Brahmin and Ajitesh a Dalit.

The MLA from Bithari Chainpur in Bareilly has, however, said he posed no threat to anyone and his daughter has the right to make her own decisions.

He said he was concerned about the age difference between the husband and wife and also the boy not having any proper employment.
