‘Cow slaughter’ provokes mob attack; 6 cops injured

Protests

Chiplun

Konkan

Angry villagers attack cops in Chiplun 01:18

Ratnagiri district

Shiv Sena

A mob of about 800 people injured six police officials, including a deputy superintendent of police at Lote, an industrial town near, in theregion on January 26, while protesting against the alleged disposal of cattle carcasses in the area.The attack was similar to one in Bulandshahar, UP, in which a police official was shot dead by alleged gau rakshaks.Protesters blocked the Mumbai-Goa highway from 5.30 am on Republic Day, leading to a 7-km-long traffic jam. When police tried to disburse the mob around 8.30 am, the mob turned violent, pelting stones and attacking 15 police officials with sticks, and burning a police vehicle.On January 27, police registered two FIRs, one against the protesters who attacked police, and another against the unknown people who had allegedly brought a cow and bull to slaughter at the lonely spot near Lote.The unknown persons were booked under the Maharashtra Animal Preservation act and the Arms Act, as they were allegedly carrying arms. No arrests had been made till late Sunday night.Locals said a month-long campaign by a Hindutva organisation in the area could be linked to the protests. Stray and abandoned cattle have become a major issue in Konkan after the slaughter ban, and such cattle are seen wandering on bazars and highways.Terming the attack an “intentional act”, Superintendent of Police,, Dr Pravin Mundhe, said, “There was a complaint from locals that some people were slaughtering cows at a spot a few km away from Lote town. A few remains found there were sent for laboratory testing about five days ago. There was no reason for the crowd to call for a rasta roko on Republic Day. There is no justification for the attack on the 15 police officials by the mob. They were, in fact, disbursed by the police, but gathered again in some time and turned violent,” Mundhe said.After complaints from locals, police had increased patrolling eight days ago in nearby villages to trap the alleged cattle killers. On the night of January 25, they found a vehicle with four people that had brought a cow and a bull allegedly to slaughter or abandon there. However, the vehicle escaped and the cow and bull were rescued.“The police had laid a trap after complaints from locals. They rescued two animals. So the allegation that the police did not do anything is wrong,” Mundhe said.Deputy SP Vishweshwar Nandedkar, who was seriously injured in the attack was admitted to a private hospital in Chiplun. “I received the best service medal last Republic Day, and this January 26, I was attacked by a mob.My officials had taken measures to address the complaints by locals, but still the highway was blocked. We initially managed to disperse the crowd, but they organised themselves again and attacked us. It looks like a pre-planned attack,” Nandedkar said.Doctors said his condition was stable. The other five cops who were injured have been discharged.However, locals and eyewitnesses blamed the police for not taking quick action. “The police should have taken strict action against those slaughtering cattle at the spot. It was the anger by the public that led to the protest. Also, police resorted to a lathicharge to disburse the crowd. I was there when the protest took place and helped police take them to hospital after they were injured,” Sachin Kadam, the’s district president, said.Dyaneshwar Rokade, a journalist from local newspaper Sagar, who covered the protest, said: “There was a huge crowd at the highway in the early morning, but we didn’t think an untoward incident would happen. The police could not judge the situation.”
