Kerala CPI(M) secretary's son Binoy Kodiyeri, accused in rape case, refuses to undergo DNA test

File picture: Binoy Kodiyeri | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights A Mumbai court had on July 3 granted anticipatory bail to Binoy Kodiyeri but with conditions A 33-year-old woman has accused Binoy of sexually exploiting her for many years on pretext of marriage Binoy Kodiyeri had on July 8 agreed to give his blood sample for a DNA test

Mumbai/Thiruvananthapuram: Binoy Kodiyeri, the son of Kerala Communist Party of India (Marxist) secretary Balakrishnan Kodiyeri, on Monday refused to undergo a DNA test in the rape case filed against him. Binoy cited physical ailments while informing the Mumbai Police of his decision.

On June 13, a Mumbai-based woman (33) had registered an FIR at Oshiwara police station in Andheri, claiming that Binoy had sexually exploited her for many years on the pretext of marriage. She alleged that she entered into a relationship with Binoy in the year 2008 when she was working at a dance bar in Dubai.

As per the complaint, the victim claimed that till 2015, Binoy used to send her money every month. She also alleged that she has an eight-year-old child with Binoy.

She decided to file an FIR after she came to know that the man was already married.

While appearing before the Mumbai Police on July 8, Binoy Kodiyeri had agreed to give his blood sample for a DNA test.

A court in Mumbai had on July 3 granted anticipatory bail to Binoy but with conditions.

The Dindoshi court had directed Binoy to appear before the Oshiwara police every Monday for the next one month, submit an amount of Rs 25,000 and furnish one surety. He was also asked to give his blood samples if demanded by the cops investigating the matter.

After his son was named in the case, Kerala CPI(M) leader Kodiyeri Balakrishnan had made it clear that nobody from his party would save his elder son Binoy. He had also denied the charges that his family contacted the complainant.

“Neither my party (CPI-M) nor I will protect Binoy Kodiyeri. He is an adult. He stays as a separate family and is responsible for his actions,” Balakrishnan told the media in Thiruvananthapuram.

As per a report, the FIR filed by the woman read: "I came to work at Mehfil dance bar in Dubai through a friend. There I met Binoy Balakrishnan Kodiyeri. To gain my trust, Binoy used to shower currency notes over me at the dance bar. Later, he managed to collect my mobile phone number and started calling me frequently. He introduced himself as a Malayali businessman working in the construction sector in Dubai."

"In October 2009, Binoy took me to his house in Dubai and made me stay there. He promised to marry me and we had sexual intercourse at his house. In 2010, Binoy brought me to Andheri West in Mumbai and made me stay at a rented flat. In the intervening period, I had demanded several times that Binoy marry me. But he avoided that, citing several reasons. I asked Binoy to introduce me to his family members, but he avoided even that."

Though the accused - Binoy Kodiyeri - has now reneged on his pre-bail promise, the fact remains that he had told the court that he was ready to give his blood samples if the investigating team so demanded. As per the police protocol, he was to be taken to Cooper Hospital in Juhu so that blood samples from him could be collected.
