No letup in crimes against kids: Here's why POCSO is failing

Maharashtra accounts for highest number of pending POCSO cases. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Mumbai Police reports 10% rise in POCSO cases in the city Pendency of cases in courts preventing justice to victims?

New Delhi: A recent report from Mumbai Police has thrown up alarming figures about the rise in cases of sexual assault against children in the Maximum city. The cases under the stringent Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, including molestation and rape, have registered an increase of 10 per cent in 2018 compared to the year before.

At least 4,551 POCSO cases were registered in Mumbai in the last five years between January 2015 and May 2019. Of these, 529 cases were filed in May this year.

Police argue that the increase in the number of cases is due to the rising awareness among children who are now reporting the sexual assault crimes perpetrated against them. The rise in the number of POCSO cases can also be attributed to parents making their children aware of what has come to be termed as the 'good touch' and the 'bad touch' phenomenon.

The POCSO Act is intended to provide protection to children who have no voice and continue to suffer in silence. The government introduced the Act in 2014 to protect the children from incidents of sexual assault, molestation, rape, and pornography. Section 4 of the POCSO Act provides for a 7-year jail term, which may extend to life for sexual assault. And to ensure that trials were completed within a year, the government had also set up 597 courts which deal with POCSO cases across the country.

In a landmark decision to strengthen the POCSO Act, the Union Cabinet last week approved several amendments to include the death penalty in the Act. The amendments were made in 10 sections of the Act making it more stringent. The amendments will also provide for the imposition of monetary fines and imprisonment as punishment for the circulation of child pornography.

The government claims that the move will not only discourage the sexual predators but will also protect the interests of vulnerable minors in times of distress. But with the law being made more stringent, the big question which continues to haunt us is: Why has there been no let-up in sexual crimes against children? The simple answer to this question lies in the slow movement of our judiciary. As the pending cases mount, this emboldens the prospective sexual predators into believing that they won't be punished very soon or may escape punished altogether.

A Home Ministry data reveals a huge pendency of such cases, raising concerns about the effectiveness of the Act. According to a report, Maharashtra has accounted for the highest number of pending POCSO cases - totalling around 17,338 till 2018. Uttar Pradesh comes second with 15,938 cases followed Madhya Pradesh with 10,950 cases.

Recently, the Supreme Court has also ordered all high courts to form a committee meant to expeditiously monitor all POCSO cases. It has also directed the Director-General of Police (DGP) of all the states to form a Special Task Force (STF) to ensure that stringent probes are conducted in all such cases. How far the Supreme Court directives and POCSO amendments will go in ensuring justice to the victims, only time will tell.
