Pizza delivery boy stabs man to death in Delhi's Tilak Nagar

Ankit had gone to a shop to get his phone repaired but did not return till late in the night. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delivery boy allegedly stabbed the man to death over petty dispute Victim's brother claims he saw the accused stabbing Ankit Kumar The accused has been identified as Ravi Singh

New Delhi: A yet another petty dispute has claimed the life of an innocent man in the national capital. A pizza delivery boy has allegedly stabbed a man to death over a petty dispute in Delhi's Tilak Nagar area. The victim has been identified as Ankit Kumar.

Police have arrested the accused and recovered a knife used in the crime. The accused has been identified as Ravi Singh, a resident of Nihal Vihar in Delhi. Police have filed a case against the accused and an investigation is underway.

According to police, the victim's brother alleged that Ankit had gone to a shop to get his phone repaired but did not return till late in the night.

The victim's elder brother Rohit Kumar, who works at a photography shop, said when he reached Mahavir Nagar at around 10.30 pm, he heard cries and saw a lot of people gathered at the spot.

According to a report in PTI, Rohit claimed that he saw the accused Ravi Singh attacking his brother with a knife. Rohit later rushed his brother to a hospital where he was declared brought dead.

This man worked as delivery boy in the day, but robbed people at night

In June this year, police arrested two persons including a delivery boy for alleged robberies and incidents of chain snatching in Delhi. The duo was identified as 26-year-old Nadeem and his accomplice Mohsin. Their run ended when they were caught in a CCTV camera robbing a woman on Wednesday night. The duo robbed the woman in Jafrabad and even fired in air to scare her.

Nadeem has worked with a water purifier company and avoided detection for much of the time due to his uniform. During the day, the accused would move around the city installing water purifiers in the apartments and in the night he robbed people at gunpoint.

Nadeem's uniform- the yellow and black shirt and cap-had helped him evade the cops many a times. In the CCTV accessed by the police, Nadeem could be seen riding the bike with his associate Mohsin riding pillion.

Ahmedabad: Food delivery boy hacks Facebook accounts; dupes people of Rs 1 lakh

In April, a teenager who allegedly hacked his way into the social media accounts of various people to dupe them was arrested in Gujarat's capital. The accused had allegedly used the social media accounts of the victims to ask their friends for money.

The accused was identified as Genius Vijaybhai Patel. The police had received separate complaints from two people stating that they had transferred money to the accused's account thinking that their friends were in need of finances.
