If A BJP Member Rapes A Woman From His Own Party, What Hope Do We Have?

Amit Sinha, a BJP worker, has been arrested in Jharkhand’s Adityapur police station’s jurisdiction on charges of rape and blackmail, and the one who accused him of the crime also happens to be a member of the ruling party. He is now in judicial custody under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and the IT Act because, after raping her, he bullied her online too.

The woman allegedly submitted a written complaint to the police while lodging the FIR, detailing how he raped her and filmed the act to blackmail her. She said, “He had sent the video to my mobile and also uploaded on the Internet. He then started calling me frequently and blackmailing me, forcing me to even contemplate suicide for a while.” The accused denies this, saying that she owed him money which is why he called her. But the police have said that she submitted video evidence as proof of his crimes.

What does the BJP have to say about this?

Since Amit used to be the district president of the BJP youth wing in Seraikela-Kharsawan district, and an executive member of the BJP district unit, the party’s response to reports of the incident are worth noting. The district’s party president Uday Pratap Singh said they have removed the accused from the party, and he can’t return for another six years.

However, they also tried to brush the matter aside as insignificant within the party saying, “…Presently he was not holding any party post.” That’s all well and good, but BJP leaders of the highest calibre also have a history of being disrespectful towards women.

Why does the BJP always get a dishonourable mention when discussing crimes against women in India?

Despite giving lip service to women’s empowerment with empty campaigns like ‘Selfie with daughter’ and ‘Beti bachao, beti padhao’, the BJP has yet to live up to its own sloganeering as far as actual results are concerned.

From the party’s spokesperson making sexist statements to BJP leaders being caught in cases of violence against women more than once, the party has an ugly reputation with regard to women. Forget feminism, they are known for targeting other female politicians and spreading misogynist sentiments.

Whether this callousness towards women is because this party’s main base comprises people desensitised towards women’s issues, or because they genuinely aim to set India years back in terms of women’s liberation is unclear. What is clear is that it’s getting harder and harder to take this party seriously as a woman. If the ruling party’s female members aren’t safe in this country, what hope do the rest of us have?




