Hate lynchings will destroy Modi’s government

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

India is not safe for Muslims. Period! They need to get out of the country if they are to protect their life, limb and property.

The world’s largest so-called democracy has become the world’s largest mobocracy. In the latest incident of hate lynching in India, a Muslim police head constable, no less, pursuing his line of duty was thrashed by a mob until he succumbed to his injuries. This incident brings up a number of issues.

The hate lynching was in the state of Rajasthan, which is a Congress-ruled state. Congress is in opposition to PM Modi’s BJP party. Per the Constitution of India, maintenance of law and order, and thus control of the entire police machinery, is controlled by the state government, not the central government of Modi. Thus Modi cannot be accused of complicity in what happens in opposition-ruled states like Rajasthan.

In another recent incident of hate lynching in Jharkhand, a young Muslim man was suspected of theft and then beaten by a mob. He was taken to the local police station, where it is rumoured that he was thrashed even some more. The police there openly called him a thief and refused to administer him any aid. The man died later in hospital.

The police in India is mostly staffed by Hindus, with very few Muslim recruits, at least in proportion to their 15% population in the country. The situation is very similar to the US, where whites dominate the police force with very few black recruits. The police in India thus, at least at the lower levels, are believed, at least by Muslims, to have a naturally anti-Muslim stance.

But this incident of a Muslim police official being beaten to death is shocking. Hindu mobs have lost all fear of the police uniform. Hindu police officers are rushing to the scene of the crime to investigate what happened to one of their own. Will they turn a blind eye even now as they always seem to do when a Hindu mob assaults a Muslim civilian.

India is a complex country. To Modi’s credit, there has been very little mass-scale rioting against Muslims in the country during his five years in power. But a wave of hate lynchings against Muslims has been unleashed all over the country since he came to power in 2014. Hindu supremacists, at least the rabid bunch among them, which is a lot, have got emboldened that they can do anything to Muslims and get away scot-free.

Rajasthan is ruled by the Congress chief minister Ashok Gehlot. Pehlu Khan was a Muslim in the state who was transporting his cattle. A Hindu mob beat him mercilessly to death. In the height of ironies, Gehlot charged the dead Pehlu Khan for cow smuggling.

The Congress cries foul against Modi and says that the state of Jharkhand, which is ruled by the BJP, has become a hub of hate lynchings and that Modi should dismiss his party’s state government there. But the Congress leader Sonia Gandhi and her son Rahul Gandhi and her daughter Priyanka Gandhi are silent when hate lynchings happen in the state of Rajasthan, which is ruled by their own man, Gehlot.

Such no-criticism-of-my-backyard syndrome is not new to India. In the opposition-ruled state of West Bengal, ruled by the fiery Mamata Banerjee, who draws support from the state’s sizable Muslim population, Hindus are at the receiving end of widespread violence, but Banerjee turns a blind eye to the violence. Her two newly-elected members of Parliament are the attractive actresses, Nusrat Jahan, a Muslim, and Mimi Chakraborty, a Hindu, who openly deny any large-scale violence in West Bengal.

In 2013, Sonia Gandhi ruled at the Centre, with a friendly government installed in the state of Uttar Pradesh. Widespread anti-Muslim riots broke out in the city of Muzaffarnagar, with hundreds killed and tens of thousands displaced, but neither did Sonia Gandhi nor the Uttar Pradesh state government do anything to preempt the rioting. In fact, one of the state’s key ministers, a Muslim, was caught in a sting operation on camera urging the police to let the rioting go on unimpeded.

Why? Because the Congress and the state government depended upon the votes of Muslims. Hindi bigots of the BJP were believed to have perpetrated the violence. The more the Muslims got thrashed, the more they would hate the BJP and the more they would vote for the Congress and the state government.

Now Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi have the nerve to accuse Modi of being communal. His supporters argue that these incidents of hate lynchings are isolated, a mere statistical aberration in a land of 1.3 billion people.

But statistical aberration they are not. Ever since the BJP came to power in 2014, a number of BJP state governments passed anti-cow slaughter laws which emboldened Hindu fanatics to go after Muslims on the mere suspicion of eating beef or trafficking in cattle. Now the lynchings have broadened to include Muslims who are suspected of theft or even police officials just going about their routine business.

Modi has to do something. Hate lynchings are sullying India’s and his image abroad. He must forthwith dismiss the state governments of Rajasthan and Jharkhand and impose central rule there. Any person who is proven by a court of law to have taken part in the hate lynchings must be meted that rarest of rare punishments in India, death by hanging.

Hate lynchings will destroy India. Hate lynchings will destroy Modi’s government. The PM is a good man, and will surely do something. But if he doesn’t, and very visibly so, Muslims have no option but to vote with their feet and flee India. They are no longer safe there.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
