DCW notices to police, city govt over girl's rape in west Delhi

The Delhi Commission For Women (DCW) Tuesday sent notices to the police and the city government seeking information on steps taken for the care and rehabilitation of a six-year-old rape victim in west Delhi's Janakpuri.

DCW chief Swati Maliwal met the child at a hospital in the city and appealed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi to urgently call a meeting of Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal over the issue of "rising child rapes" in the national capital.

The girl was allegedly raped by a rickshaw-puller in the early hours of Monday, and the accused has been arrested.

"Devastated after meeting 6 year old raped in Janakpuri. Head smashed & injuries can't be described. In deep trauma & v critical. Appeal to @narendramodi ji to urgently call meet of @AmitShah ji @ArvindKejriwal ji & DCW. Child rapes growing, brutality growing! Govt has to act (sic)!" she tweeted.

In the notice issued to the Delhi government's Women and Child Development department, the panel sought to know whether steps are being taken to rehabilitate the child. It also sought information on the individual care plan for the child.

The department has been given time till July 26 to reply to the notice.

In its notice to the Delhi Police, the panel claimed that the Crisis Intervention Cell of the DCW was not intimated about the incident as is mandated by the Delhi High Court.

"Due to this, a DCW team could not reach on the spot to counsel the girl and her family and provide them other urgent social legal and financial support. This is totally unacceptable," it said.

The DCW has sought a copy of the FIR in the matter, reasons for not informing the Crisis Intervention Cell of the case, officials responsible it and action taken against them. It also sought details of arrest, along with the status of investigation in the matter.

The panel has sought reply to the notice from the police by July 19.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
