Powerful rajas, helpless praja: From Karnataka to Goa, citizens are marginalised spectators of political shenanigans

Sagarika Ghose has been a journalist for over three decades, starting her career with The Times of India, subsequently moving to Outlook magazine and The Indian Express. She has been a primetime news anchor and has also worked as Consulting Editor, The Times Of India. She is also a political commentator on the news channel ET Now. Ghose is the author of the best selling biography of Indira Gandhi, "Indira, India's Most Powerful Prime Minister." She is the author of the recently published theoretical work, “Why I Am A Liberal”. LESS ... MORE

Images of Karnataka politicians travelling from one five star resort to another under heavy security escort have dominated the news. In neighbouring Goa a large group of Congress MLAs suddenly switched to BJP overnight, several of them immediately sworn in as ministers. In both states, outraged citizens have taken to WhatsApp and social media to vent angrily on the dissolute antics of their representatives.

Both Karnataka and Goa are blessed with aware and active citizens’ groups, which speak up on a range of issues from environment to education. Yet in the face of brazen political normlessness, these enlightened citizens have been reduced to bystanders. They simply don’t matter.

Democracy is supposed to mean a system in which the citizen/ voter is sovereign. Democracy stands for inclusion and citizens’ participation. But today when the democratic system has been entirely captured by politicians, democracy only means citizens’ exclusion and helplessness. The sovereign is the slave.

Citizens’ anger means nothing to professional politicians who switch parties like professionals switching jobs. Yet public life is not supposed to be just another job. In democracies, politics is a path chosen by those who already have the independent means to support their peaceful quest for certain ideals. But when politics itself becomes the main source of income, the party system is bound to collapse because ideology and beliefs become meaningless.

Opportunistic defectors do not lose; instead they win elections irrespective of which party’s banner they wave. Atanasio ‘Babush’ Monserrate, one of the more colourful and controversial figures of Goa politics, has defected six times in the last two decades, always associating with whichever government is in power. Two months ago Monserrate won the prestigious Panaji bypoll. During the campaign BJP vociferously highlighted various criminal charges, including rape, against him.

But now he and his wife Jennifer have switched to BJP and Jennifer has been made a minister. When the next election rolls around, there’s nothing to suggest that Monserrate won’t win again, despite his flamboyant political immorality, one which BJP has seemingly embraced by openly welcoming the very politician it claimed was ‘unfit’ for public life two months ago. The notion of being a ‘party with a difference’ has been set aside with impunity in the quest for political dominance. Congress initiated this practice of actively inducing defections during the Indira Gandhi years in 1970s and 80s. Now BJP believes that a renewed mandate at the Centre is a licence for trampling on democratic norms in states.

Since party ideologies are now irrelevant the party system in India is broken. Former Congressman and Goa opposition leader Chandrakant Kavlekar has switched sides to BJP and become deputy chief minister. Another Congress opposition leader in Maharashtra, sugar baron Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil, has also switched to BJP and become a minister. The anti-defection law lies in tatters, as politicians switch sides with no fear of disqualification, secure in their perch as constituency level rajas who will always be re-elected.

What is the reason for this supreme power of politicians and powerlessness of citizens? Today, state power has expanded into so many areas of daily life that Indians are ruled by the imperious raj of the ‘Big State’. This means whether it’s permissions for a variety of businesses, liquor thekas, mining leases, or real estate deals nearly all income generating activities require the nod of the Big State, whose agents are politicians.

Over time these politicians who comprise the Big State build deep patron-client relationships in their area. For jobs, school admissions, water supply, electricity supply, citizens have to appeal to this local strongman. He gets the job done because of his access to state power and soon becomes invincible in his fiefdom. Also, since this local invincible strongman has to keep on dispensing patronage and distribute scarce resources, as well as recoup the money he spends getting elected, he always needs to be on the side which is in government.

Identity politics plays a big role too. As the Big State expands and pushes its tentacles into citizens’ lives, it patronises various religious and caste identities to maintain its power. It does so by distributing largesse to identity groups through quotas, sops et al. Caste and religion-based chieftains begin to function as a hosepipe of benefits to particular groups and thus become unbeatable in elections whichever party they’re in.

Can voters or the educated middle class challenge these monopolies? Not really. Middle class role models and iconic citizens tend to fail politically. When Nandan Nilekani, Infosys co-founder and brain behind Aadhaar, contested on a Congress ticket from South Bangalore in 2014, he was swept aside in the Modi wave. Many well-regarded citizens who contested the 2017 Goa election as Aam Aadmi Party candidates, with corruption as their main plank, lost their deposits.

Local strongmen have captured politics so completely that the space for any alternative politics has shrunk. Even when choices are offered, voters plump for the safety of patron-client relationships. This is precisely why Mahatma Gandhi, always standing for individual freedom and liberty against overweening state power, strongly advocated local self-government to protect citizens from strongmen wielding state power.

In states where there are ideologically opposed parties like Kerala or Tamil Nadu, intense political competitiveness means there’s at least some space for the voter to actually make a difference through her vote. But in states where ideology is dead and only ‘cash and carry’ rules apply, voters can’t challenge, question or influence the arbitrary actions of entrenched strongmen MLAs. No wonder politicians can flit uncaringly between five star resorts, while outrage is the citizens’ only resort.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
