Man Accused Of Raping Daughter Watched Pornography With Children Present

A man accused of raping his daughter would watch pornography in front of his children and walk around naked at home, a Hong Kong court heard Thursday.

Senior public prosecutor Jasmine Ching said the man started molesting his daughter at the age of six. He forced her to touch his genitals for the first few years before raping her when she was nine. He then went on to rape her four times in the next three years. The incidents took place in the family’s flat in Kowloon, Hong Kong, between 2006 and 2011. The daughter is now 18 years old, the South China Morning Post reported.

The 64-year-old man, has however, denied five counts of rape and two of indecent assault .

Testifying from another room, the girl, whose name was not revealed said “He did not wear anything at home … fully naked, not even underpants.”

She added that though he would watch pornography from when she was in kindergarten, she became aware of it only when she reached primary school. At times, he also asked her and her younger brother to stand with him while he watched adult videos on the computer in the living room.

Prosecutor said the man raped the girl for the first time when her younger brother slept beside them. The girl gathered courage to report the incident to police after speaking to a teacher in 2017.

“I was merely groping and touching. I did not rape her,” the father told an officer while he was being arrested.

The case is ongoing.

Photo: ANTHONY WALLACE/AFP/Getty Images

In a similar incident earlier this month, a man was found guilty of raping his daughter on his wedding night in Denmark. During his trial, the 50-year-old man said he unknowingly raped his daughter after mistaking her to be his wife. The man claimed that he and his friend decided to take his 20-year-old daughter up to the bridal suite after she got heavily drunk. He returned to the suite an hour later and went to bed. His wife also returned to the same room and he slept between the two women. The court documents, however, suggested he forced himself on his daughter.

In another incident in December 2018, a man raped his three-year-old daughter after a fight with his wife in Gurgaon, India. The man, whose name was not revealed, reached home drunk and had an argument with his wife after which she left the house with their younger daughter. On realizing that she had left the three-year-old with him, he raped her. When the mother reached home the following morning, she found the girl "unconscious and the bed sheet stained with blood.” The girl was rushed to the hospital in a critical condition and a medical checkup showed she was sexually assaulted. The man was arrested and charged under a child sexual abuse law, NDTV reported.
