Janakpuri minor rape case: DCW writes to Delhi Police, demands FIR copy

The child was raped and thrown in a deserted place where she was found in a pool of blood. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Maliwal reportedly visited the girl and said that her condition is horrifying The child was raped and thrown in a deserted place on July 15

New Delhi: Following the brutal rape of a six-year-old girl in West Delhi's Janakpuri area, the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) on Tuesday has sent notices to the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) taking cognizance of media reports on the case.

The news agency reported, a letter written by the DCW chief Swati Maliwal said, It has been reported that a 6-year-old girl was kidnapped and raped while she was sleeping with her family on a footpath. The child was raped and thrown in a deserted place where she was found in a pool of blood.

Maliwal has reportedly visited the girl and she mentioned that her condition is horrifying as she was brutalised in a terrible manner. The letter added that it is evident that the accused has even tried to kill the survivor. It also mentioned that the survivor's family belongs to a poor background and her father is a wage labourer.

She emphasised that the Crisis Intervention Cell of DCW was not intimated about the incident by the Delhi Police as it is mandated by the High Court of Delhi. Due to this, the DCW team could not reach the spot to counsel the girl and her family and provide them with other urgent social legal and financial support. The letter stated that this is totally unacceptable.

The commission has also sought for a copy of the FIR filed in the matter, reasons for not informing the Crisis Intervention Cell and the officials responsible for not informing the cell. It has also demanded the action taken against the accused along with the details of the accused who have been arrested and the status of investigation in the matter. The police have been directed to provide the required information latest by July 19.

The incident was reported on July 15, where a six-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a rickshaw-puller in west Delhi's Janakpuri area. The Delhi police have arrested the accused in the case, who was identified as 26-year-old Arun Kumar Das, hailing from Bihar's Begusarai district. News agency PTI reported that he was nabbed by the police patrolling staff. The police officials mentioned that the girl's condition is stable and she is still undergoing treatment at a local hospital.

However, the police have registered the case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
