Ahmedabad boy accused of rape, father booked

Father’s advice got him in soup: Cops

AHMEDABAD: Chandkheda police on Monday lodged an FIR for rape and molestation against a 17-year-old boy based on a complaint filed by the uncle of a 16-year-old girl. Police also booked the boy’s father for abetting the alleged offence. The juvenile’s father had encouraged his son “to enjoy his life” and bought two film tickets for his son, after which the boy had allegedly molested the girl at the cinema.The complainant, a resident of Chandkheda, alleged that his niece was sexually abused by the boy on July 11. “Around midnight of July 11, I woke up and went to toilet but I found it locked from inside. I waited a few minutes and then started knocking. After a while, the door opened and I saw a boy holding my niece inside the bathroom. The boy managed to flee and my niece was crying,” the complainant stated.The complainant’s niece told him that the boy had been studying with her for two days. He had told the girl he would marry her after they attained the legal age for marriage.“The boy’s father had also pressured my niece to get into a relationship with the boy. The boy’s father had told him ‘to enjoy his life’ with my niece. In November 2018, that boy’s father had bought two movie tickets and given them to his son, asking him to take my niece to watch the movie. When they went to the movie, the boy molested my niece,” the complainant stated.Around a month ago, the boy had came to a spot outside the complainant’s housing society, where he allegedly raped the girl. The complainant alleged that the boy raped the girl after threatening to besmirch her name in society if she did not give in to his demands.‘Rape occurred in mall washroom’In the FIR with Chandkheda police, the complainant has alleged that his niece was raped in the washroom of a mall in the Vastrapur area of the city. “On November 13, 2018, my niece went to a mall in Vastrapur on her birthday to give her friends a party. The boy had also gone to the party. When my niece went to the women’s washroom at the mall, the boy followed her entered the washroom and raped her there,” the complainant stated.The investigating officer of this case inspector B K Gamar of Chandkheda police said they have held the juvenile and his father. “The father’s only mistake was that he had once bought movie tickets for his son and he used to tell his son and the girl to enjoy life. This mistake has got him in the dock and he has been booked for abetment,” said Gamar. A case has been filed under charges of rape, molestation and the POCSO (Protection of Children against Sexual Offences) Act.
