Nails plucked, threatened with electrocution, immolation: Rajasthan custodial rape victim recounts horror

The Dalit woman has alleged that she was raped by five-six policemen and the accused included the SHO of the Sardarshahar police station.

Chilling details have come out in the custodial rape and torture of the Dalit woman, whose brother-in-law died in the custody of Churu district's Sardarshahar police station in Rajasthan.

The custodial death of the 22-year-old Dalit man and the gang rape of his sister-in-law by policemen, which has rocked the state.

Now, the woman has made serious allegations against the Rajasthan Police, claiming that police officers plucked her nails, raped her, assaulted her with sticks for days. She said she was threatened with being set on fire at one point.

Victim details horror

She said she was apprehended by the police in a private car and forcibly taken to the police station, as per a report in national daily The Times of India. There she was abused for days as a woman officer tried to save her.

"The cops forced me to strip and then verbally abused me. They even threatened to douse me in petrol and burn me alive," the victim said in her FIR.

The Dalit woman has alleged that she was raped by five-six policemen and the accused included the SHO of the Sardarshahar police station.

While one cop injured her eye, another threatened to electrocute her with a live wire, while some others got drunk and beat her up. The officers even plucked her nails with screwdrivers and spanners.

The victim also recounted that a woman constable tried to save her by taking her to a different room and locking it from inside but her ordeal continued the next day on.

The case

The Dalit woman, who is admitted at SMS Hospital in Jaipur, had alleged she and her brother-in-law were illegally detained by the then SHO and other policemen of Sardarshahar Police Station in Churu.

The man was arrested in a theft case on July 6 morning and was admitted to a hospital where he died in the night, officials have maintained. This account has been contested by the deceased's kin.

He was picked up by the police on June 30 and kept in illegal detention, his brother has alleged.

His brother further alleged that the policemen came to his house later on July 3 along with his brother and took him back along with his wife on the same day.

He also said his wife was the witness to the murder of his younger brother in police custody.

After the man's custodial death came to light, the SHO and six other policemen were suspended. Remaining policemen of the station were shunted to police lines and a judicial inquiry was ordered.

Based on the woman's statement, an FIR against the then SHO and five to seven other policemen was registered.

The case has been registered under sections 376-D (gangrape), 343 (wrongful confinement for three or more days), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) of the Indian Penal Code and relevant sections of the SC and ST (Prevention Of Atrocities) Act.

The government has also ordered a judicial probe into the custodial death.

The opposition BJP members on Monday walked out of the House amid a ruling Congress MLA's assertion that the Dalit woman was not gang-raped by policemen.
