What India Owes Lala Lajpat Rai

With all the blows raining on him, he still held the crowd under control and when the demonstration time was over ‘he marched at the head of the procession on the way back.’ In the evening, to the citizens of Lahore who had assembled after congratulating them for their splendid behaviour, he uttered those immortal words:

‘Every blow that they hurled at us drove one more nail into the coffin of the Empire.’

Though indomitable in the spirit, his fragile body had actually been wrecked by the blows. He would succumb to the injuries on 17 November 1928.

And what a life he had lived!

1907 was the fiftieth anniversary of 1857 revolt, the British were virtually in a fear psychosis. There was fear among the authorities that a hundred thousand soldiers were waiting for a word from Lala Lajpat Rai to start another rebellion. The government report stated that the people in the province of Punjab were “urged to combine to withhold payment of Government revenue, water rates and other dues; to refuse supplies, carriages and other help to Government officers on tour and Native soldiers. Police were pilloried as ‘traitors’ and adjured to quit the service of the Government.” The government assumed that the Arya Samaj, the organisation to which Lajpat Rai belonged, had a secret committee and was organising the propaganda. The cipher telegram informed the authorities:

“The head and center of the entire movement is Lala Lajpat Rai, a Khatri pleader who has visited England as the Congress representative of the Punjab. He is a revolutionary and a political enthusiast who is inspired by the most intense hatred of the British Government.”

Lalaji was not a Khatri but then being a Arya Samajist he was against caste and untouchability. So in 1907 he had been deported to Mandalay without any trial. Viceroy Minto eagerly gave his consent. As he was being spirited away, he wrote to his father that “whatever comes should be manfully borne”.

In 1914, he was in the United States, where he was striving to network with the patriotic elements and strive for the freedom of India. However, unlike some of his compatriots, who were carried away by the pro-German feeling when seeking their help for India’s liberation he stated clearly:

“I am an Indian patriot and I wish freedom for my country. I have no sympathy for the Germans nor have I anything against them. … I have been always rather fanatically attached to the theory that liberty won with foreign help was not worth having.”

Yet, when such efforts which he warned against failed and the revolutionaries got into trouble, Lalaji was always there to help. For example, when M N Roy had to flee to Mexico and was in dire straits, Lalaji was the one who came to his aid.

A strong Indic secular at heart, Lalaji believed that Hindu-Muslim problem was the creation of the British. He wrote of the India of his vision, in 1924 thus:
