[ANALYSIS] Coalition politics in India: Consensus, or the lack of it - a boon or a bane?

Dr Manmohan Singh & HD Kumaraswamy | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Initial years after Independence saw solid, single-party governments Morarji Desai formed the first coalition government in 1977 Most coalitions in the period between 1989-99 were unstable

It is difficult to put a date to when democracy came to India, but the concept itself has popularly been associated with the Romans and the Greeks. In the Indian context, Jawaharlal Nehru mentioned a rudimentary form of democratic set-up in his famous tome ‘Discovery of India’. As per his book, at the end of the Indus Valley civilization when the Aryans descended into the hinterland during the Vedic Period (1500- 500 BCE), they introduced the concept of living in small communities, where the headman was chosen through a collective ( inevitably male-dominated) decision and the measure of prosperity of the herd was the number of livestock it held.

Later, India, as a gamut of small and large kingdoms was mostly ruled by monarchial regimes. It is at the end of the British Empire when sovereignties had withered with time or were forced into submitting to a larger dream of nationhood, that fiefdoms were sacrificed completely at the altar of democracy.

The Coalition Experiment in India

The early years of post-Independence saw extremely solid, nearly monolithic governments formed by the Congress. The death of the first Prime Minister lit the embers of ambition in the hearts of a few Congressmen but these were quickly extinguished as Indira Gandhi employed an iron clasp over the party and country. [The first coalition ministry of Morarji Desai lasted all of 857 days (between March 1977 and June 1979) and that of Charan Singh for 171 days (between July 1979 and January 1980).]



Charan Singh with the then PM Morarji Desai and Jagjivan Ram after the swearing-in ceremony at Rashtrapati Bhavan | Pic Credit: BCCL

It was in the decades after her death in 1984 that the experiment with coalitions was truly tried and tested; even then mostly to little success. For example after 1989 for many years, no single party managed to form a government on its own. The 1990s, therefore, witnessed a succession of unstable and short-lived formations – India got a new government in each of these years - 1989, 1990, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999. Eight governments were formed in 10 years instead of the regular two terms that were expected in the same period. [VP Singh for 344 days (between December 1989 and November 1990) / Chandra Shekhar for 224 days (between November 1990 and June 1991) / Atal Bihari Vajpayee for 13 days in May 1996 /Deve Gowda for 325 days (between June 1996 and April 1997) / IK Gujral for 333 days (between April 1997 and March 1998) / Atal Bihari Vajpayee for 394 days (between March 1998 and April 1999).]



Morarji Desai, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Chandrashekhar and Subramaniam Swamy | Pic Credit: BCCL

Fatigued with battered governance, Indians got some semblance of normalcy in the form of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) alliance in 1999-2004 and then two terms of the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) between 2004 and 2014. While Atal Bihari Vajpayee was constantly pestered by AIADMK’s J Jayalalithaa and finally lost the plot with his India Shining campaign, citizens grew weary of the Left’s tantrums and the way it held the Dr Manmohan Singh government hostage.

Finally, in 2014, BJP secured 282 seats, ushering in another era of strong single-party governments, which had allies only because of some pre-poll understanding or based on strategic partnerships rather than a necessity for its survival at the helm.

The Many Cs – Compulsions of Creating a Coalition and the Constricting Consequences

In a multi-party democracy, when no single party is able to garner the requisite numbers to cross the half-way mark, a coalition is a natural option. Mostly, though not always, parties with broadly similar sensibilities come together to cobble a majority number, so as to be invited (as a cohesive whole) to form a government. They also usually draft a basic minimum common programme which they agree to implement.

There have been exceptions to this rule when hitherto political and ideological foes have come together simply to grab power or to create bloc resistance against a third party. The current Karnataka coalition of the Janata Dal (Secular) [JD(S)] and Congress is a prime example of the former, and a Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) - Samajwadi Party (SP) coalition in UP as a syndicate against the BJP could be viewed as a sample of the latter. Another good example is that of the several disparate players who came together to take on Narendra Modi in the General Elections of 2019.

The adverse impact of such an arrangement is the inability of providing good governance or pushing through policies. For most of the year, since the HD Kumaraswamy government was sworn in, most of the time (of the ones at the coalition's helm) has been lost in keeping the flock together rather than making a positive difference to the lives of those whom they govern.

As mentioned earlier, the tenure of the UPA government was not all one of smooth-sailing. In the first tenure itself, in July 2008, Dr Manmohan Singh’s government survived a no-confidence motion with the help of SP and BSP when the Left withdrew support over the N-deal issue. The second term too was wrought with trouble as first the Trinamool Congress left the coalition over business reforms and then DMK got embroiled in the 2G spectrum scam and later left the ship completely over the issue of war crimes against Tamils in Sri Lanka. The day was once again saved by SP and BSP who came to the aid of the government which had been reduced to a minority with just 228 seats.



Dr. Manmohan Singh and Sonia Gandhi | Pic Credit: BCCL

It goes without saying that the impediments created by frequent skirmishes with allies were severe roadblocks to policy implementation and UPA II came to be associated with governance paralysis.

Gains of a Union

Considering the chequered history of coalitions in India, there is, however, an equal need to look at the benefits of such a complex arrangement. There have been a few success stories like the coalitions in Kerala; and at the national level, all said and done, the first full term of the NDA under Vajpayee and the two tenures of the UPA were seminal in many ways for the country.

For one, they pulled India out of the uncertainty and instability of the past decade.

The second major value of such a proposition is that it is a platform for regional aspirations in a diverse country like India and is more representative in nature. It facilitates a system that hears the voice of segments that are non-powerful and remotely located, helping to provide a more inclusive and decentralised model.

Thirdly, a coalition can provide an ideal counterbalance, providing a hedge against possible hegemony and unbridled power in the hands of one or a few people.

Mostly though, it can be said that pre-poll partnerships are more durable and ideologically relatable than a motley crowd lobbying together to grasp power after the results disclose that no one party has the numbers.

The final take on coalition remains a delicate one – with so many advantages that the concept brings, it needs to be checked that the structure does not degenerate to serve narrow, parochial interests of politicians and that the grouping presents itself not as a barrier but as an enabler or even a catalyst of national interest.
