ICJ verdict on Kulbhushan Jadhav: What went in India’s favour and against

The International Court of Justice on Wednesday stayed execution of sentence passed to Kulbhushan Jadhav. (Photo credit: PTI)

India has secured major relief for retired naval officer Kulbhushan Jadhav, who was awarded death sentence in 2017 by a Pakistani military court on the charges of espionage. The International Court of Justice (ICJ) on Wednesday stayed execution of sentence passed to Kulbhushan Jadhav.

India had challenged Pakistani military court’s verdict citing the violation of the Vienna Convention on consular access and process of resolution. The ICJ ruling has come as a big diplomatic victory for India in Kulbhushan Jadhav case but not all the remedies sought by New Delhi were accepted by the court.

What went in India’s favour?

The ICJ rejected Pakistan’s objections to the admissibility of the application of India with a 15-1 votes. The only dissenting judge of the ICJ was ad hoc Judge Jillani, who is from Pakistan. India got major victories in the ICJ ruling on three counts.

First, the ICJ suspended the death penalty awarded to Kulbhushan Jadhav by the Pakistani military court. Secondly, the ICJ ruled that Pakistan will have to review the entire process of trial and conviction of Kulbhushan Jadhav.

It directed Pakistan to take all measures at its disposal to ensure that Mr Jadhav is not executed pending the final decision in the present proceedingsThe court considers that a continued stay of execution constitutes an indispensable condition for the effective review and reconsideration of the conviction and sentence of Mr Jadhav.

Thirdly, the ICJ noted that Pakistan breached the obligation incumbent upon it under Article 36 of the Vienna Convention on consular relations. This means that Pakistan has now to provide India consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav.

What went against India?

Though India succeeded in securing a stay on the death sentence of Kulbhushan Jadhav, its argument to annul the military court verdict was not accepted. The Indian side also sought a direction to Pakistan for providing a safe passage for Kulbhushan Jadhav to return home.

The ICJ ruled, it is not the conviction and sentence of Mr Jadhav which are to be regarded as a violation of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention.

Thus, the court finds that these submissions made by India cannot be upheld, reads the judgment of the ICJ.

The case

Kulbhushan Jadhav was captured by Pakistan in March 2016 and tried in a military court which pronounced its judgment on charges of espionage and terrorism in April 2017. India moved the ICJ in May 2017 challenging the Pakistani military court judgment.

Pakistan claims that Kulbhushan Jadhav was arrested from its restive Balochistan province on March 3, 2016. Pakistan claimed that Kulbhushan Jadhav entered Balochistan from Iran for espionage.

India, on the other hand, refuted Pakistan’s version of the incident saying that Kulbhushan Jadhav was abducted by militants from Chabahar area of Iran where the retired naval officer has business interests.

The militants handed over Kulbhushan Jadhav to Pakistani agencies for money. India then sought consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav but Pakistan denied it saying that Indian authorities would try to extract information from its spy.

Though Pakistan denied India consular access, the sustained pressure from New Delhi saw Islamabad allowing a meeting of Kulbhushan Jadhav with his mother and wife in Islamabad on December 25, 2017.
