Scarlett Keeling: Man convicted of killing British teenager on beach in Goa, India

A man has been convicted of killing a British teenager at an Indian beach resort, 11 years after her death.

Scarlett Keeling, 15, was found dead after being raped in Goa in 2008 while on a six-month holiday with her family.

The Mumbai High Court yesterday found Samson D'Souza guilty of "culpable homicide not amounting to murder", the BBC reports.

Scarlett Keeling, 15, was found dead after being raped in Goa in 2008 while on a six-month holiday with her family. (AAP)

D’Souza was acquitted alongside another man, Placido Carvalho, in 2016 after years of delays, but that controversial verdict was appealed by the country’s Central Bureau of Investigation.

While police at the time said her death was accidental, her mum, Fiona MacKeown, 55, from Devon, campaigned for justice.

A second post mortem showed she had been drugged and raped before drowning in sea water.

While Goan police at the time said her death was accidental, her mum, Fiona MacKeown, 55, from Devon, campaigned for justice. (AAP)

She also had 50 separate injuries to her body.

A Goan police officer was sacked over the investigation.

After the verdict Mrs MacKeown told the BBC: "I think he murdered her but culpable homicide is very close.

"I hope that we can all put this behind us now and get on with our lives.”

Scarlett had been to a Valentine’s Day beach party, under the care of a tour guide and family friend, in the resort of Anjuna, while her family - including her eight brothers and sisters - were in a neighbouring town.

After the verdict Mrs MacKeown told the BBC: "I think he murdered her but culpable homicide is very close. (AAP)

Two days before her body was found, her mother discovered her sandals and clothing near the beach.

But the accused men claimed she drowned while high on drugs.

Mrs MacKeown was criticised for her parenting, and has gone on to warn about safety in India.

“I am going to regret letting her go for the rest of my life,” she said.

The prosecution alleged the men were working at a beach-side shack near where Scarlett’s body was found, had plied her with drugs and then attacked her.

D’Souza will be sentenced on Friday and faces life in prison.
