Pune: Man rapes woman on pretext of ‘curing’ her husband

The woman in her complaint to the police stated that the accused has also cheated two other persons by taking Rs 15 lakh and Rs 93 lakh respectively. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused extorted money from the survivor by threatening to release the video The accused promised the woman that he would cure her husband's illness The police have booked him under the sections of the Indian Penal Code

Pune: A 29-year-old man has been arrested for allegedly raping a 42-year-old woman in Pune, Maharashtra. The accused allegedly made a video of the incident and extorted money from the survivor by threatening to release the video.

The woman lodged a formal complaint on Tuesday. The police officials said that the woman's husband is ill and between November 2014 and October 2018, the accused promised the woman that he would cure his illness. Reportedly, the accused went to the woman's house and allegedly developed physical relations with her without her consent.

According to a report, he swindled her of her money and jewellery by promising to cure her husband and also threatened to leak the videos he shot while raping her. The woman, in her complaint to the police, stated that the accused has also allegedly cheated two other persons of Rs 15 lakh and Rs 93 lakh respectively.

However, the police have booked him under the Indian Penal Code, sections 384 (extortion), 307 (attempt to murder), 376 (rape), 420 (cheating), 467 (forgery), 468 (forgery for purpose of cheating), 506 (2) (criminal intimidation), sections of the Information Technology Act and sections of the Maharashtra Prevention and Eradication of Human Sacrifice and other Inhuman, Evil and Aghori Practices and Black Magic Act, 2013.

Similar cases of godmen swindling families of patients:

Sadly, this is not the only case of its kind. In a similar case reported from Mumbai in March, a woman in her 40s, and her husband who were struggling to ensure treatment of their 10-year-old son who was battling cancer was swindled for lakhs and the woman was allegedly raped and blackmailed by the Ujjain-based self-proclaimed godman. The accused had apparently shot a video of the act which he threatened to make public.

The accused extorted Rs 3.5 lakh from the woman who lived in Mumbai's Chembur area. He apparently carried out some havan and yagya at her house, after which the woman and her son fainted. Later, when they came around, they found the man still hanging around and had to allow him to leave with Rs 60,000 worth jewellery.

Later he even had the woman visiting his Andheri-based flat under the pretext of checking on the son's health progress and this time raped her, saying it was a part of the ritual she had to undergo to save the son's life.

Sadly the child died despite treatment at a very expensive hospital but the man continued to blackmail. The couple then approached the police and the accused was soon nabbed.

A case has been registered under Sections 376 (rape), 354(a) (sexual harassment), 384 (extortion) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC and also the relevant sections of the Black Magic Act have been included.
