Uttar Pradesh: 30-year-old woman sets herself, two children ablaze; FIR not registered yet

Somehow her son managed to unbolt the door and rushed out crying for help | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The woman and her two-year-old daughter died on the spot The woman took the extreme step following a domestic quarrel with her husband The bodies have been sent for post-mortem and report are awaited

Ghaziabad: A 30-year-old woman set herself ablaze by pouring kerosene on herself and her two minor children at her residence in Preet Vihar, Ghaziabad's Mudranagar area. The incident happened on Wednesday, where the woman and her two-year-old daughter died on the spot and her five-year-old son survived.

The woman was identified as Deepa and her children were named Reena and Lalit. Reportedly Lalit is still under treatment for severe burn injuries. According to a report, the incident took place at around 4 PM, when Deepa's in-laws and husband were not at home. Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, Superintendent of Police said that the woman out of a domestic dispute with her husband locked herself in the room along with her two children and poured kerosene on herself and them. She then set all three ablaze.

He added that somehow her son managed to unbolt the door and rushed out crying for help. In the meantime, neighbours in the locality rushed to save them but Deepa and Reena died on the spot due to severe burns. The police further stated that following a quarrel between the husband and the wife, the husband allegedly slapped her before leaving for his work. Her husband, Kailash works at a handloom factory in Muradnagar.

The SP further said that Lalit survived as he rushed out in time. He is currently under treatment and has severe burns but he is likely to survive. However, the police will lodge the complaint once the deceased's parents come and they are yet to get the motive behind this extreme step.

The two bodies have been sent for post-mortem and the reports are awaited for further investigation in the case.

In a similar case reported from Pune, Maharashtra a woman allegedly set herself ablaze after repeated incidents of domestic violence by her husband. The victim and her husband, both suffered burns in the incident. She was pursuing the last year of her medical studies and set herself on fire following a heated argument with her husband.
