Four police personnel attacked in separate incidents

All occurred on Monday

The attacks on police personnel by citizens continue to be a problem for the force. Four policemen were assaulted in three separate instances on Monday alone. One of the more brutal attacks involved seven men assaulting a 45-year-old head constable.

The constable, Ramegowda, is attached to Kadugodi police station. He was assaulted while he was on duty near Prestige Shantiniketan apartments at ITPL, Whitefield. “He had been assigned to supervise the Shantiniketan Residents’ Welfare Association elections. Around 9.30 p.m., he was sitting on his bike and talking with the security guard of the complex. Suddenly, he was attacked by a group of seven men. Ramegowda fell off the motorcycle. The group of men allegedly kicked and punched him till he fell unconscious,” said the police.

Ramegowda sustained multiple injuries and was taken to a hospital for treatment. The Kadugodi police have registered a case and are searching for the accused.

Software engineers booked

In another incident, Constable Lokesh S. and Sub-Inspector Ishwar — attached to Begur station — were attacked by three men with knives on being stopped them for questioning at Devarachikkanahalli on Monday afternoon.

According to the police, the men attacked Ishwar when he stopped them. Lokesh, who was on patrolling duty nearby, received an alert and rushed to the spot. “He found the men beating up the PSI and abusing him for harassing motorists,” said the police.

When Lokesh intervened, the accused attacked him. One of the men pulled out a knife and attacked Lokesh who sustained injuries on his neck and hand.

“He told the police that the men repeatedly threatened to kill him to teach them a lesson,” said an officer.

Additional personnel were despatched to the spot and the accused were arrested. They have been identified as Rakesh, 30, Ramesh, 33, and Abhishek, 28.

“They are from Kerala. They are software engineers who work for a private company in Bengaluru. They have been booked for assaulting a public servant, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation. They have been remanded in judicial custody,” the police said.

Rowdy-sheeter turns on constable

Constable Swalappa Rolli, attached toAmruthahalli police station, was assaulted and humiliated by a habitual offender whom he had caught on Jakkur double road signal on Monday.

While patrolling the area, Rolli found Chandra Kumar, 28, a known rowdy-sheeter standing on the kerb and abusing passers-by. Rolli told him not to trouble people and asked him to leave the place. In response, Chandra attacked the Rolli, who immediately alerted the control room. A police team was despatched to the spot. They arrested Chandra for assaulting a public servant on duty.
