Opposition Leaders Demand CBI Probe into Muzaffarpur Children Shelter Sexual Abuse Case

Patna: Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) leader Tejaswi Yadav, outside Bihar Assembly in Patna on Tuesday, demanded a CBI enquiry into the sexual exploitation of young girls at the Muzaffarpur Shelter Home alleging Nitish administration was resisting a full-blown probe in the case to protect his own reputation.

Talking to reporters after an equally noisy session inside the Assembly that saw frequent disruption of the proceedings by opposing leaders, Yadav, the leader of the opposition, said that an investigation by the state police would not be trustworthy as they all worked for the Chief Minister.

"We are not going to accept the findings of any probing agency unless it is investigated by the CBI. This investigation must take under close supervision of the Patna Court," the former Deputy Chief Minister said.

Meanwhile, Yadav's mother and former Bihar Chief Minister Rabri Devi, along with other RJD leaders, protested against rising crime in the state and reporting of rape coming from all parts of the state.

"Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has failed to protect the children, particularly the girls, of Bihar. He should resign from his post on moral grounds," she said amidst disparaging slogans targeted at Kumar and other NDA leaders.

Harpreet Kaur, Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Muzaffarpur, earlier had said that medical reports did confirm that 29 of the 42 girls were indeed found to have been sexually abused but a claim made by one of the young victims that one girl was beaten to death and then buried in the shelter home ground has so far turned out to be false.

"We dug up the area that was pointed by this girl who said that one of the inmates of the shelter home was sexually attacked, then brutally beaten to death and then buried in the yard. However, we have failed to find any human remains from the site. The dirt dug up from the front yard has been sent to a forensic lab for further testing," Kaur said.
