Middle-aged man held for rape of mentally challenged woman

Ludhiana: Police on Thursday morning arrested a middle-aged man for raping a mentally challenged woman. The accused was aged between 45 and 50, a married labourer.

In his police complaint, the 34-year-old survivor’s father said his daughter was mentally weak and unmarried. He added that two to three days ago, the accused had met his son and asked him for a room on rent. The complainant said that on Wednesday at around 4 pm, the accused came to his place with his (complainant’s) son to see the room. He added that after his son showed the accused the room, he went to Mundiyan Kalan to get beds.

The survivor’s father told cops that as he was outside, the accused (who was drunk) came and raped his daughter. He added that when his daughter raised an alarm, the accused fled from the spot, but threatened them not to report the matter to the police. However, they did inform the cops.

Police reached the spot and started a probe. They later booked the accused under sections 376 (rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC. Investigating officer, ASI Surjeet Singh, said the accused was arrested on Thursday morning.

The IO said the woman’s medical examination was being done by doctors at Civil Hospital on Thursday. He added that the police would produce the accused in the court and seek his remand to dig out more evidence into the case. Police officials said the accused was a father of two children, including a son and a daughter, both of whom are majors. They added that the accused might have known the family earlier, and knew they had a mentally challenged daughter.

PREVIOUS RAPE CASES

March 13: Police detained a 21-year-old man for allegedly raping and murdering a five-year-old girl.

March 24: Ludhiana police booked a person for raping a 17-year-old.

May 5: In a gruesome reminder of the Nirbhaya case of Delhi, a 16-year-old Ludhiana girl was allegedly repeatedly raped by five men, including four minors, for two days and later attacked with bricks, leaving her battling for life.

July 4: Police booked two persons for the rape of a 15-year-old girl.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
