Scarlett Keeling: Man who raped and killed British teen in India jailed for 10 years

Scarlett Keeling's semi-naked body was found covered in 50 injuries lying face-down in the water in Goa, India, Bombay's High Court heard

Scarlett Keeling: Man who raped and killed British teen in India jailed for 10 years

A beach shack worker who raped and killed a British teenager in Goa has been jailed for ten years.

Scarlett Keeling, 15, was abused on a tourist beach in Goa and her body was found covered in 50 injuries in February 2008.

Samson D'Souza, 36, was found guilty of five charges at Bombay's High Court earlier this week.

Today he has been handed a ten-year jail sentence, according to Indian Express.

At the sentencing, defence lawyer Shailendra Bhobe argued that D'Souza is the lone earning member of his family, is a husband and a father of a 12-year-old girl, it is reported.

He also referenced six-months already served during the investigation.

Prosecutor Ejaz Khan asked judges to impose a life sentence.

Scarlett's family had stayed in Goa for two months, and then moved down the coast, but Scarlett begged her mother to let her return for a big Valentine's Day party.

At first her mum refused, but then agreed after a family friend said they'd look out for her.

Scarlett's half-naked body was found on Anjuna beach on February 18, 2008.

Police initially declared her death was caused by accidental drowning but mum Fiona MacKeown, fought for a second inquest.

A postmortem showed there to be ecstasy, cocaine and LSD in Scarlett's body as well as multiple cuts to her body and signs of sexual assault.

The trial at Goa Children's Court started in March 2010, but a verdict was not reached until 2016 when judge, Vandana Tendulkar, acquitted D'Souza and Placido Carvalho - the two accused.

The case - initially investigated by the Goa Police - was handed over to the CBI, India's premier investigation agency, who appealed the court's not-guilty decision.

Image: PA) PA)

On Wednesday, Scarlett's mum Fiona received a text from her lawyer while at work to confirm a court had overturned the acquittal of D'Souza.

The court had upheld the acquittal of Carvalho, 47.

Mum-of-nine Fiona said she was "shocked but relieved" but only regretted that she can't get to India to watch D'Souza being jailed.

Image: REUTERS/Keeling family/Handout) REUTERS/Keeling family/Handout)

She said: "I can not get out there quick enough due to connecting flights.

"But I would have liked to have been there to look into his eyes when he is sentenced.

"He stared at me constantly and was so arrogant and did not look even a slightly bit sorry. I would like to stare at him as he is taken away.

Image: PA) PA)

"I still think about Scarlett all the time. When I see her friends and the things they are doing I always wonder, she could have been a mum by now.

"I have one daughter about to have a baby and another that has two children. She would have been an amazing aunt and was always great with children.

"Thoughts of what could have been will never go away. I don't know if this is closure as I don't think I will ever get over what happened but it goes some way towards it."
