IPS officer Merin Joseph in Riyadh by wearing Abaya – Pic inside

By Mr. Irfan Mohammed

Jeddah: The extradition of NRI worker, who is accused in a rape case in Kerala, is diplomatic success for a number of reasons. India’s success rate in extraditing fugitives is abysmally low; only one in every three fugitives are being successfully extradited to India.

However, Unlike in other parts of the world, extradition of Indian fugitives from gulf region is easier but many of Indian law enforcement agencies not keen on documentation and persuasion of cases. But, a young lady police from Kerala has proved that where there is a will there is way. Indian expatriate community touched by her action.

The young IPS officer, Merin Josepeh, 29-year-old known as fire brand lady cop in Kerala, not only followed the case but all the way traveled Saudi Arabia not only to bring the accused of teenage girl rape case but to understand and analyse the procedures that involved with host countries.

The officer, who wore black Abaya or Burqa, respecting the tradition of conservative Islamic country, spent her hectic three days in Saudi capital has sent stern warning to large number of diaspora. Also, Indian police won praise for their action.

Joseph has cracked a teenage girl rape case and arrested the accused from Riyadh.

The accused, Sunil Kumar Bhadran (38), a tile fixer in Riyadh was wanted in Kerala for the rape of a teenage girl in 2017.

Bhadran who had been working in Saudi for years was accused of raping the girl, the daughter of a family friend while he was on a vacation. The girl later committed suicide at a rehabilitation center. By the time police identified Bhadran as the accused he had fled the country. Even though an Interpol lookout notice was issued against him, the case made little progress.

It was only in June 2019 after Joseph took charge as Commissioner of Kollam she stumbled upon the two-year-old case while reviewing pending cases of crime against women.

Following up on the lookout notice, Joseph approached the CBI who in turn contacted the Interpol. The Interpol confirmed that Sunil was in fact in Saudi and got him arrested, said a report.

In such extradition cases, low rank officers travel to abroad to take custody of fugitives but in this case, Joseph herself opted to come to Saudi Arabia.

She called Indian Ambassador Ausaf Sayeed besides meeting her counterparts in Saudi. She also visited Lulu Supermarket and met with number of social workers and media from Kerala before returning home after completing her mission.
