Kerala Commissioner Merin Joseph who brought back rape accused from Saudi: Need more women IPS officers

When Kollam Police Commissioner and IPS Merin Joseph decided to leave for Saudi Arabia to nab a child-rape accused, who had fled Kerala and gone to Riyadh, she was unsure of the procedures that would follow once she landed in the middle-eastern country.

It was because extradition from a foreign country is quite rare, despite many Keralites having fled to Saudi after committing serious crimes.

What made Merin’s case stand out was that the 38-year-old accused, Sunil Kumar Bhadran, a native of Kollam in Kerala, had raped a 13-year-old girl in 2017 while he was in the state on a holiday. He raped the girl, his friend’s niece, for three months.

By the time the girl narrated her story to her family, Sunil had already fled the country to Saudi Arabia, where he was employed as a tile worker.

The girl was later moved to Government Mahila Mandiram rescue home at Karicode in Kollam district, where she committed suicide.

The case had been pending for almost two years and when Merin came across it, she immediately wanted to bring justice to the girl’s family. She managed to capture the accused, making him the first person to be extradited for a crime committed in Kerala.

When asked about her interest in the case, Merin told IndiaToday.in in an interview, "No one was really familiar with the extradition procedures as it had not been done in the past. Also, cases related to women and children are pretty close to my heart. I take special interest in solving them. I wanted this person to be brought back to face trial in India. People should not live with the impression that they can commit a grave offence, then escape to foreign country and evade justice. So the message had to be loud and clear."

She added, "This was a heinous case where the victim had committed suicide; I felt it was my responsibility to do something about it. Because even though there is a lot of hype around such cases, people forget and move on and that is not fair to the victim, especially poor people who may not have the resources, because they lose out in the long run."

This urge to solve women-oriented cases wasn’t an aberration; Merin has always been passionate about cases involving women and children. "I feel that women and children have no one to speak up for them, so they become victims of the difficulties of getting justice. I feel that woman often fight lonely battles with the courts with no one to help them out. So being someone who has been in the system, I have seen how difficult it is for people to negotiate their way through the complicated and time-consuming process. So the least I can do is be compassionate and help them in any way. I try to give everybody the assurance that I would do the best that I can to get them justice."

She added, "These issues tend to get neglected because no one has the time to pay special attention to them. So as a lady officer, the least bit you want to do is to help out your own gender. Especially with women safety, it is a matter of debate in India and as a lady officer, such things are expected from me. And you have to live up to the public expectations and deliver what they want."

Merin knows the problems that her gender faces and the discrimination too. We asked her if she has ever had to face any kind of discrimination in the force, given that her job is considered essentially 'male', she said that it is her work and not her gender, that defines her.

"I never seek concession on the basis of my gender. Even when people have discouraged me, I have gone ahead and taken the challenge. Having said that, it is a fact that lady officers are discriminated against when it comes to field posting. There is a perception that women may not be able to handle the pulls and pressures of being in tough assignments. This is not true because women officers have done exceedingly well. They have that grit and determination to do well," said Joseph.

Being an IPS officer doesn’t come without difficulties and according to Merin, who has inspired many with her determination to solve the Kollam case, it is a career that can actually bring about a change. "The kind of power you wield being an IPS is overwhelming. You touch the lives of so many people. The kind of reach that you have is immense. It is tough, but it also gives you peace and satisfaction. My advice to women would be to start considering IPS as a profession."

Merin, whose idol, very fittingly at that, is Dr Kiran Bedi, always wanted to become a civil servant, "I never wanted a conventional 9 to 5 job. I wanted something dynamic, exciting, that kept me on my toes all the time, so IPS suited the bill perfectly. I wanted to make bold decisions and do things differently and IPS gave me those possibilities."

There is no denying the fact that every word that the IPS officer said is true. She proved the same with her grit and determination as she finally managed to deliver justice to the 13-year-old girl’s family, two years after she killed herself.

ALSO SEE | Kerala Police extradites absconding rape accused from Saudi Arabia
