P Rajagopal: Indian restaurateur who murdered love rival dies after losing final appeal

A well-known Indian restaurateur known as the "dosa king" has died - months after losing his final appeal against a murder conviction.

P Rajagopal was the founder of Saravana Bhavan, a vegetarian hotel chain that expanded across India, the UK, Australia, Singapore and elsewhere.

In 2004, he was convicted of kidnapping and killing the husband of a woman he wanted to marry and sentenced to 10 years in prison.

Rajagopal's sentence was increased to life in 2009 after his appeal was rejected by the high court - and he had battled to avoid going to prison ever since.

In March, the supreme court upheld the life sentence and rejected a plea for bail on medical grounds - exhausting his legal options.

Advertisement

The 72-year-old turned himself in on 9 July, arriving at court in an ambulance with an oxygen mask strapped to his face.

He died in hospital on Thursday morning in Chennai, with local media reporting he suffered a heart attack.

"We failed to revive him and he passed away due to cardiac failure," a hospital official said in a statement.

The man Rajagopal killed, Prince Santhakumar, was one of his employees - and the husband of the woman he was besotted with.

At his murder trial in 2004, the court heard that Rajagopal had asked an astrologer in the 1990s if he should marry the woman, who was then in her 20s and had rejected his advances.

Rajagopal was already married to two women at the time.

The couple started receiving threats from Rajagopal in 2001, demanding that they ended their marriage.

They went to the police to complain about the threats. Days later, Mr Santhakumar went missing and was found dead in a forest, with police confirming that he had been strangled.

Image: The Saravana Bhavan restaurant chain specialise in vegetarian Indian food

Rajagopal set up Saravana Bhawan in the 1980s, rising from rags to riches.

His restaurants, now run by his sons, employ thousands of people.
