Watch: Maha Cong Working President argues with cops as she tries to meet rebel Shrimant Patil at St George's Hospital

On Friday, Maharashtra MLA and Congress Working President Yashomati Thakur forcibly entered St George’s Hospital where she tried to meet ‘sick’ Cong MLA Shrimant Patil.

Thakur had a heated argument with the Mumbai Police and also Shrimant Patil’s relatives at the hospital.

On Thursday, the Karnataka Congress had claimed that the BJP "abducted" its MLA Shrimant Patil, ahead of the trust vote of Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy-led government.

Watch: Cong MLA and Maha Working President Yashomati Thakur argues with cops and family members at St George's Hospital Mumbai, as she tries to meet Karnataka Rebel Cong MLA Shrimant Patil pic.twitter.com/xXNyCjRfqn — DNA (@dna) July 19, 2019

However, the legislator had said he was in Mumbai for treatment and would return to Bengaluru only after recovering completely.

Karnataka Congress had approached the Bengaluru Police alleging Patil was "abducted" by BJP MLA Laxman Savadhi in order to dethrone the Kumaraswamy-led government in the trust vote.

The Congress had alleged that Patil was deprived of his right to vote, "which is a serious act and also a cognisable offence which needs immediate necessary action to protect" Patil.

However, Patil had said he travelled to Chennai for personal work and later to Mumbai on the advice of a doctor after he developed chest pain.

"I went to Chennai for some personal work. After reaching Chennai, I felt some pain in my chest. But after visiting the hospital, I came to Mumbai on the suggestion of the doctor and got admitted here. On doctor's advice, I will return to Bengaluru once my health improves," said Patil, who was among the 18 MLAs absent during the motion of confidence yesterday.

Earlier, the Mumbai Police allowed Karnataka cops to take the statement of Congress legislator Shrimant Patil, who was admitted at a hospital following chest pain.

"Permission has been given to Karnataka Police officials to meet and take the statement of Congress MLA Shrimant Patil," a Mumbai police official said.

Earlier in the day, Karnataka Police accompanied by Mumbai Police arrived at St. George Hospital to meet Patil.
