Dozen armed robbers take family hostage, steal Rs 93,000 valuables

Vadodara: Around a dozen robbers broke into a house in Ishwarpura village of Waghodiya taluka on Sunday midnight and escaped with cash and ornaments worth Rs 93,000.

The family members were held hostage and beaten up while the robbers were ransacking the safes and cupboards in the house.

According to police, the robbers entered the house of Natwar Vasava from the backdoor around Sunday midnight. Natwar and his wife Nandi were sleeping in the neighbouring house and his sons and mother were sleeping in the house that was targeted.

The robbers thrashed Natwar’s son Ravi and Ankit and his mother Vidya and snatched their gold and silver necklaces. Police said that Rs 2,000 cash and gold and silver ornaments worth Rs 62,000 that were kept in a safe were also stolen. They also broke into Natwar’s shop which is also on right beside of the house and stole Rs 1,000 from there.

When the family members shouted for help, their neighbours came out of their houses, some of the robbers pelted stones at them. As more number of people started coming out of their houses, the robbers started rushing out of the house to flee.

While fleeing also, the robbers thrashed three women on their way and stole their gold necklaces and earrings. “It was a large group and when they were fleeing, one group was targeting women, while another group was pelting stones,” said a police official.

In response, villagers too pelted stones at the robbers who were armed with sticks and similar objects. While fleeing towards Gajadra village, they also broke windshield and windows of a car.

Police sources said that six persons were injured in the attack and all of them were rushed to a private hospital in Waghodiya.

Eye-witnesses told police that the robbers were aged between 20 and 30 years and were talking in Hindi. Some of the robbers had worn woollen clothes and some of them had tied their pants to their waist and were donning shorts.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
