Midnight Loot: Armed robbers assault, rob locals at a village in Gujarat's Vadodara

It was a group of almost 20 men aged between 20 to 30 years of age, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Vadodara: Unidentified men wreaked havoc in Gujarat's Ishwapura village on Sunday night, said police. According to a complaint registered with the police on Monday, a group of about 12 armed men assaulted and robbed several villagers in the village which falls under the Waghodia taluka of Vadodara. Going by reports, the robbers managed to flee with the loot of articles estimated to bear the collective worth of Rs 93,000.

The unidentified robbers first entered a house adjacent to mine where my son and mother sleep, said complainant Natwar Vasava. Vasava further alleged that the robbers thrashed his family members with sticks before turning their attention to the house where he lives with his wife.

Over a dozen robbers took three families hostage at Ishwarpura village in Waghodiya taluka of Vadodara and escaped with ornaments worth Rs 93,000. — TOI Ahmedabad (@TOIAhmedabad) January 28, 2019

In his complaint, Vasava claims that the men pillaged his home and took all the jewellery they could get their hands on. Covered in sheets, they seemed to be aged between 20-30 and were talking in Hindi, the complainant told police officials. In addition, Vasava also claims that the unidentified accused also ransacked his grocery store.

Speaking to media outlets, police officials said that other villagers gathered around after Vasava raised an alarm. However, the group of robbers began pelting stones at the locals and even managed to loot ornaments that were worn by the women of the village before fleeing the scene. The officer-in-charge of investigating the case, Bhagwatsinh Rathore told Indian Express that since most of the accused had their faces covered, the police is looking for such gangs in and around Vadodara.

Must Read: PUNE SHOCKER! Man stabbed several times outside movie theater
