Angry over jam, man thrashes traffic policeman in Delhi's Paharganj

Delhi:

In yet another attack on the traffic policemen in Delhi, a constable was thrashed by an irate man in Paharganj area on Friday. The man was furious over the long traffic jam and was blaming the traffic policemen for the trouble he was facing. According to Times of India report, the cops were checking the heavy vehicles in Paharganj. They asked the man to stay in his lane and move away as they were checking the heavy vehicles. Stuck in the jam for a long period, the man, identified as one Ranjan, hit the cop with stone and tore the uniform of another on-duty policeman.

The traffic police constable is undergoing treatment and the labourer has been booking under suitable sections of the Indian Penal Code.

This is third such incident in the National Capital where traffic policemen have been assaulted by the public. Earlier this week, two persons were arrested for allegedly assaulting traffic police officials when they were impounding their vehicles in north Delhi. Lucky and Aakash were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), including assault or criminal force to deter a public servant from discharge of his duty, they said. The incident took place on Sunday at the NSP complex area of the city. They also misbehaved with personnel who stopped them during a drive against drunken driving, police said.

In the second case, a drunk couple was caught on camera misbehaving with traffic policemen after they were stopped for violating not wearing helmet while driving a two-wheeler in Delhi’s Mayapuri area on Tuesday. The clip of the incident that was posted by news agency ANI showed a woman and her partner were seen shouting at the traffic police officials. “Aap jaane do please…,” the woman was seen shouting on top of her voice as the traffic policemen told her partner to stop the scooty. The woman has been identified as one Madhri and the man who was driving the scooty has been identified as Anil Pandey. According to ANI, they were ‘heavily drunk’ when they manhandled the cops.

(With inputs from agency)
