Court blames woman for 'sexual relationship', acquits minor of rape charge

The court said that the boy was not at fault | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Gurugram juvenile court acquits minor of rape charge Juvenile Justice Board blames woman of trapping the teenager Woman first met the minor in 2017 when she came from Nainital

Gurugram: In a rare development, a juvenile court in Gurugram acquitted a minor of rape charge levelled by a married woman and instead held that the boy was the victim. The Juvenile Justice Board blamed the woman for establishing sexual relations with the 17-year-old boy and pressing rape charges after her wish to marry the minor was not fulfilled.

The court held that the prosecution failed to prove the guilt of the boy beyond doubt. Acquitting the teenager of all charges, JJB Principal Magistrate, Gurugram, Maglesh Kumar Choubey, maintained that every sexual relationship between a man and a woman can't be termed rape.





According to a report, the court said that the boy was not at fault and the woman probably trapped the teenager. However, the court stopped short of initiating any action against the woman for levelling false rape case against the minor.

The court also noted that the woman was not minor and she fully knew the consequences of her act of engaging in 'sexual intercourse' with the boy for a long time.

The Juvenile Justice Board also maintained that “no woman can be allowed to enter into a physical relationship with a minor and later take benefit of rape law if her wishes are not fulfilled”.

The case was filed against the boy under Sections sections 376 (rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) at women’s police station, Sector 51 of Gurugram.

The woman met the teenager in 2017 when she came to Gurugram from Nainital,Uttarakhand, in search of a job. The report further suggested that the boy wanted to marry the woman, a mother of a boy, but was forced to shelve his plan after the insistence of woman.

However after months of physical relationship with the boy, the woman proposed to marry the teenager, but his mother objected to the idea.

Later, the state women commission and police intervened in the matter and forged a compromise between the woman and the boy in the presence of his family. After some time, the boy's family retracted from the compromise and demanded over a lakh rupees from the woman, following which she filed a rape complaint against the boy.

Court frees man of rape charge, says woman was mature enough

In May this year, a man, accused of raping and threatening a woman, was acquitted by a Delhi court which said the complainant was mature enough to fully understand what was happening between them. The court also noted that there was an inexplicable delay on the part of the woman in approaching the police as the FIR was lodged in 2016 while the alleged incidents of rape occurred over a time span of eight years since 2008.
