Sexual abuse case: Madras High Court rejects anticipatory bail plea of journalist

Initially, the police took no action on the woman's complaint. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Madras HC rejects anticipatory bail to journalist Prakash M Swamy Swamy allegedly assaulted a woman actor on the pretext of helping her Swamy's lawyer says woman framed the journalist after he probed her husband's mysterious death

Chennai: In a blow to journalist Prakash M Swamy, the Madras High Court has denied him advanced bail in connection with the sexual assault case. The woman complainant had accused the scribe of sexually abusing her on the pretext of helping her resolve the issues related to her son's passport.

The prosecution informed the court that the accused visited the woman's house, who is a Chennai based actor, and made calls to a travel agent to sort out the passport related problems. At this moment, the accused journalist sexually assaulted the actor. Hearing her scream, the woman's daughter who was in the nearby room rushed to her rescue.

According to a report in PTI, the woman immediately lodged a criminal case against Prakash M Swamy. The incident occurred on June 30, 2018. Initially, the police took no action on her complaint. The victim later approached the Chennai metropolitan magistrate court which ordered an FIR against the accused. The FIR was filed at an all-woman police station.

Hearing the bail plea, the Justice GK Ilanthiraiyan observed, "Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the seriousness of the offence alleged to be committed by the accused, this court is not inclined to grant anticipatory bail to the petitioner, since the custodian of the petitioner is very much required in this case."

The accused moved the anticipatory bail application bail before court apprehending an arrest in the case. During the hearing, Prakash's counsel argued before the court saying the petitioner is a senior journalist and was in no way connected to the crime.

Prakash's counsel also alleged that the woman developed a grudge and filed a 'false' case against the journalist after the investigated the mysterious death of her husband.

On Thursday, July 18, Sharma wrote a letter to Vaibhav Krishna, Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Noida and asked him to take prompt action in the case. Sharma's letter read, "The Commission is seriously perturbed by the crime targeted against the woman despite the enactment of sexual harassment laws and Information Technology Act, 2000."

The Noida Police assured that timely action would be taken against the accused. Krishna said, "An FIR is being registered in the case. A suitable legal action based on merits will be ensured as soon as possible and the NCW will be apprised of the matter. "
