Delhi air pollution today: AQI remains in 'poor' range as moderate wind prevents it from deteriorating

It is predicted that the air quality would fluctuate between 'very poor' and 'poor' categories for some days.

New Delhi: The overall air quality in the national capital was recorded in the 'poor' category on Tuesday. According to the System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting And Research (SAFAR), Air Quality Index (AQI) was recorded at 245 on Tuesday morning. The moderate wind speed is helping in the dispersion of pollutants and thus, preventing the air quality from worsening further.

High moisture in the air is increasing the air holding capacity. Cold wave conditions and moderate fog are likely to prevail in Delhi for a couple of days that might deteriorate the air quality slightly. SAFAR predicted that the air quality would fluctuate between 'very poor' and 'poor' categories for some days.

Delhi: Major pollutants PM 2.5 at 186 and PM 10 at 159, both in 'Moderate' category in Lodhi Road area, according to the Air Quality Index (AQI) data. pic.twitter.com/2F6kGYR07s — ANI (@ANI) January 29, 2019

The prominent pollutants PM 2.5 (fine particulate matter in the air with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometre) was recorded at 176 in and PM10 (fine particulate matter in the air with a diameter of fewer than 10 micrometre) was at 159, both in the 'moderate' category in Lodhi Road area, news agency ANI reported.

The overall PM2.5 level in Delhi was recorded at 104 in the 'poor' category while the PM10 level was recorded at 174 in the 'moderate' category on Tuesday.

Also Read: Midnight Loot: Armed robbers assault, rob locals at a village in Gujarat's Vadodara

India Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted that in Delhi, the minimum temperature would hover around five degree Celsius while the maximum temperature is likely to be 19 degree Celsius. IMD predicted a shallow fog in the city. As many as 16 trains to Delhi were delayed due to fog and low visibility, ANI said.
