8-year-old found unconscious in garbage dump, sexual assault suspected

The girl went missing on Saturday night when she was sleeping. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 8-year-old was found lying in garbage dump in Angul district Victim has injury many marks on her body Police suspect she could have been raped

Angul: In yet another crime against children, an 8-year-old girl was found unconscious in a garbage dump in Angul district of Odisha on Sunday. The victim had many injury marks on her body leading to suspicion that she may have been sexually assaulted.

The girl was admitted to the district hospital where her condition is said to be stable. A police officer said that the girl could have been abducted, raped and thrown in garbage dump.

"The sexual assault can only be confirmed after a medical examination. The girl went missing on Saturday night when she was sleeping with her parents in the verandah of her home," a police officer told news agency PTI.

The victim resides near Angul Bus Stand in Odisha. According to Deputy Inspector General of Police, North Central Range, Narsingha Bhol, police have gathered some important leads during the initial probe in the case.

Police said the victim currently is not in a condition to record her statement. A team of forensic specialists was rushed to the spot to gather some evidence in the case.

Ghaziabad: Man held for raping two minor girls

In a similar incident, a man was arrested for allegedly raping two minor girls in Ghaziabad on Sunday. Subhash Yadav, a vegetable seller, was known to the family of one of the girls and he would often visit her house, City Superintendent of Police Shlok Kumar. On July 14, he found the 9-year-old girl, and her friend, alone in the house. The accused lured them to the vegetable market on the pretext of giving them chocolates and raped them there, said an officer. The officer also said that the accused also threatened the girls not to reveal the crime to their family members, following which the victims kept mum, though they had suffered injuries to private organs, Kumar said. On July 15, the accused again visited the house to see the situation. When all looked normal, he again raped one of the girls. When another girl raised an alarm, Yadav fled, the SP said. The girls narrated their ordeal to their parents who later approached the police.

Bihar: Minor girl raped; video of crime circulated on social media

An elderly man was arrested for allegedly raping a seven-year-old girl in Bihar's Arrah village on July 11. Another youth who allegedly recorded the obscene act was also arrested. When the minor's parents learned about the video, they approached the police and lodged a complaint. Station House Officer (SHO) Mohan Lal Prasad said that the minor had gone to play when the accused allegedly approached her. Prasad added that the minor was taken to a room inside a temple where she was raped. It is being alleged that a video of the incident was also posted on social media.
