Bihar: Five police officers arrested for taking bribe to release criminals

Cops allegedly took Rs 1.5 lakh bribe to release the vehicle seized by them. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Five policemen arrested for taking bribe of Rs 1.5 lakh Bribe was taken for releasing criminals caught with stolen money DIG: Strict action will be taken against guilty

Patna: Arrest of criminals by police for various offence is no surprise. But in Bihar, five police officers have been arrested for taking bribes to release criminals. The latest incident has come from Patna's Beur police station.





The policemen were accused of releasing the criminals who were caught with stolen coins worth over Rs 18 lakh. The accused cops have been identified as Beur police station in-charge Pravesh Bharti, ASI Sunil Chaudhary, SSI Vinod Rai, home guards Vinod Sharma and Krishna Murari.

According to a report in news agency ANI, the cops took Rs 1.5 lakh bribe to release the vehicle seized by them.

"The arrested cops took a bribe of Rs 1.5 lakh to release the car which they seized on the intervening night of July 15 and 16. The criminals were later given free passage after they offered a bribe to the police officers patrolling the area," the report quoted Rajesh Kumar, DIG Central Range, Patna, as saying.

Police said they have also arrested the driver of the seized vehicle in connection with the case. DIG Rajesh Kumar also said that strict action will be initiated against the guilty police officers for gross misconduct during the duty. Police have filed an FIR in the case and a probe is underway into the matter.



Rajasthan: Woman claims she was gang-raped by cops in Churu

Six police officers were arrested for allegedly torturing and gang raping a woman in Churu district of Rajasthan on July 16. The timeline of the case states that on July 3, a Dalit man was arrested on the suspicion of theft and days after he allegedly died in police custody. Meanwhile, his sister-in-law was also detained by the police and was kept in illegal custody for days. Reportedly, her nails were pulled out from her hands and feet after which she was allegedly brutally gang-raped by the police officers within the police station premises.

Chhattisgarh horror! Policeman rapes his 6-year-old daughter

A police constable was arrested for allegedly raping his six-year-old daughter in Chhattisgarh's Raigarh district in April this year. As per the complaint filed by the 45-year-old accused's wife, he allegedly raped the child at their home in the city on March 29 and threatened her of dire consequences if she disclosed the crime to anyone. The girl, however, later told her mother about the incident.
