There was a Plan B if Kargil operations didn't work out: Ex-Army chief General VP Malik

Former Army chief General (Retd) VP Malik | Photo Credit: ANI

Yes, the Indian Army was taken by surprise. Yes, there were early setbacks, says General VP Malik (Retd), then Army chief, but a victory is greater if you've bounced back. General Malik acknowledged that was a Plan B if the Kargil operations didn't work out. The troops were ready to cross the Line of Control to strike targets in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

In an interview to TIMES NOW, General Malik ventured into the "What if?" world. What if the Kargil operations hadn't gone well? What if the Pakistani soldiers, in their sangars, had not been pushed out? What if they continued to hold some of the peaks in the autumn. What was the Indian Army's Plan B? What would the Atal Behari Vajpayee government have done?

"I had spoken to the Prime Minister. In case we couldn't undo things, I sought permission to cross the line of control, perhaps, not the international border," said General Malik. And the Prime Minister had cleared the plan. Brajesh Mishra (the then National Security Advisor) had even hinted that while there were no plans to cross the LoC, that could change. Of course, after the Indian Army captured Tololing and Point 5140, a full-scale war wasn't necessary, said General Malik, as the troops were on alert. They were ready to cross over and strike in six days.

India was indeed taken by surprise. After the Lahore agreement between Vajpayee and Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif, nobody thought Pakistan could or would attack. Intelligence reports said Pakistan didn't have the capability. Troops on the ground were slack; they didn't patrol enough. And the army didn't have surveillance equipment.

Just after the war, General Malik had acknowledged that General Pervez Musharraf’s Kargil plan was a good plan. "It was a good plan," he had said, "but what was he thinking?" Now, he says General Musharraf was a "good commando." And it was a commando plan. But it is important to see things through and General Musharraf failed. He was "strategically nowhere."

Brajesh Mishra told him very clearly, in the PM's presence: he couldn't cross the Line of Control. Both - India and Pakistan - were nuclear powers. India was still facing sanctions. And then, in the early days, there was a belief that the people holding the posts weren't Pakistan army regulars, but the mujaheddin, just jehadis. "I challenged them and they were forced to admit that they were army men."

There was also international pressure. The Americans, he said, were talking about the war between two nuclear powers. But there were no signs that Pakistan would use tactical warheads if they had any at that time. And it was doubtful that they did, one year after their blasts. India certainly had no plans to go nuclear.

"I wish we had got clearance from the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) to cross the line of control... not the international border, but the line of control. We had the capability, we had to follow orders," the General said. Today, the circumstances are different; India strategic thinking is more evolved, which is why the surgical strikes and Balakot could happen.

A difficult moment was when Captain Saurav Kalia's mutilated body was returned. One the one hand, the Pakistanis handed over bodies of Indian soldiers tortured to death. On the other, India was exhuming bodies of Pakistani soldiers and returning them. The Indian Army buried bodies of fallen Pakistani soldiers (that Pakistan didn't accept) with full military honours.

So, how did it all end? "The PM came to the Ops Room. He complimented each one of us. I said that the battle had been won by the people in the front line."
