Jabalpur: Minor takes cousin out on pretext of playing, rapes her

The minor suffered injuries in the incident but refrained from telling her parents (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place at a village in Jabalpur The survivor is undergoing treatment at Netaji Subhash Medical College and Hospital

Jabalpur: A minor allegedly raped his four-year-old cousin on Saturday, July 20 in Jabalpur. The accused allegedly visited the minor's house and took her outside on pretext of playing. The accused then took the minor to a secluded spot and raped her there.

The minor suffered injuries in the incident but refrained from telling her parents. However, at night, when she experienced severe pain, she started crying and narrated her ordeal to her parents.

The minor's parents rushed her to a hospital and approached the Barela police station. Reportedly, the minor is undergoing treatment at Nejatji Subhash Medical College and Hospital and is in a critical condition. The accused has been arrested and sent to a juvenile home.

Uttar Pradesh: Jealous over her excellence in academics, cousins rape minor for 2 years in school staff room

A minor was allegedly raped by her cousins for over 2 years in Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh. Allegedly, the accused were jealous of the minor as she was good at academics. The incident surfaced after the accused shared the videos of the incident on WhatsApp. One of the teachers was also among the accused.

The accused allegedly used to sedate the minor before taking turns to rape her. The accused used to tell the 16-year-old survivor that she had fainted at the playground and was brought to the staffroom after that. According to an investigation, the accused used to fail their exams and were jealous of the survivor.

Bhilwara: Minor girl accused alcoholic father of raping, threatening her with sword

In July this year, the police rescued a seven-year-old girl from Bhilwara, Rajasthan. After the minor was rescued, the police handed her over to the Child Welfare Committee. The minor approached the committee and alleged that she had been sexually assaulted by her father.

The minor said that her mother had left their house due to her father's alcoholism. After some time, the minor's father allegedly brought her back and she started living with him. The minor alleged that she used to sleep in her father's room and was sexually assaulted by him more than once.

Following this, she opened up to her grandmother who helped her in contacting the commission. The minor alleged that her father brought her back when her mother was away working in the field. Allegedly, the minor's mother did not try to contact her. She also alleged that her father threatened to kill her with a sword when he was inebriated.
