Woman hangs herself in UP's Muzaffarnagar after argument with step-sons

Kumari was found hanging from the ceiling of her residence in Meenakshipuram (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place on Sunday, July 21 The woman has been identified as Balesh Kumari

Muzaffarnagar: Disturbed after a fight with her step-sons, a woman from Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh took the drastic step of ending her life. The incident took place within the limits of the Mandi police station on Sunday, July 21. The woman, Balesh Kumari was the second wife of one Raghunath.

Kumari was found hanging from the ceiling of her residence in Meenakshipuram. The body has been sent for a post-mortem. Reportedly, Raghunath died some time back.

The police have said that Kumari had been having differences with Raghunath's two sons. Further investigation is underway.

Rajasthan: Woman found hanging inside well, kin allege torture by husband for dowry

A woman was found hanging inside a well in Rajasthan's Jhalawar district in July. The deceased's husband was identified as Nanuram Tanwar. According to the FIR of the incident, Tanwar had been torturing his wife as his demands for dowry had not been met.

The woman was identified as Nainuram Meena. Meena's father claimed that Tanwar had strangulated Meena to death and had hanged her in the well as his dowry demands had not been fulfilled. The police booked Meena under Section 304 B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Woman attempts suicide after petty argument with husband, rescued by Delhi Police

In July this year, the Delhi Police saved a woman's life by taking prompt action. The 36-year-old woman allegedly tried to end her life after she had an argument with her husband. The Delhi Police reached the woman's residence in South Delhi, rescued her and rushed her to a private hospital.

After the argument, the woman allegedly asked her two children to go to another room. When the woman's 8-year-old son and 16-year-old daughter left the room, she locked herself in.

The children went to the neighbours for help and told them about the incident. The neighbours called the police control room (PCR) and a team of police personnel reached the woman's house in no time. Deputy Commissioner of Police (South) Vijay Kumar said that the beat officer caught hold of a welder and cut through the window of the room.

The cops entered the locked room through the window and rescued the woman. The police rushed the woman to a hospital. A preliminary investigation revealed that the woman resorted to committing suicide after she had an argument with her husband. The police did not find a suicide note from the woman's residence.
