In WTF News, A Tamil Nadu Woman Was Beaten Because Her Son Eloped With A Woman

In another instance of violence against women, Selvi, a 45-year-old woman from Tamil Nadu was tied to a pole and beaten. Her crime? Her son had eloped with the assailant’s daughter.

According to reports, Selvi’s son Periyasamy had been in a relationship with Pavali, a nursing student in Trichy. Pavali’s family, however, did not approve of the relationship. The two then eloped.

Selvi was approached by Pavali’s father. When she told him that she did not know the whereabouts of her son, she was tied to a pole and beaten up. She was saved when the police were called by bystanders.

Periyasamy and Pavali both belong to the Scheduled Caste category in Tamil Nadu. However, the Paraiyars--the caste to which Pavali belongs--are said to be better off in terms of education, resources, and opportunities than the Arunthathiyar caste--the caste of Periyasamy.

Double marginalisation

Women in India already face grave disadvantages due to their gender. However, women from the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe communities face the double whammy of being both lower caste and women.

How was Periyasamy’s mother responsible for her son’s actions? This incident is proof of the entitlement that men feel when it comes to how women are treated.

Women, of course, are blamed for everything and are not allowed to have agency. Just last week, the Thakor community in Gujarat’s Banaskantha district banned unmarried women from using cellphones. This diktat was passed unanimously by a body of “elders” who make the rules that the community follows. The diktat issued at the meeting stated, “Unmarried woman should not be given mobile phones. If they are caught with mobile phones, their parents will be held responsible.”

In this case, the women are not even deemed capable of being responsible for their own actions; the parents of adult women are still seen to be the custodians of their daughters.

The justification given for this bizarre ban is patronising to say the least. The move was apparently made so that single women could “concentrate on their education”. What about the boys? Well, according to the Thakors, boys will “automatically” be controlled once young women are not using cell phones. Sexist logic 101: Control the girls and the boys will behave.

Catch 22

The logic in the Tamil Nadu assault case is similar. If you cannot punish the son, hold his mother responsible. Take into account that Selvi is also from a disempowered community, we have the perfect scapegoat for all of society’s woes.

On the one hand, women are not seen as full human beings with agency. On the other, they are held responsible for anything that goes wrong in society.

When will violence against women stop? When we change the double standards society has for women. Until then, it’s damned if we do and damned if we don’t.




