Trump Offers To Mediate On 'Kashmir Dispute'

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) WASHINGTON — US President Donald Trump has offered to mediate in kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan 'if mediation is required'.

President Trump said this during his meeting with Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan currently underway in White House in Washington DC.

"If I can help in the Kashmir issue, I will help," Trump said during the meeting.

"If I could mediate in the Kashmir issue, I would love to help," he said.

Trump also said that he "would love to go to Pakistan, if invited". "Both countries can play an important role in the Kashmir dispute".

India in the past has categorically denied any foreign help in the Kashmir dispute with Pakistan. India maintains that Kashmir dispute in an internal issue and will be resolved bilaterally with Pakistan.

In televised remarks from inside the Oval Office, President Trump noted that the US is working with Pakistan to leave Afghanistan, and does not want the US to be policeman in the region.

President Trump said that the US is willing to invest in Pakistan and sees great trade opportunities here.

To a question from a reporter asking whether he would ever go to Pakistan, Trump joked that while he hadn't been invited yet, he would "love to" visit one day.

Prime Minister Imran told Trump there was only one solution for Afghanistan and that a peace deal with the Taliban was closer than it had ever been. He said he hoped that in the coming days, "we will be able to urge the Taliban to talk with the Afghan government and come to a political solution", a point that was promptly appreciated by Trump — who noted that Pakistan had helped tremendously in recent weeks.

Ahead of the meeting, US Senator Lindsey Graham, who by some accounts has been instrumental in arranging the meeting, tweeted the following: "In my opinion he and his government represent the best opportunity in decades to have a beneficial strategic relationship the US. This will help us secure Afghanistan and the region long-term."

India has not been engaging with Pakistan since an attack on the Air Force base at Pathankot in January of 2016.

Khan was accompanied by Army chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) chief Lt Gen Faiz Hameed and foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, among others.

Early this year, tensions flared up between India and Pakistan after a suicide bomber from Pulwama killed at least 40 CRPF personnel in south Kashmir's Pulwama district.

The Indian Air Force carried out an operation in Balakot on February 26. The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in an aerial combat and captured Indian pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1.
