'PM Modi did not ask Trump to mediate on Kashmir issue': India refutes US President's claim

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: India on Tuesday categorically rejected US President Donald Trump’s claim that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had requested him to mediate on the Kashmir issue.

“We have seen @POTUS's remarks to the press that he is ready to mediate, if requested by India & Pakistan, on Kashmir issue. No such request has been made by PM @narendramodi to US President. It has been India's consistent position,” tweeted the Ministry of External Affairs.

“...that all outstanding issues with Pakistan are discussed only bilaterally. Any engagement with Pakistan would require an end to cross border terrorism. The Shimla Agreement & the Lahore Declaration provide the basis to resolve all issues between India & Pakistan bilaterally,” it added.

While meeting Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan at the White House on Monday, Trump offered to be the "mediator" between India and Pakistan on the Kashmir issue. He claimed that PM Modi had sought his help on the Kashmir issue and he would love to become a mediator between the two nations.

"I was with Prime Minister Modi two weeks ago and we talked about this subject and he actually said 'Would you like to be a mediator or arbitrator', I said 'Where', He said 'Kashmir'. Because this has been going on for many, many years... I think they would like to see it resolved and you (Imran Khan) would like to see it resolved. If I can help, I would love to be a mediator," Trump said at the joint press briefing with Imran Khan.

Khan welcomed Trump's remarks and said if the US agrees, prayers of more than a billion people will be with him.

Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah was quick to react today. His tweet read: "Is Govt of India going to call @realDonaldTrump a liar or has there been an undeclared shift in India's position on third party involvement in #Kashmir?"

India maintains that the Kashmir issue is a bilateral one and no third party has any role.

India has not been engaging with Pakistan since an attack on the Air Force base at Pathankot in January of 2016 by Pakistan-based terrorists, maintaining that talks and terror cannot go together.

Khan was accompanied by Army chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) chief Lt Gen Faiz Hameed and Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi among others.

Early this year, tensions flared up between India and Pakistan after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) killed 40 CRPF personnel in Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Amid mounting outrage, the Indian Air Force carried out a counter-terror operation, hitting the biggest JeM training camp in Balakot, deep inside Pakistan on February 26.

The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in an aerial combat and captured Indian pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1.

Posted By: Abhinav Gupta
