[INTERVIEW] Wanted DCW to be the commission addressing grievances of transgenders: DCW chief Swati Maliwal

We have also done around 50,000 ground visits, attended over 2 lakh calls on our helpline- 181 | Photo Credit: Twitter

In July 2015, the then 30-year-old Swati Maliwal was appointed as the chief of the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) by the Delhi government. Receiving around 400-500 cases every day, Maliwal says they are the only commission in the country officially working six days a week and 24x7, off the clock. Most of these cases relate to domestic violence followed by child sexual abuse, sexual assault, rape, cyber crime and acid attacks.

Maliwal emphasised over creating awareness about the commission’s all-time available grievance redressal helpline, where citizens can come and seek help for the issues they face. "In one such attempt creating awareness, we took a 13-day walk across Delhi where we covered almost the entire city and met over 10 lakh people who cited their grievances in context with women security and crime against women. The one-to-one contact with the citizens helped us figure out how a lot of crimes go unreported,” said Maliwal.

Mirror Now talks to Maliwal about the rising crime rate in the national capital, DCW’s functioning and the formation of a transgender cell within the DCW.



Q) Delhi Police's response time is one of the best in the country. What do you think can be done to provide the right environment for speedy justice to the victim?

There are several aspects to this, the delivery of justice is closely related to the kind and the quality of investigation done, while the time taken to investigate the case does not matter much. So, four aspects need to be strengthened in order to achieve speedy justice especially in cases pertaining to sexual abuse. These include the reinforcement of resources for the police, building accountability of the police, fast-track courts along with appointments of judges and better forensic departments.

The police should be made accountable. The authority of the police should be given to the Delhi state government in order to directly connect the forces with the citizens. Since the last 13 years, there is a dearth of police officers and the department has been demanding 66,000 officers to meet the daily needs of police stations. In 2018, I staged a dharna demanding from the Ministry of Home Affairs police officers and only 3,000 police officials were appointed. This gap eventually leads to a compromised law and order situation and lack of patrolling during the night as there are not enough officers to perform the duty. Unless the basic demands of a department are met, we cannot expect a speedy justice.

Similarly, the fast-track courts have to be strengthened in every way possible. More judges should be appointed so that cases are resolved as soon as possible and there is no pile-up. Once the system is in place, speedy justice can be ensured to the victim. Currently, the situation is, first a man rapes a woman and after gathering all courage when she demands justice, the system rapes her.

Swati Maliwal during a dharna against rape incidents, at Rajghat in New Delhi in 2018.

Q) In recent months, what kind of crimes has the DCW witnessed a spurt in?

We have constant cases coming up about crimes against women but the maximum number of complaints that our desk receives are of domestic violence followed by rapes and cyber crimes. On average, the DCW witnesses three child rape cases every day. Last week, there were two such cases where the genital injuries of the minor girls were shocking. The girls will be treated for one year and they have to undergo multiple surgeries. The Delhi government has given them Rs 10 lakh compensation each and lawyers have been hired so that they can demand justice in the court.

Q) How does the DCW’s Mahila Panchayats and Rape Crisis & Pre Marital Counselling Cells work?

These cells are a significant part of the commission. The Rape Crisis Cell was born post the High Court issued guidelines on how to deal with cases of sexual assault. On receipt of information regarding the commission of a rape, the police have to immediately inform the Rape Crisis Cell established by the Delhi Commission for Women. The cell provides legal assistance in the cases of sexual assault to the victim and her family. We also provide counselling to the victim regarding the long battle of legal proceedings.

The Mahila Panchayat is a community awareness and intervention programme where we have partnered with various NGOs. The workers here are present on-ground and they conduct awareness programmes, provide information to the commission if any case is going unreported. Considering the severity of the case, the volunteers either deal with it on their own or they pass on the information to the commission.

Although the pre-marital counselling cases are much lesser than others, yet we do receive cases where women are not prepared to get married but they are being forced by the families. In such cases, we provide counselling to the woman, her family and several times we have also talked to a woman’s would-be husband. In cases of honour killing, we deal with them with more sensitivity and involve the police if required.

Swati Maliwal during the fourth day of the dharna against rape incidents, at Rajghat, Delhi in 2018.

Q) The DCW has recently formulated a transgender cell. What was the inspiration behind the move?

I feel very strongly about the issue of atrocities committed against transgenders, the prolonged discrimination that they have been facing despite being an integral part of the society. So, we thought it was high time that they were given recognition in the society and since they do not have any commission for addressing grievances, I wanted DCW to do the part. Currently, we are having a series of meetings to finalise the structure of the cell.

Q) The government has also strengthened POCSO laws. Do you think stringent punishments can act as a deterrent for crimes against minors or do we need to look at other solutions? What can they be?

Definitely, stringent punishment will act as a deterrent but more importantly, there should be certainty and swiftness of punishments. Especially in cases of child rapes, after conducting thorough investigations and trials, the convict should be given a death penalty. And all this should be done within six months. It will act as a deterrent only when the punishment is certain for the heinous crime that a convict has committed.

Q) Despite huge promises during the Lok Sabha elections 2019, the Women Reservation Bill is still not tabled in Parliament. What are your views about it?

It is absolutely shameful and somewhere it is clear that no political party wants to empower women. Until there is a law stating a certain number of women in Parliament, it will not happen in reality. I have also seen women of all political parties coming together and demanding reservation for women and it is sad to see that there no step has yet been taken towards it on the ground. It is a need of the hour to have (more) women representatives in Parliament to raise our issues.

Q) Can the judiciary pitch into improving the conviction rate which may act as a deterrent to Delhi's rising crime graph?

Justice (delivered) at the right time and an increased conviction rate will definitely change Delhi’s crime graph. Unless and until there is stringent punishment, the person committing crime becomes fearless and it gives him impunity to commit more crimes. Before I joined the DCW, the commission only solved one case in eight years but in the last three years, we have solved over 55,000 cases.

We have also done around 50,000 ground visits, attended over 2 lakh calls on our helpline - 181, we have assisted sexual assault survivors in around 31,000 court cases; 11,000 counselling sessions for rape survivors have been done and we have made over 200 recommendations to both the state and the central governments. The commission has been receiving complaints only after people saw that some work is being done. Similarly, unless there is speedy justice with a high conviction rate, the crime rate cannot be reduced.
