Uttar Pradesh: Minor raped in Banda district, medical examination report awaited

The girl has been sent for medical examination and the reports are awaited. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights POCSO Act has been invoked and other relevant sections have been imposed on the accused The girl has been sent for medical examination

Lucknow: In a case reported from Banda district of the Uttar Pradesh, a minor girl was allegedly raped by unidentified persons in Tindwari area. The local police's investigation in the case is underway.

Raghvendra Singh, Circle Officer, Sadar told news agency ANI that the complaint was registered by the survivor girl that some persons kidnapped her from the house. Since she is a minor POCSO Act has been invoked and other relevant sections have been imposed, added Singh.

However, the police have registered a case under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act and a case has been registered. The girl has been sent for medical examination and the reports are awaited. However, further investigation in the case is currently being done.

Banda: A minor girl was allegedly abducted and raped by unidentified persons in Tindwari area. Police says,"Case registered under relevant sections of POCSO Act. Further investigation is being done." (22/7) pic.twitter.com/BBPJZ5a5gM — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 23, 2019

In another case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a Class 8 student was allegedly raped by her cousins several times for over two years within the school campus in Sitapur district of Uttar Pradesh. The accused cousins were allegedly jealous of her being good in academics and crime came to light only after the accused uploaded the video clips of the incidents.

Reportedly, the accused forwarded the videos on the family's WhatsApp group, where the victim's parents were also added. The accused gang also included the minor's school teacher, who often participated in the sexual assault.

The case was reported with the police on June 29, 2019. However, the police are still probing the case and five accused were booked under the POCSO Act.
