Panchayat in Telangana passes resolution to chuck sexual predators out of the village

Protests in Alwar, Rajasthan against the gang-rape of a woman in June of this year | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Kanukanta Gram Panchayat passed the resolution on July 16 Almost 10 lakh names added to National Database on Sexual Offenders in first six months "Need for displaying zero tolerance for such abhorrent and horrifying behaviour towards our children": CJI Ranjan Gogoi

Vijaywada: In what is being hailed as a massive step towards deterring rising instances of sexual crimes against women and children, a Gram Panchayat in the state of Telangana has passed a resolution to banish all sexual predators from the limits of the village. The decision to implement this move was taken by the Kanukanta Gram Panchayat of Gummadidala Mandal in Telangana's Sangareddy district on July 16.

Village elders who made the decision claimed that the move is a show of their commitment to the safety and security of girls and women in their village. They further added that the resolution has been passed at a time when increasing cases of sexual assault on girls and women are emerging from across the length and breadth of the country.

As per the resolution, individuals accused of sexual assault or a similar crime will have no place in the village. Furthermore, such people will be handed over to the police and the Panchayat will ensure that stringent action is taken against them. Kanukanta Sarpanch Neelamma, Vice Sarpanch P Govardhan Reddy, and others passed the resolution.

In September of last year, the Ministry of Home Affairs released a National Registry of Sexual Offenders. Maintained by the National Crime Records Bureau, the database includes names, photographs, address, DNA samples, fingerprints, Aadhar and PAN numbers of convicted sexual offenders. With this move, India became the ninth country to manage such a registry.

Just this week, Supreme Court took suo moto cognizance of the spurt in instances of child rape and registered a PIL to take up the matter for hearing on Friday. The aim is to send a clear response displaying 'zero tolerance' towards sexual assault of minors in India. Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi had on July 1 asked the registry to submit a report on the number of such cases registered in the country since January 1 of this year and stages of the investigation. He also sought details about the time taken to file a chargesheet and pendency in trial courts.

Earlier this month, the Union Cabinet approved an amendment to make provisions for the death penalty in the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. Apart from strengthening the POCSO Act, the amendment also introduced fines and imprisonment as punishment for circulation of child pornography. In a press release, the government added that the decision to taken to tackle the "menace of relatively new kind of crimes on the other hand".
