Lauren Goodger hints she’s secretly dating Celebs Go Dating co-star as she twerks in cheeky Instagram video – The Sun

LAUREN Goodger has hinted she is secretly loved up with her Celebs Go Dating co-star as she twerks in a new Instagram video.

The former TOWIE star has admitted she is dating someone she is on the E4 dating programme with, but it is not who fans would have thought.

4 Lauren Goodger has admitted she is dating someone on Celebs Go Dating Credit: Instagram

Speaking to New! magazine, she said: "I am dating.

"I'm still single, technically, for the first time ever, really. It's such an exciting time.

"Plus I haven't done TV for two years, so this feels like a real comeback for me."

Despite speculation Lauren, 32, has insisted she is not romantically linked to Lee Ryan, and it is another male on the show she is dating, although she has remained tight lipped as to who the mystery man is.

4 Jack Fincham has signed up for Celebs Go dating after splitting from Dani Dyer Credit: Rex Features

4 Lee Ryan is also looking for love on the E4 dating show Credit: E4

She added: "I've known Lee for a long time.

"He's a lovely guy but there's absolutely nothing romantic in it.

"Everyone got that one wrong, if they knew the truth about who I really liked, they'd be shocked."

Lauren has signed up for the new series alongside Love Island 2018's Jack Fincham and Megan Barton-Hanson, as well as Nathan Henry and Lady Colin Campbell.

4 Lauren has insisted she is not dating the Blue band member but teased it is another co-star she is dating Credit: Rex Features

The insight into Lauren's love life comes shortly before she shared a video of her twerking in the kitchen ahead of a night out.

The clip was shared on her Instagram feed and her Stories. She captioned the upload: "Thank you @arabellarosehair for my hair pulled it out the bagggg."

The star went on to share a separate clip of her pulling down her top to show off her chest in a complete Zara outfit ahead of shooting new episodes of Celebs Go Dating.

Lauren Goodger showcases her Yorkshire Terrier ponytail

Lauren has had a turbulent year as she split from ex-boyfriend Joey Morrisson last year, and was recently involved in a terrifying car accident, which left her fearing for her life.

She told the publication: "I've had a bad week. I had a car accident the other day on the M25. Some object fell off a lorry and I hit it head on. It was terrifying. It went under the car and I was convinced the car was going to blow up. There was no hard shoulder to pull over on and I was genuinely beside myself, but I eventually came off the motorway and tried to get some guy to help me. I couldn't feel my hands because I got pins and needles through sheer stress.

"I was on my way to a hair appointment at the time ... and they had to give me a bottle of wine as I was so shaken. Anyway I wanted to dye my hair, so we put the product in and I swear on my life my hair turned blue ... I was having a panic attack. I nearly died and then my hair turned blue."

Got a story? email digishowbiz@the-sun.co.uk or call us direct on 02077824220.

We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
