Nirbhaya convict is Punjab poll panel ambassador, DCW fumes

The Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal on Monday met Asha Devi, mother of brutal gangrape and murder victim Nirbhaya after a photo of one of the convicts in the crime was being circulated on social media, displaying him as the brand ambassador for Punjab Election Commission.

DCW chief took immediate cognisance of the matter and issued a notice to the Election Commission of India. Swati Maliwal described the matter as one of great shame and an attempt at glorifying a rape convict. In the notice, she mentioned that the matter has caused great pain and hurt not only to the parents of the victim but to all victims of sexual violence.

DCW has sought strictest action in the matter against those responsible for this act and has asked the Election Commission to fix accountability of the officers. DCW has sought specific names of the officers responsible for the act and details of the action that has been taken against them. Further, DCW has sought the steps that shall be taken by the Election Commission to ensure such incidents don't occur in future.

DCW chief Swati Maliwal stated, "I am deeply disturbed at this state of affairs. Instead of ensuring that the rape convict is given death penalty as ordered by the Supreme Court, the government agencies are glorifying his act! The convict whose photo has been displayed on advertising boards by the Punjab Election Commission played a major role in the December 2012 gang rape of Nirbhaya. In fact many times he has been heard stating on record that women invite rape. Is he a model citizen that his photo should be publicised by the Punjab Election Commission? Nirbhaya's mother has met me today and her pain is indescribable. How can the system be so insensitive? Election Commission must ensure that the strongest action is taken against those officers responsible for this shameless act!"

ALSO READ: Government to set up 1023 fast track courts to clear pending rape, POCSO cases

ALSO WATCH: Modi government chairs important meeting to amend POCSO Act
