Last rites of Nepali girl murdered after attempted rape, performed in New Delhi

KATHMANDU: The last rites of a nine-year-old Nepali girl who was murdered in the Indian capital of New Delhi was held on Sunday.

The girl was murdered on Friday after resisting an attempted rape in the East-Delhi building she was living in with her parents. The parents of the deceased hailed from Bajura district of Nepal.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Prakash Adhikari, who is currently stationed at the Embassy of Nepal, in New Delhi told THT's correspondent Prakash Singh that the minor was killed in Shakarpur of Eastern Delhi, on July 19.

The embassy reported that a local resident Wasim Ahmad, aka 'Sanu' has been arrested on the charge of killing the minor.

According to SSP Adhikari, the minor was killed in House No. 113 A, Block-D, Shakarpur. It has been learnt that the victim's father worked as a security guard at the house while her mother was a cook at the hostel operated by the perpetrator in the same building.

SSP Adhikari informed that the minor was found unconscious at home by her father, at around 12:45 pm, on Friday. Susequently, she was rushed to a nearby hospital where doctors pronounced her dead upon arrival.

The arrestee has already confessed that he killed the child by strangling her neck which was also determined in the postmortem report, SSP Adhikari confirmed. The report stated that a sexual assault was attempted on the child. Her throat bore the mark of fingers pressed against it, SSP informed.

With the call of support and request from various Nepali associations based in India and Non-Resident Nepalis to the embassy, a complaint was filed at police office to arrest the murderer, General Secretary of Nepali Jansamparka Samiti Khagendra Bahadur Singh informed.

The final rites of the minor was conducted on Sunday after the postmortem.

Meanwhile, it has also come to light that a 14-year-old girl from Doti district was allegedly raped by her employer's son in New Delhi about two weeks ago, on June 30. The victim was working as a maid in the house of Dalveer Singh, an Indian police personnel.

Police arrested 33-year-old Pankaj Singh after he was found guilty of the crime, SSP Adhikari informed THT.
