Netflix announces web series based on investigation of Nirbhaya rape case

Delhi Crime — a seven-part series inspired by investigation of Nirbhaya rape case by the Delhi Police will premiere on March 22 on Netflix.

Netflix has announced that Richie Mehta's series Delhi Crime will be streamed on its OTT platform from March 22. The first season of series is inspired by real-life police investigation of Nirbhaya gang rape. The seven-episode series will be premiered today at Sundance Film Festival.

Delhi Crime revolves around female police officer Vartika Chaturvedi, played by actress Shefali Shah, who leads the investigation and finds out horrific details about the rape incident. Apart from Shefali, the series stars Rasika Dugal (of Mirzapur fame), Rajesh Tailang(of Selection Day fame), Adil Hussain, Gopal Datt, and Vinod Sherawat.

The makers have researched on the show for over six years and it has been shot in real locations in Delhi. The series is being helmed by Richie Mehta, who is best known for directing films such as Amal (2007), I'll Follow You Down (2013) and Siddharth (2014). Mehta got the idea for the show during a conversation with Neeraj Kumar, a former Commissioner of the Delhi Police.

Shefali Shah in a still from Delhi Crime.

"The making of Delhi Crime has been a personally transformative journey; speaking to every individual involved, retracing the paths that the police took during the course of the investigation, and hearing of the determination that it took for the case to be closed, despite severe limitations. I hope that we've been able to provide context, catharsis and open once again a difficult conversation that must be had about the forces that enabled this brutality," Mehta said.

"Delhi Crime" a seven-part series inspired by a notorious 2012 rape investigation by the Delhi Police that reverberated across India and the world, written and directed by @RichieMehta will premiere March 22 on Netflix pic.twitter.com/sVdINGQvz5 See What's Next (@seewhatsnext) January 29, 2019





"Delhi Crime is an important story told with sensitivity and responsibility, and we are honoured to help bring this series to Indian and global members. It is honest and emotional and powerful. Shows like this bring a much-needed lens to the lived reality of women around the world. Watching this series is an affecting experience, and we are sure it will be as meaningful of an experience for Netflix audiences as it was for us," said Simran Sethi, Director, International Originals, Netflix.

(With inputs from PTI)
