Upcoming South Indian Movies This Week: Enai Noki Paayum Thota, Rakshasudu and more to release this Friday

Upcoming South Indian Movies This Week | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights 8 South Indian films are releasing this week including Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Malayalam films Here are all the details you need to know about these films before booking your tickets

So, we have reached the mid-week and while work and other commitments are keeping you busy, we present to you a list of Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Kannada movies that are releasing this week so that you are able to enjoy a happy weekend while watching your favourite film. Scroll down to check out the list.

Upcoming Telugu Movies of the Week

1. Rakshasudu. Starring Bellamkonda Sai Srinivas and Anupama Parameswaran in lead roles, the film is about a newly recruited sub-inspector who sets out in pursuit of a mysterious serial killer who targets teen girls and then kills then brutally.

2. Guna 369. This movie is a happy-go-lucky guy named Guna whose life revolves around his family, friends and a girl whom he loves. His life takes an ugly turn when he is framed for a crime he never committed.

Upcoming Tamil Movies of the Week

1. Enai Noki Paayum Thota. One of the biggest films releasing this week is this romantic thriller. The film features Dhanush and Megha Akash in lead roles and has been directed by Gautham Menon.

2. A1. It is a Tamil movie starring Santhanam, Tara Alisha Berry, Mottai Rajendran and Swaminathan in prominent roles. The drama has been directed and written by Johnson K. The music of the film has been given by Santhosh Narayanan.

3. Nungambakkam. Featuring Ajmal Ameer in the lead role, the film is loosely based on a real-life incident where a Chennai-based software engineer was stabbed to death in 2016 at a railway station.

Upcoming Kannada Movies of the Week

1. Randhawa. The film has been made by the same team that gave us superhit film, Magadheera. This action thriller has elements of mythology where the story keeps shifting from 1827 to 2019 and vice-versa. The film will see Bhuvann Ponannaa and Apoorva Srinivasan in lead roles.

2. Nandanavanadol. Helmed by Sandeep Shetty, and produced by Sharan Poonacha Avaremadanta and Umesh Giriya Hebri, the suspense thriller features Santhosh Shetty, Bharath Rai, VanchiraVittala Nanaiah and Anand Yadwad in pivotal roles.

Upcoming Malayalam Movie of the Week

1. Thanneermathan Dinangal. This Malayalam drama will see Vineeth Sreenivasan in the lead role. The movie has been directed by Girish A. D.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for latest updates on entertainment, lifestyle, fashion and much more!
