Lucknow: Lone Christian family in 'Thakur' majority area thrashed, forced to leave locality

Incident is reported from Nandi Vihar area of Chinat. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Christian family allegedly thrashed and abused in Lucknow Family alleges they were being persecuted because they were from a minority community Son of a police officer arrested for assaulting the Christian family

Lucknow: Members of a Christian family allege that they were thrashed, abused and forced to leave a 'Thakur' dominated locality in Lucknow. The incident has been reported from Nandi Vihar colony in the Chinat area of the state's capital.

The harassed couple alleges that they were being subjected to abuse for a long time as they were the lone minority (Christian) family in the area. However, on Monday, the matters came to a head following a brawl between the children of the Christian family and the Thakur family.

According to a report, the victim Pomila Paul alleges that they were being abused for many days for being Christians and her husband was thrashed by their neighbours.

The woman also said that their neighbours have threatened them that they won't allow the family to stay in the Thakur dominated locality as they were from the Christian community. The victim said she fears for the life of her husband and children.

Promila also alleged that there has been no action from the police despite repeated complaints. The victim also said that they were being pressurised to opt for a compromise as the father of one of the accused is a sub-inspector (SI) in the UP Police. Promila also alleged that the police officer's son beat her up and tore her clothes.

According to the victim, one of the neighbours who tried to help the family was also threatened with dire consequences if he chose to help the Christian family.

Awnishwar Chandra Srivastava, Circle Officer Gomti Nagar, said police have filed cases from both sides and the prime accused Shubham has been arrested and a case under Section 307 (Attempt to Murder) has been registered against him.

Srivastava said the matter took an ugly turn after a brawl between the Christian and the Thakur families, where the Christian family was assaulted.

Recently, a number of incidents have been reported from across the country where members of the Muslim community were allegedly thrashed after they refused to chant religious slogans.

A Muslim man was thrashed by a group of unidentified men and forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' in Aurangabad city of Maharashtra. In a similar incident, two Mulsim youths were threatened by a few miscreants after they refused to chant the religious slogan near Azad Chowk in the same district.

One of the victims alleged that they were threatened by some men when they refused to chant Jai Shri Ram. "They asked us to chant Jai Shri Ram, which we refused. They did not thrash us. They threatened us and fled," the victim was quoted as saying.
