Netflix to start new series ‘Delhi Crime’ based on 2012 Delhi gang rape

The seven-episode series directed by Indo-Canadian filmmaker Richie Mehta will premiere on March 22

Shefali Shah-starrer series, “Delhi Crime”, is set to be released on Netflix on March 22 this year.

Directed by Indo-Canadian filmmaker Richie Mehta, the seven-episode season one of the series is based on 2012 brutal gang rape case in Delhi that had shook the whole country.

The show captures the “complexities of the scrutiny, the emotional toll on the investigating team, and their determination to bring the perpetrators to justice in a fraught environment,” the streaming giant said in a statement.

The show is set for a world premiere on Tuesday at the ongoing Sundance Film Festival.

Shah (46), is portraying police officer Vartika Chaturvedi in the series, which will also feature actors Adil Hussain, Denzil Smith, Rasika Duggal, Rajesh Tailang and Yashaswini Dayama.

Over six years of research went into the making of the series, which was shot on location in New Delhi.

Mehta, best known for directing films such as “Amal” (2007), “I’ll Follow You Down” (2013) and “Siddharth” (2014), got the idea for the show during a conversation with Neeraj Kumar, a former Commissioner of the Delhi Police.

“The making of ‘Delhi Crime’ has been a personally transformative journey; speaking to every individual involved, retracing the paths that the police took during the course of the investigation, and hearing of the determination that it took for the case to be closed, despite severe limitations.

“I hope that we’ve been able to provide context, catharsis and open once again a difficult conversation that must be had about the forces that enabled this brutality,” Mehta said.

The show has been produced by Golden Karavan and Ivanhoe Pictures.

Simran Sethi, Director, International Originals, Netflix, said, “’Delhi Crime’ is an important story told with sensitivity and responsibility, and we are honoured to help bring this series to Indian and global members. It is honest and emotional and powerful.

“Shows like this bring a much-needed lens to the lived reality of women around the world. Watching this series is an affecting experience, and we are sure it will be as meaningful of an experience for Netflix audiences as it was for us,” she added.
