Lord Ram Statue In Ayodhya, Dalit Girl Raped In UP + More Top News

One more statue is coming up in India. This time, UP government will build Lord Ram's 251-metre-tall statue, the highest in the world. This will be built in Ayodhya, the birthplace of Lord Ram. The statue will be taller than the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's Statue of Unity in Gujarat. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Class 12 Dalit Girl Raped In UP, Claims Of Women Security In The State Fall Flat

The police citing complaint lodged victim’s relatives said that the victim had gone to relieve herself when a villager harassed her, PTI reported. Read more

2) After Half-Filled Water Glass At Offices, UP Makes Rainwater Harvesting Mandatory For New Buildings

In yet another bid to tackle the problem of depleting groundwater, the Uttar Pradesh government has made it compulsory for new residential and commercial buildings to have provisions of rainwater harvesting. Read more

3) 3,500 Trees To Be Axed To Make Way For Eight-Lane Delhi-Panipat Highway, Reveals RTI

Just last week, the government told that a total of 53,467 mangrove trees in the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat must be cut down to make way for the upcoming Mumbai-Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project or simply the bullet train project. Read more

4) 'India On Its Way To Moon,' International Media Hails ISRO For Chandrayaan-2 Launch

Since the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) launched Chandrayaan-2 into Earth’s orbit yesterday, Indians are over the moon. While ISRO has grown into one of the most trustworthy and affordable space launch destination across the world, the Chandrayaan-2 feat in particular has added to credibility of the organisation. Read more

5) Dalit Youth Set Ablaze In UP After He Was Mistaken To Be A Thief, Dies In Hospital

Mob justice, which is seemingly becoming the new normal in India, has claimed yet another life. This time a 28-year-old Dalit man who was set on fire by a mob in Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh. Read more
