SP leader Gayatri Prajapati ‘relieved’ after 2017 gang-rape victim withdraws charges against him

SP leader Gayatri Prajapati. | File image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Prajapati, who was jailed in March 2017 on charges of gang rape, is also accused in a mining scam Prajapati was arrested along with his aides based on an order by the Supreme Court of India

Lucknow: More than two years after he was accused of gang-raping a woman and her minor daughter and then being jailed for the heinous crime, Samajwadi Party leader Gayatri Prajapati heaved a sigh of relief after the complainant withdew her statement from the case on Tuesday.

Prajapati, who was jailed in March 2017 on charges of gang rape, is also accused in a mining scam, which is at present being investigation by the Central Bureau of Investigation. The woman took back her statement at a Lucknow court claiming that it was not the former minister but two of his aides who had raped her and her daughter.

The complainant hails from Chitrakoot and had in 2014 claimed that Prajapati had invited her to Lucknow on the pretext of providing her a job and a house to live in. But much to her horror, Prajapati allegedly raped her along with his accomplices. She had claimed that the rapists even filmed the horrifying act and continued to blackmail her.

After she claimed that her complaint was not considered and registered, Prajapati was arrested along with his aides based on an order by the Supreme Court of India.

However, shockingly, the rape survivor gave a written application to a special MP-MLA court in Prayagraj (formerly Allahabad) and withdrew her case against the SP leader, news agency IANS reported.

It is to be noted here that Prajapati, who belongs to Amethi, was also miffed with the Samajwadi Party leadership for distancing from him after he was jailed. Interestingly, the former minister’s sons campaigned for Bharatiya Janata Party leader Smriti Irani during the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Irani defeated Congress Member of Parliament and former party chief Rahul Gandhi from Amethi.

The Enforcement Directorate earlier this month began questioning Prajapati in relation to the illegal sand mining scam in Uttar Pradesh. “We have started questioning Prajapati under the Prevention of Money laundering Act,” IANS quoted a senior ED official as saying.

Prajapati is currently lodged in Lucknow Jail in the rape case but was shifted to King George’s Medical College in Lucknow recently after he complained of illness.

The ED move came a week after the CBI filed a case against him and several Indian Administrative Service officers in the illegal sand mining case in Fatehpur district from 2013 to 2014.
