Stop spreading lies, CPI(M) tells CPI

Ties between coalition partners sour

Tuesday’s police action against Communist Party of India (CPI) activists, including the party district secretary and a legislator, has further soured the strained relationship between the CPI and the Communist Party of India (Marxist) [CPI(M)] in the district.

CPI district secretary P. Raju accused the CPI(M) of high-handedness and demonstrating a lack of humaneness in dealing with it. Eldho Abraham, MLA, used strong words against the police and said he hoped to see action against erring police officers, quoting responses from Speaker P. Sreeramakrishnan.

CPI cadre unhappy

Meanwhile, there was bickering among the CPI cadre over the silence maintained by State secretary Kanam Rajendran over the issue.

As for the CPI(M), while the party State secretary described the development as ‘unfortunate’, the district secretary was a bit unkind to the CPI, arguing the CPI should have raised its issues within the Left Democratic Front (LDF).

On Wednesday, the CPI(M) Vypeen Area Committee issued a press note demanding that the CPI stop spreading lies. Maintaining that the incidents at the Government Arts and Science College at Elamkunnapuzha and later at the Government Hospital at Njarakkal on July 17 were not actually perpetrated by SFI and DYFI activists, CPI(M) Vypeen Area Committee secretary C.K. Mohanan said that it was SFI unit secretary Aleesh, who wasn’t involved in any skirmish on the campus, who got beaten up outside of it that day.

He never named AISF activists Afreed and Vishnu, who were also admitted to the same hospital as Aleesh, as part of those who beat him up, Mr. Mohanan claimed.

He also said that no SFI, DYFI activists heckled Mr. Raju when he visited the hospital.

Accusing CPI mandalam committee secretary E.C. Sivadas of triggering speculations of misconduct on the part of SFI and DYFI activists, he said coalition partner CPI’s open stance against the Home Department was tarnishing the government’s image.
