Director of lift company found dead, police claim suicide

Faridabad, July 24 : Mystery shrouds the death of a director of a lift company who was found dead by his wife, a senior associate with Google, in his residence here at Sector-45. The local police has termed the death as a case of suicide.

The police are awaiting viscera reports of the deceased, Vineet Jaiswal (49), from the Forensic Science Laboratory Madhuban. The police claim that the deceased had a tiff with his wife over her plans to visit America the next year on an office assignment for one year.

The incident came to light on Tuesday morning when the local police was informed by a city hospital about the mysterious death of a man later identified as Vineet Jaiswal.

During investigation, it was found that Vineet Jaiswal was a director of a Delhi-based lift company and stayed with his wife at third floor of a flat in Sector-45 of Faridabad NIT.

"His wife, Vandana, works with Google in Gurugram as a senior associate. He is survived by his teenage son and daughter. Vandana was the first person who had spotted her husband at 5.40 am lying unconcious with his masked face tied to a small gas cylinder," said Station House Officer of Sector-59 Police Station, Arjun Dev.

"It was found there were four rooms in the flat and that he used to sleep alone in a personal room," Dev said.

"The woman and their children were unaware of the presence of the small gas cylinder in his room," Dev said.

The samples of unidentified gas used in the case is being examined for its impact, he added.

A printed suicide note was also found attached to a mirror. A signed suicide note mentioned the time 3.30 a.m. But the printer kept in the house, as per the children's version, had not been functional for the last three months.

"My brother was highly educated... why did he type his suicide note, get it printed with date and time mentioned and later sign on the printed copy? Before his suicide why did he stick up a note on the mirror to show as visible evidence? It is a murder case," the deceased's sister alleged.

"There were no CCTV cameras installed in and around the flat," investigating officer of the case Rajbir Singh told IANS.

No injury marks were found on the victims' body, Singh said.

We have not given a clean chit to anyone as a parallel investigation is underway," he said.
