High Court allows rape victim to abort at 21 weeks

Bengaluru

pregnancy termination

Forensic Laboratory

DNA tests

Vani Vilas Hospital

18-year-oldgirl did not wish to have the child; fetus to be preserved for conducting DNA testAn 18-year-old girl will undergoat 21 weeks after the High Court gave its permission two days ago. The girl is a rape victim and the pregnancy was a result of the assault on her. The HC has directed for the preservation of the foetus at the Stateso that it is available forduring the rape trial. The victim has also been directed to be paid Rs 3 lakh in compensation.The girl, from Bengaluru, approached the High Court seeking a direction to the authorities atto terminate her pregnancy.The HC noted that she was a victim of rape and sexual assault. She conceived because of the rape and the fetus was 21 weeks old. The girl sought relief of medical termination of her pregnancy, preservation of the fetus for the purpose of DNA test and compensation. Earlier this year in February, the High Court had given similar reliefs in another case. Noting that the HC gave its permission for the termination of pregnancy.Justice Alok Aradhe made four specific directions after hearing the arguments of the advocates for the girl and the government advocate. Firstly that “the Legal Services Authority concerned shall release a sum of Rs 3,00,000 by way of compensation to the petitioner within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order passed today” Secondly, the Deputy Commissioner was also directed to release a sum of Rs 75,000 as compensation.Thirdly, “The District Medical Board, in pursuance of the order dated 16.07.2019 has submitted a report that the petitioner is in a fit mental and physical condition to undergo the medical termination of pregnancy. In view of the said report, Vani Vilas Hospital, Bengaluru is directed to immediately admit the petitioner and to take steps for termination of pregnancy of the petitioner.”Fourthly, “That the fetus shall be preserved and the Investigating Officer shall take steps to conduct DNA test in State Forensic Laboratory, Madivala, Bengaluru for purpose of investigation and trial.”
