We will pass Women's Reservation Bill after coming to power, says Rahul Gandhi in Kerala

New Delhi:

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, today, said that his party will pass the Women's Reservation Bill if voted to power in 2019 Lok Sabha poll. While addressing a rally in Kerala's Cochin, Rahul Gandhi said, "We will ensure that in every election, many more youngsters and women participate. We want to see women in positions of leadership and I know leaders of Kerala are extremely capable."

Rahul Gandhi also said that the Congress will make up all the crimes committed by Narendra Modi against the farmers over the last 5 years. "We have forgiven farm loan waivers in the 3 states where we've won elections. We've committed that in 2019 we will have a government that will make up for all the crimes that Narendra Modi has done against farmers over the last 5 years," he said.

On the issue of job creation, the Congress chief launched a scathing attack against PM Modi and said that he has been telling one lie after another. "Mr Narendra Modi has spent 5 years wasting India's time telling one lie after another. He promised 2 crore jobs to youngsters," he said.

"He (PM Modi) has provided a maximum income guarantee to 15 of his friends. If you're Anil Ambani you've guaranteed to maximum income you can get. We're going to give a minimum income guarantee to all the Indians," he added.

Earlier today, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi met Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar at the state Assembly complex and enquired about his health. Parrikar, 63, who has been suffering from a pancreatic ailment, heads the BJP-led government in the coastal state.

The meeting comes a day after Gandhi alleged that the "Goa audio tapes", cited by the Congress to attack the Centre on the Rafale issue, were authentic and Parrikar was in possession of "explosive secrets" that give him power over Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Gandhi arrived in the Assembly premises around noon, soon after the House was adjourned following Goa Governor Mridula Sinha's address, which was boycotted by Congress members. After his arrival, the Congress president went to meet the chief minister in his chamber in the assembly complex.

Gandhi later went to the opposition lobby in the Assembly to meet Congress MLAs. He held a meeting with them for 10 minutes before leaving. The Congress chief refused to talk to waiting mediapersons, saying, "I am getting late."

Leader of Opposition Chandrakant Kavlekar, who accompanied Gandhi to meet Parrikar, said, "It was a courtesy visit to enquire about Parrikar's health. There was no discussion other than enquiring about his health condition." Kavlekar said Rahul Gandhi had an informal discussion with Congress MLAs in Goa as he would be arriving here next month to address party workers.

Rahul Gandhi and his mother Sonia Gandhi were on a private visit to the coastal state. Goa's Town and Country Planning Minister Vijai Sardesai dubbed the Congress chief's visit to Parrikar as a "positive development in politics". "I had asked the chief minister. He told me that even in the past, four to five times, Rahul Gandhi had called on his (Parrikar's) son's mobile phone and enquired about his health," Sardesai told reporters after the Congress president left the Assembly complex.

The minister appreciated Gandhi's move to enquire about a political opponent's health. "This is a positive development in politics. The political leadership in the country is concerned about the health and well-being even of its opponents is something which has to be lauded," he added.
