ICJ’s Kalbushan Jhadav’s verdict – KashmirWatch

Trail to India’s terror in Balochistan and KPK

By: Amjed Jaaved

First, a few words about background to the case. According to New Delhi’s narrative, Kulbushan Jhadav was abducted from Sistan in Iran, and wrongfully sentenced to death by a Pakistani military court. Jadhav, whose family lives in Mumbai, had gone to Iran for business purposes and was kidnapped by Pakistan. Pakistan Army officer (Lieutenant Zaheer), who went missing in Nepal, allegedly played a role in the abduction, which occurred in March 2016.

According to Islamabad, however, Jadhav was an Indian-navy officer, attached to the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW). His mission was to covertly carry out espionage and terrorism in Pakistan. Pakistan also alleged there were Indian markings on arms deliveries to Baloch rebels pushed by Jadhav. To India’s chagrin, India’s investigative journalists confirmed from Gazettes of India that he was commissioned in the Indian Navy in 1987 with the service ID of 41558Z Kulbhushan Sudhir. A later edition of the Gazette showed his promotion to the rank of commander after 13 years of service in 2000. His passport, No E6934766, indicated he traveled to Iran from Pune under the name Hussein Mubarak Patel in December 2003. Another one of his Passports, No. L9630722 (issued from Thane in 2014), inadvertently exposed his correct address: Jasdanwala Complex, old Mumbai-Pune Road, cutting through Navi Mumbai. The municipal records confirmed that the flat he lived in was owned by his mother, Avanti Jadhav. Furthermore, in his judicial testimony before a Karachi magistrate, Karachi underworld figure Uzair Baloch confessed that he had links with Jadhav.

India’s prestigious Frontline reportage (Praveen Swami, February 16, 2018, India’s secret war) surmised the possibility that Jadhav still served with the Indian Navy. Gazette of India Files bore no record of Jadhav’s retirement. India told the International Court of Justice (ICJ) that Jadhav was a retired naval officer. But, it refrained from stating exactly when he retired. The spy initially worked for Naval Intelligence, but later moved on to the Intelligence Bureau. He came in contact with RAW in 2010. The Verdict: The case involved intricacies of conflict between municipal (domestic) and international law. Inidia extols the ICJ’s verdict as a `victory’ as the court admitted India’s application for hearing. The factual position is that Pakistan’s gentleman ad hoc judge, Tasadduq Hussain Jilani, a life-long crusader for human rights (who represented Pakistan at the ICJ), also concurred with ICJ’s jurisdiction. However, the fact remains, that if Jhadav had been caught in the USA, he would have been electrocuted straightaway (precedence to municipal law). A cursory look at post-verdict India reflects that the whole country, top-down from prime minister to the gullible Indian in Jhadav’s village Javli (Maharashtra) regards the judgment as a `victory’. India’s pleader Harish Salve however stayed calm. At post-verdict press conference, he admitted that military court’s judgment has not been overturned. He said, `Pakistan is now bound to give Jadhav a fair trial irrespective of the trial being held in a military court’. He added, `if Pakistan still fails to give him a fair trial, we can always go back to ICJ’. India Today dated July 17, 2019 echoed a similar opinion. It reported, `Though India succeeded in securing a stay on the death sentence of Kulbhushan Jadhav, its argument to annul the military court verdict was not accepted. …The ICJ ruled, it is not the conviction and sentence of Mr. Jadhav which are to be regarded as a violation of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention. Thus, the court finds that these submissions made by India cannot be upheld, reads the judgment of the ICJ’ (ICJ verdict on Kulbhushan Jadhav: What went in India’s favour and against?).

Implications: The verdict is a signature victory confirming India’s `espionage and terrorism’ against Pakistan_ documented in RAW’s officer B. Raman ‘s book The Kaoboys & R&AW: Down Memory Lane, and another RAW officer, RK Yadav’s letter dated August 14, 2015 published in Indian and Nepalese media. Pakistan understood abhorrence of some judges to military courts and expected an order for a civil trial. Yet, the world court, thanks to Khawar Qureshi’s advocacy, did not fetter military court’s jurisdiction.

The court did not absolve Jhadav of charge of being a spy or saboteur. It confirmed that he was an Indian national despite having passports in multiple names. Anything to rejoice infiltration of a RAW agent into Pak territory with evil intentions? Jhadav had confessed to his crimes. His re-trial would unmask India’s terrorist face to the world. The confessions in the above-quoted letter are corroborated by B. Raman’s book. The letter and the book indicate that India’s prime minister Indira Gandhi, parliament, RAW and armed forces acted in tandem to dismember Pakistan. RK Yadav reminds `Indian parliament passed resolution on March 31, 1971 to support insurgency. Indira Gandhi had then confided with Kao that in case Mujib was prevented to rule Pakistan, she would liberate East Pakistan from the clutches of Military junta. Kao, through one R&AW agent, got hijacked a plane Fokker Friendship Ganga of Indian Airlines from Srinagar to Lahore.

Through Jhadav India wanted to replay mukti bahini (freedom fighters) experience in Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunwa. In line with Doval Doctrine, RAW aims at fomenting insurgency in Pakistan’s sensitive provinces. Doval is inspired by India’s nefarious efforts which resulted in secession of East Pakistan. Naila Baloch’s `free Balochistan’ office has been working in New Delhi since June 23, 2018. BJP MLAs and RAW officers attended its inauguration. . RAW’s former officer, B Raman in his books admitted that not only India’s then prime minister Indra Gandhi but also heads of RAW and IB created and trained mukti bahini (freedom fighters). India’s security czar Ajit Doval publicly claims that he acted as a spy under a pseudonym in Pakistan for 11 years.

`Free Balochistan’ sponsored offensive posters on taxi cabs and buses in Switzerland and Britain. USA has recently outlawed Balochistan Liberation Army. However, earlier, in 2012, a handful of Republican had moved a pro-separatist bill in US Congress. It demanded `the right to self-determination’ and ` opportunity to choose their own status’ for people of Balochistan.

Pushtun Tahafuzz Movement is apparently being backed up by India. In their over-ebullient speeches, PTM’s leaders openly scold Pakistan’s National Security institutions. For instance, Manzoor Pashteen, in his interview (Herald, May 2018, p.48), berates Pak army operations and extols drone strikes. He says, ‘The army did not eliminate even a single Taliban leader. All the 87 Taliban commanders killed in the last 18 years were eliminated in drone strikes’. At a PTM meeting in Britain, even Malala Yusafzai’s father (Ziauddin), like His Master’s Voice, echoed anti-army sentiments. He said, “Pakistan army and intelligence agencies knew that Fazalullah was a terrorist who continued to operate radio station in Swat’.

Both India and Pakistan are nuclear armed. There is no reason why they should be toujours at daggers drawn. Entente and terrorism may flare up into a nuclear Armageddon. India need to shun jingoism, stop its evil machinations in Pakistan, and solve differences through talks.

India’s `independent’ Indian media should not toe Modi 2.0’s line as it did about downing of PAF aircraft in Abbottabad strikes, despite Belling cat’s denial.
