Who is Nalini Sriharan? What was her role in Rajiv Gandhi assassination conspiracy?

Nalini Sriharan, one of the convicts in Rajiv Gandhi assassination case | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Nalini was sentenced to life imprisonment for her role in Rajiv Gandhi's assassination Nalini was granted 30-day parole for her daughter’s wedding on Thursday Nalini is lodged in Tamil Nadu’s Vellore Central Prison for nearly 3 decades

Lodged in Tamil Nadu’s Vellore Central Prison for nearly three decades, Nalini Sriharan, one of the convicts in Rajiv Gandhi assassination case, is the longest-serving woman prisoner.

Nalini, who was sentenced to life imprisonment for her role in the assassination of the former prime minister, has been serving a jail term for the past 28 years. She was arrested in 1991 for her involvement in the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.

Earlier today, Nalini was granted 30-day parole to make arrangements for her daughter’s wedding. In February, she had made a representation before the prison authorities requesting for leave, arguing that she's been serving a jail term for over 28 years and has never availed ordinary leave of a month available to convicts serving lifers.

How and when Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated

Raji Gandhi was assassinated by a woman suicide bomber named Dhanu in Tamil Nadu’s Sriperumbudur on the night of May 21, 1991, when he was campaigning for the then-upcoming elections in the southern states. The suicide bomber, who was a member of Sri Lanka’s terrorist organisation, Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), approached and greeted him when he reached a campaign rally in Sriperumbudur. She then bent down to touch his feet and detonated the explosive-laden belt attached to her body.

Role of Nalini in Rajiv Gandhi’s assassination

Nalini was the lone surviving member of the five-member squad behind the assassination. Her role in the murder was exposed with the help of pictures clicked by S Haribabu, a local photographer who also died in the blast.

Nalini was a close aide of an LTTE operative and convict in the case, known as Murugan was arrested a month after the assassination and awarded death sentence.

However, in 2000, her death sentence commuted to life imprisonment after Rajiv Gandhi’s widow and Congress leader Sonia Gandhi pleaded for clemency for the sake of Nalini’s daughter who was born in prison.

Earlier, Nalini had said that she “regrets” the killing of Rajiv Gandhi, adding that his death was a loss to the country, news agency PTI had reported.

Nalini knocked on the door of Madras HC for release of assassination convicts

In May, Nalini moved the Madras High Court seeking direction to the Governor of Tamil Nadu to approve the state government's recommendation regarding the release of all seven convicts. She also appealed to Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami for her early release, besides sitting on a hunger strike in the Vellore prison.

In September last year, the Tamil Nadu government had recommended the release of Nalini and six other convicts -- Murugan aka Sriharan, Jayakumar, Santhan, Robert Payas, Ravichandran and Perarivalan aka Arivu to the Governor under Article 161 of the Constitution.

According to Article 161, the Governor of a state has the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the state extends.
