Terrified of social media storm, kidnappers return four-year-old boy less than 60 hours after abduction

The child was abducted from his home on Monday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Jashith was abducted from his home by two kidnappers on Monday Police officials found the child near Kutukuluru village Both of the child's parents are bankers in the public sector

Hyderabad: Prompt police response, detailed coverage by the press and widespread assistance by social media led to the safe rescue of a four-year-old boy who was kidnapped from his home in East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh earlier this week. N Jashith, a resident of Mandapeta was abducted on Monday evening from his home in Vijaylakshmi Nagar. Ever since the boy's abduction, Hyderabad Police had been making relentless efforts to locate and rescue him.

Following his kidnapping, Jashith's pictures were being widely circulated on social media with internet users seeking help to locate the child. The constant media attention bestowed on the case by social media users and Telugu news channels gave the kidnappers cold feet. They left the boy at Kutukuluru village in Rayavaram manal in the wee hours of Thursday from where he was rescued hours later by law enforcement personnel. Both of the child's parents are public sector bankers and his mother is expecting a second child.

In their statement to the police, the boy's parents claimed that he was with his grandmother when two masked kidnappers barged into their home on Monday at around 8 PM and abducted the child after assaulting the elderly woman. They then fled the spot with the boy on a two-wheeler. Police officials familiar with the matter also said that a motorcycle owned by the child's father was stolen a few days ago. He then lodged a complaint of theft with the city police. It is still being probed whether the bike theft had something to do with the abduction of the child.

The parents decided to approach local police and lodged a complaint against unknown persons. About 11 teams of police personnel were formed to locate and rescue the child. The operation was led by superintendent of police (East Godavari) Adnan Nayeem Asmi and Rajahmahadevrama along with Urban SP Shimoshi Bajpayee. Going by the most recent inputs, the kidnappers did not even demand ransom from the kidnappers.

During the course of a preliminary investigation, police discovered grainy CCTV footage from cameras installed in the area. A thorough search operation led police officials to the spot where the kidnappers had dumped the child barely 60 hours after abducting him. It was SP Asmi who eventually found the boy and personally handed him over to his parents. Social media is hailing the boy's safe rescue as a win and rightfully so. A UKG student, Jashith is now back home in his parents' arms and the credit goes to the collective effort by police and internet users.
