Delhi Police constable booked for raping minor domestic help in Mundka; investigation underway

A similar case was reported last year, where an assistant commissioner of police was booked for allegedly raping a woman and molesting her minor daughter. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police have reportedly registered a case under the sections of the Indian Penal Code and the POCSO Act The accused was posted at the Tis Hazari court complex The case has been transferred to Crime Branch of Investigation

New Delhi: In a case reported national capital, a Delhi Police head constable is absconding after allegedly raping his 14-year-old domestic help in outer Delhi's Mundka area. The officials confirmed the incident on Thursday.

The incident happened on Tuesday early morning when the accused and the minor girl were alone at his residence as the policeman's family were out. The police have reportedly registered a case under the sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act. The police told news agency PTI that the accused who is in his 40s, is still at large and police have formed teams to nab him as soon as possible.

The accused was posted at the Tis Hazari court complex. However, the police are trying to ascertain if the accused had assaulted the minor on previous occasions as well. Reportedly, the case has been transferred to Crime Branch of Investigation. A similar case was reported last year, where an assistant commissioner of police was booked for allegedly raping a woman and molesting her minor daughter.

Protector turns predator, Mumbai woman accused police officer of sexual harassment

A Mumbai-based woman alleged that she was harassed by the police officials in the Lokhandwala area of the city. The incident happened during night hours in October 2018 and the video of the same had also gone viral on social media.

The survivor allegedly had a heated argument with the watchman of her residential society in Oshiwara area. When the situation went out of control, the woman dialled 100 and called the cops to the apartment. The police team arrived but without the female constable, the violating rules formulated by the Supreme Court.

Reportedly, when the woman pointed out that she wanted to go to her house and not to the police station since, they did not have a female constable, the cops began blocking her way. However, a police complaint was later lodged in the case and the investigation was underway.
