Lynching of Muslims by Hindu mobs continue in Modi’s India - The Muslim News

Jonathan Ashworth, Labour MP wrote to the Foreign Office about attacks on Muslims in India (Photo: Chris McAndrew/UK Parliament CC)

Harun Nasrullah



The number of Indian Muslims being savagely attacked by Hindu mobs has soared in the last few months, making this summer one of the bloodiest in recent memory for the country’s 200 million Muslims.



The rise in Hindu mob attacks on Muslims coincides with the release of the annual report by the US State Department which accuses senior officials in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of making “inflammatory speeches against minority communities” and of maligning the country’s Muslims.



Degradingly many of the victims set upon are forced to chant the name of Hindu Gods during the horrific assaults on them.



Last month, a video that went viral on social media showed a terrified young Muslim man tied to a pole being assaulted by a Hindu mob.



Tabrez Ansari was brutally thrashed to death on June 18 in Dhatkidih village in Saraikela-Kharsawan, Jharkhand, when he was returning home. The lynch mob had accused him of stealing a motorbike. In the viral video, Ansari is seen pleading for his life, blood and tears streaming down his face while the mob forced him to repeatedly chant “Jai Shri Ram” (Hail Lord Ram) and “Jai Hunuman” (Hail Hunuman) in Hindi.

Ansari does as he is told, and when the mob is finished with him, he is handed over to the police, who in turn lock him up and bar his family from seeing him.



Police waited for four days to take Ansari to the hospital where he was pronounced dead shortly after arrival. According to the post-mortem, the 24-year-old’s died from a brain haemorrhage caused by trauma to the head.



In Barpeta, in the state of Assam, Rakibul Haque, Burhan Ali and Kurban Khan were assaulted and then made to chant “Jai Shri Ram”, “Pakistan murdabad” (death to Pakistan) and “Bharat Mata ki Jai” (long live Mother India).



In Mumbai, a 25-year-old Muslim taxi driver was abused, beaten up and told to chant “Jai Shri Ram” by a group of men. Faizal Usman Khan said he was attacked when his taxi broke down and he was trying to fix it. His attackers fled after a passenger called the police.

In the eastern city of Kolkata (Calcutta), Hafeez Mohd Sahrukh Haldar, a 26-year-old Muslim teacher was heckled while travelling on a train by a group of men chanting “Jai Shri Ram.” He told reporters that they made fun of his clothes and beard, and then insisted that he also chant the slogans. When he refused, they pushed him out of the moving train.



On July 4, a rickshaw driver in Kanpur was beaten up and locked inside a public toilet by three Hindu men for refusing to chant “Jai Shri Ram.” Mohammad Atib was hit in the head with a brick before being kicked and punched. He staggered home while bleeding heavily. He was admitted to hospital with multiple gashes and bruises on his back, shoulder and head.

Muslims were also taunted in Parliament. On June 17, Muslim MPs were heckled by members of the BJP as they stood to take the oath in the Lower House.

Critics say those who heckle minorities, inside Parliament and outside it, see the BJP’s landslide victory in last month’s general elections as sanctioning their behaviour. The party won more than 300 seats in the 543-member lower house, propelling Modi to a second term. Modi’s first term in power was marked by violence against minorities. There were numerous incidents of Muslims being attacked by so-called “cow vigilantes” over rumours that they had eaten or smuggled cows, an animal Hindus deem holy.

Despite telling Parliament those guilty of the lynching of Ansari “must be severely punished” Modi and his party are criticised for not only failing to resolutely condemn such attacks on Muslims but to tone down their rhetoric.



Scores of Muslims have been killed and hundreds injured since 2014 in mob attacks, but there have been convictions in only a handful of cases.



In others, the accused remain free, often due to a lack of evidence, and some have been seen being feted by BJP members. BJP leaders often downplay such incidents.

In its annual report on International Religious Freedom, the US Government has said that anti-Muslim violence is continuing in India. The State Department report published on June 23 says that mob attacks in the country occurred throughout 2018 and contained allegations of law enforcement involvement in the violence.



“Mob attacks by violent extremist Hindu groups against minority communities, especially Muslims, continued throughout the year amid rumours that the victims had traded or killed cows for beef,” the document noted.



The report said authorities “often protected perpetrators from prosecution” and that attacks “included allegations of involvement by law enforcement personnel. There were reports of religiously motivated killings, assaults, riots, discrimination, vandalism and actions restricting the right of individuals to practise their religious beliefs,” the document added.

In the UK a shadow cabinet member has also slammed India over the violent attacks on Muslims and called on the British Government to look into and respond to the “extremely worrying situation.”



Jonathan Ashworth, Labour MP for Leicester South, wrote to Foreign Secretary and prime ministerial hopeful Jeremy Hunt earlier this month. Ashworth informed Hunt that many of his constituents had raised concerns that the Indian Government was not doing enough on the issue. ‘I have been contacted by members of Muslim communities in my Constituency in regard to the on-going violent attacks on Muslims in India.’



In his letter addressed to the senior Cabinet minister in the UK’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) Ashworth, who is Shadow Secretary of State for Health and Social Care, called on Hunt to look into the ‘serious issue’ of attacks on Indian Muslims. He writes, ‘The situation in India is extremely worrying, there have been reports of religiously motivated killings, assaults, riots, discrimination, vandalism and actions restricting the right of individuals to practice their religious beliefs My constituents are concerned that the Indian government is not doing enough to address the on-going attacks on Muslim communities in India.’



The FCO said in its response that it engaged with India on the full range of human rights matters to build capacity and share expertise and condemns any instances of discrimination because of religion or belief, “regardless of the faith or country involved.”
