India-Pakistan Relations in Retrospective: VI

Dr. Jaipal Singh

(A) Major Terrorist Groups

Lashkar-e-Taiba:

It was founded by Hafiz Saeed in 1990 with Abdullah Azzam as co-founder; the latter was a teacher and mentor of Osama Bin Laden once upon a time. LeT is perhaps the largest, most active and deadliest terrorist outfit in South Asia, mainly operating against India from the POK and mainland. LeT has been the major force behind the 2001 Parliament attack, 2008 Mumbai terror attack and many other dreadful incidents. It has been banned as a terrorist organization by India, US, UK and European Union. The outfit is formally banned by the United Nations (UN) and the US has declared a bounty of ten million dollar on the global terrorist Hafiz Saeed. The outfit has been active in recent years under the banner of Jamat-ud-Dawa, a camouflaged organization, which regularly conducted mass rallies and congregation under official patronage calling for jihad in Kashmir; this organization is also banned by the UN, and only recently the Pakistan government has put some restrictions on its activities under intense international pressure. However, the formal ban notified by the Pakistan government on Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) and its subsidiary Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation (FiF) appears to be only eyewash as reported by an Indian private media group after investigation.

Jaish-e-Mohammed:

After December, 1999 release from an Indian prison in exchange of passengers of the Indian Airlines flight IC 814 held hostage at Kandhar, Afghanistan, under the Taliban regime, Masood Azhar founded Jaish-e-Mohammed with separation of Kashmir from India as its main objective. This is one of the most active and notorious terror outfits which has carried out numerous terror attacks in Kashmir and elsewhere in India including 2001 Indian Parliament as also more recently Uri attack in September 2016 and Pulwama arrack in February 2019. In spite of a formal ban on JeM by United Nations, US and some European countries, India’s efforts in UN to get its head Masood Azhar listed as a banned terrorist had been repeatedly frustated by China in the past.

After a JeM suicide bomber killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel on 12 February 2019, India retaliated with an aerial attack on 26 February on the biggest training facility of JeM deep inside the territory of Pakistan at Balakot in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan. Although there are conflicting claims and counter-claims about the nature of facility and extent of damage, but India was able to clearly display its intent and objective that was well taken by the international community giving massive support to India’s right to defend self. The local people varied as to the purpose of the facility. In the aftermath, France, US and UK took fresh initiative to ban JeM chief Masood Azhar and this time in May 2019 international pressure compelled China to withdraw its technical objection paving way for the UN Security Council to enlist Masood on the UN ban list.

Hizb-ul-Mujahideen:

Hizb-ul-Mujahideen is a Kashmiri separatist terrorist organization which was founded by Muhammad Ahsan Dar in 1985. It’s a pro-Pakistani militant organization which is mostly operates from the areas of north-west Pakistan and seeks for the integration of Jammu and Kashmir with Pakistan as an Islamic state. Currently, it is headed by Syed Mohammed Yusuf Shah (common name Sayeed Salahudeen), self-appointed supreme commander, who currently lives in Pakistan. He is listed on the National Investigating Agency (NIA)’s most wanted list and is also designated global terrorist by the US Department of State. Terrorist activities of this organization are mostly centred in Jammu and Kashmir and the outfit is banned by India and the European Union. The outfit is stated to be operating under the active patronage of ISI and Pakistan army.

Besides, there are many other terrorist groups like Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, Tahreek-ul-Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Jabbar etc. which are believed to be constantly assisted and pampered by the ISI and Pakistan army to carry out terror strikes in Kashmir and elsewhere in the name of jihad. Apart from the terrorist groups, certain extremist and secessionist groups such as Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC), Mutahida Jehad Council (MJC), Jamaat-e-Islami and Dukhtaran-e-Millat (DeM) too are active either to see Jammu and Kashmir as an independent state or its merger with Pakistan. In a recent crackdown on separatist forces in Jammu & Kashmir, the Indian government has banned Jamaat-e-Islami and JKLF and majority separatist leaders have been put behind the bars and are under investigation in terror funding cases.

(B) Major Terror Attacks

Amongst numerous terrorist attacks during the past three decades, a few major incidents involving Pakistani connection are briefly listed below:

Serial bomb blasts took place in Mumbai on the 12th March, 1993 killing more than 350 and injuring about 1,200 people. The notorious don, Dawood Ibrahim, is believed to be the architect these attacks following the demolition of a disputed mosque structure in northern India (Ayodhya) in December 1992.

The Jammu & Kashmir Legislative Assembly in Srinagar was hit by a car bomb and three suicide bombers killing 38 people on 1st October, 2001. According to subsequent investigation and intelligence reports, Pakistan backed terrorist group JeM had organized this attack.

Five terrorists belonging to LeT and JeM attacked the Indian Parliament in New Delhi leading to the death of about a dozen people including cops and staffers on 13th December, 2001. The incident escalated tension between India and Pakistan and brought the two countries at the brink of war.

In a terrorist attack at the Akshardham Temple at Gandhinagar, Gujarat on 24th September, 2002, 30 people were dead and over 80 injured. NSG Commandos tracked and killed two terrorists hiding in the premises. Later during investigations, the City Police Commissioner suggested that the conspiracy to attack Akshardham was hatched in Riyadh by JeM, Let and ISI of Pakistan. None of the terror outfits, however, claimed responsibility for the attack.

In two bombing incidents on commuter trains in Mumbai on 13 and 25 March, 2003, 65 people were dead and 244 wounded. Pakistan based LeT outfit was behind this attack and three suspects including a woman were convicted and sentenced to death in 2009.

A busy market in New Delhi was rocked by serial blasts during the festive Diwali season on 29th October, 2005 killing 62 people and wounding 210 people including women and children. The terror outfit Let was identified to be behind this attack on civilian population.

In another dreadful terrorist incident of train bombing in Mumbai Suburban Railway on 11 July, 2006, 209 people died and over 700 were wounded. The bombs set off in pressure cookers on trains exploded in short span of less than 15 minutes causing havoc on commuters. LeT and Students Islamic Movement of India are said to be behind these attacks.

A heinous terror attack on Mumbai in the form of shootings and bombings from 26th to 29th November 2008 by Pakistani terrorists of Lashkar-e-Taiba left 166 people dead and over 300 wounded. The incident escalated tension between India and Pakistan with the risk of a war because the subsequent investigations including confession of one terrorist caught alive gave sufficient evidence that the attackers came from Pakistan on boat and were in constant touch with the masterminds of attack in Pakistan.

On 7th September, 2011, a bomb blast outside the High Court in Delhi led to the killing of 17 people and injury of 76. Reportedly Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami (HUJI), a fundamentalist organization active in Pakistan with presence in India and Bangladesh as well, was responsible for this terror attack.

Four heavily armed JeM terrorists carried out an attack on an Indian army establishment on 18 September 2016 near the town of Uri in Jammu & Kashmir. In the ensuing encounter, 19 Indian soldiers and 4 terrorists were killed. In retaliation, the Indian Army conducted a “surgical strike” on certain “launch-pads” used by the terrorist outfits and their Pakistani masterminds in POK. Subsequently, India also cancelled its participation in the 19th SAARC summit scheduled in Islamabad, Pakistan stating that “one country have created an environment that is not conducive to the successful holding of the 19th SAARC Summit in Islamabad in November 2016”.

A suicide bomber rammed an explosive ridden car on a bus carrying CRPF personnel near Pulwama on Srinagar highway in Jammu & Kashmir on 12 February 2019. Pakistan based JeM took responsibility for the attack in which at least 40 jawans were killed. In retaliation, India carried out another “surgical strike” on a large training facility run by JeM at Balakot, Pakistan on 26 February. These incidents led the two hostile neighbours at the brink of war with Pakistan flexing muscles giving threat to use nuclear weapons in stockpile.

To be continued…

(Courtesy:www.boloji.com)

(The author is a retired civil servant having his interest in history sports, literature, art and culture. Currently, he is engaged as Advisor with a Central Autonomous Body and a Public Enterprise.)
