[FACT CHECK] Did PM Narendra Modi lend his chopper to ferry rape convict Gurmeet Ram Rahim?

Screengrab of the post from Facebook

New Delhi: The social media is abuzz with a collage picture which claims that Prime Minister Narendra Modi lent his chopper to 'ferry' rape convict Gurmeet Ram Rahim. The comments on social media claim that when the country's Prime Minister lends chopper to a rapist, the slogan 'beti bachao' is a joke.

While one of the images shows PM Narendra Modi stepping out of a chopper bearing number AW139, another one shows Dera chief and convicted, self-proclaimed godman Gurmeet Ram Rahim sitting in the chopper bearing the same number.

The post was shared on several social media handles and commented upon by many. A quick fact check, however, reveals that the claim that PM Narendra Modi lent his chopper to Gurmeet Ram Rahim is completely false. PM Narendra Modi never lent his chopper to Ram Rahim.

According to media reports, the chopper used for ferrying Ram Rahim to Rohtak jail from Panchkula was hired by the Haryana government from a private aviation company.

The same was confirmed by a newspaper report which quoted Ram Nivas, Additional Chief Secretary of Haryana as saying that the AW139 chopper which ferried Ram Rahim was hired by the state government from a private company. The chopper was arranged as massive riots had broken out at ahead of the self-proclaimed godman's trial.

During his election campaign in 2014, PM Narendra Modi had also used a chopper of the same 'make' AW139. Contrary to the claims on social media, the number AW 139 is not the registration or identification number of the chopper, but, instead, the model number of the helicopter.

The fact that PM Narendra Modi used a chopper AW-139 owned by a private group, was confirmed in a newspaper report. The report said that PM Modi used this chopper for his rallies in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.

Besides, this was one of the three choppers used by Modi during his election rallies — the other two being — a Bell 412 chopper owned by a private service and an Embraer 135BJ belonging to another private aviation company.




