Chargesheet in Pranay murder case to be filed in Feb, cops wait for FSL results

Chargesheet in Pranay murder case to be filed in Feb, cops wait for FSL results

Nalgonda SP Ranganath told TNM that the police will oppose Maruthi Rao's bail application stringently.

news Crime

The chargesheet in the murder case of 24-year-old-Pranay will be filed in court by February, Nalgona police told TNM. Pranay, a Dalit man was hacked to death on September 14 by an assailant Subash Sharma when he along with his wife Amrutha and mother were coming out of a private hospital, following a medical check up in Miryalaguda. The entire incident was caught on tape. Four days after the murder, the Nalgonda police arrested all the seven accused--Amrutha’s father Maruthi Rao, Shravan, Asgar Ali, Mohammed Bari, Abdul Karim, Shiva and Subhash Sharma--involved in the crime.

Speaking to TNM, Nalgonda police Superintendent, AV Ranganath said, "We are awaiting for the Forensic Science Laboratory which will come next month. After receiving the report, we will file a chargesheet."

Maruthi Rao, the prime accused, hatched the plot to kill Pranay, a Dalit from the Mala community for marrying his daughter Amrutha belonging to the Vyshya caste. This brutal caste based killing which took place last year in September had shocked the state and sparked wide outrage. Although Maruthi Rao and others, had applied for bail in October, it was rejected by the court.

As per rules, the accused are entitled for bail if the police don't file a chargesheet within 90 days of arresting the accused. However, on December 18, police invoked Preventive Detention Act against three accused--Maruthi Rao, Shravan Kumar, Maruthi Rao's brother and Abdul Kareem, a local politician who aided in the killing.

In Telangana, a statutory advisory board headed by a retired High Court judge reviews cases where the police have invoked the Preventive Detention Act. “In this case, the board was convinced that the Act can be invoked against these people. This means that they will not be granted bail for a year. We have time to file a strong chargesheet. There is strong evidence against all the accused,” the SP said.

Meanwhile, the accused have challenged the Preventive Detention in the Hyderabad High Court. However, the SP said, "We will strongly oppose the bail of the accused, as they might tamper with the evidence and meddle with the investigation process."
