Forced to marry, 16-year-old girl claims husband tortured and raped her for two months

Police have recorded the girl's statement in connection to this case (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Patiala: A shocking case has come to light from Punjab where police have booked a man for allegedly marrying a minor girl and raping her for over two months. The accused identified as one Rinku, a resident of Ambala in Haryana, has been arrested and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

City police confirmed the allegations and said that the girl's maternal grandparents forcibly married her off to the accused on October 12 of last year. A statement of the girl, a resident of Patiala, has been recorded by city police who are in the process of investigating the allegations against Rinku. She told probing officials that she was being tortured and raped ever since her marriage to the accused last year.

Station House Officer of Tripuri told Times of India that a case was registered following an official complaint from authorities in Chandigarh. As a result, the accused has been booked under section 376 of the IPC and Section 6 of the POCSO Act along with Section 9 of the Children Marriage Prohibition Act of 2006.

Just this week, a similar case had emerged from Vaishali in Bihar where a 14-year-old girl was abducted and gang-raped by three youths late Monday night. Police officials familiar with the matter said that the accused kidnapped the minor girl when she had gone out to fetch water from a nearby well. They took her to a field where they took turns raping her before fleeing the scene.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Molestation survivor kills self after village panchayat lets accused go scot-free in Agra
