Stalker stabs girl to death at Delhi market, caught by passerby

The accused had also threatened to kill girl's sister. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused first met the girl at her sister's home in Sarai Kale Khan Girl was being stalked by the accused for some time Accused had also threatened to kill girl's sister

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, a girl was stabbed to death by a stalker at Bhogal area in South Delhi on Friday evening. The girl was stabbed at least half a dozen times by the accused youth. The girl was being stalked by the accused, identified as 22-year-old Shakeel, for a long time.

The accused was caught by the passerby and thrashed and handed over to the police. The local residents claimed that the accused even tried to stab people when they attempted to stop him.

According to a report, the incident happened around 7.30 pm when the woman was visiting Mathura Road weekly market at Bhogal near Nizamuddin. The accused came from behind and pushed the victim to the ground and stabbing her multiple times in the neck, abdomen, and chest.

As the woman lay on the ground writhing in pain, the nearby shopkeepers rushed to nab the attacker but were threatened with a knife by the accused. However, he was caught by the locals when he tried to flee the spot.

The accused, who works as a mason, had been stalking the girl for quite some time. Shakeel first met the girl when he was staying at her sister's home in Sarai Kale Khan.

According to the victim's family, the accused had threatened to harm her if she did not meet him. Shakeel also threatened to kill the girl's brother when he warned the accused to stay away from his sister.

A case of murder under Section 302 of the Indian Penal code (IPC) has been registered against the accused.

The youth is being treated for his injuries after he was thrashed by people in the market. We are waiting for him to recover and will arrest him," said Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Chinmoy Biswal.

The accused had purchased the knife shortly before he went to kill the girl. According to police, the body of the victim will be handed over to her family after autopsy.

In a similar incident, an 18-year-old girl was set ablaze by her stalker in broad daylight on March 12 in Kerala. The girl later succumbed to her injuries. The victim had sustained 60 per cent burn injuries. The accused was identified as Ajin Reji, who had set the girl on fire in Thiruvalla after pouring petrol over her. An onlooker nabbed the accused as he tried to flee the spot and handed him over to police.
