Nun alleges tampering of evidence to save rape accused bishop Franco Mulakkal

Nun alleges Mulakkal himself is behind conspiracy to weaken the case against him. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Kerala court found discrepancies in cyber-forensic report Sister Anupama alleges tampering of evidence in the case Nun alleges Mulakkal himself behind conspiracy to weaken the case against him

Kottayam: There is yet another twist in the Kerala nun rape case. A nun has alleged that efforts are being made to tamper evidence in the case to save rape accused Bishop Franco Mulakkal. The fresh development comes after a local court in Kerala found discrepancies in cyber-forensic report presented before it.

A local court in Pala has now directed the investigating officer in the case to produce a fresh copy of the forensic report after it found that the earlier copy submitted by the forensic lab was different from the one produced by police.

According to a report, Sister Anupama has told the court that there is an attempt to weaken the case against the powerful Bishop. Sister Anupama has been leading a movement to seek justice for the nun who was allegedly raped by Franco Mulakkal.

The nun has alleged that Mulakkal himself is behind the conspiracy to sabotage the case against him.

"I will lodge a police complaint against the forensic lab if real evidence is not submitted to the police. There is a clear attempt to prolong the trial, the report quoted Sister Anupama as saying.

The fresh order to submit a new copy of the report came after the judge P A Sirajuddhin found discrepancies in the lab and the police report.

On Friday, the judge watched the content of the cyber forensic report that was submitted in the DVD format. The report included details of SIM card, mobile phone, hard disk seized by the police as part of the investigation.

Claiming that there was no breach of privacy, the investigating officer had earlier agreed to give a copy of the report to Mulakkal's counsel.

In April, the special investigation team had filed the charge sheet against Mulakkal, seven months after he was arrested over allegations of raping and sexually assaulting the nun. Mulakkal was former Bishop of Jalandhar diocese and a senior member of the Roman Catholic clergy in India.

The nun, who belongs to Missionaries of Jesus congregation under Jalandhar diocese, had accused the 55-year old clergyman of repeatedly raping and having unnatural sex with her between 2014 and 2016. He allegedly committed the offence when he was the Bishop of the Jalandhar diocese.

Mulakkal has been charged under various sections of the Indian Penal Code, including 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement), 376C (sexual intercourse by person in authority), Section 377 (unnatural sex) and 506(1) (criminal threat). Franco Mulakkal is currently out on bail.
