Family of four from Bengaluru family die after car crashes into KSRTC bus

Family of four from Bengaluru family die after car crashes into KSRTC bus

While the couple died on the spot, their two children succumbed to their injuries on their way to the hospital.

news Accident

In a tragic accident, a family of four from Bengaluru was killed on Sunday in a vehicular collision that took place on the Bengaluru-Mysuru Highway at Gejjalagere in Maddur. The deceased have been identified as Ravi (31), Manjula (25) and their children Sukanya (10) and Sagar (5).

They were staying in Kumaraswamy Layout In Bengaluru. While the couple died on the spot, the children succumbed to their injuries on their way to the hospital.

Police said the family was heading towards Ravi's native village, Hebakavadi, in Maddur taluk of Mandya district.

Police said that a car hit Ravi’s car from behind, which forced his car to cross the divider and crash head-on with a KSRTC bus. Police said as the result of the impact, the car was mangled in the front, and they had to struggle to recover the bodies. The Maddur police have registered a case.

While nobody on the bus was hurt, the Times of India reported that some students fainted after seeing the major accident. One such student said, "I've never seen such an accident. Within seconds, the entire family lost their lives and their bodies were mutilated in front of us.”

This incident comes after in May-end another four persons— two couples from Kerala had died after their car crashed into a parked lorry in Maddur on the same Bengaluru-Mysuru Highway. Two months before that in March, 41 tourists from Kolkata were injured after a private bus they were travelling in toppled over on the same highway in Maddur.

According to the latest statistics published by the Union Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways, a total of 464,910 road accidents were reported in 2017, resulting in the death of 147,913 people and injuring 470,975 people. This means that every day, on an average, 405 people die in road accidents. According to that report, Karnataka was the third-worst state in the country, with 11% of the total accidents in India.
