Karnataka was George Fernandes’ base during Emergency

George Fernandes had planned to blow up a part of Vidhan Soudha as part of resistance

As a political leader, when George Fernandes went underground to resist the Emergency in 1975 and security agencies were on a massive manhunt for him, he made his home State Karnataka his base for most parts of the year before he was arrested.

Michael Fernandes, younger brother of George Fernandes and a fellow trade unionist, recounted how he was active in Bengaluru and was planning to use violence without causing harm to people to resist the Emergency. “I used to arrange for the logistics, take him food and arrange for meetings during his stay in the city. There were plans to blow up government offices and post boxes at night. He had told me to sabotage an electric transformer in Peenya. But that did not happen as I was arrested in December 1975,” said Mr. Michael.

Mr. George had planned to explode a bomb in a lavatory of the Vidhana Soudha too, writer U.R. Ananthamurthy had recounted in his autobiography Suragi. He also recounted how he got an anonymous letter that just said: “Come and meet me in Bangalore at once,” which he suspected to be from Mr. George.

Describing how Pattabhirama Reddy took him to meet Mr. George at a decrepit church in the city, Ananthamurthy recounts: “George was sitting on a cot. He was unrecognisable. He had grown his hair and beard. He gave me a mission with these points: Snehalata has to go to a rarely used lavatory in Vidhana Soudha. Making sure no one was around, she has to explode a bomb at night. I had to provide some young men to help her. The explosion had to bring down a portion of the Vidhana Soudha, but not kill anyone. Our objective was to hassle the government, and not to inflict violence on anyone.” But the plan did not come through as “a constable always stood guard at the toilet, making it impossible to place a bomb at the Vidhana Soudha,” he says in Suragi.

However, actor-activist Snehalata Reddy was arrested in May 1976 and lodged in Bangalore Central Prison for her links with Mr. George. She was allegedly tortured and made to live in inhuman conditions. She was released on parole in January 1977 when her health deteriorated. She died five days later.

Nandana Reddy, Snehalata Reddy’s daughter, told The Hindu that her mother had ideological differences with Mr. George over his choice of violence to resist the Emergency.

Mr. George was eventually arrested in Kolkata in June 1976.
