84 Activists Killed, Many More Are Missing Or Threatened; Now The RTI Itself Is Under Threat

In June 2019, an RTI activist M Sreenivas, 44, was killed by unidentified person in Vishakhapatam. Sanjay Dubey was killed in Mumbai’s Ghatkopar in May, and these two are among the 84 RTI activists who have lost their lives because they had used the Right to Information (RTI) to unearth to wrongdoings of the powerful who don’t want to their deeds to come out in open.

With the government passing the Right to Information (Amendment) Bill, 2019 in Lok Sabha within three days of its introduction, the speculation of opposition, RTI activists and people in general that the Amendment Bill would weaken the RTI which is probably the most empower the citizens of India have in their hand to fight corruption is gathering momentum.

But any Amendment in the Bill which has unearthed so many corruption scandals and scam is bound to be seen with suspicion.

The Activists and the RTI

Since 2005, when the RTI Act was enacted, 84 RTI activists and whistleblowers have lost their lives in attacks allegedly by people whom they had exposed using the RTI. The government, however, doesn’t maintain any data which tells about the number of whistle blowers and RTI activists killed, assaulted and threatened.

afp

A tracker set up by Commonwealth Human Right Initiative (CHRI) with title ‘Hall of Shame-Mapping Attacks on RTI Users’ maintains the data of the RTI activists killed, assaulted and threatened. According to attacksonrtiusers.org, 84 RTI activists have lost their lives since 2005 when RTI act was enacted and out of these, 7 were suicides while the rest 77 were alleged murders. The number of RTI activists assaulted and harassed or threatened since 2005 is 169 and 183 respectively.

RTI increases India’s credibility

According to the Centre For Law And Democracy initiative ‘Global Right to Information Rating Map’, India is ranked 7th in terms of the strength of its RTI Act, allowing people to access information from the public institutions and the government.

Now, when there is a debate over the effectiveness of the RTI, it is important for the citizens to demand its safety. If we can't ask questions, the authorities will feel free to do whatever they want and the citizens of this country will never be able to know the truth.
