Day after holding ADC hostage in Mansa, Congress sarpanches meet Preneet, allege favouritism

PATIALA: A day after they held an additional deputy commissioner (ADC) hostage in his office after a controversy broke out over distribution of sewing machines to the needy, nearly 50 sarpanches of the Congress from Mansa reached the New Moti Bagh residence of chief minister Amarinder Singh on Saturday to meet Patiala MP Preneet Kaur.The sarpanches had confined ADC (development) to his office on Friday, after they alleged that the authorities were favouring people associated with MLA Nazar Singh Manshahia, who defeceted from AAP to Congress before Lok Sabha polls, in the distribution of sewing machine macghines. They claimed that names of beneficiaries whose list they had handed over to authorities had not been included in the list.The ADC was freed after intervention by an SP-rank official, who later gave a written complaint to Mansa police chief. Employees of the panchayat department went on a strike after the incident. Led by Mansa District Congress Comittee president Manoj Bala, the Congress sarpanches claimed in their meeting with the MP that Mansa deputy commissioner, ADC and panchayat officers were indulging in corruption and ignoring local Congress leaders.Bala said they officials were acting at the behest of Akali leaders and issues being raised by Congress leaders were being overlooked. She said some local officials were indulging in corruption and demanded that they be transferred out of Mansa. She told TOI that Preneet gave them a patient hearing to them and assured them she would take up the matter with chief minister Amarinder Singh.Mansa administration on Friday organized an event to distribute sewing machines and rickshaws to poor SC families under the Centre’s Special Assistance Scheme where Manshahia was the chief guest. The sarpanches and other local leaders got upset when they noticed that “those associated with Manshahia were being given priority” in the distribution of machines.They accused the ADC (development) of “step-motherly” treatment. They also brought the matter to the notice of Bala, who reached the spot. She asked the officials to address the grievances of the Congress sarpanches, but later she ended up arguing with them. It led to sloganeering at the event and the event turned into chaos. As the protesting Congress workers were raising slogans, the ADC (D) went to his office, where the sarpanches held him hostage.Later, SP Kuldeep Singh Sohi and DSP Baljinder Singh Pannu rushed to the spot and persuaded the protesters to lift the dharna.
