Unnao rape survivor critical, aunt dead as truck hits their car

Unnao rape victim injured in road accident

LUCKNOW: The Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer, Mahendra Singh, were critically injured when a truck crashed into their car on NH-31 on Sunday afternoon. Her aunt and another woman relative, who were in the car, were killed in the accident. They were returning from Rae Bareli prison after meeting the rape survivor's uncle, who was jailed in a forgery case.The lawyer is battling for life with head injuries and multiple fractures in KGMU Trauma Centre, Lucknow. No guard accompanied them to Rae Bareli even though the court had ordered security cover to the rape survivor's family last year.Talking to TOI, inspector general of police, Lucknow range, SK Bhagat, said, "A woman died on the spot, while the rape survivor's aunt was declared brought dead at KGMU, Lucknow." The truck owner, Devendra Singh, and the driver, Ashish Pal, have been arrested.The accident took place near Ataura police post under Gurubakshganj police station, 15km from Rae Bareli prison. Owners of eateries near the accident spot tipped off police. On December 27, UP Police registered an FIR against the rape survivor on a complaint filed by the husband of a co-accused, accusing her of framing their son in a kidnapping case. Police registered a case of forgery and cheating against the minor, her mother and uncle Mahesh, who played a key role in the arrest of Bangarmau MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar last year.The rape case shot into prominence when the survivor attempted self-immolation in front of the CM's residence on April 8, 2018, alleging that Sengar had abducted and sexually assaulted her. Next day, the survivor's father died, allegedly due to police torture in prison.The government transferred the case to CBI, which lodged three FIRs on April 13, and arrested Sengar and his 10 aides.A subordinate of the Unnao rape survivor's lawyer, Vimal Kumar Yadav, said the survivor along with her kin returned from Delhi on Saturday without courtdesignated security guards.Relatives of the Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer claimed it was not a mere accident, but a conspiracy. Mahen Bahadur Singh, father of lawyer Mahendra Singh Chauhan said, "The nature of the accident is suspicious."
