'Mentally disturbed' woman thrashed by mob in MP over suspicion of child-lifting

The police have alleged that the woman might be mentally disturbed (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place in Cantonment area, Sagar It being alleged that the victim is mentally disturbed

Bhopal: An angry mob brutally thrashed a woman in Cantonment area of Sagar, Madhya Pradesh over suspicion of her being a child-lifter. The incident came to light on Sunday, July 28. The police have alleged that the woman might be mentally disturbed.

Police inspector JJ Choudhary said, "We received information that people were beating a woman suspecting her to be a child lifter on Saturday evening in Cantonment area in Sagar."

The woman told the police that she was from Ratlam and that she did not have any recollection of how she reached Sagar. The inspector said to the news agency PTI, "A case of assault has been registered and efforts are on to arrest the accused.

Instances of mob violence have been surfacing from different parts of the country. Several members of the Dalit community have also fallen prey to mob violence in the last few years. These incidents show that the people do not have complete faith in the administration, due to which, they take the law in their hands. Instead of informing the police and following the legal procedure, people find it easier to resort to violence in the name of justice.

Suspected child lifter brutally thrashed in Indore

In the month of July this year, a man was beaten up by a furious mob in Indore, Madhya Pradesh. Agitated locals beat the man as they suspected him of being a child-lifter. The victim was identified as Badri Lal.

The police said that no one had contacted them to inquire about the child and that no formal complaint had been lodged with them in relation to the incident. Lal was admitted to the hospital as he had sustained injuries in the incident.

Mentally unstable man beaten in Bihar over suspicion of being child-lifter

In November last year, a man was beaten up by a mob in Bihar's Jehanabad district over suspicion of being a child-lifter. The mob caught hold of the allegedly mentally retarded man and beat him brutally. The man, Suraj Kumar was found with a two-and-a-half-year-old child.

The child's father, Anuj Kumar said that his child was playing outside their residence. A man allegedly told Kumar that he had spotted the child with an unknown man outside the village.

The father and some of the villagers located the man and started beating him. The police reached the spot after they learned about the incident and saved the accused.
