Unnao girl who accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar of raping her hit by truck; mother dead

Follow us on Image Source : ANI Unnao rape case: Survivor who accused BJP MLA hit by truck, condition critical

Unnao rape survivor who had accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar of raping her met with a road accident on Sunday. According to the report, the victim's car was hit by a truck in Rae Bareli in Uttar Pradesh. It is said that it was raining at the time of the accident.

The incident took place when the mother-daughter duo was in the car, which was being driven by their lawyer Mahendra Singh. The woman was on her way to meet her uncle Mahesh Singh, who is lodged in Rae Bareli jail.

Police told IANS that the car's front portion was badly damaged due to the impact of the crash. There were four occupants in the car at the time of the accident - the rape victim, her mother, aunt, and her lawyer Mahendra Singh.

Speaking to ANI, Junior of Advocate Mahendra Singh said the mother and aunt succumbed to injuries while the victim and lawyer survived and are critically injured. They were immediately rushed to a hospital in Lucknow. The truck driver has been arrested and is being questioned.

"Victim, her mother, her aunt, and her lawyer were injured in the accident. Victim's mother and aunt succumbed to injuries; the victim and her lawyer are in critical condition," Advocate Vimal Kumar Yadav told ANI.

Police are investigating the case while treating it as both an accident and a conspiracy to murder.

Meanwhile, Samajwadi Party has demanded a CBI inquiry into the accident.

The survivor had accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar of raping her on June 4, 2017, at the time she went to his residence with one of her relatives. The case came to light after a year when the girl held a protest outside Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence demanding justice. She had also tried to immolate herself in front of Adityanath's residence in Lucknow.

A case was registered against Kuldeep with Makhi police station under section 363, 366, 376, 506 and Pocso Act of Indian Penal Code.

Sengar has been in jail since the past several months while the case is being probed by the CBI. Sengar's brother has also been accused of beating up the victim's father after tying him to a tree. Her father was then arrested and later died in police custody.

(With inputs from Naveen Singh)

Video: Unnao rape victim's car hit by a truck in Rae Bareli in Uttar Pradesh

ALSO READ:3-year old girl raped in Kanpur, accused arrested

ALSO READ: Rape victim asked to settle case for Rs 1 lakh in Jharkhand

ALSO READ:Five-year-old girl raped by neighbour in Muzaffarnagar

Latest India News
