Probe officer turns hostile in case against ex-DGP Saini : The Tribune India

editorial@tribune.com

Satya Prakash

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, July 28

A CBI Superintendent of Police, who probed a kidnapping case against former Punjab DGP Sumedh Singh Saini, has turned hostile and refused to support the prosecution case.

“I have no knowledge…”, “I do not remember…”, “I do not recollect now” and “I am unable to identify…” These were the standard replies given by 77-year-old Investigating Officer Dharampal Singh, now retired, to the questions from CBI’s special public prosecutor Kumar Rajat.

Saini is facing trial along with three others for alleged abduction of automobile businessman Vinod Kumar, his brother-in-law Ashok Kumar and their driver Mukhtiyar Singh. While Vinod and Mukhtiyar were picked up by the police from the parking lot of the Punjab and Haryana High Court on March 15, 1994, Ashok was allegedly abducted from Ludhiana the same day.

A criminal case was registered against Saini and others by the CBI on the orders of the High Court on March 24, 1994. The case was transferred to Delhi by the Supreme Court in 2004 after Vinod’s mother Amar Kaur expressed apprehension that Saini being a senior IPS officer might influence witnesses.

Amar Kaur, who waged a 24-year legal battle for her lost son and had deposed in a wheelchair against Saini before a Delhi court, died here on December 12, 2017.

Dharampal Singh, who had filed the chargesheet against Saini and three others in the case, was declared hostile after he showed “aggressive behavior” to the special public prosecutor and tried to controvert him “without listening (to) and understanding the query…”

“I cannot say whether the enmity between accused Saini and Vinod Kumar (who went missing) aggravated due to filling of petitions in the High Court by Vinod Kumar and issuance of bailable warrants and contempt notice to Saini,” the IO said in his testimony recorded on July 20.

As he failed to support his own chargesheet, Special Judge Anju Bajaj Chandana noted, “It appears that the witness (IO) has made up his mind to counter every question of the learned special PP”.

On another occasion, the IO said, “I do not remember that Ashish Kumar (Vinod’s brother) was forcibly taken away on February 24, 1994, by Paramjeet Singh (co-accused). I do not remember about details of police custody and judicial custody of Ashish Kumar. I do not know Ashok Kumar was taken away by the Punjab Police at the instance of Saini.”

On yet another occasion, the IO said, “I do not remember whether Ashish Kumar and Pramod Kumar (Vinod’s brother who allegedly committed suicide) had filed their affidavits in the High Court on the directions of Saini to ensure the release of missing persons. I do not remember that Ashok Kumar was taken away by the Punjab Police at the instance of Saini.”

As he contradicted his own investigation, the CBI special public prosecutor cross-examined him. On Monday, he is likely to be cross-examined by the defence counsel.

Kidnapping charge

Former Punjab DGP Sumedh Singh Saini is facing trial along with three others for alleged abduction of automobile businessman Vinod Kumar, his brother-in-law Ashok Kumar and their driver Mukhtiyar Singh.

‘I do not recollect now’

“I have no knowledge…”, “I do not remember…”, “I do not recollect now” and “I am unable to identify…” These were the standard replies given by 77-year-old Investigating Officer Dharampal Singh, now retired, to the questions from CBI's special public prosecutor Kumar Rajat.
