It’s conspiracy not accident, says Unnao rape survivor’s family

The Unnao gang-rape survivor’s mother has alleged that the accused MLA Kuldeep Sengar was behind Sunday’s accident and said it was intended to eliminate the survivor and those helping her in the fight for justice.

“Rape accused MLA Kuldeep Sengar is behind this incident. He has been threatening us. Sengar is in jail but he has a mobile and is giving directions,” the mother said of the accident in which the survivor and her lawyer Mahendra Singh Chauhan were critically injured while her aunt and another woman relative were killed after a speeding truck hit the car in which they were travelling to Rae Bareli on Sunday.

“It was not an accident but a conspiracy to eliminate all of us,” her mother told reporters at Unnao on Monday.

The lawmaker’s family has rejected the allegation.

Watch | Unnao rape victim’s family allege ‘conspiracy’ behind accident

Speaking to reporters, the gang-rape survivor’s sister said she suspected a big conspiracy behind the accident. The sister said the MLA’s accomplices often followed the gang-rape survivor and her aunt wherever they went in connection with the case. She said the accident should be probed in detail.

The gang-rape survivor’s maternal uncle too alleged it was not an accident but an attempt to kill her. He said attempts were being made on her life ever since she alleged rape. Her father was murdered in judicial custody and various tactics were adopted in a bid to silence her, he said.

The woman’s family members said the number plate of the truck appeared to be scratched and this seemed to be a further indication of a conspiracy.

The injured lawyer Mahendra Singh Chauhan’s friends and juniors, who reached Lucknow late night, too voiced similar suspicions but were reluctant to speak openly about the accident. Vimal Kumar Yadav, the lawyer’s junior, said he was primarily focussing on the treatment of accident survivors and the entire sequence of events will be revealed once they recovered from their injuries.

Meanwhile, Sangeeta Sengar, the zila panchayat chairperson and wife of Kuldeep Sengar’s brother Atul Sengar, ruled out her family members’ role in the accident.

“My husband is in jail despite being innocent. I am deeply pained by the tragedy that has befallen on the family. Everyone knows the truth and it will come out one day. Why will we do something like this?” she said.
