Unnao rape survivor accident: Priyanka Gandhi raises questions on CBI probe, BJP govt

Reacting to the Unnao rape survivor's accident, Priyanka Gandhi took to Twitter, calling the accident "shocking". (PTI file photo)

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has raised questions after the Unnao rape survivor, who had accused a BJP MLA of sexually assaulting her, was involved in a car accident on Sunday.

Reacting to the accident, Priyanka Gandhi took to Twitter, calling the accident "shocking".

Priyanka Gandhi asked how far had the CBI probe in the rape case reached. She also slammed the BJP for not expelling accused party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

The Congress general secretary for UP East also questioned why there was a lapse in the security cover provided to the Unnao rape survivor. It had emerged that a gunner and two women constables who had been assigned to the survivor and her family were not present with her when the accident occurred.

Continuing her attack, Priyanka Gandhi said, "Without answers to these questions, can we expect justice from the BJP government?"

On Sunday, a car in which the survivor of Unnao rape case, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli on Sunday, killing two members while leaving her and the advocate critically injured.

BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar, who is an accused in the rape case, was arrested on April 13 last year.

ADG Lucknow Rajeev Krishna said, "Two women were killed in the accident. The rape survivor and the lawyer are in a critical condition and undergoing treatment at the trauma centre in Lucknow."

"The rape survivor's family had been provided security, but the gunner had not accompanied them on Sunday. The reason behind it is being probed," he said, adding, "The truck involved in the accident has been impounded. It has a Fatehpur district registration plate."

A woman belonging to Makhi police station area in Unnao had alleged that Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP Assembly, raped her teenage daughter at his residence in 2017.

The case had come to light after the victim allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence.
