‘Conspiracy to eliminate us’, says Unnao rape survivor’s mother; govt for CBI probe

Extra Police officials deployed at Makhi village for security reasons after Unnao rape victim was injured in an accident in Rae Barelli. (Express photo by Vishal Srivastava)

The mother of Unnao rape victim, who is in critical condition after getting injured in a road accident, on Monday termed the incident as a conspiracy to “wipe out her family”. “It was not an accident but a conspiracy to eliminate all of us,” she was quoted as saying by PTI.

“The son of a co-accused in the case, Shahi Singh, and another youth of the village had threatened us. They said that they will deal with us,” she added.

On Sunday afternoon, the Unnao rape victim, who had accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of sexually assaulting her in 2017, and her lawyer were critically injured and two of her aunts were killed when the car in which they were travelling collided with a truck in Gurubakshganj area of Rae Bareli. Police said they were going to Rae Bareli district jail, where the rape victim’s uncle is lodged.

The victim’s family has accused MLA Sengar of planning the accident. Sengar, MLA from Bangarmau in Unnao, is lodged in Sitapur district jail. “MLA Kuldeep Singh and his associates planned the attack to threaten us so that we stop pursuing the case. Everyone in the village knew they were going to Rae Bareli jail,” said the rape victim’s cousin in Unnao.

Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police O P Singh said the state government is ready to transfer the case to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

Addressing a press conference in Lucknow, the DGP said that the woman was provided with three security guards but they were unable to accompany her as there was no place in the car. Prima facie, Singh said, it appears to be an accident and an “unbiased” probe is on.

“The state government is ready for recommending a CBI probe into the Sunday’s mishap in Raebareli if the victim’s mother or any relative makes any request in this regard,” the officer was quoted as saying by PTI.

The National Commission for Women also expressed concerns over the incident and directed UP DG to ensure fair and speedy investigation into the matter.

National Commission for Women expresses concern regarding Unnao rape survivor & her lawyer being critically injured in an accident that claimed the lives of her 2 aunts; directs UP DG police to ensure fair & speedy investigation into the matter @IndianExpress pic.twitter.com/OwDYaGNo9I — Shalini Nair (@ShaliniNair13) July 29, 2019

Upping the ante against the state government, Samajwadi Party supremo Akhilesh Yadav alleged that it could be a conspiracy to kill her and demanded a CBI probe into the incident. “This incident has links with a BJP MLA and there is a BJP government in the state. There is ‘jungle raaj’ in the state. The criminals are roaming fearlessly. Only a CBI probe will solve this mystery,” Yadav said on Sunday.

So a woman is allegedly raped by a BJP MLA. Her father is beaten up and dies in custody. A key witness dies mysteriously last year. Now her aunt who was also a witness is killed and her lawyer is critically injured in an accident caused by a truck with blackened number plates. — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 29, 2019

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said the road accident of the woman was “shocking”. “The road accident involving the Unnao rape victim is shocking. Where has the CBI probe in this case reached?” she asked on Twitter. “Why is the accused MLA still in the BJP? Why is there laxity in the security of the victim and the witnesses?”

Commenting on the incident, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi slammed the BJP’s ‘Beti bachao beti padhao’ slogan, saying it is “a new special education bulletin for Indian women.” “Don’t ask questions if a BJP MLA is accused of having raped you,” he tweeted.

Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao A new special education bulletin for Indian women. Don’t ask questions if a BJP MLA is accused of having raped you.https://t.co/8ObmmFBl0L — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) July 29, 2019

BSP chief Mayawati has urged the Supreme Court to take cognizance. She said said that prima facie it appears to be a “conspiracy” to kill the survivor. “Her maternal and paternal aunts were killed and she herself and her advocate are seriously injured. The Supreme Court need to take cognizance of the matter and ensure strict action,” she tweeted.

(With PTI and ENS inputs)
