Unnao Rape Complainant Meets With ‘Accident’, But Do You Really Believe It?

Men. Power. Patriarchy. The toxic trio that have caused women in India so much suffering.

All three ingredients can be found in the current uproar over the “accident” the Unnao rape case complainant was involved in yesterday. (I refuse to say “victim”; she is a courageous woman fighting against unbelievable odds.)

How it began

The sordid tale began in June 2017 when a minor girl was raped by BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar, his brother, and other men. She had gone to his residence with a relative looking for a job.

Many would immediately say that she should have gone to the police. Well, she did just that. Repeatedly. Between the time the rape happened and April 2018. Guess what? The police refused to register an FIR.

Of course, during that entire time, the girl’s family was intimidated and threatened. Matters came to a head when the complainant’s father was beaten up by the MLA’s men. In a desperate bid to get the law’s attention, the girl threatened to self-immolate in front of Yogi Adityanath’s home in Lucknow alleging that the Chief Minister was shielding the accused MLA.

In a now predictable turn of events, the complainant’s father was arrested on (probably bogus) charges of possession of firearms. He then died while in custody.

Here’s a fact: According to the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), in the 10-month period, after Adityanath took over power, Uttar Pradesh topped the list of states when it comes to the number of custodial deaths.

In that time period, the state recorded an astonishing 365 judicial deaths out of the total 1,530 deaths recorded in the entire country.

Justice is “seen” to have been done

After the whole country was collectively outraged over the death of the complainant’s father, six policemen were suspended. Police also arrested four men, all associates of the accused MLA, in relation to beating up the complainant’s father.

The case was finally handed over to the CBI after it was clear that the police were completely compromised in their position. The BJP MLA was charged for rape on April 12th, 2018--a year after it took place.

Men band together

However, these were really cosmetic measures. The ruling party’s members continued to behave like Kuldeep Sengar had not been accused of a heinous crime like rape and, indirectly, murder of the complainant’s father.

In fact, Sakshi Maharaj, who stood for the 2019 Lok Sabha election (and won) from Unnao, openly visited the rape accused in jail and “thanked” him for his help in winning the election.

In the latest twist to the saga, the complainant, two women relatives, and her lawyer were travelling from Rae Bareli Jail--where they went to meet her uncle--when their car collided with a truck. It was raining at the time so you would have thought that it was a routine road accident. But, the number plate of the truck was wiped out with black paint. Also, the court designated security detail that was supposed to accompany the complainant was not present.

The girl’s aunt, another woman relative, and her lawyer have now died due to the accident, thereby, severely compromising her ability to fight the rape case in court.

The complainant herself is critically injured and is getting treatment at the KGMU Trauma Centre in Lucknow.

Crime pays

Clearly, rape is no big deal for men in power. It’s par for the course. Nearly half (43%) of the newly elected Lok Sabha have criminal charges against them, according to the Association for Democratic Reforms (ADR). Nearly 29% of these cases are related to rape, murder, attempt to murder or crime against women.

Are women, especially those who are poor and vulnerable, the ones who have to pay the price for the fact that we elect criminals as our leaders? Brave women like the complainant are harassed, their family members murdered, and they face constant threat just because they have the audacity to question and accuse men in power.

It’s time our election system went through a thorough reform so that those in power do not abuse it, especially when many a time, women are at the receiving end of the abuse.




