Unnao rape victim accident: Truck driver missed paying installments, so blackened number plate - Police

Rajeev Krishna, ADG Lucknow Zone on Unnao rape victim's accident | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Police are investigating if the numbers of the driver, cleaner match known numbers of Kuldeep Singh Sengar The police have sought a report on recommending the case to CBI

Unnao: Uttar Pradesh police on Monday said that Unnao rape victim's case appeared to be a case of an accident. Addressing a press conference, Rajeev Krishna, ADG Lucknow Zone said that the truck was financed and the owner had missed paying a few installments, as a result of which the number plate was blackened.

"We are investigating if numbers of driver, cleaner and owner (of the truck) match with known numbers of Kuldeep Singh Sengar (accused in Unnao rape case) and his associates," he said while addressing a press conference.

Two aunts of the victim succumbed to injuries and the victim was critically injured after a car they were travelling in collided with the said truck on Sunday. Unnao MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is the prime accused in the case that involves alleged rape of a minor.

Krishna further said that a 'case is being registered on the complaint of Mahesh Singh (uncle of Unnao rape victim)'. "He has also requested to transfer this case to CBI, we're getting a report on that request, as soon as that report comes it'll be recommended to CBI," he further said.

The forensic team reached the accident spot in Rae Bareli and further investigations are underway. Meanwhile, Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) Swati Maliwal took note of the incident and met the rape victim and her lawyer at the hospital where they are undergoing treatment.

"I met Unnao rape survivor, her lawyer and doctors. The doctors told me that the victim and the lawyer are critical and have less chances of survival. Doctors believe that they should be airlifted to the best hospital in Delhi. The family also wants this. I am talking to the hospital. We will shoulder the responsibility," Maliwal said on Twitter.
