Unnao rape survivor's crash: Didn't want financer's calls, truck owner on painted number plate

Delhi:

A day after Unnao rape survivor’s car met with deadly head-on collision in Rae Bareli, Uttar Pradesh Police Additional Director General (Lucknow Zone) Rajiv Krishna on Monday said that call details of the both the truck driver and the cleaner are being examined. According to Krishna, the owner of the truck has revealed that he didn’t want any calls from the financers, hence he had blackened the number plate of the truck. The cops are investigating the matter. The UP Police is bearing all the expenses of rape survivor’s hospital treatment.

The car in which the rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli on Sunday, killing two members while leaving her and the advocate critically injured, police said. Meanwhile, 5-member team of the CBI has reached the trauma centre where the rape survivors is undergoing treatment.

Briefing the media, ADG (Lucknow Zone) Krishna said that the UP Police had provided 10 constables for the rape survivors security. The UP Police will also conduct recreation of the accident to understand the sequence of the events. A woman belonging to Makhi police station area in Unnao had alleged that Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP Assembly, raped her teenage daughter at his residence in 2017. The case had come to light after the victim allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence.

Meanwhile, the National Commission for Women on Monday urged the Uttar Pradesh police to ensure a free, fair and speedy probe in the case in which a BJP MLA is an accused. NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma said a team of the Commission will visit the victim and her family members in Unnao on Tuesday. They will also hold a meeting with the Uttar Pradesh police to get details of the probe, Sharma said.

On Sunday, the rape survivor, her paternal and maternal aunts along with their advocate met with an accident while on their way to meet her uncle, who is lodged in Rae Bareli jail, police said. The woman's maternal aunt succumbed to injuries in a district hospital and the others were transferred to a trauma centre in Lucknow, police said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
