Unnao rape survivor accident: What happened and what we know so far

The number plate of the truck smudged (left) and the car in which the Unnao rape survivor was travelling.

The Unnao rape case which shocked the nation last year is in news once again as the survivor in the case met with a deadly accident on Sunday and is now battling for her life.

The accident has generated much controversy, with many alleging that it was pre-meditated -- orchestrated by Kuldeep Singh Sengar, the BJP MLA accused of raping the Unnao woman. Even the survivor's family has alleged a conspiracy.

Meanwhile, the UP Police has initiated a forensic probe in the accident and the truck driver has been caught.

Here is what we know so far:

What happened on Sunday?

Are there any casualties in the accident?

What has the victim's family said?

What has the police said?

Was the number plate of the truck blackened?

Was victim's security compromised?

Where is Kuldeep Sengar?

Will there be a CBI probe in the case?

What are the politicians saying?

What is the original rape case?



RAE BARELI ACCIDENTS: TOP QUESTIONS ANSWERED

What happened on Sunday?

At 1.30 pm on Sunday, a car in which the survivor of Unnao rape case, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli. The accident happened while the Unnao rape survivor, her paternal and maternal aunts along with their advocate were on their way to meet her uncle, who is lodged in Rae Bareli jail.

The truck was going from Rae Bareli to Fatehpur while the survivor's car was going from Unnao to Rae Bareli when the accident occurred.

"There were showers and the truck driver lost control over the vehicle which rammed into the car," eyewitnesses said. The truck driver fled from the spot after the accident. He was later arrested.

Are there any casualties in the accident?

Both aunts of the Unnao rape survivor died in the accident, while she and her lawyer are currently in critical condition and are under treatment at the trauma centre in Lucknow.

Doctors at the KGMC trauma centre in Lucknow have said that the survivor is battling for her life. According to the doctors, her lungs were injured in the accident. She was put on a ventilator for a while and the doctors are trying to control her falling blood pressure.

According to the medical report, the victim received fractures on her right collar bone, right hand and right thigh. A few of the ribs on the right side of her body were also broken in the collision.

What has the victim's family said?

The victim's family has called the accident a conspiracy by BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar to silence the survivor. Both her sister and mother have claimed that the BJP MLA is behind the accident.

"It was not an accident but a conspiracy to eliminate all of us," her mother told reporters at Unnao on Monday.

"The son of a co-accused in the case, Shahi Singh, and another youth of the village had threatened us. They said that they will deal with us," she said.

"We have come to know that the MLA's men have done this. He [MLA Kuldeep Sengar] might be in jail but he has a phone. He commands his goons from inside prison. We want justice. Whenever we used to go to court, the [accused] would threaten to kill us and look it has now happened," the survivor's mother told media.

What has the police said?

The police are treating the car collision as an accident that happened due to rains. At a press conference, ADG Rajeev Krishna said that the truck which was carrying construction material from Banda to Rae Bareli was returning to Fatehpur on Sunday when it veered into the survivor's car. The driver, cleaner and owner of the truck have been detained, he added.

Krishna said the woman and her aunt, Pushpa Singh, who died in the incident, were CBI witnesses and the other two were not.

"It was an accident... If there was any conspiracy behind it, it is a matter of probe. All the allegations are being considered and will be part of the probe," the ADG added.

Commenting on the involvement of Sengar, Krishna said, "The version given by the truck's driver, cleaner and owner is being verified. Their call details are being examined to see if they spoke to any of the associates of the BJP MLA."

"We are verifying claims of the driver, owner and eyewitnesses. Tyre marks and sequence of the incident are being also considered during the probe," he said.

"The truck was over-speeding and it was raining also. Prima facie, appears to be an accident, but a detailed unbiased probe is on in the matter," Director General of Police OP Singh told reporters.

"The state government is ready for recommending a CBI probe into the Sunday's mishap in Rae Bareli if the victim's mother or any relative makes any request in this regard," Singh said.

Was the number plate of the truck blackened?

After media reports pointed out that the number plate of the truck which collided with the Unnao survivor's car was blackened, police confirmed the same.

A police team that rushed to the spot in Rae Bareli after the accident found that the truck's registration plate was scrubbed and painted black, but they could retrieve the registration number UP 71 AT 8300, a police official said.

The truck has a Fatehpur district registration plate, Lucknow Zone ADG Rajeev Krishna said.

On reports that the number plate on the truck was blackened, the ADG said, "As per the owners claim, he did so to hide the number plate as the truck was financed and he did not give due instalments".

Was victim's security compromised?

After she accused the BJP MLA of rape, the Unnao woman was put under a security detail by the police. However, her security cover was not present with her when the accident occurred on Sunday.

One gunner and two women constables have been assigned round-the-clock duty for the safety of the survivor and her family, but they were not present at the time of the accident.

Police have denied claims of a security lapse. DGP OP Singh said that seven security personnel were posted at her home and three were there to accompany her on Sunday. "As there was no space in the car, the survivor did not take the security men with her," he said.

ADG Rajeev Krishna said, "There were already four people in the woman's car and another passenger was to sit with them in Rae Bareli. Because there was no space in the car, the woman did not take the gunner with her."

The gunner on duty, Suresh Kumar also clarified his absence. He said, "The survivor had herself told me that she does not need security as there is no space in her Swift Dzire car. The woman and her aunt had said that there is no problem, we will go on our own as we are five people, you don't worry, we will return in the evening."

Where is Kuldeep Sengar?

While Sengar is currently in jail in connection with the rape case, his family members fled Unnao after news of the accident came.

Sengar's sister and his aides, who lived in the Makhi village of Unnao district, are reportedly missing after the accident.

Will there be a CBI probe in the case?

While currently the investigation is being carried out by the UP Police, the CBI is said to be keeping close tabs on the probe.

UP Police has also said that they are ready to transfer the case to CBI if the woman's family demands one.

"The state government is ready for recommending a CBI probe into the Sunday's mishap in Rae Bareli if the victim's mother or any relative makes any request in this regard," UP DGP OP Singh said.

An FIR has been registered in Rae Bareli on the complaint of Mahesh Singh, the woman's uncle who is lodged in district jail, said Rajeev Krishna, the additional director general, Lucknow zone,

"We have got a complaint in this regard by Mahesh Singh through the jailer and registration of an FIR is in process in Rae Bareli," Krishna said. "He has also given an application requesting a CBI probe into the matter. As soon as we get the letter, as the DGP has already said, a CBI probe may be recommended."

What are the politicians saying?

The accident has caused a political storm with politician after politician slamming the BJP government and the UP Police.

"Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao. A new special education bulletin for Indian women. Don't ask questions if a BJP MLA is accused of having raped you," Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said in a tweet, tagging a media report on the accident.

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee said, "The actual truth must come...The CBI is under the PM's office...and they can send a letter to everyone...then at least take action in these cases."

SP chief Akhilesh Yadav said the accident could be a murder. "Police are saying the accident happened due to rain, they are speaking the language of those who are sitting above them in government. Samajwadi Party had raised victim's voice back then, & did same in Parliament, today," he said.

Linking the BJP to a road accident involving the Unnao rape survivor's car, CPI (M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury said on Monday that the government's 'Beti Bachao' slogan was a "grim warning in this context" as the sexual assault case was against a ruling party lawmaker.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said that the accident was "shocking" and wondered whether any hope for justice can be expected from the ruling BJP.

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi called the accident a bid to silence the survivor. "The victim had clearly stated that she wants CBI inquiry. This is no accident this is an attempt to shut the mouth of justice for that girl. Everyone wants justice in this case. Justice has been killed in UP," he said.

BSP chief Mayawati alleged of a conspiracy in the accident and demanded the Supreme Court to intervene.

Rajya Sabha proceedings were also briefly adjourned on Monday following uproar by Opposition parties over the road accident. Six Congress MPs also gave an Adjournment Motion notice in Lok Sabha over 'accident of Unnao rape victim showing absolute lawlessness of Uttar Pradesh government.'

What is the original rape case?

A woman belonging to Makhi police station area in Unnao had alleged that Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP assembly, raped her teenage daughter at his home in 2017.

The case had come to light after the victim allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence.

When the kin of the victim complained, her father was booked by the police under the Arms Act on April 3, 2018, and put in jail after two days. Last year, the father of the rape victim had died in the prison where he was kept on alleged false charges under the Arms Act. He was allegedly beaten up by the brother of the MLA and his aides while in prison.
