Bombay High Court asks Binoy Kodiyeri to undergo DNA test in rape case

Bombay High Court asks Binoy Kodiyeri to undergo DNA test in rape case

A complaint filed against Binoy by a Mumbai-based woman at the Oshiwara police station said that she has an eight-year-old child born out of the relationship.

news Court

In a major twist in the rape case in which Binoy Kodiyeri is accused, the Bombay High Court has asked him to undergo a DNA test.

TNM confirmed that a division bench of the High Court has also directed the accused to submit the examination result at the court in two weeks in a sealed envelope.

The court has adjourned the matter till August 26.

According to a report in Mathrubhumi, the police informed the court that they have served him notice to undergo the test and hence HC has asked him to give the blood samples for the test on Tuesday.

Binoy Kodiyeri is the son of Kerala CPI(M) state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan. A woman, who is a native of Bihar and a resident of Mumbai, has filed a case against Binoy accusing him of raping her for years on the fake promise of marriage.

Binoy has approached the High Court seeking to quash the FIR in the case. The complaint also said that the woman has an eight-year-old child born out of the relationship, and the police’s argument is that DNA test is needed to prove the claim.

Binoy has been reluctant to undergo the test, on the argument that the HC was yet to pronounce judgment on his plea to cancel the FIR.

Meanwhile, an audio clip was aired by a section of the media claiming that it was Binoy's conversation with the complainant in which he is heard telling the woman that he won’t be able to give Rs 5 crore as demanded by the woman to settle the case and to change her name in the passport and other documents.

Binoy, after the woman filed the complaint at the Oshiwara station on June 13, said that the woman had been blackmailing him and he has filed a complaint with the Kannur Range IG in this regard.

Binoy had been absconding and the Dindoshi branch of the city civil and sessions court in Mumbai granted anticipatory bail for Binoy on July 3.

Kodiyeri as well as the CPI(M) have taken the stand that the party won’t protect the accused and it is for him to fight it legally.
