Tired of inaction, alleged rape survivor immolates herself at police station in Rajasthan

The survivor's husband alleged that his wife had been raped by a 29-year-old man (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The woman has been admitted to Sawai Man Singh Hospital The incident is said to have taken place on July 28

Jaipur: Tired of waiting for justice to be served, an alleged rape survivor immolated herself at a police station in Rajasthan. The police said on Monday that the woman had not been raped. The incident took place late evening on Sunday, July 28. The 35-year-old woman took the drastic step as there was no progress in her case. She is undergoing treatment at Sawai Man Singh hospital and is in a critical condition.

A case of rape had been registered at Vaishali police station but no progress had been made in the same. The woman accused the police of inaction and said that they were pestering her to take back her case.

Anand Srivastava, Jaipur Commissioner of Police said, "She went with her relative to various places like Udaipur, Delhi, Ajmer, Nainital, Delhi over a period of time. We enquired from the staff of the hotels and guest houses they stayed, we also checked the CCTV footages, all the investigation till now suggests that she was not raped."

The police said that the woman had come to the office with her son on Sunday and all of a sudden, she set herself ablaze. Following this, the woman was rushed to the hospital. A magistrate also visited the survivor at the hospital and recorded her statement.

Woman harassed by BJD candidate pours kerosene on self outside Odisha CM's house

In April this year, a woman attempted to set herself on fire outside the residence of Odisha's Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik. The woman alleged that she had been sexually harassed by a candidate of Biju Janata Dal (BJD). The woman was rescued by the security staff standing outside Patnaik's house and was taken to a hospital.

According to the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), Bhubaneswar, Anup Sahoo, the woman poured kerosene on her body but was rescued by the security personnel before she could set herself on fire. The woman said that she had been sexually harassed by Srinath Soren, BJD candidate of Udala assembly constituency of Mayubhanj. The woman allegedly resorted to taking the drastic step as no action had been taken against the accused.

Hyderabad: Humiliated after drunk neighbour barges into her house, woman sets herself ablaze

In an incident from the month of March, a woman allegedly set herself on fire after a drunk neighbour walked into her house in Hayathnagar, Hyderabad. Humiliated by the incident, the woman poured kerosene on herself and set herself ablaze.

The woman used to live in the house with her husband, who was identified as K Ramesh. The accused, Naresh allegedly knocked on the door and the woman answered. Naresh entered into the house and started asking her about Ramesh. After this, the woman asked her children to go outside the house and immolated herself.
