Alleging police inaction in rape case, woman kills self

Jaipur, July 29 : A woman who immolated herself on Sunday, protesting the inaction of police on her rape complaint, died on Monday at SMS Hospital, officials said.

The incident ocurred at Vaishali Nagar police station, police said, adding a police team tried to douse the fire and admitted her in SMS Hospital where she succumbed on Monday, police said.

Police sources said she had filed a complaint a month ago accusing Ravindra Singh of raping her for four years. She also alleged the accused filmed the crime and was threatening her to make it viral. Despite her regular follow-ups with the police, no action was taken, "which left her upset, forcing her to take the extreme step", said a government source.

The Police Commissionerate in a press note said, "The victim had lodged a complaint against her brother-in-law on June 5 for allegedly raping her for the last four years." The accused offered her help as her husband, an Army person, was posted out of the city. The accused once called her at a hotel where he raped her and filmed the crime.

While investigating the case, Vaishali Nagar SHO Sanjay Godhara traced the recordings and chats of the accused and the victim. The two had developed a consensual relation. The woman along with her son used to travel with the accused, said the press note.

She had also bought a mobile phone for the accused in her name. Had it been a forceful imposition, her son could have spoken about it. In fact, the hotel staff, where they both went together, confirmed that they were seen happily together, said a police officer.

The press note further said that reports confirm that their relationship took a turn for the worse after the engagement of the accused and she logdge a rape complaint.

On Sunday, she visited Vaishali Nagar police station around 3 p.m. with her son asking for the investigating police officer. She was informed that he is out for some official task. She then immolated herself by dousing herself in kerosene. She was rushed to a hospital where she succumbed to her injuries at 4.45 a.m., said the police press note.
