FIR against BJP MLA, 25 others after Unnao rape survivor''s accident

kavishakohli@gmail.com

Shahira Naim

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, July 29

An FIR has been registered against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and 25 others, including his brother Manoj Sengar, in connection with the road accident in Rae Bareli on Sunday that killed two members of the Unnao gangrape survivor’s family and left her and a lawyer injured.

The case has been lodged on the basis of her uncle’s formal complaint with the Rae Bareli police naming the Unnao MLA, his brother and an associate, Rinku.

The FIR has been lodged under IPC Sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 120B (criminal conspiracy) against 10 named and 15-20 unnamed persons.

Besides the gangrape, the custodial death of the survivor’s father is being investigated by the CBI.

The rape survivor’s uncle (chacha) has demanded the CBI to also probe the road accident in which his wife, and the survivor’s ‘chachi’, and her maternal aunt (mausi) died and the survivor herself was critically injured.

She is in coma and on ventilator.

Her lawyer was also injured in the accident and is undergoing treatment at the King George Medical University’s Trauma Centre.

Speaking to reporters, ADG (Lucknow Zone) Rajiv Krishna said on the basis of the complaint of the uncle, Mahesh, presently lodged in Rae Bareli jail in an unrelated case, appealing for the accident case to be attached to the ongoing CBI case, the police lodged the FIR.

Once the paper work is complete the state government would recommend a CBI probe, said the ADG.

The gang rape survivor’s mother has, meanwhile, alleged a conspiracy in the accident. She claimed the accident was meant to eliminate the survivor and members of her family standing with her against the powerful BJP MLA from Unnao Kuldeep Senger, his brother Atul Singh and their aides who are in jail on charges of rape and the custodial death of the survivor’s father.

ADG Krishna said contrary to news appearing in a section of the media only two occupants in the car were witnesses in the ongoing CBI case – Pushpa, the survivor’s ‘chachi’, who was killed and the survivor herself.

Doctors tending to her described her condition as serious. She had suffered extensive fractures including in the ribs, collarbone, an arm, a leg and is in coma on ventilator.

The other woman killed in the accident was not the mother as earlier reported but, the maternal aunt (mausi) of the survivor, the ADG clarified.

The state government would bear the full cost of the treatment of the injured, he added. The other injured person under treatment is the lawyer, who was driving the car.

According to the ADG, prima facie it appears to be a case of road accident. The truck has been seized and the driver, cleaner and owner of the truck have been arrested and are being interrogated.

A forensic team has been sent from Lucknow to the accident spot which will establish the sequence of events and collect evidence to ascertain if it was indeed an accident or there was more to it.

The ADG said it was raining heavily at the time of the accident and it is very likely that the truck collided head-on due to it being a single road without a divider.

He said the truck driver had come from Banda with a load of sand which he had unloaded in Rae Bareli, collected the cash and was returning to Fatehpur when it met with the accident.

On the blackened number plate, the driver has told the police that the truck was financed and as the owner had defaulted on payment the number plate was blackened to avoid detection.

The ADG said the driver and owner’s statements were being independently verified and their phone records being checked.

Refuting claims of any laxity in the security of the gangrape survivor, the ADG said she had been provided with nine security personnel. Three were permanently posted at her Delhi residence while one male and two female security personnel took turns to guard her outside the house.

ADG Krishna said the personal security guard had been told that there were already four people travelling in the sedan and another person was to be picked up from Rae Bareli, hence there was no space for the security guard.

Confirming this version, the survivor’s gunner Suresh Kumar told reporters that the deceased ‘chachi’ had asked him not to accompany them as there was no space in the car and they were returning by the evening.

The ADG assured that all the allegations being made by the family suspecting foul play would be thoroughly investigated.

The case hit the national headlines after the gangrape survivor and her mother had attempted to immolate themselves in front of Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s official residence on April 8, 2018 complaining against the police refusal to lodge a case against the BJP MLA and the police picking up her father instead.

On April 5, 2018 the survivor’s father was arrested and accused of possessing illegal arms. He died in custody on April 9 allegedly after being beaten up by the MLA’s brother Atul Sengar and his men. The post-mortem report had confirmed extensive injuries.

Following the survivor’s mother’s plea the Allahabad High Court ordered a CBI probe and the MLA was arrested on April 14. He along with his brother and other close associates is in jail since then.

Strangely, a key witness in the attack on the gangrape survivor’s father subsequently causing his death on April 9, 2018 died a few months later on August 18 at his Unnao residence.

Mohammad Yunus (32), who ran a grocery shop at the intersection in the Makhi area of Unnao where the gangrape survivor’s father was first attacked by the BJP MLA’s brother, suddenly died reportedly due to illness.

Meanwhile, her uncle lodged in Rae Bareli jail has asked for parole to perform the last rites of his wife who was a witness and died in the car crash on Sunday.
