ASI’s brute force meets boot force

assaulting woman

Assistant Sub Inspector

policeman assaulting

ASI

Bengaluru

Suspended forin KS Layout police stationAn alleged attempt to ensure the safety of a child marriage victim from her own mother and family members by KS Layout police ended on an ugly note when anlost his cool and slapped her mother. Some other male constables then pushed her out of the station as she was trying to forcefully take her daughter back to their native place in Andhra Pradesh, something that the policemen were trying to prevent.The incident came to the notice of senior police officials only after the video of thethe woman went viral. Strangely, the video was shot by his colleagues as the woman threatened to commit suicide in front of the police station. Senior officers are peeved that the police officials themselves leaked the video.The incident has happened on January 20 and DCP (South) has sought an explanation from the station inspector as to why the incident was not brought to his notice then. An Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) has been asked to conduct an enquiry about the incident and to submit a detailed report to ascertain if any other policeman assaulted the woman.Renukaiah, thehas been suspended with immediate effect pending department enquiry by DCP K Annamalai.On January 20, the KS Layout police got a message from the police control room stating that few persons from Andhra Pradesh were trying to kidnap a, 18-year-old girl working in a hotel. When the girl was rescued, the police realised that the kidnapping attempt was being made by none other than her mother.The girl then told the police that her mother’s brother married her off when she was all of 11. After living with her husband’s family for six years, she escaped from Andhra Pradesh and came tolooking for work. When her husband and other family members came to know her location, they tried to take her away forcibly.The girl escaped again and started working in a hotel in KS Layout police station limits. When they reached the hotel, she called up the police control room.At the KS Layout police station, her mother started creating a scene and tried to take her away forcibly. The lone police woman at the station tried her best to stop her.Just then, the ASI returned to the police station and saw the hullabaloo. He then slapped the woman.“The issue should have been handed calmly. Even the City Police Commissioner has taken a serious note of the incident. The ASI has been suspended with immediate effect. Even I got to know about the incident only after seeing the video which went viral. I have sought an explanation from the Inspector as to why I was not kept informed about the incident. Even though the police did their best in rescuing the woman from the hotel and trying to avoid her family members from taking her away from the police station, the ASI should have handled the situation calmly instead assaulting the victim’s mother,” DCP Annamalai said.The Karnataka State Women Commission has also taken note of the incident.
