Delhi: Gang of six who abducted truck driver held, Rs 6 lakhs recovered

Six people including the kingpin have been arrested in connection with the abduction of a truck driver and looting of the truck in east Delhi's Akshardham, from Chambal in Madhya Pradesh on Monday. Police have recovered cash amounting to six lakhs and stolen items from their possession.

According to the police, the accused have been identified as Sonu (25), Mohan (23), Vipin (27), Dilip (50), Rajesh (28), Lokesh (28), who had looted the truck and abducted the driver.

On the night of December 27, 2018, two persons dressed as police officers stopped a truck driver, identified as Vipin Kumar, near the Akshardham Flyover. The truck contained cartons of Shikhar Pan Masala.

"As Kumar got off the truck, they overpowered him and abducted him while other members of the same gang took off with the truck. They later abandoned the driver along with the empty truck near Timarpur. Following this, a case under relevant sections was registered at Mayur Vihar Police Station. The complainant told the police that the truck had a GPS installed in it. Police team analysed the movement of the truck found that it had stopped for a considerable time at a place near Siraspur in Outer North District," a senior police officer said.

The police located the spot where the items were unloaded and, with the help of the CCTV footage, found that stolen items were transported to many places using local transporters of Siraspur. The team successfully identified all the local transporters.

During the investigation, the kingpins were identified as two brothers named Sonu and Mahesh, alias Monu. The two were known to have been history-sheeters and had managed to escape several times.

"In spite of searching their hideouts in Sirsapur, Sonia Vihar and Tronica City, we could not find them. Meanwhile, one of their associates was arrested from Rohini by the Crime Branch and Amit and Rohit were arrested by the Swaroop Nagar Police. After this, the police conducted raids in Swaroop Nagar and discovered the whereabouts of Sonu and Monu in Chambal district of Madhya Pradesh and arrested them. On their instance, further recovery of Pan Masala cartons was made and Rs 6 lakhs cash received through the sale of stolen items was also recovered," a senior police officer said.

During interrogation, the gang revealed that they used to identify trucks in various industrial areas used for delivery of expensive and quick selling items. They would then waylay them, posing as police staff and either loot entire trucks or some portion of the items loaded on the truck. They would then contact their network of receivers known to purchase stolen items. Over the years they purchased property and cars by selling stolen items, police said.
