3 years on, struggle continues for Bulandshahr rape survivors

GHAZIABAD: She should have been in Class XI now, preparing for her boards and the life of opportunities that lies ahead. But since 2016, she has changed schools thrice, haunted continuously by victim-shaming. Now, even her 10th boards are in jeopardy.The 14-year-old girl (now 17) who was gang-raped by highway robbers — they waylaid her family’s car at night in Bulandshahr and sexually assaulted the teenager and her mother in 2016 — has been living through nightmare after another since.Her family hasn’t managed to move out of their old neighbourhood in Ghaziabad, where they have been branded “the victims” and where harassment and teasing by local youths has been increasing."Six months back, three men on a motorcycle passed lewd comments at my daughter and snatched her mobile phone when she was coming home from her tuition,” said the father of the teenage rape-survivor, adding he had expected people to display more sensitivity but his family was constantly made the butt of jokes.The family is also yet to receive the compensation promised by the government. He recalled the several promises made by the Akhilesh Yadav government — most of which remain undelivered. The Nirbhaya Fund and the financial support for the education of the girl are yet to reach their bank accounts, he claimed. According to data released by the government recently, states and Union territories have failed to spend even half of the Nirbhaya Fund that the Centre disbursed since its introduction in 2015.He alleged he had made 51 appeals to the government but received no response. He also claimed his wife had still not got the job she was promised and that the family is under strain both emotionally and financially.“After the incident, politicians came to my house with promises. Now, not a single call comes from them to ask whether we are dead or alive,” he said, adding that they even promised to bear the expenses of his daughter’s wedding. “My wife and daughter continue to suffer from the trauma of being sexually assaulted. They are plagued by nightmares,” he said.When asked, Ajay Shankar Pandey, the new district magistrate of Ghaziabad, said he had been busy with the kanwar yatra ever since he took charge. “Soon, I will check the details, and their demands will be fulfilled,” he added.Former Noida MLA and UP State Commission for Women chairperson Vimla Batham said she was willing to help. “They have to write a complaint to the commission so that we can try to find a solution for them,” she added.
