#HumanityDead: Police Inaction Led Jaipur Rape Survivor To Set Herself On Fire

Four rape complaints surface every hour according to the National Crime Records Bureau of India. Then there are cases that don’t even get registered or brought to notice. The ones who do, leaving behind all their inhibitions, are subjected to police inaction and delayed justice.

Recently, a 35-year-old woman from Jaipur who was allegedly raped by her relative, set herself on fire in front of Vaishali Nagar police station in Jaipur. Reason? Police inaction. The lady was soon rushed to the nearest hospital where she battled for her life with 60% burn injuries. The police has been ignorant towards the case registered, didn’t arrest the accused, and the investigation has not progressed even an inch in the past two months.

Here’s what the officials have to say

Talking about the incident, Additional DCP Bajrang Singh said, “Yesterday, a woman, who was the rape survivor came inside the police station asking for SHO. The SHO was not there and after a while, she went outside the police station and sent her child to bring a pen for her. After that, she set herself ablaze. One of our constables got injured while trying to diffuse the flames. The woman was taken to hospital but she died of her injuries later in the evening yesterday. On June 5 this year, the woman had registered a case of rape against a person who was her relative. She had alleged that the accused had raped her several times over the past four years. The rape case was registered after the accused got engaged. The case was under investigation.”

Victim’s husband on police inaction and zero investigation

Talking about the negligence by the police, the victim’s husband said, “For the past two months, the investigation has not moved even an inch. Instead, police targeted my wife and hounded her as though she was an accused. One Assistant Commissioner of Police had been forcing her to withdraw the case. Fed up, she set herself on fire on Sunday.”

Justice delayed is justice denied, indeed

It's shocking to see how the incompetent investigation of the police led a rape victim set herself ablaze. It's even more disheartening to learn that the men in power compelled her to withdraw the case and held her responsible--leading to the death of a rape survivor pleading for justice. If this isn't a wake up call for our police and judiciary to speed up their investigation, prioritize sexual assault cases, and with much conviction, then humanity is in danger.




