'Suleh kar loh, jaan bach jayegi': New FIR reveals threat and horror Unnao rape victim went through

Follow us on Protest held at India Gate demanding justice for Unnao rape survivor

Unnao Rape Case Latest News Updates: As the Unnao rape survivor battles for her life on a hospital bed in Lucknow's King George's Medical College, her uncle's FIR has revealed how the entire family was under constant threat and pressure to withdraw the case in which BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar is prime accused.

The FIR states that how there was a threat to life if the case was not withdrawn.

"Suleh kar lo, Jaan bach jayegi [Life will be spared if you do a compromise]," FIR copy has revealed. "When Unnao ASP Ramlal Verma can be targeted, you can imagine what chance you stand," the FIR in Hindi narrates the threat. "You don't know the might of an MLA," it further alleges.

Image Source : TWITTER FIR copy of Unnao rape case

The case was registered on a complaint from the rape survivor's uncle Mahesh Singh, who is lodged in the Raebareli jail, police said. Mahesh Singh alleged that the BJP MLA used to call his family members from his associates' phones and put pressure on them to change their statements in court if they wanted to stay alive.

The FIR, in which 15-20 unnamed people were also mentioned, was registered at the Gurubuxganj police station in Raebareli, they said. "FIR has been registered under the Indian Penal Code's sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder), 506 (criminal intimidation), 120b (criminal conspiracy) against 10 named persons, including the BJP MLA, and 15-20 others," a police officer said.

On Sunday, the car in which the Unnao rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an overspeeding truck in Rae Bareli. The two persons in the car died while the advocate and the Unnao rape survivor were brought to Lucknow hospital in critical condition.

Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the Uttar Pradesh assembly, was arrested in 2018 in connection with the alleged rape incident that took place in 2017.

District Magistrate, Raebareli, Neha Sharma, while talking to reporters said: "I with SP visited the Raebareli jail and met Mahesh Sharma. He had given application for parole and as he is resident of Unnao it has been forwarded to the Unnao DM."

"He also gave two other applications. One for registration of FIR on which it has already been registered and the other for CBI probe into the matter. This application has been forwarded to Principal Secretary, Home," the DM added.

A truck hit the car carrying the rape survivor, her family and lawyer when they were going to meet Mahesh Singh on Sunday. Two-- Sheela (50) and Pushpa (45) -- were killed in the accident.

Besides the BJP legislator, his brother Manoj Singh Sengar, Vinod Mishra, Haripal Singh, Naveen Singh, Komal Singh, Arun Singh, Gyanendra Singh, Rinku Singh and Awadhesh Singh have been named in the FIR.

The rape survivor's uncle alleged that the MLA got the car hit on Sunday. "I am sure that the car was hit for killing all of them by the BJP MLA and his men," he said in his complaint.

He claimed that several complaints were made by his family members through registry post and other ways but nothing was done. "Kuldeep Sengar's men also used to say the entire government is with us and asked us to make a comprise," the rape survivor's uncle said in the complaint.

He alleged he was transferred from Unnao to Raebareli jail as part of a conspiracy.

"I had requested officials to keep me in Unnao jail otherwise my family members will be killed on the way when they come to Raebareli to meet me..." he alleged.

Meanwhile, the condition of the survivor and his lawyer Mahendra Singh is critical and both of them are on a ventilator, said Incharge of Trauma Centre (KGMU), Dr Sandeep Tiwari.

Both have multiple fractures and head and rib injuries, Dr Tiwari added.

When asked whether there is a need to airlift them to another hospital, Dr Tiwari said that KGMU had all the facilities for the treatment but the decision has to be taken by the government.

Also Read: Unnao rape survivor accident: UP govt recommends CBI probe, Sengar charged with murder. Here's what we know so far

Also Read: Unnao rape survivour accident: Case filed against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, 9 others

Also Read: Unnao rape victim's road accident raised in LS
