Unnao rape case: Opposition ups the ante against Yogi govt; Priyanka, Rahul Gandhi ‘likely to meet survivor'

Congress workers staged protests in Lucknow over the Unnao rape case on Tuesday | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Congress workers staged protests in Lucknow over Unnao rape case Sources said Priyanka and Rahul Gandhi are likely to meet the rape survivor at the hospital The Unnao rape survivor met with a car accident on Sunday, in which her two aunts lost their lives

Lucknow/New Delhi: Opposition on Tuesday upped the ante against the Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government in Uttar Pradesh following the deadly car accident of Unnao rape survivor and her family near Rae Bareli on Sunday.

Congress workers staged protests outside the BJP state office in Lucknow as well as outside the Vidhan Sabha, slamming the BJP government and demanding action against the rape accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

Sources also told Times Now that former Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi were likely to meet the survivor and her family at the trauma centre in Lucknow where she was undergoing treatment.

Meanwhile, MPs belonging to the Samajwadi Party and Trinamool Congress staged a protest in front of Mahatma Gandhi’s statue at the Parliament premises in the national capital earlier today over “attack on Unnao rape victim and an ex-soldier being beaten to death in UP’s Amethi.”

Speaking to reporters, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav, who had termed the accident as a “possible murder conspiracy” said that the accident of the Unnao rape victim was “ unfortunate and condemnable.”

He said, “Accident of Unnao rape victim is unfortunate and condemnable. It has shocked women of the country. Her father was beaten by police on instructions of BJP leaders, FIR was registered after she tried to immolate herself. It's natural that people are questioning the government and the BJP MLA.”

Meanwhile, the Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma met the rape survivor at King George’s Medical University in Lucknow and said that her family had the support of the government.

He said, “Government is with the family of the victim, FIR has been registered as they said. The family had submitted a parole application for the uncle of the victim, the court has taken a decision. He will come and take part in the cremation.”

The 19-year-old rape survivor was travelling with her lawyer and her two aunts on Sunday night to visit her uncle in Rae Bareli jail when the car she was travelling in was hit by a speeding truck.

While the teenager and the lawyer were critically wounded, her two aunts who were accompanying her were killed in the accident.

The National Commission for Women (NCW) said that their team had reached Lucknow to meet the rape victim, her family, and senior police officials including the DGP, IO, and SSP today. They said that while the team was able to meet the victim's mother, the doctors advised them to not meet the teenager while she is undergoing treatment for accident-related injuries. The NCW team will later meet the UP DGP today, July 30.

Meanwhile, the Uttar Pradesh government on Monday sought the Centre’s nod to transfer the case of the Unnao rape survivor’s accident to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

Unnao BJP MLA Sengar, who is currently in jail for the rape case, has been booked by the police on charges of criminal conspiracy and murder in connection with the rape victim’s accident.


