13 Heartwarming Moments That Prove The World Isn't Such A Bad Place After All

With all the sad news that we hear everyday, it’s rather easy to forget that kindness and optimism still exists in the world. Good always outweighs the bad. All we need is to hold on to the hope and belief that the world isn't such a bad place after all. Here are some inspirational stories that will restore your faith in humanity.

1. Selfless men worked 24x7 to save wild animals from Assam floods.

Meet the selfless men working 24x7 to save wild animals from Assam floods. The Assam floods have been devastating, not just for the over 55 lakh people who have been affected, but to a large population of wildlife too and these people are devoting their efforts to save them.

2. Yellow soldier volunteers are extending help in Bihar flood victims.

This group of student volunteers is extending help flood victims. Northeast India is under the grip of devastating flood and rain, causing millions of people to flee and look for shelter. Assam is also reeling under severe flood. In Bihar, flood and incessant rain have claimed at least 78 lives and affected 55 lakh people.

thelogicalindian

3. Mumbaikars form a human chain to remove debris after 100-YO building collapses.

Twelve persons had died after a 100-year-old, four-storey building collapsed in South Mumbai’s congested Dongri area. After this accident, residents came together and formed a human chain to remove debris with their bare hands to rescue those who are trapped underneath.

BCCL

4. An old Sikh man braves the killing Delhi heat to provide drinking water to others

Large swathes of the country were under the grip of a relentless heatwave in last month, with Churu in Rajasthan recording a high temperature of 50.8 degree Celsius. In Delhi, the mercury touched a high of 41.5 degree Celsius, and it’s only predicted to get worse. Despite this, one Sikh man set a goal to help out fellow pedestrians.

5. Chandrahati village beat Encephalitis, while over 100 kids died in Bihar

Children were dying due to widespread Encephalitis and absence of required medical attention. Almost every second home is mourning in the city of Muzaffarpur due to deaths.

Ten kilometres away from Muzaffarpur, Chandrahati comes under Kudhani block. Ever since the vicious cycle of deaths began in Bihar, this village took guards against the disease. Every single household made sure that they had to save the kids in the town.

6. Locals in Lucknow turn saviours as two saffron goons thrash Kashmiri vendors

Kashmiris living outside the state, running a business or studying in colleges across the country were at the receiving end of the backlash following the Pulwama terror attack in which over 40 CRPF personnel were martyred. In a shameful incident two Kashmiri street vendors selling dry fruits on in Uttar Pradesh’s capital Lucknow were assaulted for being Kashmiris. Two days later however the vendors were back at the same spot and the city of Lucknow showered them with love.

7. Never-say-die spirit of the people of Odisha in the wake of Cyclone Fani

Categorised as ‘extremely severe’ Cyclone Fani that hit the coast of Odisha on May 3 at 8 am. With wind speeds up to 210 km/h and heavy rainfall lashing the coastal belts, large areas in the seaside pilgrim town of Puri and other places were submerged in water. Heavy rains battered the entire coastal belt of the state, and three people lost their lives.

People of Odisha and the forces showed a lot of courage and dedication in this challenging time, and these pictures are the proof:

(a) Security guards of a private company balancing with a rope and helping rescue people

Odisha television

(b) Lady officer making all the possible efforts to evacuate every single person to the safety.

Twitter

8. Chhattisgarh collector helps 6-YO girl get out of prison & enroll in school.

A Chhattisgarh district collector is on a mission to get kids living in Bilaspur prison out and into the real world. He has taken the initiative to enroll all of these kids, including six-year-old girl Kushi* in school. The collector named Dr. Sanjay Alang spotted Kushi when he visited the jail during a routine inspection.

ANI

Mumbai rains make things miserable every year for those who get stuck on the railway stations and roads in waist-deep waters. Mumbaikars have been offering help to host anyone who is stranded anywhere in the city. Not just Mumbai Police, but citizens have also taken the initiative to help out fellow Mumbaikars.

Reuters

10. A humble man who is helping 1000 slum kids get the education

Education is perhaps the best gift one can give to a person and especially to those who can’t afford it themselves. Bhan Singh Jassi, a Sangrur based philanthropist, runs six schools for poor children with the help of 20 teachers in Sherpur, Barnala, Longewal, Sangrur, Dhuri, Patiala and Sirhind and that too without any government help.

FB

11. Sri Lankans line up to donate blood to save lives of blast survivors.

Three explosions took place in different churches and three more in hotels. The seventh explosion took place near the Colombo Zoo in Dehiwala. After these shocking attacks, several Sri Lankans have taken to social media to request people to donate blood. Sri Lankan people were not only condemned the attacks but also encouraged fellow Sri Lankans to show support for the victims by donating their blood.

AFP

12. A Sikh man takes off turban to help a bleeding woman

In a great display of humanity, a Sikh boy converted his turban into a band-aid to help a bleeding woman. The story came from Jammu and Kashmir where Manjeet Singh, 20 from Dewar, Tral used his turban to plug the injury of a Muslim lady after she had hit by a truck near Awantipora.

Kashmirilife

13. During Kerala floods, Religious communities open doors to help homeless people

When Kerala was fighting an unprecedented battle to stay afloat in the worst flooding the region had witnessed in nearly a century, millions of people across the state were forced out of their homes. It was then that religious communities open doors to help homeless people.

AFP
