In a big achievement, JeM commander involved in deadly Anantnag attack gunned down in J&K encounter

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The terrorist, identified as Fayaz Panzoo was killed along with his associates Panzoo was involved in last month’s Anantnag attack The identity of the other slain militant is yet to be ascertained

Srinagar: In a major breakthrough, security forces gunned down a self-styled 'commander' of Jaish-e-Mohammed during an encounter in Anantnag district of Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday.

The terrorist, identified as Fayaz Panzoo was killed along with his associate, Jammu and Kashmir Police said, terming it a “big achievement”.

The JeM terrorist was involved in last month’s Anantnag attack in which five CRPF jawans lost their lives and SHO Arshad Khan was seriously injured and later succumbed to injuries.

“Big achievement. Another top Commander of #Jaish Fayaz Panzoo killed along with his associate. He was involved in attack on CRPF at Anantnag town on June 12, 2019 in which 5 CRPF Personnel were killed & SHO Arshad Khan was seriously injured who later succumbed to injuries,” the J&K Police said on Twitter.

Big achievement.Another top Commander of #Jaish Fayaz Panzoo killed along with his associate. He was involved in attack on CRPF at Anantnag town on June 12,2019 in which 5 CRPF Personnel were killed & SHO Arshad Khan was seriously injured who later succumbed to injuries. https://t.co/DCJLmJvyLS — J&K Police (@JmuKmrPolice) July 30, 2019

The identity of the other slain militant is yet to be ascertained, J&K DGP, Dilbagh Singh said.

DGP J&K, Dilbagh Singh on Anantnag encounter: 2 militants killed. Fayaz Thokar, of Tral, was a Jaish-e-Mohammed commander&was very active here. He was a co-conspirator of attack on CRPF in Anantnag which claimed lives of 5 jawans. Identity of other terrorist is being ascertained. pic.twitter.com/SSc7ETqnO1 — ANI (@ANI) July 30, 2019

Based on a specific police input about the presence of terrorist at Bijbehara in Anantnag district, the police team earlier today launched a search operation in the area. When the terrorists spotted the search team, they opened fire on them, leading to a fierce gunbattle.

On June 12, Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists targeted a patrol team of the CRPF, killing five personnel of the paramilitary force.

After the encounter broke out, military and security personnel posted in nearby areas reached the spot to tackle the terrorists.

Arshad Khan, who was the Station House Officer (SHO) of Saddar police station in Anantnag also rushed to the site. Khan was shot by the terrorists as soon he stepped out of his official bulletproof vehicle.

Khan was immediately rushed to Delhi’s premier All India Institute of Medical Sciences in a critical condition, where he succumbed to his injuries.

A terrorist was also gunned down in the gunfight. Several people, including a civilian, also suffered injuries during the crossfire.

The banned terrorist outfit Al-Umar Mujahideen had claimed the responsibility for the attack. The outfit which was formed in 1989 became dormant after the arrest of its founder Mustaq Ahmed Zargar alias ‘Mustaq Latram’ in 1992.
