India PM Narendra Modi and British adventurer sniff animal dung on 'Man vs. Wild'

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

India PM Narendra Modi and British adventurer sniff animal dung on 'Man vs. Wild' Modi's involvement is expected to highlight environmental awareness, but brings back past criticism of Modi's reaction to a suicide bombing that occurred the same day Photo by Screenshot from video

Article content India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi has shed his trademark khadi kurtas for a scarf, jacket and track gear, to appear in an upcoming episode of “Man Vs. Wild”, where he will explore the country’s wilderness alongside survival expert Bear Grylls.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content A teaser video posted to Grylls’ Twitter account features clips of the two ambling through lush vegetation, drifting down a river in a makeshift terrain and sniffing animal dung. “You’re the most important man in India, my job is to keep you alive,” the former military trooper is heard telling Modi, as he wraps a jacket around him. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or India PM Narendra Modi and British adventurer sniff animal dung on 'Man vs. Wild' Back to video People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery pic.twitter.com/MW2E6aMleE — Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) July 29, 2019

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content According to The Wire, the 68-year-old leader took up Grylls’ invite to appear on the show in an effort to cast himself as a man of the environment. “For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests … For me, this show presents a great opportunity to showcase to the world India’s rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation and living in harmony with nature,” Modi was quoted as saying. The teaser release neatly coincides with recently published statistics showing an increase in the Indian population of wild endangered Bengal tigers to almost 3,000. Modi took the opportunity, during his announcement, to argue that development and environment are not mutually exclusive. “India will progress economically and take the lead in protecting the environment,” he wrote on Twitter. Development and the environment are not mutually exclusive.



India will progress economically and take the lead in protecting the environment. #InternationalTigerDay pic.twitter.com/RjcBMGpFvh — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) July 29, 2019

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content In September 2018, the United Nations General Antonio Guterres presented Modi and French President Emmanuel Macron with ‘Champions of the Earth’ award, after they launched a global initiative addressing obstacles in deploying solar energy. Modi was also recognized for his pledge to eliminate single-use plastics by 2022. The programme also ties in with Modi’s desire to iconize himself as the “alpha-male.” “He will not lose even a single opportunity to project himself as the man with the 56-inch chest,” said author Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay who wrote a biography on Modi. Videos of him practicing yoga and meditation in the Himalayas aim to boost the image of strength and health. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Yet, Modi’s self-proclamation as champion of the environment is not without opposition. Bhavreen Khandari, an Extinction Rebellion activist in India disputed the prime minister’s environmental stance to the Guardian, arguing that his pro-development approach contributes to the country’s environmental degradation.“I am standing in the most polluted city in the world,” she is quoted saying over the phone from Delhi. “My children’s lungs are black,” she added. The promotional release is also reminiscent of the political backlash Modi faced when he was in the midst of filming the episode. The Wire reported that hours before Modi was set to film, a suicide bomber rammed his explosives-laden car into the Central Reserve Police Force convoy, on a highway in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, killing at least 49 personnel. Modi was criticized for continuing to film the episode in Jim Corbett National Park that day. It is unclear whether the prime minister was informed of the attack prior to filming. The episode is set to release on the Discovery Channel on August 12.

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

News Near Cornwall
