Unnao accident case: Rape survivor’s collar bone, right thigh fractured; condition remains 'highly critical'

Women activists stage a demonstration demanding justice for Unnao rape victim, outside Uttar Pradesh Bhawan in New Delhi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is accused of raping a girl The rape survivor’s health deteriorated on Monday morning The UP government has constituted a SIT to probe the Raebareli road accident

Lucknow: The condition of the Unnao rape survivor remains "highly critical" following a car crash, as per doctors treating the victim. On Sunday afternoon, the car of the rape victim, now 19, was hit by a speeding truck in Uttar Pradesh’s Raebareli, killing two of her aunts, and leaving her and a lawyer wounded.

Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is accused of raping the girl, who was a minor in 2017.

The rape survivor’s health deteriorated on Monday morning, following which she was put on ventilator support. Her collar bone, ribs and right thigh have been fractured. The victim’s lawyer Mahendra Singh too has been on a ventilator ever since he was admitted to the trauma centre of the King George Medical University on Sunday evening.

Trauma centre’s surgery head Sandeep Tiwari said: “The girl has sustained internal injuries besides fractures in her collar bone, ribs and right thigh. The lawyer has head injury besides 13 fractures in all. Both are on ventilator and their conditions remain critical.”

Meanwhile, senior faculty member at the trauma surgery Samir Misra said: "The girl is in shock. She has suffered multiple fractures in the femur bone, ribs and collar bone as well as injury in the chest."

According to hospital sources, the girl was not breathing normally as one of her ribs had punctured her lungs, leading to excessive bleeding. The doctors added that both the accident victims needed blood transfusion.

Uttar Pradesh government has announced free treatment for both of them. Albeit, a relative of the rape survivor alleged that the family has already paid Rs 14,000 for medicines and diagnostic tests since Sunday, the hospital sources said that the amount would be reimbursed.

When asked if the rape survivor and her lawyer would be shifted to Delhi, doctors said the decision rests with the family.

"They are being given the best possible treatment under the circumstances. If the family wants to shift them elsewhere, it is their decision."

Yogi Adityanath-led Uttar Pradesh government has constituted a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the Raebareli road accident.

Meanwhile, it has come to light that the family was under tremendous pressure from BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his aides to withdraw the cases before the accident. They had even written a letter in this regard to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi on July 12, 2019, urging him to "take action against those who are making threats".

"People came to my house and threatened us to take back the cases otherwise my whole family will be put in jail under fake cases," the letter said.
