Jaipur: Ruckus in Rajasthan Assembly over rape victim’s self-immolation case

The Rajasthan Assembly on Tuesday witnessed a ruckus soon after the Opposition BJP staged a walkout to protest against the suicide of a rape victim.

On July 28, a woman, wife of an ex-serviceman in Jaipur, set herself ablaze at the Vaishali Nagar police station, demanding the arrest of the accused, who allegedly raped her.

The woman claimed that the accused was her husband's relative.

The woman claimed that the suspect had raped her after spiking her drinks and made a video of her in 2015.

It was her husband who had introduced the victim with the accused, who was well-known in the family since four years ago, further claimed the woman.

The rape victim had visited the police station several times and had submitted clothes as evidence, said sources.

The woman also accused the police of pressurising her to withdraw the case, sources further said.

Comments were also taken from the rape victim's husband.

Her husband claimed that the police had accused the woman of trapping the man (suspect) who was a lot younger to her.

The woman succumbed to her injuries on Monday.

While Leader of the Opposition staged a protest, Parliamentary Affairs Minister Shanti Dhariwal told media persons that the Ashok Gehlot-led government has removed the incharge of the state police and soon he will be suspended for misbehaving with the complaint.

Shanti Dhariwal further suspected an illicit affair between the victim and the accused, as the duo went on vacations together.

Similar suspicion was echoed by the police that said it was a case of an illicit affair.

Dhariwal insisted that despite contrary evidence of the complainant, police should have responded well to her, instead of misbehaving, which prompted her to end her life.

Meanwhile, an investigation by the National Commission of Women (NCW) found that the statement of the woman's son has not been recorded yet.

The statutory body has ordered compensation for the rape victim's minor son.

Sources said women activists will protest against the police over the incident on Wednesday.
