Afridi urges world to play role in stopping genocide in IHK

Minister for SAFRON and Narcotics Control Shehryar Khan Afridi has said that peace in Asia is linked with peaceful resolution of Kashmir dispute and that the members of the parliaments of Europe, United Kingdom and United States need to act and help save the suffering humanity in Indian-held Kashmir (IHK).

Addressing a delegation of parliamentarians from the United Kingdom and European Union here at a seminar, the minister said that the western world needs to act rising above commercial and political interests. “The US, EU and UK parliamentarians needs to play the lead role in saving the suffering humanity in Indian-held Kashmir. Who can understand the importance of peace and human rights better than them as Europe was the first to accept migrants from across the globe. There was a time when ‘might is right’ was the order of the day. But now they are leading the world and it’s time for them to act and intervene,” the minister said.

The MPs from EU and UK included Richard Corbett MeP, leader of the Labour Party in Europe; Lorraine Kirkwood, Assistant to Richard Corbett; Irina Von Wiese, MeP and member of the foreign affairs committee; Richard Burgon, MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Justice; Imran Hussain, MP, Shadow Secretary of State; Mohammed Azam, JKSDMI Secretary General and member of National Policy Forum; Raja Najabat Hussain, Chairman of JKSDMI; Councilor Nazia Rehman from Wigan North of England; Yasmeen Qureshi, Member of Parliament North East; and Shafaq Mohammad, Member of European Parliament.

Shehryar Afridi said Muslims were so much moderate that missionary schools were allowed work in northern parts of today’s Pakistan centuries back. “I along with millions of Pakistanis got education from these missionary schools. Today, we are knocking at doors of the west as Kashmir is bleeding but to no avail. The valley has witnessed so much bloodshed and oppression over the past seven decades but the world keeps mum due to certain economic and political interests linked with India,” he said.

The minister said peace in Asia is linked with resolution of Kashmir issue. “If we add Russia to Asia, this region hosts 50 percent of the world population. But the international community is paying no heed to human rights violations in India where minorities are being lynched on roads and women are being raped with impunity,” he said. He said perhaps political and commercial interests have overtaken the world powers who are shying away from playing their due role in conflict resolution to bring peace in South Asia. “If due attention is not given to humanitarian crisis in India, I fear that global peace may get affected,” he said.

He said Pakistan is fighting the cause of humanity as it is leading the largest war against terrorism on land. He asserted that 85 percent of drugs are being produced in Afghanistan and that Pakistan is fighting the global war on drugs. “We are also hosting four millions of Afghan refugees for the past four decades on humanitarian grounds. The world needs to get out of its slumber and move to help the suffering humanity in Kashmir and India before it is too late,” he concluded.
