Indian politician accused of raping teenager faces murder probe after truck crashes into car carrying accuser

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Indian politician accused of raping teenager faces murder probe after truck crashes into car carrying accuser The 19-year-old’s family and supporters allege the crash, which killed two of her aunts, was not an accident but a conspiracy to stop the case Photo by Sajjad Hussain/AFP/Getty Images/File

Article content ISLAMABAD — Police in India have launched a murder investigation after a teenager who has accused a powerful politician of rape was seriously hurt alongside her lawyer in a fatal car crash.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content A truck collided with the 19-year-old’s car on the weekend, prompting protests across India amid accusations of lawlessness and corruption in Uttar Pradesh — India’s most populous state. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Indian politician accused of raping teenager faces murder probe after truck crashes into car carrying accuser Back to video The woman’s family and supporters allege the crash, which killed two of her aunts, was not an accident but a conspiracy to stop the case. The teenager, who cannot be named for legal reasons, has accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a politician with the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), of raping her at his home in 2017. More On This Topic 'India Ashamed': Outrage grows over ruling party lawmaker accused of rape 'Justice will never be delivered': Thousands take to the streets in India in outrage over rapes of eight-year-old and teenager Police at first refused to take action. Then, when a case was registered, the teenager’s father was arrested and badly beaten in police custody. He later died of his injuries.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content His daughter tried to set herself on fire in protest outside the home of Yogi Adityanath, the state’s chief minister and a BJP stalwart. Sengar denies rape and is in prison awaiting trial. His lawyer, Awadhesh Singh, said the case was a conspiracy to harm his political career and the crash was not suspicious. However, following a complaint by the woman’s family, police formally opened an investigation into Sengar, his brother and more than two dozen others, alleging murder, attempted murder, conspiracy and intimidation, the BBC reported. Federal investigators will take over the case. One of the aunts killed in the crash was also a witness in the case. “This is not an accident,” the teenager’s mother told reporters at Lucknow hospital, where her daughter remains critically ill. “One by one, all the witnesses are being eliminated. We’re afraid for our lives,” she said.

Share this article in your social network

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

NP Posted Sign up to receive the daily top stories from the National Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of NP Posted will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
