Unnao rape survivor wrote to CJI before accident

In a letter dated July 12, she sought action against those making threats to her and her family; the girl and her lawyer remain critical



NEWDELHI Within a couple of days of the car crash in which the Unnao rape survivor was seriously injured and two of her aunts killed, a letter written to the Chief Justice of India by the victim’s family has come to light, expressing threat and danger to their lives allegedly by the accused persons in the case.



An official of the Supreme Court said the letter written in Hindi has been received by the office of the Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi who has asked the court’s secretary general to prepare anote out of it and place it before him.



“The CJI has asked the secretary general to go through the letter written in Hindi for preparing a note of it for his perusal,” he told PTI.



The letter dated July 12, written by the survivor and two of her family members, was also sent to the Allahabad High Court and other authorities of the Uttar Pradesh government.



On Sunday, the car in which the 19-year old rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over speeding truck in Rae Bareli, killing the two family members and leaving her and the advocate critically injured.



Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a four-time BJP MLA from UP’s Bangermau, is an accused in the rape case and was arrested last year in April. Uttar Pradesh BJP on Tuesday claimed that Sengar was suspended from the party in 2018.



The letter narrates the incidents of July 7-8 when some people allegedly associated with Sengar, the sitting BJP legislator, threatened the victim’s family with dire consequences.



It also sought a direction for registration of FIR against the persons who had intimidated them.



HC grants one-day parole to Unnao rape survivor’s uncle



The Allahabad High Court on Tuesday granted one-day parole to Unnao rape survivor’s uncle Mahesh Singh to attend the last rites of his wife who was killed in a road accident on Sunday.



The Lucknow bench of the high court directed the jail superintendent and district authorities to ensure that Singh is taken for the cremation at Gangaghat in tight security.



Justice Mohammad FA Khan directed officials to bring Singh back to the jail by the evening after the cremation.





Priyanka asks PM to strip Sengar of power



#NEWDELHI The Opposition stepped up its attack on the ruling BJP on Tuesday over the Unnao rape survivor’s accident, with Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra asking Prime Minister Narendra Modi to “divest” his party’s accused MLA of the political power being given tohim . PTI


