Will try to do something constructive in this destructive atmosphere: CJI to take up Unnao matter on Thursday

File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The CJI asked SC registry why there was a delay in placing Unnao rape victim's family's letter before him The CBI, on Wednesday registered a case against suspended BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and 10 others

New Delhi: Chief Justice of India (CJI) has sought a report from the Supreme Court registry asking it to file a reply within a week, as to why there is a delay in placing the July 12 letter written by the Unnao rape victim's family before him. The Supreme Court will hear the matter pertaining to the letter on Thursday. Two weeks ago, the family had written to CJI Ranjan Gogoi claiming that their lives were under threat.

"Will try to do something constructive in this destructive atmosphere," Gogoi said while asking the Secretary-General to explain why there was a delay in placing the letter before him.

Meanwhile, the CBI registered a case against suspended BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and 10 others accused in Unnao rape survivor's accident case. CBI has also registered a case against 20 unknown persons under criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation- news agency ANI reported.

The development comes even as the rape victim, a minor continues to struggle for her life after the vehicle she was travelling in along with her lawyer and family members met with an accident. Two of her aunts were killed on the spot when the truck, with a wiped number plate, rammed into the car. The victim and the lawyer were critically injured.

The police had registered a First Information Report (FIR) in the case against Sengar, his brother and eight others. The teen had alleged that she was sexually assaulted when she went to Sengar's house to seek a job. Shortly after the allegations, her father was brutally assaulted by the MLA's brother Atul Sengar. The police, on the other hand, booked the victim's father under the arms act.

The victim and her family attempted to immolate themselves in front of Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence. A day later, the father died in judicial custody allegedly due to police torture. The case was transferred to the CBI following public outrage.
