Supreme Court takes suo motu cognizance in Unnao rape case

Home >> Delhi Supreme Court takes suo motu cognizance in Unnao rape case

Calling it a “highly volatile situation”, Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi said he was informed about the letter only on Tuesday

The Supreme Court on July 31 took suo motu cognisance of a letter written by the family of the Unnao rape case victim on July 12 to the Chief Justice of India about threats received from the accused persons.

Calling it a “highly volatile situation”, Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi said he was informed about the letter only on Tuesday (July 30). The CJI asked why the court registry had not brought the letter to his attention.

The CJI listed the suo motu case for hearing on August 1, assuring that a judicial order would be passed to ensure the safety and better conditions for the rape survivor, who has been seriously injured in the road incident.

The collision, which happened near Rae Bareli on July 28, claimed the lives of two of the aunts of the victim.

Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a four-time BJP MLA from U.P.’s Bangermau, is an accused in the rape case and was arrested last year in April.

The letter narrates the incidents of July 7-8 when some people allegedly associated with Sengar, the sitting BJP legislator, threatened the victim’s family with dire consequences. It also sought a direction for registration of an FIR against the persons who had intimidated them.

The letter signed by the girl, her mother and aunt stated that on July 7, Naveen Singh, son of an accused in the rape case, Shashi Singh, Manoj Singh, brother of another accused Kuldeep Singh and one Kunnu Mishra visited their house and threatened them. The next day, another person came to their house. The victim and the family said that along with the letter they were also annexing the video of the car in which these persons came to their house.

An FIR, which was lodged a day after the car crash, names the BJP legislator, his brother Manoj Singh Sengar, Vinod Mishra, Haripal Singh, Naveen Singh, Komal Singh, Arun Singh, Gyanendra Singh, Rinku Singh and Awadhesh Singh as accused.
