Rising Communalism, Casteism And Poverty: Why Prolific Hindi Writer Munshi Premchand Is Relevant Even Today

For a young mind, reading Munshi Premchand and getting familiar with his characters, was a reality check of the society we live in. It crumpled perceptions and brought searing truth through his words staring in the face of a young reader.

The stories of this modern Hindi literary genius and the characters he weaved carefully, show mirror to society.

Premchand’s stories imparted wisdom. They made the readers ponder over the moralities, truth and realities of the world we live in.

Nirmala is story of a young girl married to a man of her father’s age suspecting her of having an affair with his eldest son that eventually led to his death shows how intricately and loosely a marriage is weaved in an Indian society, while on the outside it appears to be strong.

Idgah’s five-year-old Hamid will always have a soft corner in people's heart. The tear-jerking story of a positive child who has lost his parents and lives in abject poverty with his grandmother is still a favourite among many readers.

Through Gaban, Premchand tried to show the falling moral values among the lower middle-class youth during British rule and to what extent a person can go maintain a farce of being a rich person.

Premchand’s simplistic writings were a clear reflection of the conditions that prevailed back in those days and are still relevant. The culture, relationships, economics, caste and class discrepancies in Premchand’s books cast light on what truly pains an individual.

When one takes a closer look, they may find that Premchand’s stories are as relevant today as they were in the 20th century. The society, when you look into it with a deep lens, hasn’t changed much.

The harsh reality of life, such as caste and class, are so deeply entrenched in people’s minds and society in general in that we are still looking for ways to eradicate them.

The pain of general population in the society comes to the fore through Premchand’s writings. Religion and caste are still the dominant factors that shape the life of an individual and a family. It is the very basic parameter by which a man measures a man.

Set in the Uttar Pradesh of 30s, Karambhoomi revolves around class, inter-caste marriage and non-entry of untouchables in the temples.

Karmabhoomi/Cover

In April, tensions erupted between two communities in Tamil Nadu after people from Mutharaiyar, a Dalit community were denied access to a local temple.

In June, A Dalit boy was tied up and beaten up by Upper Caste men for trying to enter temple in Rajasthan’s Pali. The video of the incident, which went viral on the social media, the perpetrators are seen clobbering the boy even as he pleaded them to stop saying that he will never enter the temple.

Caste discrimination is still a reality. The people who die cleaning sewers in the country mostly belong to lower class and castes and while everything has been done on paper to eradicate the heinous practice, the ground reality remains grim.

Premchand’s first novel Sevasadan (Market of Beauty), originally written in Urdu (Bazzar-e- Husn) was published in 1919. This novel deals with the moral degradation of prostitutes and with the circumstances in which they are compelled to resort to this heinous profession and also suggests the solution to this problem by setting up institution like Sevasadana, a secure home for the prostitutes.

The novel evokes sympathy for them and the work they do for livelihood. The prostitutes in this country are still fighting for a legal framework that ensures their basic human rights. They are still not considered at par as any other human.

The other social issues which figure prominently in his novels are corruption, communalism, defective educational system, question of lingua-franca and problems of the Indian peasants.

Communalism in India is raising its ugly head and the whole society is threatened by its myopic and intolerant force.

In Juloos, Premchand chooses a Muslim character named Ibrahim as the main protester satyagrahi mobilising public protests and agitation in a Uttar Pradesh city. The selection of the character speaks all. Ibrahim is progressive, has a mass following, and a Gandhian – a hardcore non-violent character.

In the current scenario, communalism has grown in leaps and bounds, and with its sponsored growth has also led to several deaths. The cries to imagine and make India a majoritarian state is exactly opposite to what our country is – a secular nation.

Muslims are being forced to chant slogans like “Jai Shree Ram” to prove that they belong to this country and “Bharat Mata Ki Jai” to prove that they love and respect this country. The incidents have grown rapidly over the last five years, since the BJP started ruling in the Centre, and the state has not done much.

Mob lynching have become common. Cow vigilantism has claimed numerous lives over the years.

In Gujarat, a 17-year-old Muslim youth was beaten to death over affair with a tribal girl. A Muslim teenager was allegedly set on fire by Hindu men for not chanting “Jai Shri Ram” in Uttar Pradesh. He succumbed to his injuries at a hospital.

So far, the number incidents and crimes based on communal hatred have touched a staggering 298 between 2009-2019 and the spate of killing continues.

In Kafan, the struggles of a working-class villagers come to the fore. They struggle to feed the family, are marred by debts and often commit suicide to escape the burden. Kafan’s father-son duo have learnt to accept their ill-fate and live with it. The play depicts how ‘hunger deaths’ are common in the society and some people suffer even for basic facilities.

In the novel, the father-son duo leave the latter’s pregnant wife to her fate because of their financial helplessness. When she dies, they borrow some money from the Zamidar to buy props for her last rites. Eventually they realise that it is unfair that a woman who never worn a good piece of cloth in her lifetime to demand a shroud after death.

Hence, they skip spending money on her purchases and instead have a hearty meal thanking her.

Premchand’s last novel, Godan talks about the evil money lending system in rural areas as the harassment the farmers have to go through at the hands of the powerful.

The state of farmers in this country is as poor as it could be. A recent report by the government said that 12,000 farmers committed suicide in past three years in Maharashtra alone. Since 2016, there has been no data on farmer suicides, the agricultural minister informed the Parliament.

What the people of this country need to learn from Premchand is the communal harmony and respect that he narrated in his novels and other works. What needs to be unlearned is a vast array of caste and class biases that still plague the society.
