'You Are Not Alone', Say Hundreds As They Come Together In Solidarity For Unnao Rape Victim

Hundreds, including activists and ordinary citizens from all walks of life, came together in the national capital Delhi as they held a vigil demanding justice for the Unnao rape victim.

Swaraj Abhiyan leader Yogendra Yadav joined the citizens, who were turned on their mobile phone flashlights in solidarity with the 19-year-old victim and held posters that read “Tum Akeli Nahi Ho” (You are not alone).

BCCL

Many also questioned the silent support the BJP is still providing to Kuldeep Senger, who has been in jail since April. They urged the BJP to remove the Unnao MLA from the party and demand his resignation.

The protests over the Unnao rape case, which happened in June 2017 reignited once again after the car which the girl was traveling on with her family and lawyer met with an accident on Sunday in Rae Bareli, killing two and leaving her and the lawyer critically injured.

“The incident appears to be an attack and not an accident. It should be remembered that the victim’s father had earlier been killed while he was in police custody and the witness to the father’s killing died under suspicious circumstances,” Yadav said addressing the people.

BCCL

Protesters also questioned the inaction of the government which has extensively campaigned about beti bachao.

Yogendra Yadav at India Gate in support of #TumAkeliNahinHo movement. pic.twitter.com/W7N9rQVBmR — Swaraj India (HR) (@SwarajHaryana) July 29, 2019

“The government is running a ‘beti darao’, not a ‘beti bachao’ drive”Shilpi Raj, a protester said.

BCCL

The UP Police had initially ruled out any foul play and claimed that it was an accident. Later after outrage, they agreed to transfer the case to the CBI and booked Senger for murder.

As the victim and her lawyer continue to remain critical, her family had alleged that the accident was a conspiracy to eliminate them.

Sengar, a four-time MLA from Bangermau was arrested on April 13 last year for allegedly raping the girl who was 17 years old at the time.

The case first surfaced in April 2018 after the girl tried to self immolate outside the residence of UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath demanding justice. From there, things took a turn for the worst for the rape victim and her family. Just a day after her father who was arrested by the police died in custody under mysterious circumstances. It is alleged that Senger's brother had tortured the father inside the police station resulting in his death. However, this has not been proven as a key witness in the case, a man who reportedly saw the girls' father being tortured in custody died under mysterious circumstances a few months later.

In the meantime, the girl, and her uncle were booked by police for alleged forgery and the uncle still languishes in the Rae Bareli jail.
