Netflix Announces ‘Delhi Crime’, A Series Based On The 2012 Delhi Gang Rape

The December 2012 Delhi gang rape, where a 23-year-old girl was brutally raped inside a moving bus, shook the entire nation. The incident caused intense outrage worldwide, as we saw India asking for stringent justice. Last year, after six long years, the Indian Supreme Court finally issued the verdict of death penalty for the three men convicted. Justice was delayed, but the verdict reassured our faith in the law.

Inspired by the unsparing incident, Netflix has announced a new series based on all the investigation that went into the Nirbhaya case. Titled Delhi Crime, it’s a seven-part series and will stream on the platform come March 22. Directed by Richie Mehta, a Canadian film-maker, the series boasts of powerful actors like Shefali Shah, Adil Hussain, Denzil Smith, Rasika Dugal, Rajesh Tailang, and Yashaswini Dayama.

The official Twitter announcement post read: “Delhi Crime — a seven-part series inspired by a notorious 2012 rape investigation by the Delhi Police that reverberated across India and the world, written and directed by @RichieMehta — will premiere March 22 on Netflix.”

"Delhi Crime" — a seven-part series inspired by a notorious 2012 rape investigation by the Delhi Police that reverberated across India and the world, written and directed by @RichieMehta — will premiere March 22 on Netflix pic.twitter.com/sVdINGQvz5 — See What's Next (@seewhatsnext) January 29, 2019

In a conversation with former Commissioner of the Delhi Police, Neeraj Kumar, Mehta said: “The making of Delhi Crime has been a personally transformative journey; speaking to every individual involved, retracing the paths that the police took during the course of the investigation, and hearing of the determination that it took for the case to be closed, despite severe limitations. I hope that we have been able to provide context, catharsis and open once again a difficult conversation that must be had about the forces that enabled this brutality.”

The series features Shefali Shah as a promising female cop who goes deep into the incident, and showcases the poignant emotions the officials investigating the case experienced with the urge to bring justice.

It’s obviously a sensitive case… one that stirred the entire nation, raising questions about women’s safety. So, we hope it creates a strong impact and reaches the masses. A lot of research has gone into the making of this series, and we just hope it’s honest and powerful.
