Modi 2.0: A new dimension of persecution – KashmirWatch

Don’t lynch Muslims, set them ablaze!

Amjed Jaaved

On July 28, 2019, four Hindu fanatics set ablaze a teenaged Muslim boy Khalid in Chandauli village (Uttar Pradesh) for refusing to chant war-cry jai shri ram. Earlier, another Muslim Tabriz Ansari was video-taped while being lynched to death Jharkhand state. The incident went viral on social media. It led 49 celebrities from all walks of life to address an open letter (IANS Jul 24, 2019) to Indian prime minister Modi to remind him: (a) India’s constitution describes

`India as a secular socialist democratic republic where citizens of all religion, ethnicities, gender and castes are equal,” (b) They were ` shocked to learn from the National Crime Records Bureau reports that there have been no less than 840 instances of atrocities against dalits (oppressed) in the year 2016’. (c) `Fifty four religious identity-based hate crimes were reported between January 1, 2009 and October 29, 2018.”(d) `Such offences should be declared non-bailable, and that exemplary punishment should be meted out swiftly’. (e) `There is no democracy without dissent. People should not be branded “anti-national” or “urban Naxal” and incarcerated because of dissent against the government.

India has recently amended its draconian laws, including National Investigation Agency Act, to declare any individual a `terrorist’. Previously, these laws could outlaw only organisation (Jama`at-e-Islami, Communists). India’s home minister told parliamentary that the amended law would target Kashmiris and urban Naxals.

The 49 celebrities, who have signed the letter include Adoor Gopalkrishnan, Mani Ratnam, Anurag Kashyap, Aparna Sen, Konkona Sen Sharma, Soumita Chatterjee, among others.

As many as 49 eminent personalities including actors and filmmakers wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressing concerns over the rising incidents of lynching and the provocative use of “Jai Shri Ram” leading to law and order problems in the country.

The 49 celebrities, who have signed the letter include Adoor Gopalkrishnan, Mani Ratnam, Anurag Kashyap, Aparna Sen, Konkona Sen Sharma, Soumita Chatterjee, among others.

Historian Ramchandra Guha, doctor and social activist Binayak Sen, scholar and sociologist Ashis Nandy are also among those who have signed the letter.

A Muslim dairy farmer, Rakbar was killed by a Hindu mob on the night of July 21, 2018, in the Lalawandi village of Rajasthan’s Alwar district. The mob claimed he was taking a cow to be slaughtered. A film maker , Madheshiya, video-recorded the whole incident. In one scene, we see people gathered under a tent in a Rajasthan village, listening to a leader of one of the Vishva Hindu Parishad’s gau raksha cells in Alwar. He invokes Rakbar’s lynching and issues a dangerous warning Mother Cow is imploring the youth, the cow protectors to rise and behead the heathens. The audience responds with Jai Shri Ram. Rakbar was one of the 47 people killed in cow-related violence in India since 2012, according to data collated by the site IndiaSpend. A total of 127 incidents have been documented.

Abraham and Madheshiya made their debut with The Cinema Travellers, which premiered at Cannes 2016. They followed it up with Searching for Saraswati, the first Indian documentary to be featured on The New York Times website. The Hour of Lynching premiered on The Guardian website. They say the purpose of the films is to raise consciousness:

Supreme Court’s view

The SC wants Parliament to create a separate offence for lynching with deterrent penalties

(India Today July 27, 2018). Watching the abject horror of 28-year-old Rakbar Khan’s murder unfold in Rajasthan’s Alwar district, a year after a murderous mob of cow vigilantes bludgeoned Pehlu Khan to death, many would find it disconcerting and disheartening that it was left to the Supreme Court to point to the culture of violent intolerance that is rapidly enveloping India’s hinterland.

The past three years have witnessed the murders of 50 people mostly of the minority and weaker sections in the name of gau raksha (cow protection) .And these do not include the unfortunate Rakbar, who was beaten to death in the wee hours of July 21 as he and a friend, Aslam Khan, were herding two cows from Alwar town to their home in Lalwandi village. A day earlier, villagers in Madhya Pradesh’s Singrauli district had beaten a mentally challenged woman to death because they suspected she was a child-lifter. And on July 22, a mob in West Bengals Jalpaiguri district beat up and stripped four women who were going door-to-door selling clothes.

These incidents happened within a week after a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court spelt out its disgust at the horrendous acts of mobocracy.The bench, comprising Chief Justice Dipak Mishra and Justices A.M. Khanwilkar and D.Y. Chandrachud, asked Parliament to create a separate penal category for the offence of lynching with deterrent penalties that would instil a sense of fear for law amongst the people who involve themselves in such activities. The judges outlined preventive, remedial and punitive measures to tackle the menace, asking state governments to appoint nodal police officers in every district to identify vulnerable areas; collect intelligence on individuals or groups indulging in hate speeches and take steps to prevent the dissemination of rumours through social media. The SC directed the Centre and states to report compliance of its directions within four weeks. But, in vain.Lame justifications are given for lynching innocent people.

Back at Alwar, BJP MLA Gyan Dev Ahuja insisted that Rakbar and Aslam were gau taskar (cow smugglers) and the victim was beaten to death by the police, not by gau rakshaks. Notably, Aslam, the only known eyewitness to the lynching, told police that the five attackers had blatantly boasted they were Ahuja’s men. Too, a day after the killing, Indresh Kumar, a senior RSS functionary, was quoted as saying this in Ranchi: Mob lynching cannot be welcomed. [But] if the practice of eating cow meat is stopped, many such crimes of the Satan could be stopped. His wisdom was echoed by BJP leader Vinay Katiyar, who counselled Muslims to refrain from touching cows and provoking Hindus. In Delhi, Union minister Jayant Sinha regretted garlanding eight men convicted for lynching a cattle trader, Alimuddin Ansari, in Jharkhand in 2017. Interestingly, the minister said he was doing so only because it gave his rivals an opportunity to say I was condoning [cow] vigilantism.

Lynching on the rise

With 43% share in hate crimes, UP is still most unsafe for minorities, particularly dalits. Between 2016 and 2019, National Human Rights Commission registered 2,008 cases where minorities/Dalits were harassed, including cases of lynchings. Of these, Uttar Pradesh alone accounted for 869 cases. Lynching incidents reflect that police colludes with or connives at such incidents in different parts of the country.

Lynching has been spiralling over the past few years. According to a Reuters report, a total of 63 cow vigilante attacks occurred in India between 2010 and 2017. In such attacks on 28 people (24 of them Muslims) were killed and 124 injured. In Jharkhand itself18 persons were killed since 2016 by the lynch mob. In Jharkhand, some of the hate-mongers, who were released on bail, were honoured by some senior BJP leaders including a former Union Minister. Lynchings signify a breakdown of the law-enforcement system. In Barpeta district in the north-eastern state of Assam, a group of young Muslim men were assaulted and then made to chant slogans like “Jai Shri Ram”, “Bharat Mata ki Jai” (long live Mother India) and “Pakistan murdabad” (death to Pakistan).In the commercial capital Mumbai, a 25-year-old Muslim taxi driver was abused, beaten up and told to chant “Jai Shri Ram” by a group of men. Faizal Usman Khan said he was attacked when his taxi broke down and he was trying to fix it. His attackers fled after a passenger called the police. And in the eastern city of Kolkata, Hafeez Mohd Sahrukh Haldar, a 26-year-old Muslim teacher at a madrassa (religious seminary), was heckled while travelling on a train by a group of men chanting “Jai Shri Ram”. When he refused, they pushed him out of the moving train. Mr. Haldar was injured, but lived to tell the tale. The slogan-shouting and heckling is no longer restricted to the mob and the streets. It has entered portals of parliament.

When the newly-elected lower house convened for the first time on 17 June, Muslim and opposition MPs were heckled by members of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) when they stood up to take the oath. Many critics, including cartoonist Satish Acharya, have also expressed alarm over the rising number of such incidents.

UNO takes notice

Within days of Center of Africa Development and Progress (CADP), a non-governmental organization (NGO) which enjoys a special consultative status with the United Nation’s Economic and Social Council Civil Society Network, highlighting the lynching of Tabrez Ansari and raising concern about mob lynching in India, during the General Session of the UN Human Rights Council on July 1, Delhi-based journalist-turned-social activist, Saket Gokhale received an email from the UN seeking all the details related to Tabrez Ansari’s lynching case for a better understanding.

Conclsuion

Despite strictures by India’s Supreme Court and UN’s notice of lynching, there is no let-up in ferocity of such incidents. In fact, following an open letter from celebrities, lynch mobs chose to set Muslim ablaze. Some fanatics have publicly demanded that all Muslims should be pushed into Pakistan. About five thousand temples, including Jamia Masjid Delhi and Taj Mahal, have been converted into mosques. They should be restored into temples.

Muslims are being lynched for other reasons also _ wearing a prayer cap, offering prayers on roads if a mosque is overcrowded, posting to Facebook in favour of beef eating, so on. Lynching and setting ablaze a Muslim have unmasked true face of India’s democracy.
