Chief Justice of India to take up Unnao rape survivor's letter today

The Unnao rape survivor's letter to the Chief Justice of India (CJI) anticipating danger to her life following threats issued to her family at the behest of the accused, suspended BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, will be taken up by the Supreme Court on Thursday.

Soon after the victim wrote the letter, within less than three weeks, two of her aunts were killed when their car collided with a truck in Uttar Pradesh. The survivor and her lawyer, who were also travelling with the family in the car, are battling for life in a Lucknow hospital.

A day after the media flashed the letter dated July 12 written by the victim, her mother and aunt to CJI Ranjan Gogoi, he said on Wednesday he was not aware of the letter. Senior advocate V Giri, assisting the court in another matter, told the CJI about news reports showing how the 17-year-old Unnao victim's cry for justice went unheard by the CJI.

The bench said a "destructive atmosphere" had developed around this case but promised, "We will try to do something constructive."

Dismissing these reports, the CJI said, "The newspapers are flashing that the CJI did not act but the letter has not been placed before me." The court asked the Secretary General of the Supreme Court to prepare a detailed note on the case being investigated by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the cause for delay in acting on the letter. The victim's mother has filed a separate case in the Supreme Court seeking transfer of criminal cases against the accused. This is pending before another bench.

In the letter, the victim and her kin stated that accomplices of the accused MLA Sengar visited their home in Makhi village of UP's Unnao district on July 7 and July 8. Each time, the persons threatened the victim to withdraw the rape complaint against the MLA by arriving at a compromise. The persons who visited the house included the MLA's brother, the son of another accused named along with the MLA, and three other persons. The letter, written in Hindi, alleged that they threatened to get the victim's kin arrested on false charges while getting the accused released on bail. All that the family requested was an order to the local police to register their complaint and take appropriate action.

Besides the CJI, the letter is addressed to the Chief Justice of Allahabad High Court, which had been monitoring the case. A copy of the letter was also sent to the presiding judge of Lucknow High Court, UP Principal Secretary (Home), UP Director General of Police and other police officers in the state. The victim also annexed photographs of the accused and the car in which they came to threaten the family.
