CJI to take up girl’s letter on threat by MLA Sengar’s aides

UNNAO RAPE CASE



Gogoi seeks report from secretary general why the letter was not placed before him



NEWDELHI Taking cognisance of Unnao rape victim’s letter to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, the Supreme Court on Wednesday sought a report from its secretary general as to why it had not been brought to his notice.



In her letter to the CJI, the 19-yearold woman had expressed apprehension of threat to her life.



“Unfortunately, the letter is yet to see the light of the day and yet the newspapers flashed it as if I have read the letter,” Justice Gogoi said.



The bench, also comprising justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, lamented that newspapers gave the impression that no action was taken by the CJI.



“We will do something about this highly volatile situation,” the bench said. The observations came when senior advocate V Giri, who is assisting the court in the suo motu case on alarming rise in child rapes, sought urgent hearing of the Unnao rape case.



The apex court also asked the Uttar Pradesh authorities to file a status report by Thursday on the accident of the Unnao rape case victim. It listed the matter for hearing on Thursday.



The 19-year-old woman, who was allegedly raped two years ago by BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar at his residence in Unnao, was critically injured in a car crash on Sunday.



She was travelling with her family members and lawyer when their car was hit by a speeding truck in the northern state’s Rae Bareli district.



Two of her family members were killed in the accident and her lawyer was seriously injured. The woman’s family has filed a complaint alleging “conspiracy” behind the car crash.



A copy of the letter, written by the survivor and two of her family members, was also sent to the Allahabad High Court and Uttar Pradesh government authorities.



The letter claimed that some people, allegedly associated with Sengar, had threatened the victim’s family with dire consequences on July 7-8.



It also sought a direction for registration of an FIR against those who allegedly intimidated the family.



The letter, signed by the girl, her mother and aunt, stated that on July 7 Naveen Singh, son of an accused in the case Shashi Singh, brother of another accused Kuldeep Singh and one Kunnu Mishra had visited their house and threatened them. The next day, another person came to their house.



Along with the letter, they said, they were also annexing the video of the car in which these people had come to their house.



The Centre on Tuesday handed over to the CBI the probe into the truck-car collision that left the Unnao rape victim critically injured, even as the Opposition stepped up its attack on the ruling BJP.



An order from the Department of Personnel and Training, accessed by PTI, said the case is being handed over to the agency to probe “abetment and conspiracies” in the accident.



Earlier in the day, the BJP faced flak from the Congress, the SP and the BSP as they accused it of giving political protection to MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who was arrested last year for allegedly raping the woman when she was a minor in 2017.



In Parliament, there were walkouts and members walked into the Well of the House.



CBI books MLA Sengar, nine others on murder charges



The CBI has booked Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and nine others on murder charges in connection with the truck-car collision that left the woman who had accused the legislator of rape critically injured, officials said on Wednesday.



Aspecial team formed by the agency to probe the case reached the accident site in the Gurubakshganj area of Uttar Pradesh’s Rae Bareli district.



“The CBI has constituted a team for speedy and smooth investigation of the case,” the agency’s spokesperson said here.



The team inspected the crime scene, the truck which had hit the white Maruti Swift car.



The accident took place when the woman, who has accused the BJP MLA of raping her when she was a minor on the pretext of arranging a job for her, was returning after meeting her uncle Mahesh Singh lodged in the Rae Bareli prison.



The BJP claimed that it had suspended the MLA from the party after the allegations surfaced last year.



The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which is probing the rape case as well, has already filed a chargesheet against the MLA and his kin.


