Unnao Rape Case: Supreme Court to transfer all cases out of Uttar Pradesh

New Delhi:

The Supreme Court on Thursday said it will transfer all four cases related to the Unnao rape survivor from Lucknow to Delhi. The top court has also directed official of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to appear before it by 12 noon and apprise it about the progress so far in the Unnao rape case. It has sought details of the probe in the accident case in which the woman got critically injured.

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi also asked Solicitor General to interact with CBI Director, regarding the rape and road accident. The court said that if necessary, chamber hearing may take place.

Meanwhile, the CBI is all set to quiz Unnao rape prime accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar inside UP jail. Sources have told News Nation that the CBI team will also quiz the gunners, who were deployed for the security of the Unnao rape survivor and her family. Sengar is being accused of planning the deadly car crash, in which the rape survivor lost her family relatives on Sunday.

The development comes hours after the CBI registered an FIR against suspended BJP lawmaker Kuldeep Singh Sengar and 9 others in connection with the road accident involving Unnao rape survivor. The investigating agency has also registered a case against 20 unknown people under criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation.

The FIR registered by the CBI also consist name of Uttar Pradesh Minister Ranvendra Pratap Singh’s son-in-law. Reacting to the development, Singh said: “CBI is investigating the matter. Everything will be clear in the investigation. He is my relative there is no doubt it, but that is not a crime.”

The CBI team will also meet officials of the local police station in Rae Bareli, the officials said. On Tuesday, the Centre handed over the probe to the CBI on the recommendation of the Uttar Pradesh government. The state government has come under severe criticism for failing to provide security to the 19-year-old woman who was allegedly raped by the BJP MLA in 2017 when she was a minor. On Sunday, the car in which the rape survivor was travelling with her family members and lawyer was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli.

Two of the rape survivor's aunts were killed, while she and her lawyer were critically injured in the accident. The number plate of the truck, which was coming from the opposite direction on the wrong side, was smeared with black paint. The Uttar Pradesh Police had on Monday filed a murder case against Sengar and nine others after the rape survivor's family filed a complaint, alleging "conspiracy" behind the car crash.

With PTI Inputs

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
