SC transfers Unnao cases to Delhi, orders CBI to complete probe in a week

Police and people stand near the wreckage of the car in which the Unnao rape survivor was travelling during its collision with a truck near Raebareli (PTI)

The Supreme Court Thursday ordered the transfer of all five cases related to the Unnao rape case outside Uttar Pradesh to Delhi. The Bench headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi also ordered the CBI to complete the investigation related to the accident within a week and then file the chargesheet in a fortnight. It also ordered that the trials in all five cases should be completed in 45 days thereafter on day to day basis.

The bench also said the victim and her counsel, who are admitted in Lucknow’s KGMU hospital, can be shifted to Delhi if the family desires. Directing the Uttar Pradesh government to pay an interim compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the victim, the court also ordered CRFP protection to the girl’s family. The counsel, who is also injured in the accident, has been ordered a compensation of Rs 20 lakhs, news agency PTI reported.

The victim, who is now battling for life after an accident in Rae Bareli on Sunday, had written to the CJI stating that she faced threats by accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar in the rape case. On Tuesday the woman and her lawyer were critically injured and her two aunts were killed after the car they were travelling in was hit by a truck on the highway.

The apex court enquired Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, appearing for the CBI, why the letter sent by the Unnao rape victim’s family was lying before the PIL section from July 17 till July 30. In its reply, the Solicitor General said the court receives at least 6,000 letters every month and the letter in question was under screening.

This promoted an angry outburst from CJI Gogoi who said “What is happening in this country and you want the court to follow the letter of the law?… What is this? We will be failing in our duty….”

Meanwhile, ahead of the top court’s order on the case, BJP expelled party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who is accused of raping a woman in Unnao. Sengar, and nine others, including the son-in-law of a UP minister, have been booked by the CBI on allegations that they orchestrated the accident that has left the woman in a critical condition.

Explained | Twists & turns in Unnao story

Earlier today, the top court had directed a “responsible” officer from the investigating agency to appear before it at 12 noon. The top court had also refused a plea of the Solicitor General requesting that the matter be adjourned to 10.30 am on Friday, as the officers probing the Unnao cases were out of Delhi. “We would like a responsible officer of CBI to come here with full information,” CJI Gogoi heading a three-Judge bench had told Mehta.

The CJI added “obviously the details regarding investigation can’t be disclosed at this stage. If he wants, he can have a chamber hearing”.
