Supreme Court orders transfer of Unnao rape cases to Delhi, sets 45-day deadline to conclude trial

The Supreme Court on Thursday ordered to transfer all cases related to Unnao rape incident to Delhi from Uttar Pradesh. The court set 45-day deadline for the Delhi court to conclude trial.

The Supreme Court on Wednesday transferred all cases related to the Unnao rape incident to Delhi from Uttar Pradesh. The designated judge in Delhi will commence the trial on day-to-day basis and complete the trial within 45 days, the apex court bech headed by Chief Justice of Indian Ranjan Gogoi said.

The top court also ordered the Uttar Pradesh government to provide Rs 25 lakh as interim compensation to the victim latest by Friday and also directed it to provide protection to the families of the victim and her lawyer. On transfer of victim from Lucknow hospital to AIIMS in Delhi, the court asked the survivor’s counsel to take the opinion of the victim’s family with regard to shifting her to a hospital in Delhi.

The court said that similar opinion to be sought by amicus curiae from the victim’s lawyer who was also injured in Sunday’s accident. Both the victim and her lawyer are currently undergoing treatment at a Lucknow hospital where their situation is said to be critical.

Earlier in the day, the court directed the CBI to finish its probe into the accident case within seven days. CBI Joint Director Sampat Meena appeared before CJI Ranjan Gogoi-led bench to apprise the court about the status of the probe into the rape and accident cases.

The CBI told the court that in first case is of rape of girl in Unnao and the chargesheet has been filed and MLA and others are in jail. The second case pertains to Arms Act against Unnao victim’s father which was found to be fake. The third case was filed by the mother of the victim that her husband has been killed in police custody.

BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is the prime accused in the rape case. The girl has alleged that she was raped by Sengar in 2017 at his Unnao residence. However, her case was registered a year later when she attempted to immolate herself outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s residence in Lucknow against inaction by the police.
