SC Unnao hearing updates: CJI orders transfer of all 5 cases to Delhi, orders Rs 25 lakh compensation

The Supreme Court on Wednesday ordered the trial in all 5 cases related to the Unnao rape to be finished within 45 days. The court has asked CBI to complete its investigation into the accident of the Unnao rape victim within 14 days.

The court has left it to the victim's family if they want to shift her to AIIMS Delhi for further treatment. The CJI Ranjan Gogoi-led bench has also ordered the transfer of all the 5 cases related to the rape case to Delhi.

Updates:

2:43 pm: Supreme Court will be hearing the Unnao case again on Friday.

2:40 pm: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra hails the Supreme Court's decision.

Grateful to the SC for taking cognisance of the Jungle Raj’ being unleashed in U.P.



Meanwhile, the BJP finally acknowledges having empowered a criminal and takes some action to correct itself and move in the direction of justice for a young woman who has suffered immeasurably. pic.twitter.com/nNNWhW1CKz Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) August 1, 2019

2:30 pm: CJI asks if there is a security concern for the victim's uncle who is lodged in a jail in Rae Bareli.

2:27 pm: After receiving the medical report, CJI has said, "We request the lawyer to request the family of the victim to take a decision on whether they want transfer to AIIMS."

2:26 pm: The Supreme Court has asked the Uttar Pradesh government to pay compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the victim by Friday.

2:25 pm: CJI asks CRPF Raebareli unit to provide protection to the Unnao rape victim and four members of her family and her lawyer. The victim herself and her lawyer are currently undergoing treatment at a Lucknow hospital and are critical.

2:20 pm: The Supreme Court has pronounced its final order in the Unnao hearing. CJI Gogoi's bench has asked the trial in all 5 cases to be completed within 45 days. The court has asked for daily hearings.

2:15 pm: CJI Ranjan Gogoi asks the family members whether they will need protection.

Their lawyer says, "The girl has four siblings, her mother, her uncle whose wife died in the accident and who himself is serving a jail term need protection."

1:35 pm: BJP spokesperson GVL Narsimha Rao on expelling Kuldeep Sengar: We have taken action against him. There are questions on the security of the victim so the party will not tolerate such people. Country has seen that the BJP has never tolerated such people and it will never do so. SP government had protected Prajapati in their regime and they are commenting on us, this doesn't suit the SP.

1:30 pm: King George Medical University hospital on Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer's health: Their condition is critical. Both are on ventilator. But they are stable like yesterday. Their treatment is being done by a team of experts at KGMU free of cost.

1:03 pm: SC to pass order at 2pm. Order on airlifting victim to Delhi will be taken after looking into the medical bulletin. If condition permits, SC would want her to be airlifted to AIIMS.

1 pm: Senior Advocate Giri: This case is very disturbing. Where is it heading? What was the police doing? There is an FIR against the victim who is a minor, the mother is left alone and she's also a victim. What is happening? There should be exemplary compensation.

12: 58 pm: Amicus curiae suggests that a compensation amount for the victim should be decided.

Justice Deepak Gupta: There is a victim compensation scheme

CJI: We will direct state of UP to pay compensation

SG: Statutorily the court pays compensation

CJI: Is anything in this case happening statutorily? What is happening in this country? You expect the court to follow statute when it comes to compensation?

There are four cases related to the Unnao rape. Case 1: Rape of the 19-year-old woman. Case 2: Case against father of the victim under Arms Act. This case has been declared as false. Case 3: Case against police officials over custodial death of the father. Case 4: Gangrape of Unnao victim one week after she named Kuldeep Sengar. Case 5: Murder case against Kuldeep Sengar and others over the recent car crash.

12:53 pm: CJI Ranjan Gogoi to pass order on the transfer of all four cases related to the Unnao rape at 2 pm today.

12:51 pm: Senior Advocate V Giri tells Supreme Court that the case regarding the death of the father of the Unnao rape victim has to be carefully investigated.

"If he was badly beaten up then why was he arrested? He died within 4 days of his arrest. This needs investigation. The mother of victim must be given some protection. She is a key witness in the case. She is also a victim. Protection should be given to the woman and the mother.

CJI: Should be enlarged, the issue to victim protection, witness protection and victim compensation.

12:47 pm: CJI asks why was the Unnao rape victim's letter sitting in the PIL section till July 30?

The SC Secretary General replies, "We received 6,800 letter petitions this month. It was being vetted. Once we found out about the case we placed it before the courts. We did not know the name of the victim and her family. Once we found out about it we placed it before the court."

12:45 pm: SC asks for medical report of the victim. Doctors at KGMC to give report by 2 pm. The victim may then be airlifted to AIIMS Delhi.

12:40 pm: King George Medical College medical bulletin states both Unnao rape victim and her lawyer are critical and on ventilator support.

12:37 pm: CJI Ranjan Gogoi says investigation into the car crash must be completed within 7 days.

12:36 pm: CJI: What's the condition of the victim? Would she be in a medical condition to be moved? Where is she?

SG: She's at the King George Medical College

CJI: If she is in any position to be moved, we will order her to be airlifted to AIIMS

12:35 pm: CJI Ranjan Gogoi: The father of the victim was arrested in an Arms Act case and he died in custody What was the gap between his arrest, beating and his death?

Solicitor General: He was arrested on April 4 and died on April 7 in the jail hospital.

CJI: Was he sent to the hospital immediately after his arrest? What time was he arrested? So he was beaten at about 6 pm, arrested at 7 pm and died in custody?

12:33 pm: CBI has filed FIR in the case of custodial death of the father of the rape victim on the basis of a complaint filed by the her mother against Vineet mishra, Vinay Mishra and other police officers. An FIR has been lodged against police officers for filing a false case and FIR against a private person for beating the victim's father.

12:32 pm: According to ANI, 3 police personnel, including two women cops appointed for the security of Unnao rape survivor, have been suspended after the car crash on July 28.

12:30 pm: Hearing in the Unnao case has started in Supreme Court. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta tells SC that joint Director Sampat Meena, who is supervising the investigation is present in the court. A chart on the investigation has been prepared.

12:24 pm: In another major development, BJP has expelled MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar from the party. The MLA is currently jailed in the rape case. Two years after the rape case surfaced, BJP has finally expelled the MLA after a massive outrage against him with the recent car crash involving the rape victim and her family.

12:15 pm: Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avnish Awasthi has taken stock of the developing case and has asked for all details of the investigation so far. He has also sought a report on the progress so far.

12:13 pm: Meanwhile, Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avnish Awasthi has taken charge of his office and has immediately gone to discuss the ongoing hearing of the Unnao case in Supreme Court.

12:05 pm: CBI joint director Sampat Meena reaches Supreme Court to be part of hearing.

11:10 am: CJI has asked the CBI Director to get information from the investigating officer on the phone and depute an official to appear before the court at 12 noon.

11:05 am: Solicitor General tells Supreme Court that the investigation officer in the Unnao rape-car crash case is currently in Lucknow and he cannot reach the court at 12. The SG said that even if they take a flight they won't reach the court by 12.

11 am: Supreme Court is likely to transfer all cases related to the Unnao case out of Uttar Pradesh.

11 am: CJI tells Solicitor General to take up the Unnao issue with the CBI Director.

Taking cognisance of the Unnao rape victim's letter to Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, the Supreme Court on Wednesday sought a report from its secretary general as to why it had not been brought to his notice since July 17.

In her letter to the CJI, the 19-year-old woman whose car was hit on Sunday by a truck killing her two aunts and injuring her critically had expressed apprehension of threat to her life by alleged associates of BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

The letter however, failed to reach him on time. The CJI Gogoi-led bench is now hearing the matter on the letter's delayed arrival.

(Inputs from Aneesha Mathur)

(Updates to this story have ended)
