Unnao rape: BJP finally cracks the whip, expels prime accused MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar from party

Kuldeep Singh Sengar is a four-time MLA. He had won from Bangarmau Assembly seat of Unnao district in the 2017 Uttar Pradesh elections. He is accused of raping a girl at his residence in Unnao.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Thursday expelled its Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar from the party. Sengar, the prime accused in a rape case, was suspended from the party earlier. An MLA from Bangarmau constituency in Unnao district, Sengar is currently behind bars in Sitapur jail for raping a girl at his Unnao residence in 2017.

Sengar was suspended from the party after a rape case was filed against him by the victim last year. Recently, the CBI booked him under murder charges following the accident involving the victim and her lawyer on NH-31 in Rae Bareli. In Sunday’s accident, the girl and her lawyer suffered critical injuries while her two aunts were killed.

Sengar is a four-time MLA. His involvement in the rape case invited flak from the opposition parties and other quarters and the pressure had been mounting on the BJP to act against him.

Meanwhile, three of the nine security personnel who were assigned to guard the victim have been suspended by the Yogi Adityanath government. The girl was provided police security by the state government after she had expressed fear for her life from Sengar’s men. However, on Sunday no cop was present with the girl when the accident happened.

The girl was raped by Sengar at his Unnao residence in 2017. However, the case was registered again him in 2018 after the girl attempted to immolate herself outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s residence in capital Lucknow against inaction by the police. The case was then transferred to the CBI by the government.

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court on Thursday quizzed its secretary general, asking why rape victim’s letter was not put before the CJI as early as possible. The secretary general replied that the court received 1,100 more letter petitions and the Unnao survivor’s letter was being processed as per full court guidelines.
