Unnao Case Timeline: The Relentless Struggle To Survive

June 4, 2017: A 17-year-old girl was allegedly raped by BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar at his house in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao under the pretext of giving her employment. June 11, 2017: The girl went missing and her family members lodge a police complaint. Later she was brought back to Unnao after she was found in a village in Aurraiya. June 22, 2017: The survivor alleged that the local police stopped her from naming the BJP MLA in her statement. July 3, 2017: The girl's family sent a letter to CM Yogi Adityanath demanding registration of an FIR against Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his brother Atul Singh. February 24, 2018: The survivor’s mother moved court demanding that names of Sengar and his brother be included in the FIR. April 3, 2018: The girl’s father was brutally thrashed by the MLA’s brother, Atul Singh Sengar and was sent to jail in connection with an Arms Act case. Also Watch | Unnao Case: Here Is The Timeline Starting From 2012 April 8, 2018: The survivor and her family tried to immolate herself outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s residence, alleging police inaction against the accused. April 9, 2018: The father died in judicial custody due to alleged police torture. April 10, 2018: The MLA’s brother, Atul Singh Sengar, was arrested along with four others, by the UP Crime Branch, for allegedly thrashing the girl’s father. April 11, 2018: A special investigation team was formed to probe the alleged rape case as well as the custodial death of the father. Later, the Unnao police lodged three cases in the matter and following a public uproar, the state government transferred the investigation to the CBI. July 7, 2018: CBI charged five people in its first chargesheet in the Unnao cases, including Sengar’s brother of murdering the rape survivor’s father. Also Read | Rise And Fall Of Kuldeep Singh Sengar July 13 2018: In the third case, the CBI filed a chargesheet against Sengar and nine others for allegedly hatching a conspiracy and implicating the rape survivor’s father in an Arms Act case. July 4, 2019: The uncle of the girl was convicted in a 19-year-old case of attempt to murder and sent to 10 years of imprisonment by a district court. The case was filed by Sengar’s brother. July 28, 2019: The rape survivor and her lawyer were critically injured and two of her aunts were killed when the car in which they were travelling collided with a truck in Gurubakshganj area of Rae Bareli. One of the deceased aunts was a key witness in the case. July 29, 2019: A fresh FIR is lodged against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar along with 29 others for criminal conspiracy to kill the survivor and eye-witness in a car accident. July 30, 2019: UP government recommended CBI probe in road accident, while the news surfaced that the victim had already written to the CJI before accident about threat perception. Centre handed over to CBI probe into road accident. July 31, 2019: SC sought details of probe in accident case in which the Unnao rape victim was injured and transferred the case to Delhi. SC also awarded Rs 20 lakh compensation to the Unnao rape survivor's lawyer to be paid by UP government. Meanwhile, CBI booked suspended BJP MLA for murder. Later in the day, BJP expelled MLA Kuldeep Sengar from the party. Watch | BJP Expels Its MLA Kuldeep Sengar

The Unnao rape case that shocked the entire nation last year when the victim allegedly self-immolated outside the residence of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's, once again came to light when the survivor met a deadly accident on Sunday. She is now battling for her life in the hospital. The accident generated much attention of the people and the authorities with many alleging that it was pre-meditated - orchestrated by BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, accused of raping the victim and threatening her family. Even the survivor's family has alleged a conspiracy. Meanwhile, facing a massive public outrage, the BJP today expelled its jailed Uttar Pradesh lawmaker Kuldeep Sengar. Let us look at the timeline and progression of this case since 2017 that has taken the entire country by shock
