Indian politician faces murder probe after 'rape victim' is hit in car crash

Indian police are probing whether a ruling-party politician was behind a car crash which injured a young woman who had accused her of rape.

The 19-year-old was critically injured and two of her relatives killed when their car was hit by a lorry in suspicious circumstances on Sunday.

The girl had accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar of raping her at his home in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh, in 2017, and her family now accuses him of ordering the hit.

The alleged victim is still fighting for her life in hospital, medics said last night, and her lawyer, who was also in the car, is critically injured.

Politician Kuldeep Singh Sengar (pictured centre) from Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's ruling party was accused of rape by the teenage girl

Her family claim the accident was 'planned' in a bid to 'wipe them out' and stop the case going to trial.

Last night India's Central Bureau of Investigation said it had opened a case after claims that Sengar was 'conspiring, threatening and harassing the family'.

The rape trial has also been moved to New Delhi to fend off fears that he could influence the outcome.

Sengar denies rape, and also denies any involvement in the crash which has brought the 2017 case back into the public spotlight.

Today he was expelled from PM Narendra Modi's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, according to Indian media.

The affair has become an embarrassment for the BJP, which is also in power in Uttar Pradesh and has been accused of inaction over the case.

Opposition leaders accuse the BJP of protecting Sengar after the case stirred public attention in 2017 and 2018.

The girl and her lawyer were left in a critical condition and two of her aunts were killed in the collision between a car and lorry on a state highway in Uttar Pradesh

Modi, who won a general election by a landslide in May after a campaign that promised greater attention to women's safety, including swift investigation and trial for rapes, has not commented on the case.

India's chief justice Ranjan Gogoi said the country's top court will examine the case, after the family wrote to the court weeks before the collision claiming they were facing threats.

'We (will) try to do something constructive in the midst of this highly destructive volatile environment,' Gogoi said in court.

However, he said he had not seen the family's earlier letter and said he had first heard about it in the media.

Gogoi also asked on a status report on the case, and is expected to look into the matter further on Thursday, he added.

The revelations have highlighted the sluggish nature of India's justice system, particularly in Uttar Pradesh.

Police initially refused to take action after the girl launched a rape claim against Sengar.

The girl's family accused Sengar's associates of orchestrating the road accident to stop the rape case going to trial

Her father was detained by police and severely beaten in custody - allegedly by Sengar's brother - and later died from his injuries.

She also tried to set herself on fire outside the home of state Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, a hardline BJP stalwart.

The Central Bureau of Investigation, a national agency, has taken on the case amid fears the local police may be influenced by the lawmaker.

Sengar was arrested in April last year but reports say the four-term legislator still enjoys considerable clout.

On Wednesday several opposition parties walked out of the lower house of parliament to protest the government's silence on the case.

The case is the latest alleged sexual assault to cause outrage in India, where violent crime against women has been on the rise despite tough new laws.

Sex crimes have been a high-profile subject since the mass demonstrations that followed the gang rape and murder of a student in New Delhi in 2012.

The crime attracted international headlines and saw rape laws overhauled but high numbers of assaults persist, with 40,000 rape cases reported every year.
