PU student stabbed to death in B’luru, allegedly for objecting to batchmate’s relationship

PU student stabbed to death in B’luru, allegedly for objecting to batchmate’s relationship

According to the police, Dayasagar had been objecting to Rakshit’s relationship with a girl and two had been quarrelling over the issue for the past two months.

news Crime

In a horrific incident of violence, a 17-year-old Bengaluru pre-university (PU) student was allegedly stabbed to death by his college mate on Wednesday. The crime took place at Soundarya PU College in Nagasandra, Hesaraghatta in the city’s outskirts. The institution has a total of 1200 students of both Commerce and Science streams.

The victim has been identified as Dayasagar SP, a Commerce student of PU-II grade. He had a spat with his alleged assaulter Rakshit P, who is also a PU-II Commerce student in another section.

A college staff told TNM, “Dayasagar was killed in the toilet. The incident took place around 8 am in the morning. Only some of the staff had reached the college by then as classes begin at 8:30 am.”

“At the time, the students was chatting among themselves or were on their mobile phones. This is when Rakshit had messaged Dayasagar asking him to come to the toilet. When he reached the toilet, Rakshit stabbed Dayasagar. There was panic among the students who rushed inside the toilet after the incident and got hold of Rakshit,” she added.

A college official said as soon as the staff came to know about the incident, police was informed, who in turn arrested Rakshit. Dayasagar was declared dead after he was taken to the hospital.

According to police, the altercation was over a relationship Rakshit was allegedly having with a college mate of theirs. According to police, Dayasagar had objected to Rakshit texting her but the latter did not listen.

Bagalagunte Police Station Inspector R Virupaksha confirmed that the accused is a major and is 18 years and two months old. A case of murder has been registered.

“The issue is very trivial. The accused was involved in a relationship with one girl in the institution. Dayasagar was not happy with that and insisted that Rakshit did not continue the relationship. They have been quarreling over the issue for the last two months. There was a small incident two days before between the accused and victim as well,” the inspector told TNM.
