'Will I Meet Unnao Rape Victim's Fate?' Student's Question Leaves Senior UP Cop Speechless

The police in UP’s Barabanki are visiting schools to mark what is being called police security week. In one such visit to a school, a class 11 student asked a tough question about Unnao rape case which left the police officers speechless.

The Uttar Pradesh police is under national scrutiny over its poor handling of the teen rape survivor’s case against a BJP MLA.

The student asked questions to the policemen referring to the car crash that took place on July 28. The student said, “You said we should raise our voice and protest. We know an 18-year-old teen was raped by a BJP leader”. She reportedly added that everyone knows that the car crash was not an accident.

Screengrab

“The truck number plate was painted black...It is one thing to protest when an ordinary person is involved, but what when the person is someone powerful?” she asked the policemen.

“We know no action will be taken if we protest and even if action is taken, it will be of no use. The girl is in a critical state in the hospital...If we protest, how will you ensure justice? How will you guarantee my safety? What’s the guarantee that nothing will happen to me?”

In the minute long video, the other students sitting are seen clapping and cheering for her.

When Police took a workshop on safety, a school girl talks about #Unnao asking how she can be safe when perpetrators are those in positions of power.

Any answers to this girl's man ki baat @narendramodi

Or it is that you take scripted questions only!

Credit - @scribe_prashant pic.twitter.com/VWd6QkDRoD — All India Mahila Congress (@MahilaCongress) August 1, 2019

The incident happened when the Uttar Pradesh Police delivered a lecture to the students about women’s safety. Additional Superintendent of Police S Gautam spoke about the right to raise one’s voice and protest when the student of Anand Bhawan school stood up and questioned him.

A truck hit the car carrying the rape survivor, when her family and lawyer were going to meet her uncle, who is in jail.

What is questionable in this whole accident was that the speeding truck’s licence plate was blackened, which is being investigated by the CBI following the family’s complaint alleging Kuldeep Sengar, the rape-accused MLA, had a role to play in the accident.

A UP police officer confirmed that the Unnao girl's family had alleged that they had been threatened to withdraw their complaint.

Screengrab

Senior Unnao police officer MP Verma confirmed that 25 complaints were received from the family, but added, "From whatever I have seen, I haven't seen any request for security. We are studying the case and we will see."

Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi asked Supreme Court authorities why he was not shown a letter sent to him by the complainant. The court will take up the letter on Thursday.

Kuldeep Sengar was arrested on April 13, 2018, after the girl accused him of raping her in June 2017, when she visited his home to ask for a job. The complainant accused the police of not taking any action when she approached them after the alleged incident.

Picture Credits: Screengrab/AFP
