Exclusive! Sonam Kapoor on sexual harassment allegations against Rajkumar Hirani: Will speak at the right time

After Vidhu Vinod Chopra refused to comment on the sexual harassment allegations against his frequent collaborator and 'Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga' co-producer Rajkumar Hirani, the film's leading actress Sonam Kapoor also chose to evade the question.

During an exclusive chat with DNA on Wednesday, when asked how is she processing the entire episode of Hirani's name being dropped from the film's promotional material in the wake of the #MeToo allegations against him, she said that while she has always been a vocal supporter of the Me Too movement, she would like to reserve her comment on the matter for the 'right time'.

The actress also added that according to her, Rajkumar Hirani is one of the best filmmakers in Bollywood today and one of the nicest persons, she knows.

Watch her interview here:

Earlier during the second trailer launch event of Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga in Mumbai, producer Vidhu Vinod Chopra was asked for his response to the accusations of sexual assault against Hirani. Chopra had then stated, "This stage here is for something else, which is extremely important for us, as important as what you're talking about. This opportunity we should use to talk about this issue and that of course, when there is a right time, we will talk about it."

For the uninitiated, Sanju director Rajkumar Hirani's name is the latest addition in the list of the ones that have been called out for sexual harassment in the #MeToo movement. A female assisstant who worked with Hirani during the production of Sanju, had alleged that the director sexually harassed her on several occasions between March and September 2018, as per a report in HuffPostIndia.

Post that, Hirani, who was supposed to be the co-producer of Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga, saw his name being dropped from the posters, trailers and other promotional snippets of the film.

The movie is directed by Shelly Chopra Dhar and also stars Anil Kapoor, Juhi Chawla and Rajkummar Rao in the leads. It hit the theatres on February 1, 2019.
