Cops turn criminals! Lottery centre owner kidnapped for want of money

The two cops allegedly posed as crime branch officers and pretended to raid the lottery centre (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Bringing shame to their department, two ambassadors of law were caught misusing their powers in an incident. A Mumbai Police driver and a junior officer were allegedly involved in the abduction of a lottery centre owner. The two accused were arrested on Tuesday.

Allegedly, the driver and the junior officer abducted a lottery centre owner and forcefully took money from him by posing as crime branch officers. The incident is said to have happened on January 24.

Also Read: Budget 2019: Reduce medical expenses, say senior citizens

Ram Jadhav, who is a 55-year-old police sub-inspector and is posted with a special branch (SB) along with Arvind Andhare, a 52-year-old, employed with the Motor Transport division of the Mumbai Police decided to execute their plan of extorting money from the lottery centre owner by pretending to be crime branch officers.

As per the Times of India's report, the two accused posed as crime branch officers and deceived the lottery centre owner into believing that they had raided the centre. The incident took place at the Cotton Green in central Mumbai.

Allegedly, the centre owner, Hanumant Kamble was asked by the two accused to accompany them in a van because senior officials wanted to have a conversation with him. However, later, Kamble was taken to an isolated spot on the P D'Mello Road after which, Rs 10,000 were taken from him.

After taking Rs 10,000, they forced Kamble to withdraw Rs 10,500 from his ATM. After receiving the money, they beat Kamble and escaped. Kamble later filed a complaint with the Kalachowki police station on January 25. After the complaint, a case of robbery and kidnapping has been filed against the two accused.

The CCTV footage of the ATM centre helped in identifying the two accused. A case has been filed against the two and they have been remanded by the court to stay in police custody till February 1.
