Uttar Pradesh: Unnao rape survivor's mother receives compensation as per Supreme Court’s directive

Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) Chairperson Swati Maliwal consoles the family members of Unnao rape survivor at the Trauma Centre of King George's Medical University in Lucknow | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Lucknow District Magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said there was improvement in the health condition of Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer The BJP expelled Kuldeep Sengar, the four-time MLA, who is already in jail on charges of raping the Unnao woman The Supreme Court also provided CRPF security for the victim as well as her lawyer’s family

Unnao: Acting on a Supreme Court order, the Unnao district administration in Uttar Pradesh today sent a cheque of Rs 25 lakh to the Lucknow district magistrate for handing it over to the rape survivor's family and the lawyer.

This comes after the Supreme Court bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and comprising Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose directed the transfer of all five cases registered in connection with the Unnao rape incident from Uttar Pradesh to Delhi apart from providing CRPF security for the victim as well as her lawyer’s family.

The apex court also directed the state government to provide Rs 25 lakh to the rape survivor as interim compensation.

"As per directives of the additional chief secretary (home), a cheque of Rs 25 lakh for the family of the rape survivor has been prepared and it has been sent to the district magistrate of Lucknow," Unnao District Magistrate Devendra Kumar Pandey said.

The woman was travelling with her family when a truck hit their car in Rae Bareli district on Sunday. In the accident, two of her relatives were killed, while the rape survivor and her lawyer suffered critical injuries and are undergoing treatment at a Lucknow hospital.

The family has alleged there was a conspiracy behind the incident.

Lucknow District Magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said there was an improvement in the health condition of Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer admitted in King George Medical University hospital in the state capital. He further claimed that the family is satisfied with the treatment being provided here.

Soon after the Supreme Court cracked the whip, the Uttar Pradesh police swung into damage control mode and suspended three constables who were entrusted with the providing security to the survivor.

Meanwhile, the BJP expelled Kuldeep Sengar, the four-time MLA, who is already in jail on charges of raping the Unnao woman. The decision to expel Sengar was taken by the central BJP leadership and the announcement was made by UP party chief Swatantra Dev Singh.

Apart from transferring the five cases to Delhi, the apex court also directed the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to complete the probe related to Sunday's road accident and designated the court of Tis Hazari (West) District Judge Dharmesh Sharma as the competent court to hold the trial in five sensational criminal cases.

After the accident, Samajwadi Party termed it a political conspiracy demanding the resignation of UP CM Yogi Adityanath while Congress workers in the state performed a 'havan' for the wellbeing of the rape survivor.
