Amid confusion, BJP confirms Unnao rape accused MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar’s expulsion from party

Kuldeep Singh Sengar's expulsion from BJP confirmed | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights BJP confirms Kuldeep Singh Sengar has been expelled Sengar is accused of raping the Unnao girl The Unnao rape survivor is critical after being injured in an accident on Sunday

Lucknow: Clearing doubts over the status of Kuldeep Singh Sengar, the Bharatiya Janata Party confirmed on Thursday evening that the Unnao rape accused MLA has been expelled from the party. The development has come amid the continuing outrage over Unnao rape survivor’s accident in Raebareli last Sunday.

The survivor continues to remain critical along with her lawyer. While both were seriously injured on Sunday when a truck hit their car in the Uttar Pradesh town, two of her aunts were killed in the incident.

The Uttar Pradesh police have filed an FIR in connection with the matter and named Sengar as an accused. He has been booked for attempt to murder along with his brother and eight others.

Sengar is accused of raping the Unnao girl at his residence in 2017 when she was a minor. He is also accused of killing two members of her family.

Amid rising anger against the lawmaker and demand from the Opposition parties to sack him, the BJP today finally acted in the matter and expelled Sengar from the party. He had already been suspended after being accused of rape last year. The MLA has been behind bars since April 13 last year when he was arrested on rape charges.

The confirmation came in the evening from Uttar Pradesh BJP chief Swatantra Dev Singh, who said in Lucknow that the BJP central leadership has expelled the legislator.

Singh issued the clarification after he had earlier in the day stated that Sengar was suspended by the BJP and not sacked as against media reports. That statement had created confusion over Sengar’s fate.

As per sources, Singh received a call from BJP working president JP Nadda, who apprised him of the party's decision. Singh was asked to make a prompt announcement in the media.

The rape survivor’s family has alleged that Sunday’s accident was a conspiracy to eliminate her. They have alleged the Bangermau MLA’s role in the incident.

On Tuesday, the Centre gave the charge of probe into the accident to the Central Bureau of Investigation. The same had been recommended by the Yogi Adityanath government, which had been under tremendous pressure to act on the matter.

Meanwhile, the condition of the Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer continued to be critical but stable on Thursday. Doctors at the King George Medical University in Lucknow, where the duo is admitted, said both are stable but on ventilator support.

Lucknow District Magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma said: “There is improvement in the health condition of Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer who are admitted in King George Medical University hospital, Lucknow. Family is satisfied with the treatment being provided here.”

The official informed that as per the directive of the Supreme Court to the state government, a compensation of Rs 25 lakhs by way of a cheque has been handed over to the Unnao rape survivor's mother.
