3 year old girl raped, beheaded in Jamshedpur, Two Arrested

Jamshedpur: In a shocking incident, a three-year-old girl was brutally raped and killed by two notorious men after kidnapping her from Tatanagar Railway Station on July 25.

Following the incident, the Government Railway Police (GRP) of Chakradharpur Railway Division of South Eastern Railways arrested both the accused under rape cum murder charges.

Police conducted the search operation after the child’s mother lodged a missing report at the Tatanagar GRP on July 26, 2019.

Police arrested both the accused after examining CCTV footage of the Tatanagar Railway Station.

Speaking to the media, GRP informed that one of the accused identified as Rinku Sah (36), a resident of Ramadin Bagan under Telco Police Station kidnapped the minor girl from the platform no. 1 at around 11.30 pm. The accused then took her to the fabrication yard of ISWP Company in Telco which 4 km away from the station. Sah was then joined by his accomplice Kailash Kumar (38) and raped her.

What is more shocking into the incident is that the duo then beheaded her with a sharp weapon when she started screaming. Later, they stuffed the decapitated body in a bag and dumped it behind the boundary wall of ISWP Company.

It is to be noted that the mother and the child along with another person were sleeping on the platform on July 25 when accused Sah kidnapped her. As per media reports, the victim’s mother and Monu and the minor girl was about to board Odisha bound train.

Rape in India

Rape is the fourth most common crime against women in India. According to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 2013 annual report, 24,923 rape cases were reported across India in 2012. Out of these, 24,470 were committed by someone known to the victim (98% of the cases).

India has been characterized as one of the "countries with the lowest per capita rates of rape". A large number of rapes go unreported in various countries including India.[7][8] In India, consensual sex given on the false promise of marriage constitutes rape.[9] The willingness to report the rape has increased in recent years, after several incidents of rape received widespread media attention and triggered public protest. This led the Government of India to reform its penal code for crimes of rape and sexual assault.

According to NCRB 2015 statistics, Madhya Pradesh has the highest raw number of rape reports among Indian states, while Jodhpur in Rajasthan has the highest per capita rate of rape reports in cities followed by Delhi, the capital city.

Also Read: Minor rape, murder accused held guilty in Hailakandi
