Cops in a quandary as H’bag woman files triple talaq case

Hazaribag: On the day The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019, better known as the triple talaq law, came into existence, Hazaribag police filed an FIR against Dildaraj Ansari in what is likely to be the first case filed in the state by a woman seeking justice under provisions of the new law. However, police are in a quandary on how to proceed with the case as they are yet to receive a notification on the new law.On Wednesday, Subeda Khatoon, a mother of three from Nawadah village under Bishungarh police station in Hazaribag, filed an FIR against Ansari accusing him of giving her an instant divorce on June 8 as she failed to meet his demand for dowry . The couple got married four years ago. She told the police that she gathered courage after the triple talaq bill was passed by Rajya Sabha on July 30 and approached them.Bishungarh police station in-charge Ganesh Kumar Singh on Thursday told TOI that Khatoon in her FIR said Ansari regularly tortured her for dowry. He said, “A few days ago, Ansari beat her up and then divorced her through triple talaq. Khatoon told us that she wanted to take up the case against her husband under the new law. However, we have not received a notification on the new law and have instead filed a case against Ansari as per Section 498 (A) of the IPC (husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty ) and the Dowry Act.” Singh added that Anasri is yet to be arrested.Bishungarh sub-divisional police officer Sahdeo Sao, said: “We are pursuing this case carefully to ascertain whether the triple talaq law is applicable here or not.” As per the new law, a person found guilty of instant triple talaq can be jailed for up to three years.President Ram Nath Kovind has given assent to the triple talaq bill passed by Parliament, turning it into a law which makes the practice of instant divorce among Muslims a punishable offence, a government notification published on Wednesday said. The Act will replace an ordinance promulgated on February 21 this year to the same effect.The new law makes talaq-e-biddat or any other similar form of divorce having the effect of instantaneous and irrevocable divorce pronounced by a Muslim husband void and illegal. It makes it illegal to pronounce talaq three times in spoken, written or through SMS or WhatsApp or any other electronic chat in one sitting. “Any pronouncement of talaq by a Muslim husband upon his wife, by words, either spoken or written or in electronic form or in any other manner whatsoever, shall be void and illegal,” the law says.
