3-year-old raped, beheaded: Search on for child's head in Jharkhand

JAMSHEDPUR: Two days after they found the decapitated body of a three-year-old girl, the Government Railway Police (GRP) of Tatanagar is still looking for the severed head of the toddler who was kidnapped, raped and beheaded by two men last week. The cops, who have asked rag-pickers in the area to help them with their search, have also been unable to find the weapon that was used in executing the crime.On the night of July 25, Rinku Sah (36) and Kailash Kumar (38) abducted the child while she was sleeping by the side of her mother at platform no. 1 at the Tatanagar railway station, police said, adding that the two raped the girl at Telco police station area, beheaded her and stuffed her body in a plastic bag and dumped it behind a wall in the early hours of July 26.The victim’s mother had lodged a missing child report with the Tatanagar GRP on July 26 and police on Wednesday arrested two persons after examining CCTV footage of the station. The two accused reportedly confessed before the police during interrogation and told the cops where the headless corpse was, but they have not been able to explain where the girl’s head is.Sources said Sah, whose mother is a police constable, has a long criminal record and was an accused in two separate cases of sexual assault and attempt to murder lodged against him in 2008 and 2015. “He was in jail for two years for the 2015 case and has been out of prison on bail since last year,” Deputy SP of GRP (Tatanagar) N M Ansari said. Sah’s neighbours said his mother helped him get away lightly with previous crimes. Kailash's father is a CRPF jawan currently posted in Jammu and Kashmir.The Tatanagar GRP is taking help of rag pickers and sanitation workers of the area to trace the missing head. Ansari added, “Our team searched for the missing head all through the day in and around the incident site on Thursday. On Wednesday we had taken two dog squad teams to the crime scene to search for the missing head of the girl but couldn't find it,” Ansari said, adding that the girl's mother identified the body of the victim. “We will continue with our effort to trace the missing head,” he added.
