Jan. 30: The assassination anniversary of political leader Mahatma Gandhi

Gandhi (5/8) Movie CLIP - Not My Obedience (1982) HD Gandhi movie clips: http://j.mp/1uv2UQ3 BUY THE MOVIE: http://amzn.to/vTGqrO Don't miss the HOTTEST NEW TRAILERS: http://bit.ly/1u2y6pr CLIP DESCRIPTION: Gandhi (Ben Kingsley) gives a rousing speech promoting non-violent opposition to an unjust law. FILM DESCRIPTION: It was Richard Attenborough's lifelong dream to bring the life story of Indian political and spiritual leader Mahatma Gandhi to the screen.

Gandhi (2/8) Movie CLIP - Thrown Off the Train (1982) HD Gandhi movie clips: http://j.mp/1uv2UQ3 BUY THE MOVIE: http://amzn.to/vTGqrO Don't miss the HOTTEST NEW TRAILERS: http://bit.ly/1u2y6pr CLIP DESCRIPTION: Gandhi (Ben Kingsley) is thrown off a train in South Africa for sitting in a first-class compartment. FILM DESCRIPTION: It was Richard Attenborough's lifelong dream to bring the life story of Indian political and spiritual leader Mahatma Gandhi to the screen.

CAIRO - 30 January 2019: Mahatma Gandhi is one of the most famous political activists in the world; Jan. 30 marks the anniversary of his assassination after his calls to the Hindu majority to respect the rights of the Muslim minority were considered by Hindu fanatics as a great betrayal.A Hindu man decided to assassinate Gandhi on Jan. 30, 1948, shooting three deadly bullets at him. Gandhi died at the age of 78.Gandhi was exposed to six assassination attempts in his life; the sixth killed him.Gandhi‘s famous statement before his death was: “They will ignore you and then fight you and then try to kill you and then negotiate and then back down and eventually you will win.”In commemoration of this great historical figure, the universal film industry presented a number of films portraying his life, in which India’s top stars such as Shahrukh Khan participated.The most significant films that illustrated Gandhi’s life were “Gandhi” released in 1982, starring Ben Kingsley and “The Making of the Mahatma” released in 1996 starring Ajit Kapoor.Also, “Hey Ram”, a 2000 Indian alternate historical fiction political drama film, was simultaneously made in Tamil and Hindi and also dubbed in Telugu to commemorate the life of Gandhi. The film was written, directed and produced by Kamal Hassan, who also acted as the protagonist in the film.In 2006, “Laga Raho Munna Bhai”, an Indian comedy-drama film directed by Rajkumar Hiraniand and produced by Vidhu Vinod Chopra, was released. In "Lage Raho Munna Bhai", the eponymous lead character starts to see the spirit of Mahatma Gandhi. Through his interactions with Gandhi, he begins to practice what he refers to as Gandhigiri (a neologism for Gandhism) to help ordinary people solve their problems.Last but not least, the film “Gandhi, my father” is a 2007 Indian biographical drama by Feroz Abbas Khan. It was produced by Bollywood actor Anil Kapoor, and released on Aug. 3, 2007.The film explores the troubled relationship between Mahatma Gandhi and his son Harilal Gandhi.
