Community service at old age home for minor who raped his 5-year-old sister

Surat: A 15-year-old boy was convicted of sexual assault on his five-year-old sister by Juvenile Justice Board (JJB) here on Thursday.

The board ordered that the convict would have to do community service in an old age home and do vocational course as well. He will have to stay in a special home for 10 months, too.

In October 2018 offence, the JJB announced judgment and convicted the boy for raping his sister under various sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act. As per the board’s order, the convict will have to stay in the special home for safety at Mehsana for 10 months. Later, he has been ordered to do a one-year vocational training course and along with it community service at an old age home in the city for four months. He will have to do community service for three hours daily.

“Since the minor convict did not wish to study, we ordered the state government to help him get vocational training. He and his family work as ragpickers and he did not study after class II,” said Pratibha Desai, member of JJB.

The case proved challenging for cops since the parents were not cooperating in the investigation since their son was involved in their daughter’s rape, and they were trying to protect him. The rape survivor was not given treatment initially, but when the bleeding did not stop, she was brought to hospital where she revealed the details to doctors. When the doctors called police, the mother lied that the girl was sexually assaulted by some men despite knowing that it was her son.

The girl’s mother had turned hostile during court proceedings. However, the charges were proved as the girl confirmed involvement of the boy in the crime.

“It was a tricky case since the convict was minor and brother of the rape survivor. So police had to tackle it carefully. We are satisfied that we could bring it to conviction,” said Vidhi Chaudhary, deputy commissioner of police, who was supervising the investigation.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
