2 guilty of auto gang rape

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, August 1

The two accused in the 2016 auto gang rape case were today held guilty by the court of Additional Sessions Judge Poonam R Joshi. The quantum of sentence will be pronounced on August 7.

Mohammad Irfan (29), hailing from Uttar Pradesh, and Kamal Hasan, alias Dil Dil, from Delhi were accused of raping a 21-year-old girl in 2016. The accused was charged under Sections 376 D (gang rape) of IPC.

Irfan was also involved in a similar gang rape case that took place in 2017 and was sentenced to life imprisonment till death along with two other accused last year. He was arrested in March 2018.

The present case dates back to December 2016. A 21-year-old BA student, who worked at a call centre, was returning home from work when she was raped in Sector 29.

The victim had hired an auto-rickshaw from Sector 34 for Hallo Majra with one of the accused driving it and the other sitting on the passenger seat. The accused stopped the vehicle near a slip road in Sector 29 saying that it had broken down. They then pushed her into the forest area nearby where they allegedly took turns to rape her.

The challan filed by the police had revealed that the accused had threatened the girl at knifepoint that if she tried to raise the alarm, she would be violated like Nirbhaya. The accused had told the victim that he had raped and killed several girls.

The owner of the auto-rickshaw, who had rented it out to accused Irfan, told the court that the same vehicle was used in both incidents of gang rape, reported in 2016 and 2017.

Irfan involved in 2017 auto gang rape too

On November 17, 2017, the victim, a native of Dehradun had hired an auto from Sector 37 for Mohali. The auto already had two male occupants, who were known to the driver. The auto was taken to a forest area in Sector 53 where the trio raped her. Mohammad Irfan (29), Mohammad Garib (23) and Kismat Ali (23) were sentenced to life imprisonment till death in the case.
