Unnao rape case: BJP expels rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar from party

Amid fierce opposition from several sections, the Bharatiya Janata Party expelled Kuldeep Singh Sengar from the party on Thursday. There were reports of the party having expelled him on Tuesday itself.

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Wednesday took over the probe into the Unnao rape survivor’s accident and registered an FIR against Sengar and nine others.

The survivor and her lawyer Mahendra Singh are in a critical condition after they met with an accident on the National Highway 232 near Raebareli on Sunday. A truck rammed into the car in which she was travelling along with her mother, two aunts and lawyer. Locals rushed to the spot, pulled out the victims and rushed them to a nearby hospital where the girl’s aunts were declared ‘brought dead’. Both, the survivor and Singh are on the ventilator support.

The victim and her family had earlier written to the Chief Justice of India, Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court, UP Chief Secretary and UP DGP, stating that they received threats from the kin of accused Sengar to ‘settle’ the case, failing which, they would be implicated in false cases.

On June 4, 2017, the survivor, along with an aide Shashi Singh, had approached Sengar at his home in Uttar Pradesh’s Makhi village, where the incident took place. Singh, who was later held by police, allegedly stood guard outside the room as Sengar and his associates gang-raped the victim. The local police also delayed filing the case despite repeated requests by the victim.

The incident came to light after the victim and members of her family tried to immolate herself outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s home. On April 9, the victim’s father died in police custody, with the postmortem report indicating foul play involved. The Allahabad High Court had also rapped the police for its inaction against the BJP lawmaker who was allegedly influencing the “law-and-order machinery”.

Zee Media Newsroom
