3yo Kidnapped From Railway Station By Two Men Who Later Gang-Raped & Beheaded Her

Share Tweet Follow us on Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest stories and updates daily.

A 3-year-old girl was allegedly gang-raped and beheaded by two men in India, but before that she was kidnapped whilst she was asleep, reported NST. The poor toddler was kidnapped at Tatanagar railway station, Jamshedpur city last week by a man wearing a t-shirt and shorts.

Upon waking up and realising that her daughter was missing, the mother did what every parent would have done – she rang up the police. She reckoned that her new partner may have had a hand in the abduction of her daughter. The mother elaborated that she had left her husband and made her journey to Jamshedpur with her partner.

FYI, she was travelling from Purulia district, West Bengal to Jamshedpur.

You can watch the video of the abduction here:

Source: Youtube

The report further revealed that the body of the young girl was found near the Telco police station in Jamshedpur, but much to their horror, she was found with her head missing. Up till now, the girl’s head has yet to be found by the local authorities.

However, three men – including the two men who abducted the little girl – have been arrested, and they are suspected of raping as well as killing the child.

Apparently, Rinku Shah, who is one of the murderers, had just left prison after being convicted for kidnapping a child and attempting to murder her in 2015.

If you didn’t know, Rinku was the man who snatched the child; he’s a repeat offender and a father of three children.

Following that, he and his friend, Kailash told the local police that they gang-raped the three-year-old and strangled her because she was continuously crying.

On the other hand, the girl’s mum’s partner, Monu Mandal was also arrested, and he is currently being interrogated for child trafficking.

We hope that the police will get to the bottom of this matter and prosecute the men who are responsible for the child’s death. Hopefully, justice will be served for the girl!

Also read: 16yo Girl Drugged & Gang-Raped by 4 Cousins & Teacher Because They Were Jealous of Her Good Grades

ShareTweet

Follow us on Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest stories and updates daily.
