Don’t want to shift Unnao rape survivor to Delhi hospital for now: Family tells Supreme Court

UP Director General of Police OP Singh exits the hospital after visiting the Unnao rape survivor, in Lucknow. (PTI/File)

Family members of the Unnao rape survivor on Friday told the Supreme Court that they do not want to shift the victim to New Delhi from a hospital in Lucknow. The survivor is unconscious and is in a critical condition. The lawyer, appearing for the family in the court, said she can be shifted once her condition is stable.

Senior advocate V Giri told the top court that the rape survivor is unconscious and on ventilator, and her family has expressed that she be treated at a Lucknow hospital for the time being. Giri is assisting the court as amicus curiae in the matter.

Accepting the suggestion, a bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi and comprising Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, said the rape survivor’s family is at liberty to take a call on shifting her to Delhi from Lucknow.

Besides the victim, the bench was also informed that the lawyer, who was also injured in the accident, was taken off ventilator but his condition continued to remain critical. His father was indecisive on him being shifted to Delhi, the counsel told the court.

The bench gave liberty to the family of the victim and the lawyer, saying they can approach the Supreme Court’s secretary general if at any point they would like to shift them to Delhi.

The top court, however, ordered the “immediate shifting” of the victim’s uncle, who is currently lodged in a Rae Bareli jail, to Tihar jail in Delhi.

The court also said that media organisations should not directly, indirectly or in any manner disclose the identity of the Unnao rape survivor.

On Wednesday, the Supreme Court expressed strong displeasure over the handling of the Unnao rape case and the road accident last Sunday which left the victim and her lawyer critically injured and her two aunts dead. It transferred all cases related to the matter from Uttar Pradesh to Delhi, while ordering interim compensation of Rs 25 lakh for the victim and CRPF security cover for her, the family and their lawyer.

In line with the court direction, the Lucknow District Magistrate and SSP handed a cheque of Rs 25 lakh to the victim’s mother later on Thursday.

BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who represents Bangarmau in the UP Assembly, is the accused in the rape case and has been booked for murder in the accident case.
