Unnao Case Updates: Unnao Rape Survivor Won't Be Shifted To Delhi For Now, Says Top Court

Top Court transferred all the five cases involving the Unnao rape survivor out of UP to Delhi.

The Supreme Court today said the Unnao rape survivor won't be airlifted to AIIMS in Delhi after her family said they want her treatment to continue in Lucknow. It also ordered that the survivor's uncle, who is jailed in Uttar Pradesh's Rae Bareli, be shifted to Tihar Jail immediately.

On Thursday Supreme Court transferred all the five cases involving the Unnao rape survivor out of Uttar Pradesh to Delhi. The court also directed the Uttar Pradesh government to pay interim compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the rape survivor by today. A bench, headed by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, also said the CBI probe into the car crash must be completed in seven days and the rape case in 45 days.

The teenager is battling for her life after a car crash on Sunday. The top court also said the CBI's probe into the car crash must be completed in seven days. On Thursday, the top court had asked the "responsible" officer of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to appear before it and give details on the status of rape case and the car crash.The CBI is investigating both the cases.

Here are the live updates on Supreme Court hearing on Unnao rape case:

Aug 02, 2019 12:56 (IST) The teenage girl and her family met with an accident in Rae Bareli when the car they were travelling in collided with a truck, whose number plate was scrubbed with black paint. Two of her aunts died. The girl's lawyer, who was also in the vehicle, has been admitted in hospital with injuries. The security detail that the girl was meant to have, was not accompanying her.



Aug 02, 2019 12:48 (IST) A teenage girl who was allegedly raped by an expelled BJP lawmaker in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao won't be shifted to Delhi for treatment for injuries she suffered in a road accident on July 28. Her family told the Supreme Court today that they want her treatment to continue at the hospital in Lucknow where she is being treated for serious injuries.



Aug 02, 2019 11:32 (IST) The Supreme Court today said the Unnao rape survivor won't be airlifted to AIIMS in Delhi after her family said they want her treatment to continue in Lucknow.

Aug 02, 2019 11:09 (IST) #UnnaoCase | CBI today produced the driver and cleaner of truck that hit rape survivor's vehicle in court.



Updates https://t.co/D2DyFisvmYpic.twitter.com/o6vivMeqR4 - NDTV (@ndtv) August 2, 2019

Aug 02, 2019 11:04 (IST) The CRPF has taken over security of the rape surivor and lawyer 's families.

Aug 02, 2019 08:26 (IST) On Thursday, the top court had asked the "responsible" officer of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to appear before it and give details on the status of rape case and the car crash.The CBI is investigating both the cases.

Aug 02, 2019 08:26 (IST) The court directed the Uttar Pradesh government to pay interim compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the rape survivor by today.
