Unnao cases: Supreme Court drops decision to transfer Rae Bareli ‘accident’ case to Delhi

Counsel for Unnao rape survivor’s family tells court that girl’s mother is reluctant about shifting victim from Lucknow hospital

The Supreme Court on Friday suspended its decision a day before to transfer outside Uttar Pradesh the CBI case into the car-truck collision that left the Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer critically injured and killed two of her relatives.

A Bench of Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi and Deepak Gupta urgently assembled late in the afternoon to hear Solicitor General Tushar Mehta submit that the immediate transfer of the 'accident' case to Delhi would raise jurisdictional hiccups for the Judicial Magistrate, CBI, Lucknow, to remand the accused and to grant permission to the CBI for custodial interrogation of the accused persons.

Allowing the plea, the Bench modified its decision to the extent of keeping in abeyance the transfer of the case to a CBI court in Delhi till investigation is completed. On Thursday, the court gave the CBI seven to 14 days to complete its probe in the case.

Earlier in the day, counsel for the family of the rape survivor informed the Supreme Court that the girl’s mother was reluctant about shifting the victim from the Lucknow hospital where she is on ventilator support.

“Our primary concern is health of the victim,” Chief Justice Gogoi said.

Also Read Unnao rape case: a timeline

The Bench agreed when advocate D. Ram Krishna Reddy sought the indulgence of the court to make an urgent mention whenever it becomes imperative to shift the girl out of Lucknow for advanced medical treatment.

The court listed the case for Monday to get a further update on her medical condition.

Amicus curiae and senior advocate V. Giri, who was asked by the court to enquire into the condition of the victim's lawyer in the hospital, said he had talked to the injured man's brother. The family of the lawyer did not seem to be very clued in about the exact medical status of the injured man, but only that he was not on ventilator support, Mr. Giri said.

Solicitor General Tushar Mehta said the Centre was willing to extend any help required to the victim and the lawyer.

Restraint on media

Mr. Giri complained that past interviews revealing the identity of the victim were aired by some channels. To this, the court restrained the media, both print and electronic, from disclosing the identity of the victim directly or indirectly.

The “accident” occurred on Sunday (July 28) when a speeding truck hit their car near Rae Bareli.

Uncannily, days before this accident, the girl had reached out to the CJI in a letter. The letter, dated July 12, had spelt out the threats to her life and her family from the accused persons, which included Kuldeep Singh Sengar, a four-time BJP MLA from U.P.’s Bangermau. It had landed at the Supreme Court Registry on July 17, but did not reach the CJI’s table till July 30 – well after the accident on Sunday.

The court was further informed that the State government had paid Rs. 25 lakh to the victim as interim compensation. Further, the family had been provided CRPF protection as per the apex court order.

Meanwhile, the court allowed the transfer of the victim's uncle from the Rae Bareli jail to the Tihar jail in Delhi for security reasons. He is a witness in the Unnao cases.
