[GROUND REPORT] Jamshedpur rape case: Prime accused a repeat offender, say police

The minor girl was abducted from Tatanagar railway station on July 24 when she was sleeping next to her mother.

Key Highlights The incident took place on July 24 in Jamshedpur The accused were arrested after checking the CCTV footage of the Tatanagar railway station Rinku Sahu, one of the accused has kidnapping charges against him

Jamshedpur: A three-year-old girl was allegedly raped and beheaded in Jharkhand's Jamshedpur by three men. Police launched a manhunt for the culprits and three of the accused have been arrested. The minor girl was abducted from Tatanagar railway station on July 24 when she was sleeping next to her mother.

According to police records, one of the accused has been identified as Rinku Sahu, is a repeat offender. He had been arrested earlier for kidnapping a minor and was out on bail. After they were arrested, the accused confessed to committing the crime.

How it happened

Late-night on July 24, the minor was sleeping next to her mother and her friend at Platform Number 2 of Tatanagar railway station. When the woman woke up and saw that her daughter was missing, she informed the police. The police scanned CCTV footage of the railway station and zeroed down on three suspects.

In the CCTV footage, a man could be seen lifting the child from next to her mother and walking away. The police also found the torso of the toddler in a bush, around 4 kilometres away from the Tatanagar railway station.

Noor Mustafa Ansari, DSP told Mirror Now that the minor was taken to Telco plant where she was gang-raped, strangled to death and then beheaded. The body of the minor was thrown across the wall of a building. Her torso had been kept in a plastic bag and thrown away. When the three accused were brought to the spot, angry locals beat them up and the police had to intervene and take them to the police station.

Yashwant Jain, National Commission of Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), said that the accused might be an acquaintance of the toddler's mother. Allegedly, the man sleeping next to the toddler's mother was her paramour. The toddler's mother has separated from her husband. Jain urged the society, government and citizens to stay vigilant so that similar instances are not repeated in the future.

Delhi Police constable booked for raping minor domestic help in Mundka

In July this year, a 17-year-old domestic help was allegedly raped by a Delhi Police head constable. The minor and the accused were alone at his house when the alleged incident took place.

The accused had been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. He was posted at Tis Hazari court complex as a head constable.
