We will treat you as daughter of the state: CM Kamal Nath offers Unnao rape survivor to shift to MP

File image | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights CM Kamal Nath offers Unnao rape survivor to shift to Madhya Pradesh The state would treat you as a daughter, Kamal Nath tells Unnao girl Cases related to Unnao rape incident have been transferred to Delhi from Uttar Pradesh

Bhopal: A day after the Supreme Court directed the Uttar Pradesh government to provide protection and Rs 25 lakh compensation to Unnao rape survivor, Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath on Friday offered the girl and her family to settle in his state.

Kamal Nath, while welcoming the Supreme Court directive which was duly implemented by the Yogi Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh, said that the rape survivor would be treated as a "daughter of the state" by his government.

The Supreme Court had yesterday also ordered that all five cases related to the Unnao rape incident be transferred from Lucknow to Delhi. The apex court directed that hearing in these cases be held on a daily basis and completed within 45 days.

"The Supreme Court decision on Unnao rape case is a welcome step. I appeal to the victim, her mother and family members, who have decided to leave Uttar Pradesh as it is unsafe, to settle in Madhya Pradesh. Our government will provide full security to the entire family," Kamal Nath said on Twitter.

"We will also provide better treatment to the victim and will take care of her in all aspects, including providing quality education, and ensure she does not face any problem," he added.

The Madhya Pradesh CM said his government would make all arrangements for the rape survivor’s to and fro journey to Delhi for attending court hearings.

"We will take care of her as the daughter of the state," Kamal Nath stated.

The Unnao girl (19) has accused BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of raping her at his residence in 2017. He was arrested shortly after a case was filed in connection with the allegations.

The case came back to limelight last Sunday after the Unnao rape survivor met with an accident in Uttar Pradesh’s Raebareli. The girl was travelling in a car with her family and lawyer when a speeding truck rammed into it. While the girl and her lawyer were critically injured in the accident, two of her aunts died.

The Unnao girl’s family has blamed Sengar for the conspiracy behind the accident. He has also been named in the FIR filed in connection with the accident.

Amid mounting pressure, the BJP, which had suspended Sengar from the party in 2017, finally expelled him yesterday.

The girl and her lawyer, meanwhile, continue to be critical but stable. Doctors at the King George’s Medical University hospital in Lucknow yesterday said both continue to be on ventilator support.
