Four leopards found dead near Uttarakhand's Rajaji Tiger Reserve, poisoning suspected

Two leopard cubs rescued in Ahmednagar in 2018 | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Insides of the animals was damaged, revealed post-mortem report Rajaji Tiger Reserve is spread over an area of 820 kilometres square Leopards were held responsible for the death of a tourist in Rajaji Tiger Reserve in 2018 Since 2016, fourteen incidents of leopards attacking humans have come to light from the region Estimates suggest that 14 leopards are active in Motichur range of the reserve, also known as the core area

Dehradun: In a most unfortunate development which is emerging from the state of Uttarakhand, four leopards were found dead at the Rajaji Tiger Reserve and Shivalik Forest Circle on Friday. Officials with the forest department have reason to believe that a very strong poison may have been used to kill the majestic cats, however, a post-mortem report has confirmed that the bodies of these predators were damaged on the inside.

The matter came to light when rangers spotted the carcasses of three leopards within one kilometre of the Rajaji Tiger Reserve (RTR). Reserve Director Prasanna Kumar Patra said that the two of these leopards were females while one was male. He further added that the bodies of the animals were found at Laldhang range of Landsdowne forest division. The area is considered the meeting point of RTR's Rawasan range, Haridwar forest division's Chidiyapur range and the Landhang range.

Uttarakhand: Three leopards found dead in forest area in Haridwar, today. Divisional Forest Officer Akash Verma, says, "Prima facie it appears a case of poisoning. Post mortem to ascertain facts." pic.twitter.com/pxcjH1rOEh — ANI (@ANI) August 2, 2019

After the discovery of the carcasses, forest rangers conducted a combing operation with the help of sniffer dogs but did not find any evidence leading to the reason behind the leopards' deaths. Officials, however, found another female leopard dead in Lalpani area of Dehradun forest division. The circumstances surrounding the deaths of these big cats give rise to suspicion, said Patra.

This shocking development comes less than a day after a leopardess was found electrocuted to death at a farm near Gujarat's Gir Wildlife Sanctuary. The deaths of these majestic cats have reaffirmed concerns about the rising man-animal conflict which can be seen in play across the length and breadth of the country.

In June of this year, villagers in Sivasagar district of Assam chased and killed a leopard after the animal reportedly injured three villagers. Forest department officials caught residents of the Mothisaiga Konwar village attempting to bury the big cat's carcass. Similarly, locals in Chitradurga district of Karnataka were caught on camera beating a leopard to death after it injured locals and tried to avoid human contact by climbing on top of a tree.

The Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) in a report asserted that as many as 218 leopard deaths were reported from different parts of India in the first four months of 2019 as compared to 500 deaths in all of 2018. The non-profit's report came as a rude shock and suggested that one leopard died in India each day. These animals were either beaten or shot, run over on railway tracks or roads or died as a result of being trapped in wells, added the report.
