CBI recreates accident scene, assigns 25 officials to probe Unnao case

The truck that hit car carrying rape victim and her relatives | File photo from PTI

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which has been directed by the Supreme Court (SC) to complete the probe into Unnao rape survivor accident case within 14 days, has deputed additional officials to complete the investigation.

"The CBI has constituted an additional team of 20 officers including SP, ASP, DSP, inspector and sub-inspector rank officials to assist in Unnao accident case. This is in addition to five officers who are already working on this case," a CBI spokesperson said.

Apart from these officials, a six-member team of Central Forensic Science Lab (CFSL) including experts from the CBI also visited Rae Bareli on Friday to recreate the crime scene.

The probe team headed by Joint Director of the CBI, Sampat Meena, too visited the crime scene in Rae Bareli and supervised the recreation of the crime scene. The CBI used same model of the truck and the car which collided with each other on July 28, leaving the rape survivor in a critical condition.

Sources said that the recreation of crime scene will help the agency understand how the accident may have taken place.

Dummy truck used by the CBI to recreate crime scene | Photo courtesy: Munish Chandra Pandey

The agency is also going through the call data records (CDR) of suspects, accused and their associates, truck driver, truck owner and survivor's family.

The agency also moved an application before the trial court to seek permission for custodial interrogation of Kuldeep Singh Sengar, Atul Singh, Shailender Singh, Virender Singh and Vineet Mishra in connection with the accident case.

The accident case hearing will take place in a Lucknow court for the next 15 days.

The agency also wants to examine the uncle of rape survivor who has been asked by Supreme Court to shift to Tihar Jail from a UP jail.

The rape survivor's condition, in the meanwhile, remains critical and the family on Monday told the Supreme Court that they are satisfied with the treatment she is receiving in Lucknow.

However, the apex court has asked for medical reports of the survivor to be submitted on Monday based on which it will say if she has to be shifted at All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in Delhi or not.
