Mumbai: Gang-rape survivor's father wants accused to be severely punished

A 19-year-old gang-rape survivor's father spoke to DNA on how her daughter was saved from being paralysed. He explained that the incident had caused distress in her daughter's life and she could barely move or even speak. The father has demanded that the accused should be given severe punishment. The survivor condition is stable and she is out of danger.



On July 7 the teenager arrived in Mumbai from Aurangabad to celebrate her birthday. She met her lady friend and they decided to celebrate her birthday at a friend's place at Chembur.



"My daughter had been to Mumbai for her birthday celebration but she didn't return home as she wanted to spend more days in Mumbai. On July 23 I received a call from a relative in Mumbai and they informed me that my daughter's condition was serious as she was not able to speak or respond properly. I informed my family members to bring her to Aurangabad hospital as there are good doctors," told a survivor's father.



"In the hospital, my daughter was constantly crying but never told me the truth about the incident. Meanwhile, doctors told me about signs of rape and when I confronted her she revealed to me about the incident. I have informed the police about the incident and registered the FIR," added survivor's father.

CASE FILE In 1973 in a similar case, a nurse of KEM hospital was raped by a ward boy and was paralysed and later she went into a coma due to heavy stress In the recent case, survivor suffered multiple injuries and due to delay in medical care, the injuries were aggravated

Doctors said that the survivor suffered multiple injuries and due to delay in medical care, the injuries were aggravated. The girl's leg and tongue were paralysed but it is now recovering. She is still in hospital for further treatment and her condition is now stable and she is out of danger.

Survivor's father further said, "While in Aurangabad hospital, my daughter's condition had worsened and the doctors told me that her body is slowly paralysing and she could go in a coma. When I met my daughter in ICCU she was not able to talk and she was not responding properly.



The DCP of Zone 6 Shashi Meena said, "We sent our two officers to Aurangabad to record survivor statement. We have also led a team in Mumbai to nab the accused. We have not arrested any yet in this case."



In 1973 in a similar case, a nurse of KEM hospital was raped by a ward boy and was paralysed and later she went into a coma due to heavy stress.



She died on May 18 2015 in the hospital.
