Unnao teen not to be shifted now: Supreme Court

As the Unnao teen survivor, who has accused expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of sexually assaulting her, continued on ventilator support in a Lucknow hospital, the Supreme Court on Friday deferred decision to shift her to Delhi but left the option open for the family to decide as and when the need arises.

But the Court allowed immediate shifting of the survivor's uncle from Rae Bareli jail to Delhi's Tihar Jail following an apprehension that he could be killed. The case has already seen several twists and turns as the survivor has already lost her father while in police custody and her two aunts, who accompanied her, in the car that collided head-on with a truck near Rae Bareli on July 28.

Although her lawyer, Mahendra, who was also critically injured in the mishap, is out of ventilator, the bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi has allowed even his family to seek an order from the apex court for shifting him to Delhi for advanced treatment. The Court will monitor the case next on August 5.

CBI RECREATES IT On Friday, a joint team of CBI and forensic officials recreated the accident which occurred on last Sunday on NH 232 near Gurbakshganj. Reportedly, a black car and a truck — similar to ones involved in the accident — were called for. The police also blocked the National Highway from both sides to stop the flow of traffic. The aim was to verify the statement given by the truck driver. MP CM’S OFFER Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath has asked the family of the Unnao rape survivor to settle down in Madhya Pradesh and has assured them full security. “The survivor’s family has decided to move out of Uttar Pradesh due to insecurity. I want them to come and settle down in Madhya Pradesh. Our government will provide them complete security,” Kamal Nath said.

Meanwhile, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), tasked to pursue all five cases, including the accident incident, sought permission from Court to keep the accident case pending in Lucknow for now. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta pointed out that the accused required to be produced on remand before the Judicial Magistrate at Lucknow and such orders would be required till the investigation is over. The Magistrate is unable to pass any orders due to the August 1 order by SC shifting all cases to Delhi.

The bench, also comprising Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, allowed the request and deferred shifting of the accident case to Delhi's Tis Hazari courts till completion of the investigation. The CBI was given a maximum period of 15 days to complete the probe.

On shifting of the survivor's uncle Mahesh Singh to Delhi's Tihar jail, the UP government submitted that he faced no security threat at Rae Bareli jail but if the Court desired, the state was not opposed to shifting him to any other jail. The state informed that Rs 25 lakh compensation, as ordered by Court, was given to victim's mother along with CRPF cover as security to the victim's kin.
