Meet the judge tasked with giving closure to Unnao rape survivor

NEW DELHI: When Supreme Court transferred the Unnao gang-rape case and all related incidents that occurred in its aftermath to Delhi on Thursday, it entrusted judge Dharmesh Sharma to hear the proceedings on a day-to-day basis. Sharma, who will be presiding over the hearings starting next week, is known to be a “good human being” and an officer with vigour in judicial circles.TOI spoke to people who worked with him while he was a senior officer with Delhi State Legal Services Authority (DSLSA) and those who appear before him in his current position as district and sessions judge of Tis Hazari Courts (West Delhi).Advocate Naresh Chand Gupta, president of Tis Hazari Bar Association, opined that judge Sharma is a good human being, whose conduct speaks volumes. “He is a knowledgeable and decent person,” he said, while lauding him for treating lawyers “well” and giving logical reasoning during hearings.Sharma was appointed DSLSA member secretary on February 6, 2014 and his tenure lasted till February 28, 2017. During this period, he represented the authority in several cases before Delhi high court. One of his first cases was the murder of Nido Tania, an Arunachal Pradesh MLA’s son. Tania was allegedly killed after being teased for his appearance.The judge has played a crucial role in dispensation of legal aid to all sections of society equally. He was instrumental in empaneling seven lawyers from the Northeast in DSLSA to assist people from the region. The move had come after HC, acting on a suo motu PIL, wondered what steps had been taken by DSLSA for spreading awareness among people from the Northeast in the city. Sharma had also supervised various sensitisation programmes to address the grievances of people from the region.As a judge, Sharma is known for having passed quite a few significant judgments. Before being designated as district and sessions judge, he was presiding over the family court in Tis Hazari Courts. He gave a significant judgment saying that mental cruelty was a ground for divorce, especially when one of the partners had hidden the fact of having received treatment for a mental disorder and being delusional.A DSLSA employee, who has worked with Sharma, said the judge has been a good source of inspiration. “Work never suffered as he was particular in moving files swiftly and providing legal aid to people in need. I learnt discipline while working with him,” the employee added.Born on June 9, 1963 in Delhi, Sharma did his BCom (Hons) in 1984 from Kirori Mal College . He then pursued LLB from Campus Law Centre, Delhi University in 1987. He was appointed in the cadre of Delhi Judicial Services on October 20, 1992. During this tenure, a mediation cell was established at Crime Against Women Cell, Nanak Pura for pre-litigation matrimonial matters. He completed LLM from Campus Law Centre in 2001.Apart from the Unnao gang-rape case, Sharma will be presiding over another rape case, the custodial death of the survivor’s father and the case against jail inmates who beat him up in prison. The transfer of the fifth and recent case in which her family members were killed and she was critically injured in an “accident” has been stayed for the time being.
