Unnao case: CBI team questions expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar at Sitapur jail

File picture: Expelled Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is currently lodged in Sitapur District Jail Kuldeep Singh Sengar, an accused in Unnao rape case, has also been booked in the July 28 accident case The SC had, on August 1, asked the CBI to probe the accident case within seven days

Unnao: A team of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Saturday interrogated expelled Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar at a jail in Uttar Pradesh. The agency had on July 31 filed an FIR charging 10 people, including Sengar, with murder over the road accident in Raebareli which left the Unnao girl, who had accused Sengar of rape in 2017, in a critical condition.

Sengar is currently lodged in Sitapur District Jail.

On Friday, CBI officials reportedly spoke to the family members of the rape victim, who is receiving treatment at the Trauma Centre of King George's Medical University. The 19-year-old’s condition remains critical.

On August 01, the Supreme Court gave the CBI seven days to probe the accident case. The apex court further issued an order to transfer all cases related to Unnao rape incident from Uttar Pradesh to Delhi.

On July 28, the rape survivor, her two aunts and lawyer were travelling to Raebareli in a car when a truck hit them. While two of her aunts died in the accident, the girl and her lawyer were critically injured.

After the accident, it came to the fore that the rape survivor and her family members had earlier written a letter to Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi alleging threats from Kuldeep Sengar, who represents Bangarmau in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly.

The husband of one of the women who died in the accident had earlier this week claimed that it was Sengar’s conspiracy to eliminate his family.

Sengar allegedly raped the girl, then a minor, at his residence on June 4, 2017. However, the victim could not get her case registered at that time. Shockingly, the victim’s father was taken into custody on alleged false charges levelled by Sengar’s family.

In 2018, the survivor tried to set herself ablaze in front of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence in order to grab the attention of authorities. However, the next day, her father was purportedly assaulted inside the jail and he died of injuries.

Finally, Sengar was taken into custody on April 13, 2018, in connection with the Unnao rape case.

Earlier this week, the CBI booked Sengar and his brother Manoj Singh Sengar along with eight others under murder charges.
