Unnao Case: Sensational twist on blackened number plate puts truck owner in dock

Delhi:

Even as the Unnao rape survivor continues to battle for her life, a new turn of events is likely to impact the ongoing CBI probe in the sensational case. According to an IANS report, the financer of the truck involved in the July 28 accident has said that he never harassed the owner of the vehicle for missed instalments. Devender Kishore Pal, the elder brother of a Samajwadi Party leader, and the owner of the truck had said that he had blackened the number plate to avoid the financer’s calls.

“I met Devender, near a dhabha in Fatehpur around 25-26 June last, and requested him to pay his dues at the earliest. We had a very cordial meeting. Our company, Orix, is one of the largest finance companies ( in the world headquartered in Japan) and has a regional office at Kanpur. We have written legal agreements with our clients and never intend to forcibly seize any financed vehicle,” IANS quoted Shashi Kumar, the manager of Manager of the Orix finance company, as saying.

Uttar Pradesh Police Additional Director General (Lucknow Zone) Rajiv Krishna on Monday had said that call details of the both the truck driver and the cleaner are being examined. According to the police, the owner of the truck has revealed that he didn’t want any calls from the financers, hence he had blackened the number plate of the truck. The cops are investigating the matter. The UP Police is bearing all the expenses of rape survivor’s hospital treatment.

The car in which the rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli on Sunday, killing two members while leaving her and the advocate critically injured, police said. Meanwhile, 5-member team of the CBI has reached the trauma centre where the rape survivors is undergoing treatment.

Briefing the media, ADG (Lucknow Zone) Krishna said that the UP Police had provided 10 constables for the rape survivors security. The UP Police will also conduct recreation of the accident to understand the sequence of the events. A woman belonging to Makhi police station area in Unnao had alleged that Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP Assembly, raped her teenage daughter at his residence in 2017. The case had come to light after the victim allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence.

Last week, the rape survivor, her paternal and maternal aunts along with their advocate met with an accident while on their way to meet her uncle, who is lodged in Rae Bareli jail, police said. The woman's maternal aunt succumbed to injuries in a district hospital and the others were transferred to a trauma centre in Lucknow, police said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
