CBI Gets Three Day Custody Of Killer Driver And Cleaner In Unnao Rape Survivor's Accident Case

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has got three day custody of the truck driver and cleaner of the truck which crash into the car of Unnao rape victim on July 28. The court approved the custody of the driver Ashish Kumar Pal and cleaner Mohan involved in the accident which killed two of the victim’s aunts while she and her lawyer survived, but are still critical condition.

ap

The two will now be questioned by CBI on how the accident happened. Another astonishing fact came to fore earlier in the day as the CCTV footage near the toll plaza at Lalganj area of Rae Bareli showed that the truck’s number wasn’t smeared. The CCTV is located about 20 km from the accident site.

Devender Kumar, the owner of the truck, however, had claimed earlier that the number plate was deliberately blackened out with grease in order evade the EMI payments, says an India Today report. The police now suspect that driver blacked the number plate moments before the accident.

ANI

According to the toll plaza footage retrieved by the local police, the truck entered the area around 5:20 am on July 28 and the accident took place hours later at 12:40 pm.

The driver-cleaner duo was arrested by the police soon after the accident was reported. In the accident, the rape survivor and her lawyer while her two relatives died. The relatives of the victim’s family once again complained that their lives are under constant threat from Kuldeep Sengar, the rape accused BJP MLA who was expelled from the party after murder charge was put against him post the accident on July 28.

The Supreme Court has directed the transfer of all Unnao rape related cases from Uttar Pradesh to Delhi. The Apex court also directed the Uttar Pradesh government to immediately give Rs 25 lakhs as compensation to rape survivor and also criticised it for mishandling the case. The victim's father was also allegedly killed in jail.

The top court also gave 14 days to CBI to file a report in the accident case apart from giving 45 days to finish trial in all five cases.
