No bail to rapists: Farhan Akhtar and Arjun Rampal in support of US woman raped in Delhi by landlord

Bollywood actors Arjun Rampal and Farhan Akhtar took to Twitter to share a video where a US woman, who was raped in India in 2013, has condemned the "corrupt judge" for letting her rapist out on bail. She goes on to narrate in the video, shot outside the Indian Consulate in San Francisco, about how the man entered her apartment during her stay in India and attacked her. She says that she fought hard to ensure that the culprit was sent behind bars, but he has now been released on bail.

Asking for help from her friends to get the man behind bars again, the woman says that she isn't getting support from the Consulate General of India in San Francisco and that the Indian authorities are not cooperating.

Arjun Rampal tweeted in support of the US woman and demanded stricter laws. He wrote, "What is wrong is wrong. It’s our duty as citizens of a country we love and respect, to stand up for what is right. Not only does this tarnish India it speaks poorly on how we protect women our own, and those who visit . #NoBailToRapists."

Farhan Akhtar also appealed to the authorities on Twitter. He wrote, "An urgent and important appeal. #NoBailToRapists."

WHAT IS THE VIDEO ALL ABOUT?

In the video, which was posted on her Facebook page on July 30, the US-based woman is seen talking about her struggle. She says, "Last month I was notified that the man who viciously attacked me, who I had to fight to make sure he was convicted of his crime and he was sentenced in India, has been given bail on his appeal. This man broke into my apartment and attacked me. I fought, I went to India to testify, all by myself I had to do this. He was sentenced for years in prison and then on his appeal, a corrupt judge gives him bail. Now, I have been told that as my case is to be taken to the High Court in India, their Supreme Court you don't give bails to convicted criminals that are sentenced."

She goes on to say, "I come here to the San Francisco consulate, where I need to have these forma notarized so that High Court knows who my attorney is and I am on board, and I am again denied service and assistance from the consulate in India, now San Francisco they tell me now that I need to go and get it notarised locally then have to go to Sacramento and get the notary verified."

She then says that she isn't getting enough support from Indian authorities, "India's incredible corruption and lack of support for women that are attacked is continuing. They refuse to help me yet they say that they want to stop the violence against women in their own country. Yet a simple verification, like the one I received at the New York City at their consulate, I am being denied here in San Francisco. They want me to spend thousands of dollars to travel to the state of California on my own money because they have let a convicted criminal out on bail. We don't give bail to convicted criminals."

In the end, she asks her friends to help her, "So all my friends, I need your help, and I need your help now. We are going to take this to the Supreme Court, to the high court of India. You do not let convicted criminals off when the victims were brave enough to go and testify. I need your help."

WHAT IS THE CASE?

The incident dates back to 2013. Rajiv Panwar, nephew of former Delhi mayor Jayshree Panwar, was arrested for assaulting the US-based woman. She filed a complaint on June 24, 2013 and Panwar was arrested earlier this year.

The complaint stated that the US-based woman was staying at a flat rented out by Panwar, with her husband. One night, after partying with them, Rajeev broke into their flat and digitally raped her (raped her with his fingers) while she was asleep. He was found guilty in February 2019 and was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.

The video, after being posted on Facebook on July 30, has gone viral across social media platforms, with several people asking the authorities to help the survivor.

ALSO READ | Statistics: 92 women raped in India every day, 4 in Delhi

ALSO READ | Uber cab driver rapes 27-year-old woman in Delhi
