Intelligence agencies 'braced for fresh terror' after death of Bin Laden's son

Western intelligence agencies may have to brace for retaliation from Hamza's inner circle after Osama Bin Laden's son was killed in mysterious circumstances

AS three 5.66mm NATO 77 “open tip” bullets tore into Osama bin Laden, a decade-long manhunt for the world’s most wanted terrorist ended.

Years of painstaking CIA tradecraft, old-school spy surveillance and thousands of hours of analysis had culminated in Navy SEAL Robert O’Neill firing those fateful rounds from his HK416 assault rifle.

As bin Laden’s corpse tumbled off the USS Carl Vinson into the Arabian Sea, the 2011 mission on May 2 to hunt down the mastermind of 9/11 became legend and jubilant Americans filled the streets.

But in Waziristan, 350 miles away from bin Laden’s bullet-riddled compound in Abbottobad, Osama’s favourite son, then around 22 years old, became filled with rage and a thirst for revenge.

The killing in Pakistan virtually guaranteed another generation of terrorism. Hamza was until this week tipped as the heir apparent, the Crown Prince of al-Qaeda.

Image: Getty) Getty)

Almost 20 years after his father’s attack on US soil, which claimed 2,977 lives, Hamza – whose Arabic name derives from “hamuza”, meaning strong or steadfast – was at the heart of the terror group’s barbaric ambitions.

And the 30-year-old terrorist, who had an £800,000 US bounty on his head, almost made it to becoming the new terror chief before his ­fledgling career ended violently.

His death, revealed this week, is shrouded in mystery even though it is believed the CIA was behind it.

If they didn’t actually “pull the trigger”, they are believed to have backed the gunman, bomber or poisoner who did.

Now Western intelligence ­agencies are braced for fresh terror outrages from Hamza’s inner circle of hardened jihadis who are devastated and angered by the loss.

Hand-picked by Osama himself, Hamza’s guards were the most loyal of followers and would have died to protect the bin Laden heir.

One western intelligence analyst told the Sunday Mirror: “Operationally, Hamza was inexperienced but as a scion of the most famous terror mastermind the world has known, he was irresistible.”

Image: Getty) Getty)

Clearly, without Hamza as a figurehead, al-Qaeda still presents a clear and present danger to the west.

The Sunday Mirror has been told by security sources that there have been warnings of an al-Qaeda resurgence for two years, along with intelligence reports of major attack plots.

The western intelligence analyst added: “Osama bin Laden knew his son’s true value and hoped that one day Hamza would take up the challenge of leading al-Qaeda so he could not be allowed by the west to rally support for a new and more dangerous al-Qaeda.

“It is possible now that there will be a struggle for the al-Qaeda leadership as its nominal leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, 68, is a virtual has-been and the group needs a new leader.”

Osama had never been interested in his family fortune – a multi-million Saudi-based construction firm – except to enable his jihadi exploits, not least 9/11.

The co-ordinated 2001 attacks also injured 6,000 as two hijacked passenger planes destroyed New York’s Twin Towers, one hit the Pentagon and a fourth aimed at the White House crashed in Pennsylvania after the terrorists were overwhelmed by passengers.

Hamza had been present when his father plotted 9/11 details and they spent time together as bin Laden fled to Pakistan during the US invasion of Afghanistan.

Image: Getty) Getty)

His mother, Khairiah Sabar, 69, a Saudi child psychologist, was one of three bin Laden wives who remained in the compound during the SEAL’s raid and survived.

Before being deported back to Saudi Arabia this female extremist lied to Pakistani intelligence officers that she did not know where Hamza was.

She knew she would never see him again and is under virtual house arrest in Jedda with other bin Laden family members deported from Pakistan.

Khairiah had been a steadfast supporter of bin Laden’s al-Qaeda.

Throughout the austere years living in Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, she never complained about the lack of money and comfort, despite knowing he had once had access to billions.

Shortly after the SEAL’s mission to kill bin Laden, letters from the al-Qaeda leader revealed a burning wish for Hamza to be educated as a religious scholar in Qatar before taking over the network.

Perhaps he was smuggled to the Middle East. There are even rumours he fought with al-Qaeda in Syria.

But worryingly, when Hamza was about 19, he published a poem on an extremist website which said: “Accelerate the destruction of America, Britain, France and Denmark.”

Image: Reuters) Reuters)

The western security source told the Sunday Mirror: “Europeans are far more cautious about celebrating. Hamza’s apparent enthusiasm for jihad did not die with him.

“There is a strong will still out there for another 9/11 so the bin Laden nightmare is far from over – even though it is likely the founder’s only possible terrorist heir has been killed.”

But bin Laden’s legacy is more complicated than we in the west might realise.

British Former Army intelligence Colonel Philip Ingram MBE explained that al-Qaeda sees the world and its future in terms of generations of leaders, not fixed term democratic political figures or presidents, which dominate the western view.

He added: “Al-Qaeda is still very relevant and is clearly waiting for another opportunity to launch a big spectacular with impact, like a 9/11.

“But it can wait for generations before striking again.

“It is sitting in the background.

“It has a different ideology to Islamic State and it has watched its rise and fall with interest.

Image: REX/Shutterstock) REX/Shutterstock)

“IS was all about the caliphate and al-Qaeda about the cause, attracting people to it, building up a jihad and then building the caliphate later.

“But being prepared to wait.”

Of concern is the possibility that Hamza and perhaps his blood mother spent many years after 9/11 hiding in Tehran, Iran. There the country’s predominant Shia faith is often at violent odds with their Sunni beliefs.

It is possible Tehran protected him out of the mischievous belief that the enemy of their enemy is their friend.

And even though he is dead, intelligence officers are still keen to discover the details of his time in Iran.

For like most dynasties the bin Laden legacy appears never to end. Nor may his extremist ambitions.

In Iran, Hamza wed the daughter of high ranking al-Qaeda military chief Abu Mohammed al Masri, linked to the 1998 American embassy bombings in Africa which killed 200.

She gave him a daughter...and a son.
