Junior doctors burn effigies of Health Minister, Union govt.

Protest against National Medical Commission Bill enters fourth day

Junior doctors and resident doctors, who have been protesting the National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill that was recently passed in Parliament, organised a mock funeral procession of Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan and the Central government at Osmania Medical College here on Sunday. The protesters carried two effigies and set them on fire on the college premises.

Apart from members of Telangana Junior Doctors Association (TJUDA), Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences (Resident Doctors Association president G. Srinivas and Healthcare Reforms Doctors Association president K. Mahesh Kumar participated in the procession.

The junior doctors also continued to boycott elective and emergency medical services at government tertiary care hospitals for the fourth consecutive day. They have demanded that Sections 32 and 50 to be removed from the Bill. Section 32 says limited license may be granted to people connected with medical profession to practise medicine as community health providers. Section 50 is about educational modules or programmes for undergraduate and postgraduate courses across medical systems and to promote medical pluralism.

Indefinite hunger strike

TJUDA-Osmania Medical College unit’s vice-president Mohammad Janhangir said three undergraduates are on an indefinite hunger strike for the past three days as part of the protest. A medical team from Osmania General Hospital checked their medical condition on Sunday afternoon and found them to be stable. Senior officials from the State Health department who are tracking the protest said the medical teams will pay regular visits and monitor the condition of the undergraduates on hunger strike.

“The Centre has failed to protect public health by allowing people connected with modern medicine to practise as community health providers. There is no clarity over who will be community health providers and what their minimum qualification is. We want Sections 32 and 50 to be removed from the Bill,” said Dr. Jahangir.

Though All India Institute of Medical Sciences resident doctors association called off their strike on Sunday, NIMS RDA president Dr. Srinivas said they will continue to boycott elective services.

Monday rush

The authorities are bracing to meet Monday rush, common in government hospitals after the weekend. Since the junior doctors and resident doctors have boycotted elective medical services which includes out-patient consultation, follow-up treatment as well as elective surgeries, inconvenience to patients seems inevitable.

Officials, however, are confident about facing the challenge as they have prepared duty charts for faculty members, in-service post graduate students and resident doctors for a week.
