Unnao rape case: Kuldeep Singh Sengar's house in Unnao raided by CBI

Main accused in the Unnao rape case, suspended BJP MLA from Uttar Pradesh Kuldeep Singh Sengar was moved from Sitapur jail to the national capital on Sunday night by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). Earlier in the day, the CBI conducted search operations in 17 locations, including Sengar's residence.

The CBI also arrested co-accused Shashi Singh's son, Naveen Singh. Naveen was arrested for threatening the survivor's mother and daughter. Earlier, the survivor's kin had complained against Naveen through a letter.

A production warrant was issued against Sengar and other accused, including Shashi. The Tis Hazari court in the national capital had ordered for them to be produced before it around noon on Monday. Some of the accused have been asked to appear before the court on Tuesday.

TRUCK DRIVER GRILLED FOR CLUES CBI on Sunday grilled the driver of the truck that rammed into the car the Unnao rape survivor was travelling in



According to the details of the questioning accessed by this reporter, the driver, when asked about the blackened number plate, said that the owner had asked him to do it 15-20 days before the accident



The driver also said that he ran away after the crash happened and did not check the car his truck had crashed into

Back in Unnao, a CBI team of 18 officials conducted raids at the survivor's village and Sengar's residence. All the rooms of the house, including the room where the alleged raped took place were searched. They interrogated the servants at Sengar's residence and reached his sister's house too. Reportedly, Sengar had an office there too. The team also interrogated Sengar's brother, Manoj Singh. In addition, locations in Lucknow, Unnao, Banda and Fatehpur districts were raided. On Sunday, the CBI also questioned the owner of the truck, which had hit the car in which the survivor was travelling on July 28. While the rape survivor and her lawyer suffered critical injuries and were put on ventilator support, two other women travelling in the car were killed in the accident.

Truck owner Devendra Kishore Pal had reached the CBI office in Lucknow for questioning. Pal has, however, claimed that he is innocent and has no connection with the expelled BJP MLA.

The Supreme Court last week transferred all Unnao rape-related cases, barring the accident near Raebareli, to the CBI. Granting the CBI seven to 14 days to probe the accident, the top court said that a final decision on the transfer of the case would be taken after the investigation is completed.

The Uttar Pradesh Police filed a case of murder against Sengar and nine others in connection with the accident.

Sengar allegedly raped the woman on June 4, 2017 at his residence.

Zee Media Newsroom
