8-year-old wakes up to find dad murdered, mother tied

Ludhiana: A 58-year-old man was stabbed to death at his house in Jagraon in the wee hours of Sunday and his 40-year-old wife injured, allegedly by after three-four men who had broken into their home.

The attack on deceased Jasbir Singh, a suspended technical teacher of ITI College in Moga, was so brutal that he had 15-20 stab wounds. He had undergone a female-to-man gender-reassignment surgery nearly 25 years ago and married Daljit Kaur of Dunike village in Moga nearly 10 years ago. The couple’s eight-year-old son, Amanat, was the first one to raise the alarm in the morning.

The motive of the crime is not clear as the wife has not told the police if the intruders robbed anything from the house in Jagraon’s Kothe Sherjung village. As she too was injured and admitted to the hospital, police are yet to question her in detail. A dog squad, forensics experts and a CIA team also checked the crime scene. Jagraon DSP Gurdeep Singh, who is overseeing the investigation, said the dog squad could not detect the entry of an outsider in the house. The footage of a CCTV camera installed across the street from the house also did not reveal any outside entry, accoridng to a source in the police. “The chances of the alleged murderers entering the house from the main gate or through the roof are remote, as all doors were bolted from inside,” said the source.

The son has told the police that he woke up on hearing the cries of his mother early in the morning. When he entered the couple’s room, he saw his father in a pool of blood and his mother tied to a chair.

Police said the child had told them that he had slept in his parents’ air-conditioned room at night and his mother shifted him to the adjoining room, which does not have an AC, once he had slept. He said he, on entering his parents room in the morning, cut his mother’s dupatta, with which she had been tied to the chair, with a pair of scissors. She asked him to call a woman from the neighbourhood and told him that his father had been murdered.

The boy opened the main gate by climbing a plastic chair and called the neighbour. On returning, the boy and neighbour Mandeep Kaur found Daljeet unconcious on the floor. Kothe Sherjung sarpanch Parwinder Singh, who lives near the house, said Mandeep informed him about the incident and he informed the police around 7am. Police said the woman mostly had scratches mostly on her hands and she did not suffer any serious injury. She is admitted in a hospital at present and the police are yet to question her in detail. The body has been shifted to Jagraon civil hospital for the postmortem. The DSP said they had registered a case of murder and started an investigation from all angles.

Holes in story?

A police officer, who did not wish to be named, said they were suspecting Daljeet Kaur’s statement. He said the woman claimed that three-four men murdered her husband, but the footage of the CCTV camera installed across the street did not show anyone entering it, at least from the main gate. He said the dog squad also did not find anything amiss.

Graft case | Police said Jasbir was posted at the ITI near Nanaksar area of Jagraon, but was shifted to Moga on promotion. He was suspended after he was allegedly booked in a corruption case by the state vigilance bureau

‘No crime in 40 yrs’ | Jagjit Singh, a who lives in the same locality where the murder took place, claimed that he had been living in the area for 40 years, but had not heard of even a theft

Motive | Police said they were yet to zero in on the motive behind the crime. An officer, who did not want to be named, said it could be a property dispute too. Apart from the house in Kothe Sherjung, deceased Jasbir Singh owner a house in Nanaksar, which he had given out. His wife, Daljeet Kaur, works for a private firm



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
