Man bets his WIFE while gambling before allowing a friend and a relative to gang-rape her

An Indian man bet his wife after running out of money while gambling before allowing a friend and a relative to gang-rape her when he lost his stake, it has been claimed.

The woman, whose name is not known, lived near to the Zafarabad police station in the Jaunpur district of Uttar Pradesh, India.

She claimed that her husband had been drinking at the time and that his friend Arun and relative Anil would come to their home often, reports NDTV.

A husband allegedly let his friend and a relative rape his wife after he ran out of money while gambling in India (file picture of Uttar Pradesh)

Local reports said that after the gang-rape the woman went to her uncle's house. It is not known when the alleged crime took place.

However the husband followed her to the new address and admitted he had made a mistake by betting her.

The woman is said to have agreed to return home with her husband after hearing his apology.

She alleged that while on the drive home he stopped their car and let his friends gang-rape her once more.

At first officers would not file a report of the rape, but they did eventually register a First Information Report after she went to a local court.

This is a written document which police in India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan create when they receive information about the commission of a cognisable offence.

The woman claimed that when she returned home with her husband she was raped again by his friend and relative (file picture)

When the woman approached the court it is said to have ordered officers to register a case of gang-rape.

Last week shocking footage was revealed which showed a three-year-old girl being abducted from an Indian railway station as she was sleeping.

She was then taken from the Tatanagar railway station in Jharkhand state's Jamshedpur city and allegedly gang-raped and beheaded by two men.

One of the alleged killers, Rinku Sahu, recently left prison after serving time for kidnapping a child and attempting to kill her in 2015.

Rinku and his friend Kailash, both in their thirties, allegedly told the police they gang-raped the child over a day and strangled her because she wouldn't stop crying.
