Congress's Janardan Dwivedi quotes Ram Manohar Lohia, backs PM Modi on Article 370

Congress leader Janardhan Dwivedi on Monday backed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for the government's decision to scrap provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Speaking to news agency ANI, Janardan Dwivedi said that a mistake of history has been corrected today.

Janardan Dwivedi also said that his political guru Ram Manohar Lohia was always against Article 370.

Saying that he was not speaking on behalf of the party but giving his personal opinion, Dwivedi asserted that there was no doubt that measures related to Jammu and Kashmir would be passed in Lok Sabha tomorrow.

The Centre on Monday scrapped Article 370 of the Constitution that gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir and converted the border state into a Union Territory with a legislature, implementing the long-held agenda of the party and its predecessor, Jan Sangh.

The Congress leader's statement came even as Congress opposed the scrapping of Article 370, saying that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) murdered the Constitution and the democracy.

MISTAKE CORRECTED TODAY, SAYS JANARDAN DWIVEDI: WATCH

#WATCH Janardan Dwivedi, Congress on #Article370revoked : My political guru Ram Manohar Lohia ji was always against this Article. A mistake of history has been corrected today, albeit late. I welcome this. pic.twitter.com/KqBsROImgS August 5, 2019



Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad on Monday said that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led central government has murdered the Constitution of India and democracy by scrapping Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir.

Ghulam Nabi Azad also said that by revoking Article 370 of the Constitution, the Centre has "cut off the head of the country" while finishing off the people of Jammu and Kashmir politically, culturally and socially.

He also accused the Modi government of taking this step only to "garner votes".



Speaking with reporters outside Parliament after the government revoked Article 370, Ghulam Nabi Azad said: "This government has not only divided the powers of the state but also finished off the people politically, culturally and socially."

"The BJP, drunk on power, finished Article 370, 35A and divided the state in one go. This will be written in black letters in the country's history," the Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha said.
