Unnao rape survivor airlifted to Delhi for further treatment; green corridor created from IGI airport to AIIMS

Unnao rape survivor being taken to Delhi | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights A green corridor was created for rape survivor's ambulance Rape survivor's lawyer will also be airlifted later today Earlier, the Supreme Court directed that the rape survivor and her lawyer be airlifted from Lucknow to Delhi

Lucknow: Unnao rape survivor was on Monday airlifted to Delhi’s AIIMS from a Lucknow hospital amid tight security. The 19-year-old, who suffered critical injuries in a car-truck collision last week, had been undergoing treatment at Lucknow’s King George's Medical College for the past one week.

On July 28, a truck rammed into a car in which the rape survivor was travelling along with two of her aunts and her lawyer in Uttar Pradesh’s Raebareli. While her aunts succumbed to their injuries, the rape survivor and the lawyer sustained serious injuries.

A green corridor was created for rape survivor's ambulance from Indira Gandhi International Airport to AIIMS for faster movement of the vehicle. The lawyer will also be airlifted later today.

Earlier in the day, the Supreme Court directed that the rape survivor and her lawyer be airlifted from Lucknow to Delhi for further treatment at the AIIMS. The apex court bench, comprising Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose, also said that shifting to Delhi will be subject to they being medically fit for it.

The hospital authorities, in a statement, said that the rape survivor reached AIIMS trauma care at 9.18 pm.

“The patient was flown from Lucknow to be admitted in AIIMS trauma care. On the advice of the doctors of AIIMS, the journey of the ambulance carrying the injured person was facilitated by providing free passage. The ambulance left T-1 airport at 9.00 pm and reached AIIMS trauma care at 9.18 pm,” the statement reads.

“Route taken from T1 to AIIMS trauma centre was out from steel gate -Thimmaya Marg-Parade Road- GGR- Dhaula Kuan loop - ring road - Moti Bagh flyover- Hyatt flyover-under Raj Nagar flyover- T/R Jhandu Singh Marg- T/L and enter through emergency gate and RCD,” it added.

On Sunday, doctors at Lucknow hospital on Sunday said that the rape survivor had developed pneumonia, and remains in a critical condition as she had been on ventilator or life support system since the last six days.

"Any patient who is kept on ventilator for several days starts showing symptoms of pneumonia. This is why she developed pneumonia. Her condition remains the same as before," King George's Medical University (KGMU) Trauma Centre in-charge Dr Sandeep Tiwari was quoted as saying by news agency IANS.

He further said that the 19-year-old had lost one-and-a-half litres of blood due to the accident and has several broken bones and wounds in her chest.

"The victim lost about one-and-a-half litres of blood due to the accident. After being admitted to the hospital, she had to be administered 10 units of blood,” he added.

Last year, the teenager had alleged that BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar had raped her when she was a minor in 2017. The MLA was arrested on the basis of her allegations on April 13 last year.

Following Sunday’s car crash incident, the Uttar Pradesh Police booked Sengar on the charges of attempt to murder and criminal intimidation.

"An FIR has been registered under the Indian Penal Code Sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder), 506 (criminal intimidation), 120b (criminal conspiracy) against 10 named persons, including the BJP MLA, and 15-20 others,” a police official had said.

On July 30, the probe into the truck-car collision was handed over to the Central Bureau of Investigation.
