Unnao survivor is airlifted to AIIMS

The Supreme Court on Monday allowed the airlifting of the Unnao rape survivor to be shifted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) at Delhi, following a request by her mother, who claimed that she had contracted pneumonia.

The bench of Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose directed the Uttar Pradesh government to immediately arrange an air ambulance to transport the survivor and also her lawyer, if he, too, was willing to be shifted to Delhi. The bench asked the state authorities to ensure the same was done by Monday evening.

The court further directed the AIIMS authorities to ensure that once the survivor and the lawyer are brought to the hospital, adequate arrangements are made for their treatment.

COURT’S DIKTAT Bench asked state authorities to ensure that the survivor was sent to AIIMS by Monday



Court also directed AIIMS authorities to ensure that once the survivor and the lawyer are brought, adequate arrangements are made for their treatment.



A green corridor and free passage were provided to the ambulance in Lucknow and Delhi

The order of the court came on an urgent mentioning made by advocate D Ramakrishna Reddy, appearing for the survivor's mother. According to Reddy, the survivor was down with pneumonia, even as she remained on ventilator.

Moreover, the mother is a prime witness in the case involving the rape survivor's complaint against expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and the apex court had shifted the trial to Delhi and prescribed a 45-day period for it to conclude. Therefore, the mother told the court that her presence in Delhi is inevitable and it was in these circumstances that the family thought it fit to shift the survivor to Delhi. The court allowed the request, but asked the doctors treating the survivor to certify whether she was in a fit condition to be transported. Nobody appeared for her lawyer, who is critical as well, but off the ventilator. The bench allowed the lawyer to contact the UP administration to be shifted to Delhi.

Meanwhile, the state government informed the apex court that the survivor's uncle had been moved out of Rae Bareli jail to Tihar Jail. The Court fixed the matter for hearing on August 9.
