Kashmiri Pandits distribute sweets to celebrate govt’s move on scrapping Article 370

Kashmiri Pandits in different parts of the country hailed the revocation of the contentious Article 370 on Monday. Displaced from the Valley in the 90s, they hoped the historic move would bring peace to the region and pave the way for return to their homeland with honour and dignity.

Around 300 families of Kashmiri Pandits living in Faridabad celebrated with music and dance and distributed sweets. Kashmiri Pandit Ajay Kag, who was forced to leave the Valley in the 90s, told India Today, "We have been waiting for this moment from last three decades and finally this day has come. We are thankful to Prime Minister Narendra Modi who fulfilled his promise and got us justice."

Karan Bhan another Kashmiri Pandit who had left the Valley with his family and settled in a refugee colony of Faridabad told India today TV, "My shop was set on fire and many relatives were killed. We were thrown out of the Valley with nothing. No government thought for us but finally the justice has been delivered."

The demand for the rehabilitation of Kashmiri Pandits grows on the back of Article 370 abrogation. Kulbhushan Raina, 46, said, "We are hoping the situation to normalise in Kashmir and one safety and security is insured by the government we all Kashmiri Pandits will definitely go and wants to stay in the Valley where we had everything years back."

Simran Bhan, a 36-year-old Kashmiri Pandit who is living in East Delhi's Mayur Vihar also welcomed the move. "Scrapping of Article 370 will attract business and it will automatically cure the problem of unemployment. One of the reasons of growing terrorism is unemployment. Also, I am happy that now my husband and kids can have their own property in J&K."Moti Kaul, 70, a Mumbaibased businessman from Jammu and is also associated with Globally Kashmiri Pandits, an organization said: "The entire nation is celebrating the move taken by the Modi government. It was pending since 70 years. It was much needed to bring back peace and development."
