Court orders Tihar for Unnao accused

Survivor — who was hit by a truck — is being shifted to Delhi for better treatment



NEW DELHI A Delhi court directed on Monday that expelled Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Member of Legislative Assembly (MLA) Kuldeep Singh Sengar, accused of raping a minor girl at his residence in Unnao in 2017, be shifted to Tihar jail from Sitapur prison in Uttar Pradesh.



District Judge Dharmesh Sharma put up the matter for argument on framing charges in the rape case — one of the four related cases transferred to Delhi — for August 7.



Both Sengar and his accomplice Shashi Singh, who had allegedly lured the victim into going to the legislator’s residence, were produced in the court in compliance with an order by the judge. The court has also directed to shift Singh to Tihar jail.



Sengar and nine others were also booked recently for murder by the CBI after the rape survivor and her advocate were injured when a truck hit their car in Rae Bareli. Her two aunts were killed in the accident. The rape survivor’s family has alleged foul play.



The Supreme Court had last week directed to hold trial on daily basis and completing it within 45-days.



Besides the main case, the three other matters transferred to the national capital are — the FIR which was lodged against victim’s father under Arms Act, his custodial death and the gang rape of the victim.



Survivor being airlifted to Delhi after SC order



The Unnao rape survivor will be airlifted from Lucknow and shifted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi on Monday around 8 pm. The decision to airlift her was taken on the directions of the Supreme Court (SC).



The survivor, who suffered critical injuries when her car was hit by a truck last week, will be brought to AIIMS for better treatment.



Minutes before the direction, the apex court deferred the hearing on transfer of the woman and her injured lawyer, for further hearing on Friday, as no one on behalf of their families appeared and sought the transfer.



However, the lawyer representing the family then appeared before a bench of Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose and said the woman’s mother now wanted her to be shifted to the AIIMS for better care as she continued to be critical.



The bench took note of the submissions of lawyer D Ramakrishna Reddy, appearing for the victim, and ordered that she be transferred from the King George’s Medical College in Lucknow to AIIMS. The top court made clear that before transferring the girl, the opinion of the doctors at the Lucknow hospital “shall be obtained” to ascertain if she is in “a fit condition to be transferred”.


