Rajasthan: Minor accuses father of raping her for 10 years; 'It started when I was 6-years-old', says victim

after some months, her father began touching her private parts and that touch was not good. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights From the last three years the girl was writing her experiences in a diary The accused is grade one government school teacher in Rajasthan The accused has also allegedly raped one of his students

Jaipur: A 16-year-old victim from Rajasthan's Sri Ganganagar district revealed that she was six-year-old when her father first raped her. The accused was arrested by the police on Tuesday after the girl alleged that she was molested and raped by her father for 10 years.

He was booked on the charges of rape on multiple occasions over a period of 10 years. According to a report, the local police said that from the last three years the girl was penning down her experiences in a diary, which was recovered from her possession.

Reportedly, the victim wrote in her diary that she was six-years-old when she came to her parents' house from her maternal grandparents' house. She was excited but after some months, her father began touching her private parts and that touch was not good. She further mentioned that her father used to make her watch vulgar videos and tried developing sexual relationships with her.

The Suratgarh Deputy Superintendent of the Police (DSP), Vidyaprakash Jat, said that for the initial three years the victim could not figure out what his father was trying to do. Reportedly, the diary stated that whenever she used to ask her father, why he was doing this to her, he would convince her - that's how the relationship of a father and daughter is supposed to be.

Reportedly, when the victim was nine-years-old, the accused stopped raping her but from the last two years, he again began regularly molesting her. Meanwhile, the victim also alleged that her father, who is a teacher has raped a student as well, who used to come for attending tuition classes at their place.

The DSP added that in the past two years when the accused used to rape her by showing vulgar videos, she resisted but that would infuriate the accused father. He would reportedly beat her and rape her twice for resisting his moves. The incident came to light when the traumatised victim narrated her story to her friend and mentioned that she would take an extreme step.

However, that's when the victim's friend informed the school principal and she informed the police. The victim's statement was then recorded in front of the school principal and the accused was booked under sections of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. He was later arrested by the police and during the preliminary investigation, the accused confessed to his crime and was immediately sent to the judicial custody.

The accused is grade one government school teacher, a university topper in mathematics. However, further investigation in the case is underway.
