DCW demands details of PCRs posted along route taken by cab driver who sexually assaulted JNU student

DCW chief Swati Maliwal (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Police registered a case in this regard on Saturday morning A medical examination of the student has confirmed sexual assault The accused drover me around for three hours after the assault, claimed the complainant Need details of PCR vans deployed along cab's route on night of the incident, DCW tells Delhi Police

New Delhi: Two days after a driver employed by a private cab aggregator in the national capital was accused of sexually assaulting a college student, the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) has issued a notice to the Delhi Police in this regard. Taking suo-moto cognizance of the sexual assault of a 21-year-old student of Delhi's Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), DCW asked investigators to trace the route taken by the accused cab driver.

In addition, the commission also sought details of security roadblocks and PCR vans posted along the route on the night of the crime. In her complaint to the police, the survivor has alleged that she was driven around by the cab driver for about three hours after he sexually assaulted her. In a letter to the Delhi Police, DCW chief Swati Maliwal has claimed that the heinous crime took place due to "apparent lack of police patrolling".

While urging investigators to consider the gravity of the matter, DCW also sought a detailed status report along with a copy of the first information report (FIR) and information about arrests made in connection with the case. The commission has also asked police officials to submit a copy of the route map driven by the accused driver and the details of police checking points along the route. All of this along with specific inputs about PCR calls made and the response time of the police must be shared with the commission by August 9, said the letter authored by Maliwal.

The matter came to light on Saturday morning when the girl was found unconscious in a public park near IIT-Delhi. In her complaint, the student alleged that she was returning to the JNU hostel from a party near Panchkuian metro station when the incident took place. A case was registered and a medical examination of the complainant confirmed sexual assault. During a preliminary investigation, Delhi Police combed through CCTV footage from Mandir Marg which is where the student booked the cab from.

A native of Western Uttar Pradesh, the girl claimed that she was drugged and sexually assaulted by the cab driver. Pursuing a foreign language course from the premier institution, the complainant told police officials that the accused gave her something to eat after she boarded the vehicle. The private cab aggregator which was used by her to book the cab is yet to issue a statement in this regard. A manhunt has also been launched to identify and nab the cab driver. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is still underway.
