Article 370: Congress divided over abrogation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir

The Narendra Modi government's move to end special status to Jammu and Kashmir, and turn the state into two Union Territories redrawing the map, has left the Congress party a divided house. Senior party leaders have admitted in their media interactions that they were outfoxed by the Modi government over Article 370 and its special relation with Jammu and Kashmir.

Congress's premier leader Rahul Gandhi, having maintained silence for over 24 hours on Modi government's move on Article 370, today criticised the Centre for ending the special status to Jammu and Kashmir in the absence of an assembly in the state.

"National integration isn't furthered by unilaterally tearing apart J&K, imprisoning elected representatives and violating our Constitution. This nation is made by its people, not plots of land. This abuse of executive power has grave implications for our national security," Rahul Gandhi tweeted.

But neither Rahul Gandhi's view nor a walkout from the Lok Sabha led by Sonia Gandhi signalled unanimity among the party leaders on the issue.

First among the senior party leaders to sound a voice of difference was Janardan Dwivedi, the Congress veteran and a Gandhi family loyalist. He quoted former socialist stalwart Ram Manohar Lohia to support the government's move on Article 370.

"My mentor Ram Manohar Lohia was against Article 370 from the start...My personal view is that this is a matter of national satisfaction. A mistake made during independence has been corrected, even if belatedly," Janardhan Dwivedi was quoted as saying by news agency ANI on Monday.

This was in sharp contrast to the vehement opposition and sharp attack by Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad and Kapil Sibal on the government. The leaders had dubbed the move to end special status to Jammu and Kashmir through a Presidential Order "murder of democracy" in the Rajya Sabha.

Congress leader Deepender Hooda, the son of former Haryanaa Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda and considered a member of Team Rahul, tweeted, "My personal view is that there isn't a need to have Article 370 in the 21st century."

"The move is not only in the interest of the country but also for the benefit of Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. It is the responsibility of the government to implement the move in a peaceful environment," Deepnder Hooda said.

Another Congress leader Jaiveer Shergill also took to Twitter to voice his support to the move to make Article 370 inoperative. He said, "My Personal Point of View: I support abrogation of Art 370 (as opening words say it's temporary) but Only and Only in accordance with provisions and methodology provided by the Constitution of India which mandates consent of J&K State Assembly -any other way is Unconstitutional."

The resignation of Congress's chief whip Bhubaneswar Kalita summed up the divergence of opinion in the Congress party aptly. He resigned from the Congress and the Rjaya Sabha saying he was asked by the party to issue whip on Kashmir issue. He resigned in response.

He issued a statement saying, "The Congress has asked me to issue a whip on the Kashmir issue. But the truth is that the mood of the nation has completely changed and this whip is against the public sentiment across the country...It seems the Congress is committing suicide with this ideology and I don't want to be part of this."

However, the official position of the Congress - as stated in the Rajya Sabha on Monday and the Lok Sabha today - remains against ending special status to Jammu and Kashmir.
