Unnao rape Victim’s lawyer airlifted to Delhi

A green corridor was created to take the woman from KGMU Trauma Centre to Lucknow airport. (Express photo by Vishal Srivastav)

The lawyer for the Unnao rape victim was airlifted from Lucknow’s King George Medical University (KGMU) trauma centre to Delhi’s All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) for treatment on Tuesday. He was shifted a day after the victim was airlifted to AIIMS by an air-ambulance on orders of the Supreme Court.

The air-ambulance for the lawyer departed from Delhi at around 8.30 am and reached Lucknow at around 9.25 am. The patient was taken to Lucknow airport by 10.20 am, after which the air-ambulance left for Delhi.

The rape victim and her lawyer were seriously injured in a road accident last month in Rae Bareily. The accident had also resulted in the death of two of the victim’s aunts.

The victim was airlifted to Delhi by an air-ambulance on Monday on orders of a Supreme Court bench of Justice Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose after the victim’s family’s lawyer conveyed that the woman had developed pneumonia and her mother expressed a desire that she be shifted to Delhi.

An opinion of doctors at Lucknow was obtained as to whether the patients are in condition to be shifted. KGMU earlier stated that only one patient could be airlifted by an air-ambulance, thus the authorities decided to send the victim to Delhi first.

On Tuesday, sources at AIIMS told PTI that the victim was still critical. “She is sick and on life support system needing medication to support her blood pressure. The patient remains critical and is undergoing treatment under multi-disciplinary team of doctors,” the sources said.

Meanwhile, KGMU trauma centre in-charge Sandeep Tiwari said that at the time the lawyer was airlifted for Delhi, he was in a deep coma and was on ventilator. Tiwari also said his condition was critical but stable.

CBI team in Unnao village

A four-member team of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) visited the village of the Unnao rape victim on Tuesday and recorded the statements of the witnesses of three related cases, in which chargesheets were already filed. The team also went to accused MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar’s residence.

It also accompanied a five-member team from Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) to the spot in Rae Bareli where the victim and her lawyer were critically injured and her two aunts died as the car, they were travelling in, was hit by a truck head-on.

The CBI has been recording the statements of the witnesses for the last three days, after the woman’s uncle alleged threat to him and his family from accused MLA Sengar and his aides. Most of the witnesses belong to the victim’s village.

In the FIR lodged in connection with the July 28 road accident in Gurubakshganj police station area of Rae Bareli, the uncle alleged that there is threat to him and his family members from the MLA and his aides to settle a “compromise” in the cases and withdraw statements against the accused.

“The agency is regularly coming to the village and meeting the people whose statements had earlier been recorded by the CBI,” said a local resident.

Meanwhile, the CRRI team checked under which circumstances the accident occurred and studied the position of the car and truck at the time of the incident in Rae Bareli on July 28. The victim’s uncle had filed an FIR against 10 persons, including jailed MLA Sengar, on charges of criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal

intimidation

A fourth case of gangrape is still under investigation. Before the CBI took over the investigation in this case on the direction of the Allahabad High Court, the local police had already filed a chargesheet against three accused.

The CBI has also collected details into the death of a 32-year-old man, who was one of the witnesses in the murder case of the rape victim’s father. The father had succumbed to the injuries a week after he was attacked by the MLA’s brother Atul Sengar and his aides near Khan’s house on April 2 last year and sent to jail.

The man had died at his house on August 18 last year and was buried by the family without informing the CBI. The family had said he was suffering from liver cirrhosis. Later, the body was exhumed, following a directive by the district magistrate, and autopsy was done.

“The allegation of murder or any foul play causing the man’s death was ruled out as the autopsy report stated death occurred due to the disease,” said a police officer, adding that the CBI has already taken the documents related to the man’s death.
