RIP Sushma Swaraj: Will miss my Twitter fight with her, says Pakistan minister

Former External Affairs Minister and senior BJP leader Sushma Swaraj died after a massive cardiac arrest on Tuesday night. (Photo: IANS)

Former External Affairs Minister and senior BJP leader Sushma Swaraj died after a massive cardiac arrest on Tuesday night. She was 67.

Her demise has shaken India and the world alike. Tributes are pouring in from across the world as news spreads of her sudden demise.

Among those who said that they would miss her is a Pakistani minister.

Pakistan's Minister for Science & Technology Fawad Hussain took to Twitter that he will miss his social media melee with her. "She was a giant in her own right," the Pakistani minister said.

Condolences to the family of Smt Sushma Swaraj, ll miss twitter melee with her, she was a giant in her own right, RIP https://t.co/MEVgLAK5jM — Ch Fawad Hussain (@fawadchaudhry) August 6, 2019

Fawad Hussain and Sushma Swaraj had a Twitter spat in March 2019 over Hindu girls who were allegedly abducted in Pakistan.

Two Hindu girls were allegedly abducted and forcibly converted to Islam in Pakistan's Sindh province on the eve of Holi. The reports said the local Hindu community had staged protests and demanded action against the perpetrators.

Tagging a media report on the alleged abduction, Swaraj had tweeted: "I have asked Indian High Commissioner in Pakistan to send a report on this. @IndiainPakistan. Two Hindu girls abducted on Holi eve in Pakistan's Sindh".

Fawad Hussain, the then information minister in the government of Imran Khan, responded:

Mam its Pakistin internal issue and rest assure its not Modi's India where minorities are subjugated its Imran Khan's Naya Pak where white color of our flag is equally dearer to us.I hope you ll act with same diligence when it comes to rights of Indian Minorities https://t.co/MQC1AnnmGR — Ch Fawad Hussain (@fawadchaudhry) March 24, 2019

Sushma then responded:

Mr.Minister @fawadchaudhry - I only asked for a report from Indian High Commissioner in Islamabad about the kidnapping and forced conversion of two minor Hindu girls to Islam. This was enough to make you jittery. This only shows your guilty conscience. @IndiainPakistan — Sushma Swaraj (@SushmaSwaraj) March 24, 2019

That drew another response from the Pakistan minister:

Madam Minister I am happy that in the Indian administration we have people who care for minority rights in other countries. I sincerely hope that your conscience will allow you to stand up for minorities at home as well. Gujarat and Jammu must weigh heavily on your soul. https://t.co/7D0vMiUI42 — Ch Fawad Hussain (@fawadchaudhry) March 24, 2019

Sushma Swaraj, who was a seven-time MP and youngest political leader to be elected in a state cabinet, has touched innumerable lives. Almost every tribute on social media, from national and international leaders, carries a personal memory and anecdote on how she touched their lives.

Also Read | Sushma Swaraj demise Updates: Last rites to be performed at 3 pm

Also Read | Pay your tributes to Sushma Swaraj here

Also Watch | RIP Sushma Swaraj: Mortal remains shifted to her Delhi residence




