Sushma Swaraj dies at 67 after cardiac arrest

Sushma Swaraj, former External Affairs Minister and veteran BJP leader, died after cardiac arrest on Tuesday night. She was 67.

The senior BJP leader was brought to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) around 10 pm and taken to the emergency. While doctors tried to revive her for about an hour, she died at 10.50 pm, the hospital said in its statement.

Sushma Swaraj's sudden death triggered a wave of shock and grief with aam aadmi and leaders cutting across political spectrum paying glowing tributes to the astute leader and star minister of the Modi-1 government.

FOLLOW LIVE UPDATES HERE

The body of the former Union minister will be kept for three hours at the BJP headquarters on Wednesday for party workers and leaders to pay tributes. Sushma Swaraj's last rites will be performed at Lodhi crematorium.

WHAT HAPPENED TO SUSHMA SWARAJ?

Sushma Swaraj had not been keeping well lately. Sushma Swaraj had a kidney transplant in 2016 but had continued to work through her recovery period.

Despite a severe medical condition and prolonged hospitalisation, she continued to work. Citing health reasons, Sushma Swaraj announced that she will not contest the 2019 Lok Sabha elections held earlier this year.

On Tuesday night, Sushma Swaraj was brought to AIIMS around 10 pm and taken to the emergency ward. The hospital later released a statement saying the BJP leader died at 10.50 pm.

WHAT WERE LAST WORDS OF SUSHMA SWARAJ

Hours before her demise, Sushma Swaraj congratulated Prime Minister Narendra Modi after the government revoked the special status for Jammu and Kashmir, saying "I was waiting to see this day in my lifetime".

Taking to Twitter on Tuesday evening, Sushma Swaraj said: "@narendramodi ji - Thank you Prime Minister. Thank you very much. I was waiting to see this day in my lifetime."

.



I congratulate the Home Minister Shri @AmitShah ji for his outstanding performance in Rajya Sabha. Sushma Swaraj (@SushmaSwaraj) August 5, 2019

This was her second tweet in as many days lauding the government over the move to revoke special status for Jammu and Kashmir and bifurcate the border state into two Union territories.

"I congratulate the Home Minister Shri @AmitShah ji for his outstanding performance in Rajya Sabha," she tweeted on Monday after the bills on J&K were passed in the Upper House.

WHAT DID PM MODI SAY?

Soon after AIIMS released a statement informing the nation about Sushma Swaraj's death, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said it was a personal loss.

Saying a glorious chapter in Indian politics had come to an end with the death of Sushma Swaraj, Narendra Modi wrote on Twitter, "India grieves the demise of a remarkable leader." He said he could not forget how the former external affairs minister worked tirelessly.

I can’t forget the manner in which Sushma Ji worked tirelessly as EAM in the last 5 years. Even when her health was not good, she would do everything possible to do justice to her work and remain up to date with matters of her Ministry. The spirit and commitment was unparalleled. Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) August 6, 2019

"Even when her health was not good, she would do everything possible to do justice to her work and remain up to date with matters of her Ministry. The spirit and commitment was unparalleled," he said.

PM Modi said Sushma Swaraj was one of her kind, who was a source of inspiration for crores of people. "Sushma Ji was a prolific orator and outstanding Parliamentarian. She was admired and revered across party lines," Narendra Modi said.

Describing her as an excellent administrator, the prime minister said Swaraj set high standards in every ministry she handled. "She played a key role in bettering India's ties with various nations. As a minister we also saw her compassionate side, helping fellow Indians who were in distress in any part of the world," he said.

WHAT HAVE THE PRESIDENT, VICE PRESIDENT, SPEAKER SAID?

President Ram Nath Kovind, Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla on Tuesday condoled Swaraj's demise and hailed her as a good orator and a distinguished parliamentarian

Expressing shock over the demise of Swaraj, President Kovind tweeted, "The country has lost a much loved leader who epitomised dignity, courage & integrity in public life." "Ever willing to help others, she will always be remembered for her service to the people of India," he said.

Vice President Naidu said Swaraj's death was a huge loss to the country and a personal loss to him."She was an excellent administrator, outstanding Parliamentarian & a remarkable orator. My heartfelt condolences to bereaved family members," he tweeted.

Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla said Swaraj despite being a politician, kept human sensibilities paramount. "As an MP, Sushma ji set new paradigms in the country. She always kept the interests of the country foremost and gave it expression. "I salute Sushma ji's saintly memory. The shining sun of the India's political horizon has set in the form of Sushma Swaraj," he said.

Former president Pranab Mukherjee also tweeted, "Shocked beyond words and distressed at the passing away of Smt SushmaSwaraj. An astute parliamentarian, an effective orator & an excellent humane leader, she will forever be remembered and missed. Hers was a story of hard work to heights. My deepest condolences and prayers."

HOW BJP LEADERS PAID HOMAGE TO SUSHMA SWARAJ?

BJP leaders expressed shock at the sudden demise of former external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj.

BJP president and Home Minister Amit Shah and several other union ministers, including Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, also expressed grief and remembered her affectionately.





, Amit Shah (@AmitShah) August 6, 2019

Home Minister Shah said she left an indelible mark in national politics. Describing her as a simple and rare politician, he said she was a strong voice of the BJP when it was in the opposition and left an indelible mark as a minister.

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh described Swaraj as an extremely valued colleague, while Union minister Nitin Gadkari said her passing away was a personal loss for him, the BJP and the country.

External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar said, "Deeply shocked to learn of the passing away of Smt Sushma Swaraj. Difficult to accept this news. The whole nation grieves, the Foreign Ministry even more so."

BJP leader and former union minister Arun Jaitley said, "Saddened, pained and broken on demise of Sushmaji. She was one of the most outstanding politicians in the Present Era. She distinguished in all positions. She held Senior Positions with the Party, NDA Govt. & while in opposition. She leaves behind a void which is difficult to fill."

BJP working president J P Nadda said it is a sad incident for not only the BJP but for the entire country. "She inspired us, her last tweet tells us how she was involved in serving the nation in an emotional way," he said.

WHAT DID THE OPPOSITION HAVE TO SAY ABOUT SUSHMA SWARAJ?

Senior Congress leader Rahul Gandhi described Swaraj as an extraordinary political leader, a gifted orator and an exceptional Parliamentarian and said she had friendships across party lines. "My condolences to her family in this hour of grief. May her soul rest in peace. Om Shanti," he tweeted.

Leader of opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad said Swaraj was a great human being and will always be remembered.

Former union minister P Chidambaram said, "Deeply saddened that Sushma Swaraj ji has passed away. She served her party and the country with loyalty, devotion and distinction." "She added a new, people friendly dimension to the office of Foreign Minister. My sincere and heartfelt condolences to her family and loved ones," the Congress leader said.

Deeply saddened that Sushma Swaraj ji has passed away. She served her party and the country with loyalty, devotion and distinction. She added a new, people friendly dimension to the office of Foreign Minister

My sincere and heartfelt condolences to her family and loved ones. P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) August 6, 2019

Delhi Chief Minister and AAP national convenor Arvind Kejriwal said the country lost a great leader. "India has lost a great leader. Sushma ji was a very warm and remarkable person. May her soul rest in peace," Arvind Kejriwal said in a tweet.

AAP leader and Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia said Swaraj's contribution to Indian politics would remain immortal.

"The news of passing away of Sushma Swaraj is extremely sad. Her contribution to Indian politics would remain immortal. May her soul rest in peace," he said in a tweet.

India has lost a great leader. Sushma ji was a very warm and remarkable person. May her soul rest in peace. Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) August 7, 2019

WHAT DID PAKISTAN SAY?

As tributes poured in, a Pakistani minister said he will miss his social media melee with Sushma Swaraj. "She was a giant in her own right," the Pakistani minister said.

Fawad Hussain and Sushma Swaraj had a Twitter spat in March 2019 over Hindu girls who were allegedly abducted in Pakistan.

HOW THE WORLD REACTED?

Sushma Swaraj's demise has shaken India and the world alike with global leaders extending their condolences.

Former President of Afghanistan Hamid Karzai condoled Sushma Swaraj's death saying, "Deeply saddened to hear of the loss of Behinji Sushma Swaraj. A tall leader and a great orator and people's person. My profound condolences to the people of India and her family and friends."

Expressing my profound condolences to Prime Minister @narendramodi on the sad demise of honourable Sushma Swaraj @SushmaSwaraj. She represented India with immense dignity and grace. HK pic.twitter.com/YzzUYLvYOO Hamid Karzai (@KarzaiH) August 6, 2019

Foreign Minister of Bahrain Khalid bin Ahmed Al Khalifa, in his tweet, addressed Sushma Swaraj as 'my dear sister'. He tweeted, "Indian leader, former External Affairs Minister, who always called me "My Brother", Sushma Swaraj, is not with us anymore. Rest In Peace "my dear sister". India and Bahrain will miss you."

French Ambassador to India, Alexandre Ziegler, expressed his grief via a tweet late on Tuesday night, in which he called Sushma Swaraj "one of India's most respected leaders "who"showed remarkable dedication to serving her fellow citizens."

READ | How Sushma Swaraj realised her 1996 dream of abolishing Article 370 in her last tweet

WATCH | Sushma Swaraj: Famous speeches by the great leader
