JNU student rape case: NCW takes cognizance, demands swift action against accused cab driver

Taking cognizance of the case, the Delhi Police officials assured the NCW that stern action will be taken against the accused. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights They have urged the officials to take strict action against the accused cab driver who allegedly raped the student The cab driver drove around with the woman for almost three hours after raping her The Commission has asked the survivor to feel free to contact them for grievance redressal on Monday.

New Delhi: After the Delhi Commission of Women took cognizance of the alleged rape case of a Jawaharlal Nehru University student, now a delegation of the National Commission for Women (NCW) met the Delhi Police officials regarding the case on Tuesday. They have urged the officials to take strict action against the accused cab driver who allegedly raped the student.

The NCW told news agency PTI, a 21-year-old student was allegedly drugged and raped by the cab driver in the national capital. The horrific incident happened when the woman was returning from her friend's house on Friday night. Later, the woman was found dumped in a park in a semi-conscious state and the locals informed the police. Reportedly, the survivor then told the police that she boarded the cab from the Mandir Marg area and the cab driver drove around with her for almost three hours after raping her.

Taking cognizance of the case, the Delhi Police officials assured the NCW that stern action will be taken against the accused. A Delhi Police official further mentioned that they were apprised of the situation and they have assured that strict action would be taken against the accused.

However, investigation in the matter is underway and the police have assured that the commission will be informed and updated regularly on the matter. Meanwhile, the Commission has asked the survivor to feel free to contact them for grievance redressal on Monday.

Also, the Delhi Commission of Women has issued a notice to the Delhi Police in this regard and asked the investigators to trace the route taken by the accused cab driver. The Commissions have acted on Tuesday, two days after a driver employed by a private cab aggregator was accused of raping a college student.

However, DCW has also sought details of security roadblocks and PCR vans posted along the route on the night of the crime.
