Section 375 first-look poster out: Akshaye Khanna fights Richa Chadha in new courtroom drama

"Another case filed against a renowned Bollywood director." Fret not, this is not real, but just the plot of the upcoming film Section 375, which stars Akshaye Khanna and Richa Chadha in the lead roles. Both the actors are sharing screen space for the first time and are all set to fight over a case in the courtroom drama. Akshaye plays a criminal lawyer called Tarun Saluja in the film and Richa on the other hand, will be seen donning the black robe as a public prosecutor, Hiral Mehta.

Akshaye took to social media to share the first-look poster of Ajay Bahl's directorial venture. He also announced the release date of film's teaser.

"Another case filed against a renowned Bollywood director. The fight for justice has begun #TeaserOutTomorrow #Section375 @RichaChadha @MeerraChopra @RahulBhatActor #AjayBahl @PanoramaMovies @TSeries," the actor tweeted.

The first-look poster of Section 375 is designed as a newspaper clipping, which states, "Renowned filmmaker has been taken into custody by the Mumbai Police on charges of rape under Section 375."

The film, named Section 375, deals with the eponymous section of the Indian Penal Code.

A quote attributed to the accused director in the film's first-look poster says, "Maine kisi ka rape nahin kiya (I didn't rape anyone)."

"Judgement Day: September 13th," the poster reads, indicating that the film is set to hit the screens on September 13 this year.

The first-look poster also unveils the storyline of Sector 375.

"A young junior costume assistant working in Rohan Khurana's latest film production has filed a case against him. The victim's name has been withheld for her protection. The city has been unified in their support for the woman as reported in the media earlier and the case is up for hearing in court soon...." the first-look poster reads.

In an earlier interview to IANS, Richa Chadha revealed that she met professors from law colleges in Mumbai for the preparation of her role in Section 375.

"My character is that of a very driven and ethical lawyer. Hence, I wanted to see what drives people to take up litigation in the first place. That's why law schools were a good idea and spending time with them was of great help. The research came in handy and has been crucial," the Gangs Of Wasseypur actress said.

In Section 375, Richa Chadha will argue for the victim, played by South actress Meera Chopra (who made her Bollywood debut in Vikram Bhatt's 1920: London). Akshaye will be seen in the role of a best-in-the-business defence lawyer, working for the rape-accused film director, played by actor Rahul Bhatt.

Directed by Ajay Bahl, Section 375 is produced by Panorama Studios. The film was earlier scheduled to release on August 2.

ALSO READ | Section 375: Richa Chadha and Akshaye Khanna's film gets a release date

ALSO READ | Gangs of Wasseypur actress Richa Chadha to wear a black robe for the first time in her next movie
