Kolkata: Woman slaps girl for wearing shorts, says 'girls like you should be raped'

The police are accessing the CCTV footages of the area. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Kolkata: A 25-year-old woman was threatened with rape by a middle-aged unidentified woman for wearing shorts in a market place at the Lord's Crossing in south Kolkata. The victim is pursuing her MPhil at Jadavpur University (JU). Reportedly, the woman slapped twice the victim for dressing inappropriately in a public space.

According to a report, a delegation of the JU students met the deputy police commissioner after which she lodged an FIR against the woman with Lake Police. The police are accessing the CCTV footages of the area.

The victim woman hailed from Bangaon and said she had stayed in the Salt Lake area for five years while studying at the Presidency College. She then naratted the incident and said that at around 1:30 PM last Thursday, she went out to buy stuff from a nearby place of her PG accommodation. Soon, she was accosted by a woman, who turned towards her and said that girls like her should be raped in the Bengali language. Shocked on the woman's statement, the victim protested and said that she had no right to make any comment on her clothes. She further recalled telling the woman that what she was doing with her was a criminal offence.

The accused then allegedly verbally abused the woman and the slapped the victim. Stunned on the woman's action, the victim tried to make her understand that she was taking it too far. The woman slapped the victim again for arguing with her. Realizing that she now was being surrounded, the woman fled from the spot.

However, the woman then reached the police with the help of her friends and filed an official complaint against the woman. The cops have booked the accused under the sections related to outraging the modesty of woman, hurt and wrongful restrain of the Indian Penal Code.

An officer said that it is a rare case where a woman has been booked for outraging the modesty of another woman. The accused probably lives near Dhakuria. The police might ask the victim to record her statement in front of the magistrate.

However, further probe in the case is still underway.
