Man bludgeoned to death by relative

New Delhi, Aug 7 : A 45-year-old man was allegedly bludgeoned to death by his relative in west Delhi's Punjabi Bagh area after the latter suspected him of having illicit relationship with his wife, the police said on Wednesday.

According to the police, the deceased has been identified as Shakeel Ahmed, a resident of Mehrauli.

"We received information on Tuesday night that a labourer died due to electrocution at Punjabi Bagh. After reaching the spot, Ahmed was found lying on the ground in an office where the medical equipment are repaired," said a senior police officer.

Police said that the victim was rushed to a nearby hospital where he was declared brought dead.

"During investigation, it was found that Ahmed was working as a mechanic in the company from last nine months. His relative Naushad Aalam (31), a resident of west Sagarpur, also works there. Aalam told us that he came downstairs for some work and when he returned to the office, he found Ahmed lying on the floor," the officer added.

Aalam said that due to electric shock, he fell down, hit on the iron boxes and died. He said on seeing the body, he called his employer Sumit Arora, who called police and informed them about the incident.

"The postmortem was conducted at Sanjay Gandhi Hospital where the caused of the death was found due to head injuries not of electrocution. However, police had doubts on Aalam and questioned him for couple of hours where he accepted that he killed Ahmed as he suspected him of having illicit relationship with his wife," said Monika Bhardwaj, Deputy Commissioner of Police (West).

The police said that around 25 days ago, Aalam downloaded voice recording application on his wife's phone, from which he came to know that Ahmed and his wife were frequently meeting in his absence.

"He also told us that he confronted Ahmed, but he refused to accept any such relationship. When Aalam and Ahmed were in the office on Tuesday, he planned to kill Ahmed and hit his head with a hammer lying in the office, following which Ahmed fell down," said Bhardwaj.

The accused washed the hammer and rolled a tape around it and created a false story, police said, adding that Ahmed was the maternal uncle of Aalam's wife.
