India: 15-Year-Old Girl Kidnapped And Gang-Raped Twice In One Day

Gurgaon, India: A 15-year-old girl was kidnapped and gang-raped two times on two different occasions in one day in Punhana, Haryana.

The police said that the incident happened July 30.

According to the Hindustan Times, the kidnap and rape case was reported to the police by the father of the 15-year-old girl.

The father said his daughter was kidnapped and raped by 5 men who live in their neighborhood.

The report that was published by Hindustan Times also states that the 15-year-old girl underwent a medical examination.

The statement of the 15-year-old girl was recorded under the CrPC Section 164 at the Nuh Court on August 6, 2019.

Kirshan Kumar, the Station House Officer (SHO) Of the Pulhana Police Station, said that the girl reported the incident to her parents a day after it happened.

The girl also named one of the suspects.

The 15-year-old girl said that she was kidnapped by the suspect and was brought to an isolated area where he called his 2 friends.

SHO Kumar said, “The girl, in her statement, said the acquaintance had called two of his friends, who raped her and threatened her with a country-made pistol, against disclosing the incident to anyone. Later, she said that more people gathered near the spot. She asked two other men passing by in a car to drop her home, but instead, they also raped her and left her on the outskirts of the village.”

The father of the 15-year-old girl said he found her daughter near their old house on July 31.

At first, his daughter did not reveal what happened to her, but after her parents forced her to tell them, she revealed that she was raped by on 2 different occasions.

The police said the girl did not return home on July 30 and the parents of the girl did not register a missing complaint at the local police station.

A case was registered under the Indian Penal Code sections 34, 363, 366A, and 506.

The accused men will face charges under section 6 of the POCSO Act, relevant sections of the IPC and the Arms Act.

SHO Kumar added, “Teams were formed and raids have been conducted at suspected locations, but the accused are at large.”

A special women’s police station has been assigned to handle the case.
