Abhinandan Varthaman to get Vir Chakra: The man who took down PAF’s Fighting Falcon and proved IAF’s dominance

Union MoS Defence Subhash Bhamre meets IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman at an armed forces medical facility in New Delhi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Abhinandan Varthaman's calm and composed demeanor during his captivity was praised by everyone His performance during the aerial dogfight with PAF’s advanced American fighters proved that there is a reason why the IAF is known as one of the top air forces in the world In 2003, the US and Indian Air Forces kicked off an important bilateral air warfare exercise and results stunned the US military experts including USAF top brass

New Delhi: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who brought down Pakistani F-16 fighter plane this year, will receive Vir Chakra from the Centre. The Vir Chakra is the third highest wartime military award in India.

Varthaman, who piloted MiG-21 Bison warplane, was later captured by the Pakistan Army after his plane was hit by an enemy missile. He was later released by Pakistan on March 1 as a “peace gesture” after immense international pressure.

Abhinandan’s calm and composed demeanour during his captivity was praised by the Indians. It also gave us a glimpse of the strong mental state of the ace pilot. Images and video clips released by Pakistan clearly indicated that Varthaman was tortured; however, the pilot’s ordeal ended when he was released after 60 hours.

After his capture, Abhinandan became the face of the tense military confrontation between India and Pakistan.

Abhinandan’s performance during the aerial skirmish with PAF’s advanced American fighters proved that there was a reason why the IAF is known as one of the top air forces in the world.

Despite the ageing fleet of Indian Air Force (IAF)'s combat jets, when it comes to performance, the IAF pilots are some of the world’s best.

Pulwama & Balakot

After the ghastly terror attack in South Kashmir’s Pulwama in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, India retaliated by launching a pre-emptive strike against Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camps in Pakistan’s Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

Five Mirage 2000 fighter jets carried out a successful predawn airstrike in Balakot. Pakistan was unaware of Operation Bandar, the code name of the airstrike, as their surveillance system had been jammed by the IAF. Two jets, which were part of the strike package, were mounted with Electronic Warfare (EW) jammers.

Next day, in retaliation, Pakistan Air Force attacked with a plan to target key military installations in Jammu & Kashmir. However, the attack was thwarted by the IAF. During the aerial dog fight, Abhinandan’s MiG 21 Bison locked on to a Pakistani F-16 jet and brought it down. However, his fighter jet was hit by an enemy missile which forced the pilot to eject mid-air. After his landing, Abhinandan was captured by the villagers and handed over to the Pakistani Army.

Before that, he had destroyed important documents he was carrying with himself and also swallowed them.

He was interrogated by the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and after being in captivity for 60 hours he was returned to India at the Wagah border.

Cope India training exercise and IAF’s performance

In 2003, the US and Indian Air Forces kicked off an important bilateral air warfare exercise and results stunned the US military experts including USAF top brass.

One US Air Force publication in a detailed article praised the IAF and pilots saying, “Surprising sophistication of Indian fighter aircraft and skill of Indian pilots”. During the exercise, the Indian Sukhois and the MiGs were locating the US targets at the same time the F-15s were locking theirs.

Other media reports termed the IAF’s win at the exercise as spectacular.

The IAF’s performance at Cope India and other exercises prove how our pilots are well trained, disciplined and focused.
