Telangana court sentences man to death 2 months after he rapes and murders 9-month-old

This is one of the fastest conviction in the cases pertaining to the POCSO Act. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights This is one of the fastest conviction in the cases pertaining to the POCSO Act He has been sentenced to death under IPC Section 302 The case had come to light when the baby's mother found her missing around 2:30 am

Telangana: A district court in Telangana awarded death sentence to a 27-year-old man for raping and killing a nine-month-old girl in Warangal district. The order came just two months after the case was reported. The horrifying case had triggered an outrage in the city.

The trial began on July 24 and the First Additional District Sessions Judge of Warangal K Jayakumar announced the verdict in the case on Thursday. The trial process was completed within two weeks. This is one of the fastest conviction in the cases pertaining to the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The judge after hearing the final arguments in the case first convicted the suspect P Praveen of rape and murder and then pronounced the quantum of punishment. Praveen has been sentenced to death by hanging under Indian Penal Code Section 302 (murder) and life imprisonment for rape under Section 376 among other offences.

Reportedly, along with stringent punishment in the case, the judge imposed a fine of Rs 20,000 on the man, who had taken away the baby to an isolated place in the early hours of June 19. This happened when the infant was sleeping next to her parents on the terrace of their house in Hanamkonda area. The case came to light when the baby's mother found her missing around 2:30 am. When the family raised an alarm and informed the police, the cops found that Praveen was seen holding the baby covered in a towel on his shoulder and walking away.

The convict then sexually assaulted the child and later killed her. The judge in the order, reportedly, observed that it was a rarest of a rare case of kidnapping, committing rape on a nine-month-old baby girl and then murdering her. Keeping in mind the heinous nature of the crime, he was given the death penalty. Praveen was a resident of the same locality and was arrested by the police on June 19 after interrogation and later remanded to judicial custody. A large number of local people had taken to the streets condemning the incident and demanding justice for the baby.

Similarly, a court in Kolkata sentenced a man to life imprisonment on August 1 for raping and impregnating a teenager within a week of registration of the complaint. This was also one of the fastest convictions in a POCSO case.
