[VIDEO] Bihar: Mutilated body of 16-year-old found; cops suspect gang-rape, one arrested as others abscond

However, further probe in the case is underway and the police are trying to nab the absconding accused. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The girl had gone out of the house to relieve herself after which she went missing The police have arrested one of the suspects who is responsible for the abduction and death of the victim Other accused are still at large and police say they are trying to locate them

Patna: In a horrifying case reported from Bihar's Champaran district, the body of a 16-year-old girl was found mutilated, her face completely disfigured with acid. Allegedly, the girl was raped before being murdered by the accused. The victim's parents told the local police that the girl had gone out of the house to relieve herself after which she went missing.

Later on Tuesday, her mutilated body was recovered in a nearby sugarcane field. According to Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Ramnagar, Arjun Lal said that the police have arrested one suspect in the case whereas the others are still absconding.

Meanwhile, the body was sent for a post-mortem examination and the report is awaited. Sources claimed that the accused belong to the same village as that of the deceased. However, further probe in the case is underway and the police are trying to nab the absconding accused.

Food delivery boy sexually harasses a woman in Bengaluru

A food delivery boy was arrested for allegedly sexually harassing a woman on a footpath in Bengaluru. The incident happened at HSR Layout and the accused was identified as 26-year-old Kiran Kumar.

According to the victim, the accused touched her inappropriately when she was walking in the HSR Layout area in Sector 4 of Bengaluru. She added that the delivery boy on the motorbike came from the opposite direction and molested her and that before she could shout for help or react, he fled from the location. The police later tracked down the accused with the help of CCTV and his bike registration number.

However, the accused was arrested and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.

Teen rapes minor in UP village

A 12-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a teenager in a Pratapgarh village of Uttar Pradesh. The complaint in the case was lodged on Wednesday evening by the victim's family members. Reportedly, the incident took place on July 29.

The girl was at her house along with her grandmother when the 16-year-old accused forcibly took her to an isolated place, where he allegedly raped her. The matter came to light on August 5 when the accused reached her home and the girl began shouting at him after which he fled away. The girl then narrated the ordeal to her family members, who filed a police complaint.

However, the matter is currently being probed.
