Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

NEW YORK (AP) — President Donald Trump is confronting a storm of crises, both foreign and domestic, as he prepares to leave Friday for his annual August holiday at his New Jersey golf club. He's being tested by an escalating trade war with China, rising tensions with Iran and North Korea, pressure to act on guns and accusations of his own role in fostering an environment of hate. The dark clouds are converging as the president's bid for a second term takes on new urgency.

AGAT, Guam (AP) — Long after it erupted into scandal on the mainland, clergy sex abuse over generations remained a secret on Guam, where it reached to the very top of the church hierarchy. On this island where four out of five people are Catholic, the abusers held the power. More than 220 victims have now come forward. Anthony Apuron, former archbishop of Agaña, is accused of multiple rapes. He denies the allegations.

LOS ANGELES (AP) — Surveillance video shows a woman defending herself against a man with two knives who attacked and wounded her during a stabbing rampage that left four people dead in two Southern California cities. The footage was released Thursday by Garden Grove police. The 54-year-old woman survived. She was not identified. Zachary Castaneda was arrested Wednesday after a two-hour series of stabbings and robberies. Investigators haven't identified a motive. Police say he targeted his victims randomly.

WASHINGTON (AP) — The top two congressional Democrats say President Donald Trump has assured them he will review a House-passed bill that expands federal background checks for gun sales. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer say they told Trump the best way to address gun violence is for the Senate to take up and pass the House-passed bill. They say Trump "gave us his assurances that he would review the bipartisan House-passed legislation."

NEW DELHI (AP) — The head of the United Nations is calling for India and Pakistan not to take any steps that would affect the status of the disputed Kashmir region. U.N. spokesman Stephane Dujarric also said Thursday that U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is worried about reports of restrictions in the Indian-administered portion of Kashmir that exacerbate the human rights situation. Guterres is calling for restraint.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
