Madhya Pradesh: Man held for harassing minor, forcing him to lick toilet seat

The police found out that Khan was trying to falsely implicate the two minor boys. This happened two weeks after the FIR was lodged in the case. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police found the video in the accused's while interrogating another case Accused has been booked under sections of IPC, POCSO Act and IT Act

Bhopal: During an investigation of a land grab case, the police found a video in the accused's phone where he was forcing a minor to lick the toilet seat to pressure him to give a false statement to police. The incident happened in Madhya Pradesh's Indore district. The accused was identified as 35-year-old Mukhtyar Khan.

The police found the video of minor being subjected to torture and brutalisation in the smartphone of an accused on the run. Subsequently, the officials found the victim and helped him to register a case in the matter. The police registered the case against Mukhtyar after the video of the incident surfaced.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Ruchivardhan Mishra told PTI that Khan was arrested on the orders of a local court in connection with a case related to buying land using fake documents. Mishra added, that when Khan's mobile phone was being examined during the investigation, the video of him torturing a 14-year-old boy, where he was forcing him to lick the toilet seat by tongue was found by the officials.

Reportedly, Khan and his associates were pressuring the minor boy to give a false statement to police that two other minor boys (both brothers) were involved in a case of stabbing Khan's son. However, the police then found that these boys had nothing to do with the stabbing incident.

The SSP further added that four persons have been already arrested in the stabbing case of Khan's son. And all of those four were booked under the Indian Penal Code, Section 307 (attempt to murder). The police found out that Khan was trying to falsely implicate the two minor boys. This happened two weeks after the FIR was lodged in the case.

The police also suspected that Khan was intending to extort money from the father of these boys (both of them were brother), who is allegedly a rich man. However, an FIR has been lodged against Khan and his associates under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and Information Technology Act. And further investigation in the case is still underway.
