Corruption biggest problem in J&K; Omar, Mehbooba interested in their own empowerment, says Governor Satyapal Malik

Akhnoor (Jammu and Kashmir) [India], Jan 31 (ANI): Corruption is the biggest problem in Jammu and Kashmir, said Governor Satyapal Mali on Thursday while accusing former chief ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti of not wishing to “empower the state but themselves.”

Malik, addressing a gathering here, said: “I cancelled two big deals. Corruption is the biggest problem in Jammu and Kashmir. It takes four months to move a file.”

“I give jobs under the Statutory Rules and Orders (SRO) given by me and the Chief Secretary but it doesn’t reach beneficiaries until they pay Rs 1 lakh. In the Secretariat, people have been sitting for the last 15 years and they have eaten up this state with corruption,” he said.

Malik said that he broke the protocol and approached PDP chief Mehbooba and NC leader Omar requesting them to participate in the Panchayat elections in the interest of the state, but the two leaders denied.

“These political parties (NC, PDP) are so double standard. I went to them by breaking the protocol. I went to Mehbooba Mufti and even Omar Abdullah. I told them these Panchayat elections will benefit and empower people of the state but they did not want empowerment of the people but their own empowerment. So they boycotted the polls but we decided to hold the elections,” said Malik.

Urging the youths of Kashmir to shun violence and look for a peaceful resolve, the Governor said: “The politicians of J&K don’t want peace. They want these youngsters should die, using which they can black mail Delhi.”

“No compromise against terrorism. People have understood that with gun nothing can happen. Also if you use the gun, we will not reply with flowers. Hurriyat leaders and these two parties (NC and PDP) should know that violence won’t change anything,” he said.

He also accused the NC and the PDP of corruption and said that the menace of corruption has crippled the government establishment in the state.

He said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led Central government is willing to fulfill all demands of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.

“We are ready to give people of Jammu and Kashmir everything they demand under the ambit of the Constitution. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has great love and respect for the people of Jammu and Kashmir,” he said.

He also urged the people of the state to not turn against the Indian Army.

“The Army helped the people of Kashmir during floods at that time people appreciated, but now you are pelting stones on them. This has to stop,” he said.

“All these problems in Jammu and Kashmir have been created by some politicians in Delhi and some politicians of the state. These politicians say something in Delhi and something else in Kashmir. They sell to the people of J&K dreams of ‘Azadi.’ Jammu and Kashmir will remain here only if you want ‘Azadi’ goes to Pakistan.” (ANI)
