Mumbai: Woman 'assaulted' for feeding strays, cops refuse to investigate

A 25-year-old woman was allegedly molested and assaulted by 10-15 goons for feeding dogs on street at Malad East. However, Dindoshi police refused to register the FIR. She then approached a local court and filed the complaint after two days of the incident.



A mob of men last week, attacked the woman, tore-off her clothes and hit her with chappal. However, Dindoshi police haven't yet arrested any accused and have cited lack of evidence as the reason.



On Thursday, DNA reported about a 35-year-old Sneha and her mother Neeta Shridharani who also feeded stray dogs, being assaulted and threatened by a group. The residents complained of stray dogs tearing off the seat cover of their bikes. However, Dindoshi police refused to file FIR in this case too. It was after this news was published, the woman in the latter case demanded justice and approached DNA.



On Wednesday, morning she posted her photo of wounds caused by the assault on social media. She demanded take strict action against the culprit and also wrote about police refusing to register her complaint.



The alleged accused identified as Vilas Fhansekar, Prashant Bhosale, Pravin Bhosale, and Kavita Bhosale are the residents of Santosh Nagar, Goregaon East. According to the police officials, the incident occurred on June 29 and police registered the case on July 3.



The survivor is an event management professional and resident of Santosh Nagar, Goregaon East.



Speaking with DNA she said, "I feed 10-15 dogs in our area on daily basis. I was out of town for a couple of days in June. However, when I returned, around 10-15 men gathered and objected to my feeding of strays. They complained that the strays dirtied the compound. This further led to an argument"



"The four men hit me with chappals and other 30-40 people gathered on spot. The group then tore-off my clothes and assaulted me. Sub-inspector MA Devarshi refused to take down my complained and cited it as a non-cognisable (NC) offense. A PSI Devarshi told me that there are no visible injuries and hence he can't file FIR. It was only after the local court orders that the FIR was registered. But still no action has been taken by the police," she added.

Crime Report
