Freida Pinto On Life In Hollywood Post-Me Too

“When Slumdog happened it was just like high, high, high,” she says stretching her hand into the sky. “At some point it had to come down, right? Sometimes when the start is higher, the fall is greater.” Pinto explains that, with very little work in her late twenties, this was one of the most difficult times in her career. She partly attributes the hiatus to the lack of compelling roles to be had. “I was feeling degraded by the offers that were coming in. ‘Is this what you think I’m capable of?’,” she remembers asking herself, and by extension, the powers that be in Hollywood. “I indulged in a lot of anxious thoughts and going down a rabbit hole of ‘I should have chosen those roles.’” I ask if she means the “exotic princess” roles she had spoken about in a previous interview. She replies, “Yeah. And I've done them. Once is enough. After a while I said, ‘I don’t want to do this shit anymore, I’m not growing in my career.’”[#image: /photos/5d54473c511e9f000877c5ee][#image: /photos/5d54473b12e31a000847fd59]

What began as an eye-opening, first-hand experience of the cruel realities of Hollywood – namely the lack of multi-dimensional parts for women, especially women of colour – ended up being a crucial time for self-growth.

These days, at 34, Pinto has admittedly become a California convert and seems to have comfortably settled into her groove. “When I moved to Los Angeles from London in 2011, I wasn’t happy about it,” she remembers. “Although I hated the first two years, now I miss this city when I’m gone.” She’s found a small group of friends, including her roommate, Preeti Desai (former Miss Great Britain), who she fondly refers to as her “wife”. Each morning, Pinto practices meditation and chanting, she’s into cleanses (she is currently abstaining from red meat), and speaks of the benefits of a simple, pared-back lifestyle (she cleans out her closet four times a year, giving away anything that she deems not totally “essential”).[#image: /photos/5d54473cf197840008101bcb]

Naturally, she also has a yoga guru in Silver Lake. She insists, though, that her practice has nothing to do with Los Angeles and everything to do with the 2014 film Desert Dancer, when she worked with choreographer Erin Elliott. “Erin asked me if I had ever done yoga and I said, ‘Oh no no no, don’t try to get me to do yoga. You freakin’ Angelenos are all quacks. I come from the country of yoga! I do not need a white person to teach me yoga.’ But I was so wrong,” she says looking down as if still sorry. “I discovered my body for the first time. I discovered where I hold my sorrow and happiness. It opened me up emotionally.”Read more: Everything You Need To Know About Priyanka Chopra & Nick Jonas’s Wedding
