Man in Rajasthan's Bundi rapes 70-year-old woman while she was guarding her fields

Rajasthan Police arrested the accused on Wednesday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The heinous crime took place on Tuesday, said police Officials have identified the accused as 40-year-old Gyan Singh Meena A court in Bundi sent Meena to judicial custody on Thursday

Jaipur: Accused of raping a 70-year-old woman, a man in Rajasthan's Bundi district was sent to judicial custody by a court on Thursday. Identified as Gyan Singh Meena, the accused is a resident of Dei town of Bundi. He was arrested on the basis of a police complaint by the survivor who claims that she was raped by him while she was guarding her fields on Tuesday.

Meena was arrested on Wednesday and produced before a court the next day which sent him to judicial custody. Officials recorded the woman' s statement before a magistrate under Section 164 of the Criminal Procedure Court (CrPC) on Friday. An initial complaint in this regard was made by the woman on Tuesday of this week which led to the accused's arrest, Sub-Inspector Guman Singh with the Deikhada police station told a news agency.

#ElderAbuse is a serious issue & more common than people realize.



It can happen:



In their own homes

In hospitals

In nursing homes or other kinds of long-term care facilities



If you witness #ElderAbuse, don't think twice & dial 1090. Your one call can bring to faces. pic.twitter.com/82meZqLK71 — Rajasthan Police (@PoliceRajasthan) July 29, 2019

In her complaint, the woman even alleged that the accused was heavily under the influence of alcohol at the time of the incident. While confirming that Meena has been sent to jail, SI Guman Singh added that further investigation into the matter is underway.

This is the second such incident to have been reported from the state of Rajasthan in recent months. In May of this year, an elderly woman was gang-raped at a government hospital while she was visiting her newborn grandchild. In her complaint, the woman alleged that she was sexually assaulted by multiple men at a state-run hospital in Alwar district. A case was registered and inquiries into the matter are still underway.

Similarly, a 61-year-old woman was raped at a public park in Delhi's Lajpat Nagar in April of this year. Police found her in an unconscious state at the park. A resident of East of Kailash, the victim was unclothed when locals spotted her lying unconscious at the park in South-East Delhi. A senior police official probing the matter had told media outlets that the complainant lived with her sister at an apartment owned by her father. The two often went to gurudwaras and shops in the area to buy groceries.

In March of last year, a district court in Kolhapur city of Maharashtra sentenced a man to life imprisonment for raping a 90-year-old woman in 2015. Identified as Vishnu Krishna Nalawade, the accused was a resident of Naganwadi in Bhudargad tehsil. Public prosecutor Amruta Patole had told the court that the accused was a neighbour of the bed-ridden woman and raped her on March 4, 2015. Nine witnesses were examined in connection with the case against Nalawade after which Judge Aditi Kadam sentenced him to life imprisonment while terming his crime as "inhuman".
