Vehicles set on fire as Maoists call for Bharat bandh

Maoists have called for a Bharat Bandh in Maoist-affected areas of the country today. The Maoist offensive against tribals, security forces and government agencies continues as seven vehicles used for the construction of roads were set on fire at two places in Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra.

Two earth movers and four tractors used in the interior area of Potegaon in Gadchiroli were set ablaze by armed Maoists during the wee hours of Thursday.

Similarly, a truck was set on fire in Bedgaon area of Korchi tehsil of the district this morning. Banners were put up by the Maoists which stated that people should join CPI Maoist and come together to defeat the Brahmin Fascist rule.

Heavy police forces were deployed along with CRPF teams across the district, especially North Gadchiroli to avoid any kind of law and order situation or attacks by Maoists.

On Wednesday, a fifth tribal villager was killed by Maoists since January 22 in Maharashtra. Vale Vanja Kudyami, 50, and his wife Messy, 45, were abducted from their house in Bhamragad Taluka of Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra seven days ago.

His dead body was found in Pengunda, some 20 kilometres from the taluka headquarters, on Wednesday morning with a note left on it. Messy is still missing.

The note left on Kudyami's body said Kudyami was a police informer and had informed police regarding the movement of Maoist cadres on April 22 last year which led to two encounters that ended with 40 maoist cadres being gunned down.

The note further said that Kudyami was awarded capital punishment by CPI Maoist for his act.

Last Sunday another tribal Sonsay Tanu Baig, 32, from Talguda village under Jarawandi police help center in Etapalli taluka of Gadchiroli was killed by armed Maoists.

They had abducted him from his home and he was reportedly placed in front of villagers when Maoists called for a hearing.

The Maoists declared him guilty for being a police informer. He was charged with crime and capital punishment was awarded to him.

Baig's body was found on Sunday along with Maoist banners that said Baig was awarded capital punishment for being a police informer against Maoists and was punished for his crime.

Last week three other villagers from Kasansur - identified as Mallu Madavi, Kannu Madavi and Lalsu kudyeti -were also killed after being abducted by Maoists on suspicion of being police informers.

Maoists have launched similar attacks in neighbouring Bastar district of Chhattisgarh as well. During a ptrol on Monday, the Bastar police and CRPF recovered an improvised explosive device (IED) planted by Maoists on Moulavada-Mokhpal road in South Bastar, Chhattisgarh.

The IED, loaded with 3 kg of explosives, could have caused massive damage. The IED was planted under the road and any heavy vehicle could have triggered the explosion.

Maoists have called for Martyrs week starting from January 25 to January 31. As part of this week, attacks on local villagers have been launched and banners have been put up across the district to protest the government and security forces.

The banner put up by Maoists stated that 40 Maoist cadres were killed and those responsible for the encounters were the deceased villagers that had informed police about the movement of Maoists that eventually led to the encounter.

Forty Maoist cadres were killed in two encounters last year on April 22 and 23 in the jungles of Kasansur in Bhamragad Taluka, Gadchiroli district. Termed as the biggest offensive against red terror, the encounters almost wiped out Maoists in the district.

After the April encounter, the CPI(M)'s central committee changed its leadership last year. Ganpati who had been leading the central committee was replaced by Basavraju.

Last month, Maoists had torched construction vehicles worth Rs 3 crore in the district but this incident could be the first violent act of Basavraju in Maharashtra.

Many villagers from areas bordering Chhattisgarh and Telangana have fled fearing Maoist attacks.

There has been a protest against Maoists by villagers as many villagers burnt banners put up by Maoists in the district.
