Friday prayers in Valley peaceful

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Majid Jahangir

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, August 9

Friday prayers in the Kashmir valley, the first after Article 370 was scrapped, passed off peacefully. The government allowed congregational prayers at most mosques, except the historical Jamia Masjid. Clashes erupted when youths hurled stones at security forces. A youth was critically injured. There were reports of clashes in other parts of the Valley too.

Edit: Reaching out to J&K

The authorities relaxed restrictions across Kashmir to allow locals to offer prayers at mosques. However, restrictions in the old city continued. Hundreds of police and Central Armed Police Force personnel guarded sensitive areas in Srinagar and other parts of the Valley to ensure there was no breach of peace.

Reports from south Kashmir said security personnel advised against loudspeakers during the prayers.

The information blockade continued for the fifth day in a row. The mobile phone facility, Internet and landline facilities continued to remain snapped. Shops in Srinagar remained closed.

With normalcy returning to Jammu, the district administration today lifted Section 144 of the CrPC and instructed that all educational institutions be reopened on Saturday. Munir Khan, ADGP, Law and Order, said the situation was “very much under control,” adding that all necessary steps to maintain peace are being taken. “The administration will impose Section 144 again, if required,” he told The Tribune.

Thar Express to depart as scheduled

Jaipur: After the disruption of the Samjhauta Express service at the Wagah border, there was apprehension that the Thar Link Express — a weekly train (every Friday) that runs between Munaboa in Barmer and Khokhrapar (Pakistan) — could be suspended. But there was no official word on any cancellation so far. TNS/PTI

300 phone booths set up in valley

Authorities have set up 300 telephone booths for people to reach out to their relatives. Most residents said they had no such information

Over 800 detained

More than 800 political leaders and activists of mainstream parties and alleged stone-pelters have been detained across the Valley

Chaos at airport

Chaos, confusion persisted at Srinagar airport with many travellers desperate for a ticket to return home. There were long queues outside ATMs
