Neighbour gets 5-yr RI for rape bid on minor

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a salesman to five years of rigorous imprisonment for rape attempt on a minor girl.

The court of Additional Sessions Judge Rashmi Sharma has also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 on the convict. In case of default in fine payment, he will undergo another two years of rigorous imprisonment. Of the fine amount, Rs 40,000 would be paid to the survivor as compensation.

On July 24, 2016, police had booked the man, who is in his late 20s, for rape bid on his seven-year-old neighbour.

The minor’s father had told the police, “My daughter, a student of Class III, was playing outside our house around noon when our neighbour took her along on the promise of giving her sweets. When she did not return for long, my wife started looking for her. On hearing her shrieks, my wife knocked on the neighbour’s door. But he escaped. Our daughter then told her mother that he was trying to violate her.”

During the case trial, the accused said he was being implicated.

Additional public prosecutor for state S S Haidar sought punishment on the basis of prosecution evidence.

After going through evidence on record, the court observed that it was an aggravated sexual assault as the age of the survivor was less than 12 years at the time of the incident.

“The draconian effect of sexual assault or an attempt to defy the physical dignity of a child creates a shadow of fear in the social fabric shattering the reposition of trust and faith in the fellow beings. Sexual assault or its attempt in any of its manifestation is degrading, humiliating, and monumental blow upon self-esteem, dignity, respect, honour and confidence of child victim. The scars of such traumatic experience haunt the victim for life. Sexual assault on minor children is gross and blatant violation of their fundamental, constitutional and human rights. Adequate sentencing is better statutory armour against gender outrage than the long clauses of complex sections with all the protections writ into it,” the court said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
