Mumbai Police likely to file closure report in MeToo case against Alok Nath

Mumbai Police likely to close MeToo case against Alok Nath | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Mumbai Police is reportedly likely to close the case of alleged rape against Alok Nath Alok Nath was accused of rape by a television screenwriter during the Indian extension of the MeToo movement last year Alok Nath was last seen in Ajay Devgn, Tabu and Rakul Preet Singh-starrer De De Pyaar De

A rape case was filed against Bollywood actor Alok Nath about ten months ago by a renowned television screenwriter. Now, it is being said that Oshiwara Police is likely to close the case due to 'lack of evidence.' During the Indian extension of MeToo movement last year, the screenwriter had shared her alleged ordeal on social media in October.

Alok Nath, last seen in De De Pyaar De, was booked for alleged rape a month later. Now, the police are reportedly likely to file a closure report in the case as it seems to be lacking sufficient evidence against the accused and a charge sheet can't be filed in the matter.

"We have recorded a detailed statement of the victim. Two witnesses were called to the police station a number of times but they haven't yet recorded their statements," a report quoted an Oshiwara police station officer as saying.

The details of the witnesses were provided to the police by the survivor when she narrated the incident, that allegedly happened 20 years ago, to them. The writer-producer had said that the incident allegedly occurred at the time of the shoot of popular 1990s' TV serial Tara, in which he played the male lead.

In his defence, Alok Nath lodged a counter defamation suit against the complainant, by the means of which he demanded from her a written apology, alongside a monetary compensation of Re 1, as well as, a restraining order.

In October last year, Alok Nath was expelled by Cine And TV Artistes' Association (CINTAA) for not turning up before the executive committee. He was granted relief from arrest by the sessions court in January this year.

The sessions court observed that the alleged rape case against Alok Nath was filed on the basis of a defamatory and false report by the complainant. It also granted him a pre-arrest bail against a surety bond of Rs 5 lakh. SS Oza, Additional sessions court judge called the complaint 'personal vendetta'.

The judge had reportedly observed that even though the complainant remembered the entire incident but could not recall the date and month that it took place. The complainant's lawyer, on the news of the police planning to close the case, said, "Let the police do whatever they are planning, we will take it forward accordingly."
