Son Gets Lifer For Murdering Father And Fine Of Rs 100

Hyderabad: A local court sentenced a man to lifer for murdering his father and imposed a fine of Rs 100 on him on Thursday.

The accused, Ch.Ramesh, 26, is a scrap trader from Kuntloor in Hayathnagar. He killed his father in July 2016 and was in an inebriated state. Police said Ramesh had bludgeoned his father Yadagiri to death with a boulder following an argument over Ramesh’s alcoholic behaviour.

"During a quarrel, the convict took a cement slab and repeatedly hit his father on his chest, head, and face. He died on the spot," police was quoted saying by a leading daily.

Police said that he claimed that he became an alcoholis after his wife left him in 2017. Ramesh also frequently bashed his mother and niece as well.

After a complaint was lodged by his mother in Hayathnagar Police Station on July 4 in 2016, police moved to action.

Meanwhile, In one of the fastest trials, a court in Telangana on Thursday awarded death sentence to a 27-year-old man for raping and killing a nine-month-old girl in Warangal in June this year. The trial in the sensational case that triggered an outrage began on July 24 and First Additional District Sessions Judge, Warangal, K Jayakumar delivered his verdict on Thursday, completing the process in two weeks, police said.

In his order, he observed it was a rarest of rare case of kidnapping, committing rape on a nine-month old baby girl and murdering her and therefore he was giving the death penalty, according to Additional Public Prosecutor M Satyanarayana Goud, who represented the prosecution in the case.

He was sentenced to death by hanging under IPC Section 302 (murder) and life imprisonment for rape under Section 376 among other offences and also under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The speedy verdict comes close on the heels of a court in Kolkata sentencing a man to life imprisonment on August 1 for raping and impregnating a teenager within a week of registration of the complaint, making it one of the fastest convictions in a POCSO case.

Also Read: Warangal Infant Rape Murder Case Speedy Verdict Hailed

Also Read: Warangal Man Gags 9-Month Baby In Alleged Rape Attempt, Girl Dies

Also Read: Mahesh Fans Plan Birthday Celebrations In Dookudu Style
