Dehradun: 11-year-old Delhi boy sexually assaulted in boarding school

The accused boy, a resident of Haryana, has been expelled from the school. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Boy was allegedly sexually assaulted on August 3 Accused, who is a resident of Haryana, has been expelled from school Accused student has been booked under Section 377 of IPC

Dehradun: In yet another crime against children, an 11-year-old boy was allegedly sodomised by his senior at a residential school in Dehradun in Uttarakhand. The victim hails from Delhi.

The matter came to light after the boy shared his ordeal with his parents and they lodged a First Information Report (FIR) with the Raipur police in Dehradun. The crime is said to happen on August 3, said Raipur Station House Officer CB Singh.

According to a report in PTI, the boy, a student of class 10, was taken to a room by his senior and sexually abused and beaten up. The report further suggested that the accused boy, a resident of Haryana, has been expelled from the school after the management came to know about the sexual assault.

Police have booked the accused student under section 377 (unnatural sex) of the Indian Penal Code. The police are also probing the role of the school management which did not report the incident to the police.

In May this year, the Mumbai police arrested a man for allegedly sodomising a 9-year-old boy at Kolegaon in Dombivli. The boy was known to the accused as he lived in the neighbourhood. The accused was identified as 36-year-old Dinesh Lawhari. Manpada police said the accused had been booked under IPC sections 377 (unnatural offences), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The complaint was lodged by the parents of the victim. The accused worked as a housekeeper.

In a similar incident in August last year, a class 11 student was allegedly sodomised by his peers at the country's most reputed boarding schools, Mayo College in Ajmer, Rajasthan. The boy accused six of his seniors of sexually assaulting him on multiple occasions between July 10 and July 20 in 2018.

The matter came to light when the boy's father registered a first information report (FIR) against the accused at the Alwar Gate police station. Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP) Priti Chaudhary had confirmed the allegations and said six students of class 12 at the Mayo College were named as the accused in the case.


