Mentally challenged boy thrashed twice by mob in three days on suspicion of child lifting

Uttar Pradesh Police have arrested two accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The victim was counselled for two days after the first attack, said police He was attacked by a mob on the Fatehabad-Firozabad road Police have arrested two people and booked another 12 in connection with the assault

Lucknow: In recent months, reports of individuals being mercilessly thrashed by mobs on suspicion of child lifting have emerged from various parts of the country. Despite efforts by local law enforcement agencies to curb these incidents of mob violence, innocent men and women continue to fall prey to this culture of mob justice. States such as Manipur and Rajasthan have even enacted laws to prevent such tragedies.

One such instance which has come to light from Agra city in Uttar Pradesh involves a mentally challenged boy in his 20s. Identified as Chung, the boy was brutally assaulted by unruly mobs twice in three days after they suspected him of being a child-lifter. Surprisingly, police swung into action only after a video of the barbaric assault went into wide circulation on social media platforms.

Patna: A person who was thrashed by a mob on suspicion of being a child lifter yesterday, died in hospital today. Garima Malik, SSP Patna says, "today an incident of mob lynching has been reported from Naubatpur. Police responded immediately & we have arrested 22 persons." #Bihar pic.twitter.com/PhXsGUAzFw — ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

(A similar incident in Patna)

Following a preliminary inquiry, police arrested two accused and booked another 12 unidentified men apart from one who has been identified as Ramji Lal. All of the men have been arrested under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Officials familiar with the investigation said that one of the accused who has been taken into police custody hails from Firozabad even as investigators are in the process of identifying the remaining accused who can be seen thrashing Chung in a video of the assault.

Station house officer (SHO) of Fatehabad, Parvesh Kumar said that the second assault on the mentally challenged boy took place on the Fatehabad-Firozabad road after the mob suspected him of being a child-lifter. Interestingly, it was Kumar who on Wednesday told reporters that police would grant Chung security following the first attack on him earlier this week. The SHO had also said that efforts were underway to track down the victim's relatives.



Meanwhile, Inspector General (IG) of Agra, A Satish Ganesh said that the Fatehabad Police took the victim to a local bus stand after counselling him for two days. Chung was then made to board a Kanpur-bound bus as per his request. The senior official added that a distress call was received by policemen barely two hours later, alerting them about an assault on a mentally-challenged boy on the Fatehabad-Firozabad road.

Despite having been given a recommendation and a draft bill by the Uttar Pradesh Law Commission, the state government is yet to bring about a law which will act as a deterrent to instances of mob lynching fuelled either by rumours of child abduction or cow slaughter.
