Nehru a 'criminal' for declaring ceasefire with Pakistan, imposing Article 370 on J&K: Shivraj Singh Chouhan

BJP leader Shivraj Singh Chouhan (File photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Parliament gave its nod to scrap J&K special status under Article 370 on August 6 Chouhan blamed Nehru for imposing the temporary provision on J&K and declaring ceasefire with Pakistan On August 5, Govt moved resolution to scrap Article 370 in RS. It was later ratified by both Houses and got Presidential assent

New Delhi: Former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan jumped in the debate on Jammu & Kashmir on Saturday, blaming the former Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru for committing the crime of imposing Article 370 on the state.

“Jawaharlal Nehru was a criminal. First, he committed the crime of announcing ceasefire in war with Pakistan at times when Indian forces were driving out the Pakistan infiltrators from Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), due to which one-third of the portion (PoK) remained with Pakistan," BJP leader Chouhan said.

"Second he did the crime of imposing Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir. In one country, how can two symbols, two constitution and two heads can exist? This was not injustice but was a crime against the nation," he told the news agency ANI.

The government got the Parliament to scrap the special status accorded to the troubled state under Article 370 of the Constitution.

On August 6, the Parliament cleared the resolution revoking Article 370 that gave Jammu and Kashmir rights to take decisions for all matters except for defence, foreign affairs, finance, and communications. The temporary provision also restricted the non-residents of the state from acquiring land, permanently living in the state, holding local government jobs and securing education scholarships.

The Parliament also gave its nod to the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation bill that sought bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh.

Ahead of these developments, the Central government had deployed thousands of additional troops across Jammu and Kasmhir to prevent any untoward incidents and protests. The government also snapped the internet and telephone services and imposed Section 144 of CrPC, prohibiting the gathering of more than four persons in an area.


