Mumbai: Germany-based Indian doctor fined Rs 5 lakh for assaulting wife

Woman told the court her husband kicked her in the stomach during pregnancy. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman told court her husband kicked her in the stomach during pregnancy Court ordered accused to pay Rs 5 lakh as compensation to wife for trauma Court also asked the man to pay Rs 60,000 monthly maintenance to wife

Mumbai: In a severe reprimand, a Mumbai court has ordered a Germany-based Indian doctor to pay Rs 5 lakh as compensation for assaulting his 37-year-old wife. The court came down heavily on the doctor for indulging in domestic violence despite being highly educated and coming from a 'noble' profession.

The magistrate's court has also ordered the man to pay monthly maintenance of Rs 60,000 to his wife and children.

According to a report, the court's order to pay Rs 5 lakh as compensation was passed for causing mental and emotional trauma to the woman.

The court in its order observed, "It is very relevant to mention here whether it is expected of a person who is highly qualified and in a noble profession to cause any kind of violence to his wife. The evidence of the woman reveals not only a single incidence of violence but a series of it."

The woman told the court that her husband kicked her in the stomach when she was pregnant and used to lock her out in the balcony in the dead of the night.

The victim also accused her in-laws of forcing her not to feed her baby and instead asked her to go to Europe to find a high paying job. She further stated that her husband's family abused her and called her names and continuously demanded her salary. The woman also claimed that she later deposited the salary into the joint account of her in-laws.

Finding substance in the woman's argument, the court said that a woman cannot be forced to leave her child back and go to a foreign country to earn money. The court also stated that it is highly insulting to the motherhood if the woman is being forced not to feed her child.

According to the court, such acts on the part of woman's mother-in-law amounts to cruelty, mental and emotional abuse.

The couple met through a matrimonial site in 2010 and later got married. The woman is currently employed with a reputed hospital in Mumbai, while her husband is based in Europe.

The woman approached the court against her husband and in-laws in 2015 and sought relief from the alleged domestic violence inflicted by them. The woman claimed that her parents had given Rs 25 lakh as dowry to her husband's family.

The victim also accused her husband of having an affair with another woman and ignoring her all through. She also said her husband used to justify his fling and assaulted her repeatedly.
