ITBP constable held for minor’s rape in Saran

PATNA: Police on Sunday arrested Ravi Raj, a constable of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), for his alleged involvement in the gang rape of a 14-year-old Saran girl, who is undergoing treatment at the Patna Medical College and Hospital (PMCH). Two other accused — Sonu Kumar and Atish — were earlier arrested in the case.Saran superintendent of police (SP) Har Kishore Rai said the ITBP jawan had called the girl to a room where his two associates joined him and the three took turns to rape her on Saturday. The ITBP jawan is at present posted at Katihar where a battalion of the elite force is stationed to guard the Indo-Nepal border.The SP said Ravi, who is a resident of the locality where the rape survivor’s family resides, happens to be her friend. “We will send a police team to Katihar to collect more information about the ITBP jawan,” Rai told this newspaper over the phone.A Forensic Science Laboratory team from Patna visited the crime site on Sunday and collected samples.Meanwhile, it came to light on Sunday that the rape survivor had to wait for nearly three hours for treatment at the PMCH after she was referred there from Chhapra sadar hospital on Saturday.“Nobody paid heed to our repeated requests to begin her treatment. The doctors at the hospital kept on asking for the copy of the FIR, which was with the police officers of the district concerned,” said the girl’s cousin, who accompanied her to the PMCH.The girl’s relative claimed that he tried to draw the attention of the doctors to the advisory issued to states in the aftermath of infamous Nirbhaya rape-cum-murder case, but in vain. “We kept on running from pillar to post but nobody was ready to listen to us despite the fact that the rape survivor was bleeding profusely,” he said.The treatment began only after the SHO of Saran women’s police station, Vibha Kumari, reached the hospital and provided a copy of the FIR to the hospital authorities. “I had to record her statement and then lodge an FIR. Obviously it’s a time consuming process,” the SHO said.PMCH superintendent Dr Rajiv Ranjan Prasad said there is clear instruction to start treatment of the patient immediately. “If there was any delay in this case, I will look into the matter and ensure that action is taken against the errant doctors,” Dr Prasad said, adding the girl’s condition is out of danger now.Meanwhile, the Saran SP denied the report that an iron rod was inserted in the girl’s private part. “It’s true that she was bleeding profusely, but no iron rod was inserted in her private part. She was referred to the PMCH for better treatment on the doctors’ recommendation,” the SP said.The incident has taken political turn with opposition parties criticising the state government for its failure to check the incidents of crime against women.“Hey bhagwan ye kaisa din aa gaya hai,” RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha tweeted. RJD spokesperson Mritunjay Tiwari also took a dig at CM Nitish Kumar for his “failure” to check crime in general and atrocities against women in particular.In the government’s defence, JD(U)’s Rajeev Ranjan Prasad said the recent crimes against women had been shocking. “The accused are being arrested and sent to jail,” he added.
