Rapists hanged in days? Really?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi

NCRB

OCT 2014

Jagaruk Nagrik Manch

Manodhairya Yojna

OCT 2015

Nationalist Congress Party

2015

FEB 2016

REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

Victims’ families and activists slam PM’s claim of rapists now being hanged ‘within 3 days, 7 days, 11 days and a month’.During a youth conclave in Surat on Wednesday,made this bold claim - “There used to be rapes in this country earlier too. It is a shame that we still hear about such cases. Now culprits are hanged within 3 days, 7 days, 11 days and a month.Steps are being taken continuously to get our daughters justice.” This statement has not gone down well with many, especially rape survivors who are awaiting justice.Supreme Court lawyer Karuna Nandy criticised Modi on Twitter. ‘The PM can’t possibly know this, there has been no(National Crime Record Bureau) data since 2016. Aside from the fact that hanging doesn’t quell crime not a single culprit has been hanged within 3 days, 11 days or a month of his rape. So no, this is not true,’ she wrote.Mumbai Mirror spoke with five rape survivors, to their families and activists who have all slammed Modi’s claims.In October 2014, a middle-aged man raped an eight-year-old girl on Diwali in Wadala. When the child was busy bursting crackers with her friends, an unknown person lured her with a chocolate and took her to an empty plot and raped her. She was badly injured when she returned home.“The girl had no idea what happened to her, she was so small. But the Wadala police could not find the culprit till date. The girl was shifted to Malad for six months until she recovered from the trauma,” said Niranjan fromwho helped the family get Rs 3 lakh compensation through the state’s. “Forget hanging, police couldn’t even find him,” Niranjan fumed.Arushi Dhotre was just two and a half years old when she was raped and killed on October 7, 2015. Her family found her body three days after the incident. Police said the infant had been raped and her body thrown down from a hilltop in Sakinaka. Police have not been able to find the culprit.Chitra Wagh, state president of the women’s wing of the, who was a member of the State Commission for Women in 2015 said, “Police couldn’t find the culprit in this case till date. Her father is a daily wage worker who couldn’t afford to lose his daily earnings and follow up with the police. It is all so unfortunate.”A minor girl was raped in a Satara village in 2015. When she fainted in school, it emerged that she was pregnant. A 26-year-old man from the same village had raped the daughter of a sugarcane labourer. The girl later delivered a daughter and dropped out of school. Varsha Deshpande of Lek Ladki Abhiyan told Mirror, “We fought to get compensation under Manodhairya scheme but till date police couldn’t find the accused.” The accused is putting pressure on the complainant to withdraw the case. The 17 years old is taking care of her 4-year-old daughter alone.On February 15, 2016, a 14-year-old girl was gang-raped in Kalyan Wadeghar. Chargesheet has been filed and the accused have been arrested but the trial is yet to start. Two of the accused are out on bail for medical reasons. “The minor girl was vulnerable as she is from a poor family. The police have no political will to chase the absconder. We are the victims and we are made to feel guilty by the agencies. Fighting for justice is not a simple thing in this country. The PM of this country making such claims is a cruel joke,” said an agitated family member.
