30-year-old stabbed to death in Rajasthan's Kota; police arrest wife, her paramour

While the police were interrogating, the woman confessed the crime and stated that she killed her husband along with her lover. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused called the police control room and claimed that three unidentified men had entered their house The woman later confessed to the crime and stated that she and her lover had killed her husband The police have arrested the accused and further probe is underway

Jaipur: A 30-year-old man was brutally stabbed to death, allegedly by his wife and her paramour, in Rajasthan's Kota district on Saturday. The police confirmed the incident and told the media on Sunday that the two suspects (the wife of the deceased and her male friend) have been arrested. In order to cover up the murder, the deceased's wife called the police control room and claimed that three unidentified men had entered their house, robbed Rs 18,000 in cash and snatched her mangalsutra.

Superintendent of Police Deepak Bhargav told news agency PTI that the woman had further added that when her husband had resisted the burglary, the attackers killed him. Meanwhile, during the preliminary investigation by the police, they noticed certain contradictions in the statements given by the woman and her younger sister. This created suspicion and they were detained for interrogating.

During the interrogation, the woman confessed to the crime and stated that she had killed her husband with the help of her lover. And all this while, the woman's 14-year-old sister was present in the room where the crime had been committed. The woman's alleged lover was identified as Om Prakash, who was later arrested from the Baran district of the state after the woman testified to his involvement in the murder.

The woman and the deceased got married 10 years ago and have two children. The couple used to work together as salespersons. Meanwhile, when her husband came to know that the woman was having an extra-marital affair, he imposed several restrictions on her and did not allow her to step out of the house.

Enraged by her husband's attitude, the woman and her lover decided to kill the man. They plotted the murder and on Saturday, pulled it off using a knife. However, the police have arrested the duo and the woman's minor sister is being questioned by the police.

The accused have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway.
