No Country for Dissent? Anurag Kashyap Leaves Twitter Post Threat To Family

Anurag Kashyap has deleted his Twitter account after trolls threatened his parents and daughter.

The filmmaker had made a tweet that went against popular sentiment over the abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir. He had said, “You know what is scary, that One Man thinks that he knows exactly what’s the right thing to do for the benefit of 1,200,000,000 people and has the access to the power to execute it.”

Anurag then went on to explain that his knowledge on the situation in J&K is not that of an expert, but that he disagreed with the manner in which it had been done. That’s when the trolls hit. In his last tweet, he had said:

#AnuragKashyap



Feel for Anurag ?

When you criticise govt so you and your Family members get threat...



Welcome to New India. pic.twitter.com/5xveEVZOJ6 — Mr Bean (@IndianBean_) August 11, 2019

Noone is spared

Has the internet become such an intolerant space? Trolls abound on every social media platform, especially so on Twitter. Last year, former Congress spokesperson, Priyanka Chaturvedi had to resort to getting the police involved when trolls issued rape threats against her 10-year-old daughter.

Yes I plan to file an FIR. Also for kind attention of @MumbaiPolice , this fake quote with my pic is being shared on varioua FB pages with call for violence directed at me, I would request you to treat this as urgent. https://t.co/112Ctsa3Z4 — Priyanka Chaturvedi (@priyankac19) July 1, 2018

Even former External Affairs Minister, late Sushma Swaraj, was not immune to the army of trolls that lurk around Twitter. When Swaraj helped an inter-caste couple get their passports last year, she was massively abused and trolled.

She even retweeted some of the abusive messages she got to highlight the level of vitriol that was being poured on her.

These tweets look even more offensive now that Swaraj has passed away and the nation is mourning her death.

Free reign for trolls

Anurag Kashyap’s departure from Twitter should not come as a shock for us. Increasingly, it looks like trolls are being allowed to run free on social media without any checks. Women are the ones who seem to get the most of the abuse, especially rape threats.

Even with a case like Anurag’s, he drew a line when his parents and his daughter started receiving threats. But, this is not even the first time he has been in the line of fire of right-wing trolls.

Earlier this year, in May, he had tagged Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Twitter when his daughter had been threatened with rape by a troll who had the prefix “chowkidar” added to his twitter username. Bringing the PM’s notice to this abuse, he had tweeted, "Dear @narendramodi sir. Congratulations on your victory and thank you for the message of inclusiveness. Sir please also tell us how do we deal with these followers of yours who celebrate your victory by threatening my daughter with messages like this for me being your dissenter."

Have we become so intolerant of a differing opinion that we do not even spare a child from abuse? Are rape threats the way ahead for everyone involved?

Many, however, have come out in support of the filmmaker and his right to dissent.

Very sad that Sri Anurag Kashyap deleted his Twitter. It is sad & bad for democracy when we cant voice our opinion with out fear.



I disagree with Anurag Kashyap ji on 99% of issues, but his Right to say is our Responsibility as a Nation. #AnuragKashyap .. God bless

Jai Hind pic.twitter.com/GUwXp80tA6 — Rahul Easwar (@RahulEaswar) August 10, 2019

This is what they want, they want you to give up,to bend down before the haters.. Don't leave the twitter but fight back an till each of this haters get tried and give up#anuragkashyap pic.twitter.com/n4l6CS4A0e — bhagyashree surwade (@Bhagyas87016613) August 10, 2019

It is a sad reality we live in when a different opinion is met with trolling, abuse, and rape threats to children. Hopefully, the voices that believe in the right to dissent will be heard.




