Cousins, 12 and 13, are found mutilated and tied up after being kidnapped and gang-raped in India

Two teenage cousins have been found dead after they were allegedly gang-raped, in the latest shocking sex attack in India.

The two girls, aged 12 and 13, were found dead in a small village near the city of Katihar in Bihar, India on Thursday, August 8.

They were found with their throats slit and their bodies mutilated and tied-up, after having been allegedly gang-raped.

The two girls, aged 12 and 13, were found dead in a small village near the city of Katihar (pictured) in Bihar, India on Thursday, August 8

Both had been out searching for vegetables to bring home to their family for dinner when the reported attack took place.

'We had a frantic search for them all night and on Thursday we found their bodies,' their grieving parents told local media.

'They bore cut marks at several places including their private parts, suggesting they were murdered after being tortured and raped.'

On Sunday, two men were arrested by Katihar police for their alleged involvement in the gang rape and subsequent murder of the young girls. Another remains on the run.

The village where the incident took place, Gadai Diara, is around 60km from the local police headquarters in Katihar.

The superintendent of police Vikash Kumar (pictured) said he is awaiting a postmortem to see if the two girls were indeed raped

The superintendent of police Vikash Kumar told the Hindustan Times: 'Bodies of the minor girls have been sent for postmortem. The autopsy report will reveal the cause of death and confirm whether the girls were raped or not.'

It comes just a week after a three-year-old girl was abducted from a railway station in India before she was allegedly gang-raped and beheaded.

The girl, who was sleeping next to her mother, was picked up by a man in a T-shirt and shorts from the Tatanagar railway station in Jharkhand state's Jamshedpur city in late July.

And in June a 16-year-old girl was held captive and raped by six men and boys for five days. She was found in shock at the bus station in Ongole, in Prakasam district.
