Delhi: Woman from Uzbekistan alleges she was gang-raped in moving car in Vasant Kunj area

The crime was committed in a moving car on Saturday, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Complainant living in Delhi for past two months, said police The accused have been absconding following the incident A medical examination of the victim is being conducted

New Delhi: Police in the national capital have registered a case against three men for allegedly gang-raping a 31-year-old woman from Uzbekistan. In her complaint, the woman claimed that the three accused took turns raping her inside a Scorpio car in Southwest Delhi's Vasant Kunj area on Saturday. An official with the Delhi Police informed the media about the incident on Monday.

The complainant, a woman from Uzbekistan, arrived in India about two months ago and had been living with her friends in Madangiri area. She told police officials that she met one of the accused, a resident of Gurugram in Haryana, about seven months ago. After the two became friends, he invited her to meet him near a mall in Vasant Kunj on Saturday. At the time he arrived to pick her up, the accused was accompanied by two of his friends.

In her complaint, the woman has alleged that the three gang-raped her and assaulted her demonically when she resisted. They later let her off the vehicle near her apartment. A police official familiar with the matter said that she managed to walk back to her friends' place and narrated her ordeal. She was then taken to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) where hospital staff confirmed signs of sexual assault and immediately alerted the police.

A case was registered against the accused on the basis of her complaint at the Vasant Kunj (North) police station. A senior official probing the case told mediapersons that an investigation into the matter is underway and a medical examination of the woman is to be conducted. He further added that the woman has identified one of the accused by name and he is reportedly absconding. It is also coming to light that the parents of the accused who befriended the woman even tried to dissuade her from filing a police complaint against their son.

This incident has come to light barely two months after two senior customs officials posted at the Delhi airport were suspended for allegedly sexually assaulting a woman from Uzbekistan. The complainant was visiting India for the medical treatment of a relative. She even sent out an email to revenue secretary informing him about the incident and demanding justice. In her plea to the top revenue official, the woman had referred to the accused as public servants who are "wolves in the skin of sheep".
