Chennai: Drunk Korean man caught on camera abusing, slapping staffers from Nagaland

A screenshot from the video where the Korean national is seen abusing his employees who hail from Nagaland.

A video of a Korean national harassing his employees from Northeast India in Chennai has surfaced on Facebook, following which the local police have registered a case of abuse and harassment. The Korean national, Won ji-Moon runs a guest house in Chennai and employs youth from Northeast.

In the video, Won ji-Moon is seen abusing four of his employees and slapping them. The audio is inaudible but he appears to be questioning them about something.

The video of the abuse has gone viral on Facebook and various students' groups from Northeast have taken up the matter with concerned authorities.

Poujatlung R Panmei, president of Zeliangrong Students Union (Chennai), shared the video on Facebook on August 8. Since then it has received more than 1,000 comments. The union is a local organisation formed to support students from the Northeast.

The incident took place on August 5.

In their police compliant, the victims have said that the Korean national was drunk and assaulted them at the guest house.

The victims belong to the Zeliangrong and Sema tribes of Nagaland.

The victims were later reportedly rescued by the Chennai branch of North East India Welfare Association.

The complaint against the Korean national has been filed under Sections 294 (b) (uttering obscene words) and Section 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The victims have alleged that their employer used to abuse them on a regular basis and had assaulted four of them on August 5. They were in-charge of taking the final count of the inventory which had beer and Soju, a Korean liquor. They were abused after a discrepancy was found in the final number.

ALSO READ | Bengaluru: Northeast student critically injured in suspected racial attack

ALSO READ | Racist slur on people from Northeast could get you jailed for five years

ALSO WATCH | Northeast women discriminated
