Drug kingpin, wanted for peddling mephedrone, nabbed in Mumbai

Pervez Khan alias Chinku Pathan, 38, (circled) was wanted for several drug peddling cases, says Mumbai Police

The Dongri police in Mumbai have nabbed a narcotics kingpin wanted in connection with the seizure of contraband worth Rs 30 lakhs last month.

The accused, identified as Pervez Khan alias Chinku Pathan, 38, was named as a supplier by street peddler Junaid Shaikh, who was arrested with Mephedrone (street name: MCAT, Meow meow, MD) by Pydhonie police last month. Ever since the police had been on a lookout for Pervez Khan.

On Monday, a police sub-inspector attached with the Dongri police received information that Pervez Khan was seen in the Khadak area of Dongri.

When the police team reached the spot, Pervez Khan tried to resist the arrest. He gathered his friends and relatives who tried stopping the police team from entering the premises where Pervez Khan was holed up.

Around 10 pm on Monday, when the police team reached the area where Khan was spotted, seeing police team Khan started fleeing towards Israel mohalla area of Dongri.

Some friends and relatives even resorted to violence and attacked police team but eventually, police officers managed to nab Pervez Khan.

The alleged drug lord was arrested and handed over to Pydhonie police station.

A senior police officer said Khan was a notorious drug supplier and was wanted in a number of cases. His arrest could help to cut off the drug supply to Mumbai's streets, the officer said.

MD or Mephedrone has been a menace on Mumbai's streets and it has affected a large number of youngsters, of which many had even committed crimes after being addicted to the drug.

Several such youngsters had to be sent to rehabilitation centers.

Mumbai Police has started a crackdown on the drug and supply ring.

An easy to manufacture the drug, Mephedrone can be manufactured in tiny kitchen labs. What makes it a most sought after the drug is that it can be snorted, smoked and even consumed with aerated drinks. Post 2013, a lot of students from South Mumbai, especially areas of Dongri, Bhendi nazarm and Pydhonie had been majorly affected with the growing menace of Mephedrone sales.

It was earlier being sold as a drug to school going students stating that it would them stay awake during exams but addiction even resulted in deaths and mental illness for several such students.
