Section 375 Trailer: Akshaye Khanna and Richa Chadha come face to face in an intense courtroom drama-thriller

Akshaye Khanna and Richa Chadha don the garb of a lawyer for Section 375 – a film that revolves around the subject of a high-profile rape case. The convicted in this case is a film director and the victim, a junior costume assistant. And as the name suggests, the plot dives into the deeper end of what Section 375 means as well as its intricacies.

Here's a quick reference to the section, before you watch the trailer: Section 375 is a section of the Indian Penal Code that defines rape as "sexual intercourse with a woman against her will, without her consent, by coercion, misrepresentation or fraud or at a time when she has been intoxicated or duped, or is of unsound mental health and in any case if she is under 16 years of age."

The trailer of this Ajay Bahl directorial was released today, and not only does it ruffle the right feathers with excellent penmanship but also makes one wonder about the misuse of the section.

Watch the Section 375 movie trailer here:

Content This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

Richa and Akshaye essay the roles of two lawyers on either side, who come face to face in a courtroom for the Anjali Vasudev Dange (played by Meera Chopra) vs Rohan Ravi Khurana (played by Rahul Bhat) rape case. The two debate over various possibilities of what might have had happened between Dange and Khurana, and also the current situation of a courtroom case of such nature.

Apart from Khanna’s menacing looks and Chadha’s grit, what really stands out in the 2:46-second trailer is the hard-hitting meaning of what consent means as articulated by Chadha and why along with it permission is also important. Talking about prepping for such a serious role in the film, Richa told Times Now that “shooting for courtroom scenes needs a lot of channelling of emotions and thus, my life was all about going to the sets and back home.”

Produced by Bhushan Kumar, Krishan Kumar, Kumar Mangat Pathak, and Abhishek Pathak, and co-produced by Aditya Choksi, and Sanjeev Joshi, Section 375, has been adapted by real-life cases. “India has one of the highest conviction rates in the world and stands at number 94 on the Global Rape Index. Further, the lack of gender neutrality in our rape laws also prompted me to make a film on this subject,” Ajay Bahl reportedly told a daily on being quizzed about the nature of the film.

Section 375 is slated to release on September 13.

NOW READ

Sacred Games 2: Is Kalki’s character Batya Abelman based on Maa Anand Sheela?

Dream Girl Trailer: Ayushmann Khurrana is Pooja, the 'Dream Girl' you didn't know you needed

Ayushmann Khurrana & Vicky Kaushal won the National Award for Best Actor
