Delhi: School sweeper sexually assaults minor girl, arrested

The accused was identified by the mother of the victim. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused works as sweeper at a school in South Delhi Accused has been sent to judicial custody Medical examination at AIIMS confirms rape

New Delhi: A sweeper of a school in South Delhi has been arrested on charges of sexually assaulting a minor girl. The crime against the minor took place on August 8. The accused was arrested after the minor made a complaint against the accused.

The accused has been identified as Picha Mutthu. Mutthu worked as a sweeper at a school in Greater Kailash-2 area of New Delhi. After the crime, the victim was taken to All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) for a medical examination, where the doctors confirmed sexual assault.

The 45-year-old accused, who is a resident of Sudhar Camp in Kalkaji, has been sent to judicial custody. The accused was identified by the mother of the victim. The police have also reportedly seized the CCTV footage of the area where the crime took place.

According to Delhi Police, they have collected the age proof document of the victim from her school. Police said they are probing the matter further.

In another case reported from the national capital on July 25, a Delhi Police head constable allegedly raped his 14-year-old domestic help in outer Delhi's Mundka area. The incident happened on July 23 morning when the accused and the minor girl were alone at the cop's residence when his family was out. The police have registered a case under the sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO). The police said that the accused who is in his 40s, is still at large and police have formed teams to nab him as soon as possible.

Similarly, on July 28, a minor girl was allegedly gang-raped in a village in Alwar in Rajasthan. A photograph of the incident went viral on social media. A senior police official had said, "The accused and the victim were from the same village. Two of the accused gang-raped the girl. The other two assisted them in committing the crime. They also made the picture of the incident go viral." The police have assured that the accused will be arrested soon. Further investigation is underway.
