Prohibitory orders in parts of Jaipur after communal tension

Prohibitory orders have been imposed in 10 police station areas here for five days after violence broke out and communal tension prevailed while 15 people have been arrested, a top police official said on Wednesday.

Mobile Internet services have already been suspended and ample security forces have been deployed in view of Independence Day and Raksha Bandhan festival.

"A total of 15 people have been arrested so far and additional police forces have been deployed in areas where tension is prevailing. Section 144 (prohibitory orders) has been imposed in 10 police station areas for five days from today," Rajasthan DGP Bhupendra Singh told reporters here.

Twenty-four people, including nine policemen, were injured when members of two communities pelted stones at each other in Jaipur.

The violence on Monday night broke out after members of the minority community blocked the Delhi highway in front of an Eidgah near Galta Gate and pelted stones on a Haridwar-bound bus, leaving some passengers injured.

Singh said, "Five separate cases have been registered in the incidents reported in the last three days and a total of 15 people have been arrested. Arrest of more miscreants will be done soon."



Singh said additional vigilance measures have been taken in view of Independence Day and Raksha Bandhan festival.

"Police makes special arrangements during all kinds of festivals and national days. But, considering the present situations extra measures have been taken," he added.

The DGP also appealed to the people not to pay heed to rumours.

"People should not get swayed by rumours. Rumours create an environment of fear and insecurity, which leads to action and reaction and ends in untoward incidents," he said.

"If there is any doubt in anyone's mind then they should contact the police station and officers concerned for verification," he added.

On Monday night, tension and stone pelting occurred in few areas, including Galta Gate and Idgah area between two communities.

While the situation remained normal during the day on Tuesday, tension increased in the night in Gangapol area of the city. Stone pelting was reported in few areas following which prohibitory orders under Section 144 were imposed.

Police have registered cases for obstructing public servants from discharge of their duties, thrashing policemen and blocking national highway. The police have also identified people who spread rumours through social media.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
