Cub falls into well, tigress maintains vigil for two days

Cub to be released into the wild after primary treatment | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Rescued cub sent to White Tiger Safari in Mukundpur Tigress stood on hilltop to guard her cub for two days Cub to be released into the wild after primary treatment

Bhopal: In a heartwarming incident, a tigress went on to keep vigil for two days after her cub fell into a dry well in Katni district of Madhya Pradesh. The cub was later rescued by the forest department officials after a day-long operation.

The cub has been sent to White Tiger Safari in Mukundpur and is stated to be out of danger. The incident took place at Piparia village in Barhi Forest range of Katni district.

According to a report, officials have said the cub will be released into the wild after further treatment. Before the incident, an adult tigress was seen roaming in the area with her three cubs in the past few days.

After the cub fell into the well, villagers said the tigress mounted herself at a nearby hilltop to keep an eye on the safety of her cub.

Initially, the villagers said they did not understand why the tigress was standing on the hill. The matter came to light after some shepherds in the area heard some sound coming from the well.

When they peeped into the well, the shepherds found the cub trapped in the well and informed the village, who later called forest officials.

Katni's District Forest Officer, Rajesh Rai, said the cub was first tranquilised and later rescued from the well. The officer said the cub will be given primary treatment and released into the forest.

Recently, many cases of man-animal conflict have been reported from various parts of the country leading to loss of human as well as animal lives.

On July 26, residents of Mataina village in Pilibhit district of Uttar Pradesh trapped and killed an adult tigress after she reportedly injured nine people over the course of the past few days. Officials with the wildlife department said that the animal was beaten to death, not far from where forest rangers were stationed in the area.

Even as the injured were undergoing treatment, the big cat pounced upon 19-year-old Shyam Mohan the very next day. This angered villagers who surrounded the tigress and mercilessly assaulted her with lathis and spears before forest officials could arrive at the spot.

The villagers did not even allow rangers to take the cat to the veterinary hospital which led to the tigress succumbing to her injuries within a few hours of the attack. Field director of the Pilibhit Tiger Reserve (PTR), H Rajamohan said that the predator had sustained fractures and injuries from "sharp-edged weapons like spears on almost every part of her body".
