Class 11 student stabbed in Delhi allegedly over minor scuffle

Although, there he found two injured boys who were Shubham's friends, namely, Shubham Gupta and Lokesh Aggarwal. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A Class 11 boy was stabbed to death and two others were admitted to hospital with stab injuries The police investigation in the case is underway The deceased was identified as Shubham Tiwari, who was on his way to the tuition class at around 7 PM

New Delhi: In a case reported from West Delhi's Patel Nagar area, a Class 11 boy was stabbed to death and two others were admitted to hospital with stab injuries, following a clash with a group in the same area on Tuesday. The police investigation in the case is underway.

Reportedly, the deceased was identified as Shubham Tiwari, who was on his way to the tuition class at around 7 PM and his parents were about his death at around 8:05 PM. The deceased's father told news agency ANI that he got to know that his son, Shubham was attacked with a knife in the Patel Nagar area while he was at his place at around 8:05 PM. He reportedly rushed towards a hospital in Patel Nagar and he couldn't find his son there. Although, there he found two injured boys who were Shubham's friends, namely, Shubham Gupta and Lokesh Aggarwal.

He reportedly put them on a stretcher and they were immediately rushed to another hospital. The father further mentioned that later he got to know that his son was admitted to BL Kapoor Hospital. After he reached the hospital, he got to know that his son was no more and he was stabbed in his chest with a knife.

Shubham was a Class 11 student and he was reportedly headed to his tuition class. The father further added that there were as many as six boys and out of them one died, two were injured and two boys are in the police custody. Although, one of them is still at large. However, a police case has been registered and further probe in the matter is underway.

Delhi: Married man murders live-in partner after argument

In another case reported from the national capital, a man allegedly murdered his live-in-partner after the two had a heated argument earlier this week. The accused was suspecting the deceased of having an illicit affair. The accused was identified as Ram Das, who was arrested by the Delhi Police from the Connaught Place area.

Das was allegedly trying to evade arrest and was on his way to New Delhi railway station when he was arrested by the police. However, he has been booked under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Meanwhile, during the preliminary investigation, the accused confessed to committing the crime.
