1947 Partition: The wounds that can never be healed

In this September 1947, file photo hundreds of Muslim refugees crowd on top a train leaving New Delhi for Pakistan | Photo Credit: AP

“They hacked my husband to death with a sword in front of me,” recounts Veerabai. Her tears have dried over the years but her voice still trembles while narrating the ordeal she suffered in the month of August in 1947. Veerabai was pregnant with her third child at that time.

When the group of men left, leaving the blood-soaked body of her husband in the middle of the verandah of her home in Lahore, Veerabai rushed to her neighbours to seek help.

With her husband brutally murdered, all she wanted was to ensure that her children, born and the one in her womb, survive the hatred and madness that had gripped the Indian subcontinent. “I was horrified… I did not know what to do. I pleaded with the Muslim families in my neighbourhood to give shelter to my kids. They agreed… but only in exchange for all the gold ornaments I was wearing.”

Veerabai is now 105 years old and resides in Delhi with her sons, grandsons and great-grandsons. This is the story of just one Veerabai; millions of other such Veerabais have equally painful and bone-chilling memories to share of the Partition days - that shocking event in 1947 - when the Indian subcontinent was split into two nations.

In August 1947, the British colonisers left after ruling India for over 200 years. Years of resistance, the martyrdom of thousands of nationalists had finally brought to fruition the dreams of Indians, who were choked in the shackles of slavery. However, the joy of freedom was overshadowed by the painful divide of the country.

The ‘unity in diversity’ concept had dealt a huge blow when the country, in which communities had been coexisting, was fragmented on the basis of religion. While many hold Muhammad Ali Jinnah solely responsible for the split, some are of the view that Jawahar Lal Nehru and Congress leaders were equally to be blamed.

Millions of Hindus and Muslims were forced to leave their homes in order to reach the other side of the border, leading to the largest mass migration in human history. More than 14 million people were forcibly relocated.

Muslims moved to West and East Pakistan (the latter is now known as Bangladesh), and Hindus and Sikhs trekked to the opposite direction to reach Hindu-majority India.

As per some estimates, over a million people never made it to their destination. They were brutally killed in the cataclysmic event. In ‘Midnight's Furies: The Deadly Legacy of India's Partition’, Nisid Hajari writes, “Gangs of killers set whole villages aflame, hacking to death men and children and the aged while carrying off young women to be raped. Some British soldiers and journalists who had witnessed the Nazi death camps claimed Partition’s brutalities were worse: pregnant women had their breasts cut off and babies hacked out of their bellies; infants were found literally roasted on spits.”

“Special refugee trains, filled to bursting when they set out, suffered repeated ambushes along the way. All too often they crossed the border in funereal silence, blood seeping from under their carriage doors,” adds Hajari while penning the incidents of almost unimaginable violence.

Pakistani historian Ayesha Jalal has described Partition as “the central historical event in 20th century South Asia.”

She writes, “A defining moment that is neither beginning nor end, the partition continues to influence how the peoples and states of postcolonial South Asia envisage their past, present and future.”

Partition in 1947 is not just an event in the history; for millions, it is a synonym for horror. In the words of Amrita Pritam, the Punjabi poet who also shifted to India from Pakistan after the Partition: “The most gruesome accounts of marauding invaders in all mythologies and chronicles put together will not, I believe, compare with the blood-curling horrors of this historic year. Tale after tale, each more hair-raising than the last, would take a lifetime to retell.”

In 1948, Amrita Pritam penned a poem addressed to Waris Shah, the author of love saga Heer Ranjha, to express the pain of lakhs of daughters of Punjab. The composition made her immortal, both in India and Pakistan.

Aj akhan Waris Shah nu ki tun kabran vichchon bol,

Te aj kitab-e-ishq da koi agla varka phol.

(I summon Waris Shah today, 'speak from inside your grave', and turn the next page in the Book of Love)

Ik roi si dhee Punjab di, tun likh likh maare vain,

Aj lakhan dheean rondian tainu Waris Shah nu kahen.

(Once, one daughter of Punjab cried and you wrote a wailing saga, today millions of Punjabi daughters are crying out to you, Waris Shah!)

Uth dardmandaan dia dardiaa, uth takk apnaa Punjab,

Aj bele lashan bichhian te lahu di bhari Chenab.

(Rise! O’ sympathiser of the victims, rise and look at your own Punjab. Fields are filled with corpses today, and blood fills the Chenab)

Kise ne panjan panian vichch ditti zahar rala

Te unhan panian dharat nun ditta pani la

(Someone must have poisoned the Five Rivers and the deadly water, when irrigated, is poisoning the land)

Is zarkhez zameen de lun lun futtia zaher

Gith gith charhiaan lalian fut fut charhia kaher

(Our fertile land is now sprouting venom from every pore. The sky seems to have turned red due to endless cries of gore)

Veh vallisi wha pher, van van vaggi ja,

Ohne har ik vans di vanjhali ditti naag banaa

(The toxic forest wind is screaming. The fluty sounds of the bamboos seem to have turned into deadly snakes)

Pehla dang madarian, mantar gaye gawach,

Dooje dang di lag gayi, jane khane nu lag

(With the first snakebite, the charmers lost their spell. The second bite turned all into snakes as well)

Lagan kile lok munh bus phir dang hi dang,

Palo pali Punjab de neele pae gaye ang

(People drank from this deadly stream, filling the land with bane. With the pain of poison, the limbs of Punjab have turned black and blue)

Galeyon tutte geet phir, takaleon tutti tand,

Trinjanon tuttian sahelian, charakhre ghukar band

(Songs in the streets have been silenced. Cotton threads have been snapped. Girls left their play-groups. The spinning wheels were left shattered)

Sane sej de berian, luddan dittian rohr,

Sane dalian pingh aj, piplan ditti tor

(Our nuptial beds are boats, their logs have cast away. Our hanging swing of childhood, the Pipal tree, has broken in disarray)

Jitthe vajdi si kook pyaar di, ve oh vanjhali gayi gawach

Ranjhe de sab vir aj, bhul gaye usdi jach

(Lost is the flute, which once, played the melodies of love. Ranjha’s brothers, today, have forgotten that art)

Dharti te lahu vasiya, kabraan paian choan,

Preet dian shahzadian, aj vichch mazaran roan

(Blood rained on the Earth and drenched graves to the core. The amorous princesses today sit crying at the graveyards)

Aj sabbhe qaido ban gaye, husn ishq de chor

Aj kitthon liaiye labh ke Waris Shah ik hor

(Today, every prisoner has become the thief of the beauty of love. Where can another Waris Shah be found today?)

Aj akhan Waris Shah nu ki tun kabran vichchon bol,

Te aj kitab-e-ishq da koi agla varka phol.

(I summon Waris Shah today, speak from thy grave, and turn, today, the Book of Love’s next affectionate page)
