What It’s Like To Be Adulting As A Single Woman In Delhi

Delhi has a bad rap. It’s been nicknamed the “rape capital” of India. After the Nirbhaya rape case of 2012, even more scrutiny has been paid to the number of crimes, especially crimes against women, in Delhi.

Of course, data can be interpreted in more ways than one. Many activists see the rise in the number of reported rapes as a good sign. Women are no longer afraid of speaking out against physical assault.

But, what is everyday life in Delhi really like for women? It’s actually a mix of being really good and pretty bad. As it is, adulting is quite a struggle even on normal terms. Try adulting in a hostile environment.

Here’s what to expect when you’re a woman adulting in big, bad Delhi:

1. Male workers do not listen

Just because you are working a full-time job and see yourself as independent, it doesn’t mean that the carpenter is going to listen to what you have to say. Not just him, there’s the plumber, the building’s caretaker, the guard… the list of men who will not give a rat’s ass about your opinion is long.

There was a time when my building’s caretaker would turn off the water motor to my floor whenever we had a disagreement. It was a set pattern--he’d refuse to help me with something, I’d get angry, and then the water would run out. Once, it ran out mid-shower. That was the last straw.

But, in the end, it was solved when my boyfriend gave him a talking to. Only men can tell a male worker what to do in Delhi.

2. Men hit on you. All. The. Time.

When I was growing up in Shillong, boys and girls hung out together all the time. We started officially dating people somewhere between 16 or 17. It was considered a normal process. The boys who didn’t make it to the “boyfriend” tag stayed your friend.

In Delhi, however, (almost) every man is on a mission. You politely ask someone for help lifting a heavy bag of groceries onto a rickshaw? He will start hitting on you. You absentmindedly smile at someone while window shopping in the mall? He will hit on you. You rescue a stray puppy with your dog-loving neighbour? He will hit on you.

It is relentless. I’ve become so wary of being nice to any man that the few male friends I have always reminds me of how “intimidating” I was to talk to. It took them months to convince me that they did not come with an agenda. Cheers to these guys for proving me wrong!

3. You never let the delivery guy know you don’t have a man around

My boyfriend travels a lot for work, so I end up spending many nights cuddled up on the sofa alone. Inevitably, I order take out. But, when the doorbell rings, I immediately make sure that my boyfriend’s very male shoes are visible as soon as I open the door. Maybe I’m just overreacting, but the thought of a random man knowing that I’m alone in the house with just a cat is terrifying.

4. Ask for help sometimes

When I first came to Delhi in 2010, I was afraid of speaking to anyone. But, as time went on, I overcame my fear of the people and then magic happened! Before Google Maps came along, my navigator was the hawker on the street or the guard in front of someone’s gate. Until date, nobody has said no whenever I have asked for help.

In my college flat, I actually had a pair of identical twin neighbours who would help me change light bulbs (they were high up), lift gas cylinders, and deal with cab drivers. To be honest, sometimes I didn’t know which one of the two I was speaking to but they were both extremely helpful.

5. The Delhi Metro is a boon for women

It’s fast, safe, and comfortable. The Delhi Metro is a big boon for women. Every morning on my commute to work, I walk into the women’s compartment of the train and it smells heavenly. There’s floral shampoo and fruity perfumes and a mix of so many heady scents.

You get from one end of Delhi to another without a hassle. I used to wonder how people managed before the metro came along, and for the life of me, I still haven’t figured it out.

All in all, Delhi is not such a bad place to be. It’s green, well-connected, and has an amazing history. I won’t lie, I do look over my shoulder every once in a while to check if I’m being followed. But, nine years down the line, I do see this mad city as home.




