Mumbai: 38-year-old woman arrested for kidnapping minor, forcing him to have sexual relations

After which they came back to Mumbai and settled in Kurla area. As per the youth, the woman forced him to have physical relations with her. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The Mumbai Police said that the teenager had left his house on June saying he was going out for breakfast The police found that the youth was in touch with the accused woman for the past three months The woman allegedly took the teenager to New Delhi and started looking for rented accommodation

Mumbai: A 38-year-old married woman from Kurla area of the commercial capital was arrested for allegedly kidnapping a 16-year-old youth and forcing him to have sexual relations with her. The Mumbai Police said that the teenager had left his house on June 29 saying he was going out for breakfast but didn't return till late afternoon.

According to news agency PTI report, the boy's father then filed a missing person complaint at the Nehru Nagar police station a month after his son went missing. During the probe, the police found that the youth was in touch with the accused woman for the past three months. Meanwhile, the police record revealed that the husband of the accused woman - a mother of four children had also registered a missing person complaint with the same police station on June 29.

Acting on a tip-off, the police rescued the youth from a shanty near the Kurla railway tracks and arrested the woman. They were taken into custody only after a trap was laid in the area. The teenager, in the statement to the police, claimed that after he left his house on June 29, the accused called him and took him to Bandra railway station. There she destroyed their sim cards and mobile phones.

The woman then allegedly took the teenager to New Delhi and started looking for rented accommodation. Meanwhile, after they failed to get any accommodation in Delhi, they went to Baroda and then to Navsari, where they stayed till August 11. After which they came back to Mumbai and settled in Kurla area. As per the youth, the woman forced him to have physical relations with her.

However, the accused woman has been booked under section 363 (Punishment for kidnapping) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. On Tuesday, the accused was produced before the court which remanded her in police custody till August 21.

Further probe in the case is underway.
