Minor's rape in South Delhi school: DCW takes cognisance, demands factual report from police

Meanwhile, the minor girl has too identified the accused and he was immediately sent to the judicial custody. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor victim was a student of a private school in South Delhi DCW has directed the Delhi Police to provide a factual report of the incident and the action taken by the police, by August 20, 2019

New Delhi: The Delhi Commission of Women headed by Swati Maliwal has taken suo-moto cognisance of media reports regarding the rape case of a 5-year-old girl in the national capital. The minor victim was a student of a private school in South Delhi.

DCW has directed the Delhi Police to provide a factual report of the incident and the action taken by the police, by August 20, 2019. DCW in the notice has demanded answers for queries, whether the school authorities were aware of the incident or not. If yes, the Police should provide the details of the steps taken by the school authorities in the matter. The Commission also asked whether the police verification of the employees including the accused was conducted or not and if yes, the documents of verification should be submitted to the commission.

Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) takes suo-moto cognisance of media reports regarding rape of a 5 year old girl studying in a private school in South Delhi. DCW directs Delhi Police to provide factual report of the incident and the action taken, by 20th August. pic.twitter.com/K69zPbyGZw — ANI (@ANI) August 14, 2019

They have also highlighted, why the male staff had access to the female toilets in the school. The horrifying incident was reported on Tuesday, where a five-year-old student of a private school was allegedly sexually assaulted by a sweeper inside the school premises.

The private school is located in South Delhi's GK-2 area. The accused was identified as 45-year-old Picha Muthu, a resident of Sudhar Camp, Kalkaji. The police stated that the matter came to light on August 8 after the minor's mother alleged that her daughter was sexually assaulted in the washroom by Muthu. He works in the school as a sweeper and has been there for the last 20 years. Reportedly, the minor's medical examination was conducted at All India Institute of Medical Sciences hospital and it was confirmed that the minor girl was sexually assaulted.

However, the police have registered a case under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. And the accused who had been working in the school for nearly 20 years, was arrested the same day. The police have also recorded the statements of the victim and the mother. Also, the CCTV footage and digital video recorder have also been seized from the school authorities.

Meanwhile, the minor girl has too identified the accused and he was immediately sent to the judicial custody.
