Mumbai: Juvenile out on bail in gang-rape case kidnaps 11-year-old

Accused was released on bail around a month-and-a-half ago. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Juvenile allegedly assaulted and kidnapped the girl in suburban Ghatkopar Girl was recovered from a temporary shade in the nearby area Accused was lodged in a correctional home in connection with a gang-rape case in January

Mumbai: Police have detained a juvenile, who was recently released on bail in a gang-rape case, for allegedly kidnapping an 11-year-old girl in suburban Ghatkopar. The arrest was made on Wednesday.

The victim's family lodged a complaint with Vinoba Bhave Nagar police station after the minor girl went missing from her home in Kurla.

According to a report in PTI, the police recovered the girl from a temporary shade on the Lal Bahadur Shastri Road.

A crime branch official said they started the investigation after receiving the complaint and identified the accused after establishing his identity.

Later, police detained the juvenile for allegedly kidnapping the victim. Police said the accused is a habitual offender. He was lodged in a correctional home in connection with a gang-rape case in January this year.

According to officials, the accused was released on bail around a month-and-a-half ago.

In a similar case of crime against a minor, a 14-year-old girl was gang-raped by three men first in Gurugram and then in Delhi on August 6. The minor girl came to the National Capital Region (NCR) from Meghalaya last week in search of work.

The girl was raped repeatedly by three men and sexually assaulted by another. The girl was accompanied to Delhi by a man named Aman, who promised her that he would help enrol her name with a placement agency in the city.

The minor was held captive and moved between Delhi and Gurugram while the accused raped her. The girl was rescued from Chauma village in Gurugram on August 6 by two men from Meghalaya and taken to Meghalaya House in Delhi.

The accused who raped the girl were identified as Lokesh, Bhupender and an unknown relative of Lokesh. Omprakash has been identified as the one who sexually assaulted the girl.

Similarly, a man was arrested for allegedly raping two minor girls in Ghaziabad on July 14. Subhash Yadav, a vegetable seller, was known to the family of one of the girls and he would often visit her house. The accused found the 9-year-old girl, and her 10-year-old friend, alone in the house. The accused lured the girls to the vegetable market on the pretext of giving them chocolates and raped them.

He also threatened the girls not to reveal the matter to their family members, following which the victims kept mum, though they had suffered injuries to private organs.
