Kejriwal Government Announces ‘Patriotism’ Syllabus for All Its Schools

New Delhi: Eager not to cede any political space to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Delhi ahead of the state elections due in a few months, the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) was quick to hail the Centre’s decision to scrap Jammu and Kashmir of its special status and bifurcate it into two union territories.

It has now gone a step ahead – announcing a syllabus in “patriotism” in all Delhi government schools.

Earlier, the Kejriwal government had also expanded its religious outreach by sponsoring pilgrimage for senior citizens and their spouse and attendants and providing for more camps for kanwariyas.

‘Patriotism’ outreach for all Delhi government schools

The ‘Deshbhakti’ curriculum will be introduced in all Delhi government schools, the AAP leader and Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal declared on Wednesday. As per the announcement, made on the eve of India’s 73rd Independence Day, the government will introduce the syllabus in patriotism in all its schools from the next academic year.

After announcing the decision at a programme organised by the Directorate of Education at Thyagaraj Stadium, the chief minister also tweeted about it. “We want our education system to ensure that each child becomes a good human being, is equipped to support their family and becomes a true patriot,” he noted.

Inputs to be sought

Kejriwal then added that suggestions would be sought for the purpose. “We need inputs from everyone about what kind of course (the ‘Deshbhakti’ curriculum) should be.”

On how the decision was arrived at, he said: “Yesterday (Tuesday) evening, the education minister and I had an hour-and-a-half-long meeting and we have decided that the time has come to take concrete steps towards building a class of patriotic citizens.”

The decision is bound to raise several eyebrows as Kejriwal, who was once seen as a staunch opponent of the BJP, has suddenly started speaking in the voice of the saffron party and RSS from which it draws its inspiration.

What is AAP’s idea of patriotism?

As such, he chose to elaborate on what his idea of patriotism really is and how it was different from that of others.

“Ordinarily we are reminded of our love for the country either when there is an India-Pakistan match or when there are tensions on the border. In our day-to-day lives, we forget about our country. The ‘Deshbhakti’ curriculum is being introduced so that each and every citizen of this country truly loves their country,” he said.

Also read | Invoking Patriotism as a Way of Shutting Down Questions

‘Children should not betray Bharat Mata’

The Delhi chief minister also invoked “Bharat Mata” in the scheme of things. “When our children grow older and start working, and at any point if they accept a bribe, then they must feel from within that they are betraying Bharat Mata. When they jump a traffic light, they must feel they’ve wronged their country.”

Kejriwal added that people would also have to change the way they conduct themselves. “We hear of so many incidents where foreign nationals come to India, they are faced with loot, assault, rape. When we hear stories of Indians returning from Japan, we only hear praise for the Japanese and their hospitality. That is our ideal, we have to love our country to the extent that we respect it and respect our guests.”

Three aims of the new patriotism curriculum

On what would be the objectives of the curriculum, the AAP leader said: “The ‘Deshbhakti’ curriculum is aimed at achieving three important goals.”

“First, each and every child must feel pride for the nation. Children must be taught about the glories of the country. Second, each child must be made aware of their responsibility and duty towards the country. India has a hundred problems. We are poor, our farmers commit suicide. But who will solve these problems? It is us who will have to find solutions. Our children have to realise that the problems our country is facing will have to be solved by all of us. We have to create a sense of ownership among all children that they have to take on the challenges we are facing as a country head on and address them. Third, we have to instil among children the passion and commitment to be prepared to sacrifice anything for the nation.”

He held out that on this Independence Day, the decision would probably “be the biggest gift to the nation”.

Deputy chief minister and education minister Manish Sisodia exuded confidence that teachers and principals of Delhi government schools will be able to achieve the goal. “They will be at the forefront of designing this curriculum, similar to the way the Happiness and Entrepreneurship Mindset Curriculums were designed.”

He said the education department has been directed to form a cell to drive this and take inputs from people across the country.
