Out on bail, 14-year-old rapes another minor

The police said that the 14-year-old accused was released from children’s home on bail in a gang rape case only a month ago.

The officials said that the boy sexually assaulted her while she with him.

Mumbai: The Mumbai crime branch on Wednesday arrested an underage boy, recently released on bail in a gang-rape case, for kidnapping and sexually assaulting a juvenile girl in Ghatkopar under the pretext of helping her.

The Unit VII of the crime branch rescued the 17-year-old girl, within 24 hours of abduction, from his hutment near Sarvodaya Hospital in Ghatkopar where he had allegedly raped her.

The police said that the 14-year-old accused was released from children’s home on bail in a gang rape case only a month ago. The officials said that the accused spotted the girl when she stepped outside her house in V.B. Nagar to look for her sister. He struck a conversation with her and took her to his hut in Ghatkopar where he lived with a couple. The accused’s parents had given his custody to the said couple when he was a child. The duo was not at home when he brought her home and allegedly raped her.

“He tricked the girl, who was looking for her younger sister, by offering to help track her sister. Later, he lured the victim to his hut saying that her parents had gone to the police station leaving her here,” said a crime branch officer.

The officials said that the boy sexually assaulted her while she with him.

After the girl failed to return home, her parents lodged a missing person’s complaint with the V.B. Nagar police station.

While the police were looking for the girl, they received a tip-off that a girl matching the victim’s description was sleeping in a hut near the hospital.

A team of Unit VII rescued the girl and upon detaining the accused boy, learnt that the accused was released on a bail recently.

The investigators said that he was arrested by the Shivaji Nagar police in a gang-rape case after a juvenile girl was sexually assaulted.

He was arrested in January and was released a month ago.

The police have arrested the boy for kidnapping and rape. He was booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO).
