Pehlu Khan case: Who killed my father, asks Pehlu’s son

Pehlu lynching case: Who killed my father, asks son

NUH: Pehlu Khan ’s eldest son Irshad, 28, had seen his father being thrashed remorselessly by a mob of cow vigilantes next to the national highway in Rajasthan’s Alwar district on April 1, 2017. Two days later, Khan died in hospital in front of Irshad’s eyes, losing the battle against injuries inflicted during the attack. Two years on, Irshad feels like a helpless spectator again after the six men accused in the lynching case were set free by a district court in Rajasthan because of “serious shortcomings” in the police probe.“Who killed my father then?” he asks, admitting the family was shaken by the outcome of the court hearing.Irshad says he still gets panic attacks when he remembers the assault on Pehlu, 55, who the mob had accused of being a cattle smuggler.Sitting on a cot at his home in Jaisingpur, 70km from Gurgaon, in Nuh (Mewat) district bordering Alwar, Irshad says a big crowd — around 100 people — had surrounded them (Pehlu and his sons Irshad and Arif) in Behror when they were transporting cows from Jaipur to Nuh. The mob, Irshad recalls, had turned on Pehlu, who pleaded for mercy and said the cattle were not for slaughter, tortured him and made videos, which later went viral.“I was sure each of them would get at least 20 years in jail, if not life imprisonment. But this verdict has completely shaken us to the core. I have seen my father getting killed by the same men who got acquitted a day ago. One of them had himself admitted in a sting operation earlier that he killed my father. Why can’t police get evidence? Did my father die on his own? Did he kill himself?” asks an incredulous Irshad. “At least tell us who killed my father?”However, Irshad and his seven younger siblings say they continue to have “full faith in the judiciary”. His sister Hunija, 13, says police have a lot to answer for and should be held accountable. “In September 2017, six of the accused named by my father in his dying declaration were acquitted, and now, six more have been set free. It seems there is no one listening to us,” she says.The family is determined to carry on the legal battle, but admits the costs are daunting. “After my father died, we have fallen on hard times. I am the main earning member of the family but a majority of my income is spent on fighting for justice,” says Irshad. “But I cannot ignore this case. I will not let this case die, even if it means neglecting the affairs of my own house. The moment I receive a copy of the court order, I will approach the high court in Jaipur,” he adds.
