Sabarimala row: 1 dead, normal life disrupted as violence grips Kerala

BJP activists stage a protest march in Kochi over the entry of women in the Sabarimala temple. (Photo: PTI)

Kerala continues to be on the boil after two women of menstruating age entered the sanctum sanctorum of the Sabarimala temple on Wednesday. The day saw widespread violence as parties across the political spectrum protested.

Kanakadurga (44) and Bindu (42) had made history when they stepped into the hallowed precincts of the Lord Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala early on Wednesday, breaking a centuries-old tradition and defying dire threats from the Hindu right.

The Sabarimala Karma Samithi, an umbrella organisation of various pro-Hindutva groups, and the Antarrashtriya Hindu Parishad (AHP) called for a day-long hartal in the state which descended into chaos.

Lord Ayyappa devotees stage a protest against the entry of two women in Hubbali. (Photo: PTI)

Around 600 people have been detained in the violence that ensued over the day. 266 were arrested and 334 put in precautionary detention as per reports. As the state continued to witness massive violence due to the hartal called by Hindu outfits, the police launched a special drive, 'Operation Broken Window' to take action against those indulging in violent protests, they said.

As tempers ran high in Kerala, the Supreme Court on Thursday refused to urgently hear a contempt petition moved by a lawyers' group against Sabarimala temple authorities for closing the shrine for purification after two women entered it.

Vandalism, clashes and bombs

Protests by the BJP and Sabarimala Karma Samithi turned violent at several places in Kozhikode, Kannur, Malappuram, Palakkad and Thiruvananthapuram. Police used batons and water cannons to break up protests. Protestors blocked roads and burned tyres to protest against the entry of women into the Lord Ayappa temple. They also vandalised shops, government buildings and offices of the ruling CPI (M) government in the state.

The office of the CPI (M) in Palakkad was attacked by the protesters and the vehicles parked in front of it, including state transport corporation buses, auto-rickshaws and police vehicles were pelted with stones.

Agitators hurled a crude bomb at a local beedi manufacturing unit managed by the CPI(M) in Thalassery in Kannur district, but it did not explode, police said, adding 10 right-wing activists were arrested. Another crude bomb was thrown at Nedumangadu police station about 17 km from here, officials said.

Besides buses, police patrol vehicles were also attacked in some places.

A large number of protesters were arrested in various districts in connection with the violent incidents but the police are yet to divulge the total number of people arrested across the state.

Three stabbed, one dead

The resulting clashes led to three Bharatiya Janata Party workers being stabbed in a knife attack in Thrissur. The men were stabbed during a clash with workers of the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI), the political wing of Popular Front of India, a fundamentalist Islamic organisation.

Meanwhile, a 55-year-old protestor belonging to the Sabarimala Karma Samithi, injured in clashes between his organisation and CPI (M), succumbed to his injuries late Wednesday night in Pathanamthitta. Nine people accused of involvement in the attack have been identified and two of them arrested, police said.

Mediapersons also became victims of the violence. A senior TV reporter was attacked in Palakkad and the cameraperson of another channel was attacked in Thiruvananthapuram.

A woman journalist was allegedly assaulted by the Bharatiya Janata Party workers in Thiruvananthapuram while she was covering statewide protests against the entry of two women devotees, in their forties, into Lord Ayyappa temple in Sabarimala.

The reporter who was injured.

Images and video of Kairali TV camerawoman Shajila Ali Fathim, covering protests on Wednesday despite the attack, have gone viral on social media.

Daily life disrupted

Normal life was thrown haywire because of the shutdown, as shops and hotels remained shuttered in the state capital. The state's universities postponed examinations scheduled for Thursday.

The hartal paralysed transport services in the state, with government buses being out of commission. Buses coming from neighbouring Karnataka and Tamil Nadu also shut down services. Many airlines also issued advisories to passengers travelling to Kerala.

Sixty workers of a Tamil Nadu-based fringe Hindu outfit Hindu Makkal Katchi were arrested for trying to stage a 'rail roko' on Thursday in Coimbatore. Adding to the woes of the public, a number of autorickshaws plying were very fewer.

CPI(M) had organised a massive march at Payyanur town against the widespread violence carried out by Sangh Parivar criminals in the name of hartal called by the Sabarimala Karma Samithi. The march witnessed participation of people from all sections of society. pic.twitter.com/B90UJCRyuO CPI (M) (@cpimspeak) January 3, 2019

A large number of passengers, including women and children, were seen stranded at bus stands and railway stations across the state.

CM slams Sabarimala priests

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan slammed the Sabarimala head priest for conducting purification rituals after two women entered the temple, saying he should have quit if he was not ready to accept the Supreme Court verdict.

"A strange thing happened at the Ayyappa temple yesterday. The tantri [priest] closed the shrine and performed the purification rituals. This was a violation of the SC verdict," Vijayan told reporters here.

"The tantri should have quit if he had any objection to the apex court order as he was also a party to the case," he said.

The chief minister said that conducting hartal over women's entry into the shrine was like calling hartal against the Supreme Court's order.

He also said that devotees at the temple never had any issue with women visiting the shrine and all the violence that started hours after their visit was a "conspiracy for political gain by the RSS".

(with inputs from PS Gopikrishnan Unnithan in Kerala)
