Behind War and Peace between India and Pakistan – KashmirWatch

By Afshain Afzal

Amid pain and anger, tension heightened between the two South Asian traditional rivals over blunt violation of United Nations Security Council (UNSC) Resolutions by India. The main cause this time was proclamation of the latest Presidential Ordinance dated 6 August 2019, over disputed Jammu & Kashmir State, imposing change of temporary status under Article 370 to special status of Union Territories (UTs). Although this is a temporary measure and Jammu & Kashmir presidential proclamation is to go in sometime and replaced by another “Executive Order”, as spelled by the Indian authorities in New Delhi and Srinagar, but, no doubt, India has planned a dangerous game especially for Ladakh. Settlement of two specific communities from inside India as well as another South Asian country, which is going on since long has accelerated in the recent months. Such moves of Indian agencies are being monitored with concern as it would affect entire demography of Jammu & Kashmir State. Keeping aside everything, there is a big question about the legitimacy of stakeholders’ action in the dispute i.e. whether India or Pakistan is authorized to take such steps under available options or not.

We need not to be confused with the developments with events in July this year, when US President Donald Trump claimed that Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi had asked him to intervene in dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir. On 1 August 2019, formally US Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo met Indiain External Affairs minister, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar on the sidelines of an Asian Security Forum in Bangkok, where he passed message that US President Trump had reiterated his offer to and mediate dispute between India and Pakistan over Jammu and Kashmir. Not only PM Modi refuted any such request but it fuelled anger in Indian parliament. If we recall, in June 2017, Indian Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh assured the world that “New Delhi is seeking permanent solution to the Kashmir problem and it will be done after taking Kashmiri people into confidence”. The statement came in reaction to Indian Army Chief, General Bipin Rawat statement in May 2017, “People are throwing stones at us, people are throwing petrol bombs at us. If my men ask me what do we do, should I say, just wait and die? I will come with a nice coffin with a national flag and I will send your bodies home with honour. Is it what I am supposed to tell them as chief? I have to maintain the morale of my troops who are operating there… In fact, I wish these people, instead of throwing stones at us, were firing weapons at us. Then I would have been happy to do what I want to do”.

There is a big question why India took this unconstitutional and illegitimate step in violations of UNSC Resolution to merge Jammu & Kashmir State in Indian Union Territory? In fact, India had no way out as the unarmed peaceful movement of Kashmiris in Jammu & Kashmir was gaining strength with the passage of each day. On the other hand, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) published the Report on the Situation of Human Rights in Kashmir in the recent past, documenting grave violations committed by Indian security forces from June 2016 to April 2018. The report called for the repeal of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) in all states and territories, and an international probe into the human rights situation in the Indian state. If we recall, a committee to review AFSPA chaired by Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy in 2005 and another Administrative Reforms Commission headed by Veerappa Moily in 2007 submitted their reports to Indian Home ministry, suggesting that the AFSPA be repealed. In another development in July 2016, the Supreme Court of India ruled out the concept of absolute immunity for the Army and police. Over 300 Indian Army officers and soldiers went into appeal in Supreme Court of India, However, in November 2018, they lost the cases and the Court observed that even if the victim is an enemy, an inquiry could still be ordered if excessive force is used and also allowed institution of proceedings in a criminal court. This put compulsion on Indian Armed Forces authorities to investigate every encounter with militants or Mujahideen.

In the recent development, where satellite imageries could not prove additional deployment by either country, Indian Army Commander, Northern Command, Lieutenant General Ranbir Singh claimed that India started moving additional troops in January 2019, when the Supreme Court was about to decide the fate of Article 370 and 35A. He claimed the 14 February “Pulwama attack” was in series to these events. Indian regular Army, secondary and auxiliary forces have moved to buildup areas including Baramulla, Kupwara, Ananatag, Akhnoor, Badgam, Pulwama, Samba, Srinagar etc.The movement of large number of troops along Srinagar-Udhampur and Srinagar-Jammu continued from sometime back and is now acquired a permanent feature. Some movements in Arunachal Pradesh were also witnessed in the recent months. The situation in Jammu and Kashmir has turned bad to worse, where till 14th August 2019, 22 Kashmiri Muslims have been martyred and over 218 injured in the creak down operation by Indian Security Forces. Indian authorities have arrested or detained over tens and hundreds of Kashmiri activists and leaders including top Pakistani-Kashmiri leader Syed Ali Geelani. In an incident Indian Security Forces lost 8 personnel when an Indian Special Police Officer (SPO) opened fire own troops in reportedly Samba District. However, there are reports that this incident took place in some other district. Deployed forces suffered over 54 injuries and 14 killings including a Major during the current week in Jammu & Kashmir State.

Extensive coverage of Pakistani and Indian media reflected that the UNSC will meet on 16 August 2019 to discuss Jammu & Kashmir issue, in the wake of India’s abrogation of Article 370 and 35 A. However, there is no confirmation from the UNO or Secretary General’s office. In response to Indian move of merging disputed state of Jammu & Kashmir into Indian Union Territory, Prime Minister of Pakistan said, “I am pacifist, Pakistan and India have common interests; unemployment, climate change and trade on which both countries could cooperate”. He claimed that Pakistani Army is fully aware that India has made a more deadly plan to take action in Azad Kashmir on Pakistan side of LoC on the similar lines of action on Balakot after Pulwama attack. He challenged Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi to take action and Pakistan would give a befitting response. New Delhi should not get confused by the Islamabad’s official statements as people of Pakistan including Azad Jammu & Kashmir, Gilgit Baltistan, Tribal Districts, Balochistan etc. have planned a “Hybrid Strategy”, a combination non-Kinetic and Kinetic actions to neutralize illegitimate move of India to merge dispute Jammu & Kashmir State into Indian Union. It aims to pave way for right of self-determination for the entire State subjects of Jammu & Kashmir State under UNO through free and impartial plebiscite. The only solution to the issue is that Pakistan must approach International Court of Justice (ICJ), especially after India violated Simla Accord of 1972, by taking the case of Kulbhushan Jadhav to ICJ and getting verdit in favour on 17 July 2019. New Delhi still has time to repeal Presidential Ordinance and contribute positively for the peace in the region.

Writer is Pakistan-based analyst and can be reached at afshainafzal@yahoo.com
