A woman who calls for gang rape of another woman is beyond evil: Armeena Khan





Local actor Armeena Khan has called out a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader for stating Hindu men should rape Muslim women to "protect India".



Sunita Singh Gaur, in a



Local actor Armeena Khan has called out a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader for stating Hindu men should rape Muslim women to "protect India".Sunita Singh Gaur, in a Facebook post on June 29 , mentioned that Hindu men should enter the homes of Muslim women and rape them.

BJP's Mahila Morcha, the women’s wing of India’s ruling party, expelled Gaur for posting hateful comments against Muslim women. "There is only one solution for them [Muslims]," Gaur noted. "Hindu brothers should make a group of 10 and gang rape their Muslim mothers and sisters openly on the streets and then hang them in the middle of the bazaar for others to see."Gaur added that “if we need to protect India” then it is important for Hindu men to rape Muslim women. “There is no other way,” she added. Soon after, she deleted the post.Responding to Gaur's gruesome tweet, the Janaan star said, "That a woman can call for the gang rape of another woman is beyond evil. I do not know where this comes from but it certainly is sinister and worrying. She has since deleted the post and has been expelled but imagine the closet Nazis."https://twitter.com/ArmeenaRK/status/1162067022068498433This is not the first time a member of BJP has spewed hate online. However, many were shocked to see Gaur openly encouraging rape and sexual violence."In a statement, a leader of BJP Mahila Morcha, Sunita Singh Gaur said that BJP workers should collectively abuse Muslim girls. The BJP's unclean intentions have become clear. Chitra Sarwara, you should strongly condemn the move but no stand has yet been made on your behalf," wrote on user.https://twitter.com/ZohaibZahidPK/status/1162196718110171136Another penned, "Sunita Gaur calls upon Hindu brothers and exhorts them to form a group of 10 to 20 other Hindu brothers and barge into every Muslim home to rape their mothers and sisters. Shame on all those who are misusing power to promote this vulgar ideology."After the backlash, Vijaya Rahatkar, national president of Mahila Morcha, announced Gaur's dismissal from the party. She said, “Be assured, BJP Mahila Morcha will not tolerate any hateful comments whatsoever from any karyakarta. The lady in question has been expelled even before you tweeted.”Rahatkar shared a press statement dated June 27, in which Chandraprabha Pandey, the district chief of the BJP’s Mahila Morcha, announced Gaur's sacking for "anti-party activities."Have something to add to the story? Share it in the comments below.
