Unnao rape case: CBI seeks more time from Delhi court to complete investigation

CBI has sought more time from a Delhi court | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Saturday sought an added time of a week from a Delhi court to present its final investigation report in one of the cases pertaining to the gangrape of a minor girl in Unnao in 2017. It should be noted that, earlier, the court had ordered the CBI to file a status report in the matter by August 17 after the investigative agency had sought 30 days to complete the investigation. The court has now put up the case for further hearing on August 26.

The court was hearing the case in which Shubham Singh, Naresh Tiwari, and Brajesh Singh Yadav are the accused. While making its argument before District Judge Dharmesh Sharma, senior Public Prosecutor Ashok Bhartendu, appearing for the CBI, said the matter is still under investigation and they will file a report very shortly.

"The matter is at the final stage of investigation and the agency will be coming up with a report shortly. The IO seeks one week's more time," added Bhartendu.

Appearing for the accused Shubham Singh, advocate Sunil Kumar Singh told the court that while the charge sheet has been filed in the other three cases, the investigation is still pending in the alleged gangrape case. He asked why the investigation is lingering from the past 16 months.

Earlier, the Supreme Court had transferred four criminal cases - the 2017 rape case; an alleged fake matter under the Arms Act against the father of the rape survivor; his death in police custody, and the gang rape of the woman - to the CBI from Uttar Pradesh.

Back on June 4, 2017, the woman, who was a minor back then, was allegedly raped by expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and later on June 11, she was gang raped by the three accused. Apart from Sengar, all the three accused - Shubham Singh, Naresh Tiwari, and Brajesh Singh Yadav - are currently out on bail.

The woman is currently battling for life at AIIMS, New Delhi after a truck recently rammed into the car she was travelling in with some family members. Two of her aunts died after the accident.
