Priyanka Gandhi slams BJP over I-Day ad featuring rape accused Kuldeep Sengar; asks party to clarify stand

Priyanka Gandhi | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Priyanka Gandhi lashed out at BJP over an advertisement which carries Kuldeep Sengar's photo Priyanka Gandhi asked BJP leaders to clarify their stand on the issue

New Delhi: Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi on Saturday lashed out at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and asked them to clarify their stand on Unnao rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar, after his photo features in an Independence Day advertisement in Uttar Pradesh.

In an I-Day ad published in the local edition of a Hindi daily, a photograph of Sengar – who has been accused of raping a minor girl two years ago – appeared along with the pictures of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Uttar Pradesh CM Adityanath and Home Minister Amit Shah.

Taking to Twitter, Gandhi asked the BJP leaders to comment on the controversial advertisement in which a rape accused’s picture was used.

"CBI submitted the report. Supreme Court has also reprimanded but BJP people still have rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar in their hearts. His photo is there with big leaders of BJP. Will they comment?" the Congress leader tweeted. She cited a media report regarding the ad in her tweet.

Notably, the BJP had expelled Sengar, who represents Unnao in the state assembly, earlier this month amid huge outcry after the rape victim met with a car accident near Rae Bareli.

While her two aunts were killed in the accident, the girl and her lawyer were undergoing treatment at AlIMS in New Delhi, where their condition is said to be critical.

The advertisement was reportedly funded by the Panchayat chairman of Ugoo area in Unnao. The ads carried a message for the residents, wishing them on Independence Day and Raksha Bandhan on August 15.

The ad also carried a photo of Sengar’s wife.

However, Ugoo Panchayat chairman, advocate Anuj Kumar Dikshit, who had commissioned the ad, remained defiant regarding the use of Sengar’s photo in the ad.

He also denied having any links with any political party.

"Kuldeep Singh is MLA of our region and hence his picture is there. I have not mentioned any party in the advertisement. Till the time he is an MLA we will put his pictures", Dikshit said.

Last week, charges against Sengar were framed by a Delhi court in the rape case against him. He has also been named in a case related to the death of the rape survivor’s father.

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which has been tasked with probing the rape victim’s accident, has booked Sengar in connection with the case.

The lawmaker is presently lodged in Tihar jail of the national capital.
