PM Imran introduced reforms in all institutions: Firdous Ashiq Awan

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) - Special Assistant to Prime Minister on Information and Broadcasting Firdous Ashiq Awan said Pakistan needed to open its doors for the world and it was done under the leadership of PM Imran Khan.

Addressing a ceremony in connection with first year’s performance of Pakistan Tehrik-e-Insaf (PTI) government, she said for the first time Pakistan Postal Service is running in profit and FC is being made effective.

She said PM Imran Khan’s address has been canceled considering the serious issue of Kashmir. She said every department needed reforms when we took the government and the Prime Minister with sheer efforts introduced reforms in every institution.

SAPM further said PM Imran Khan himself oversee the performance of every ministry, adding that a social media wing has been established in Information ministry.

Firdous said Foreign Ministry has beaten every diplomatic move of India. Awan lauded the foreign ministry for raising the Kashmir issue at international forums, including the United Nations. She thanked opposition for supporting national stance on Kashmir issue.

She said PTI government believes in the right to freedom of expression and speech. The greatest achievement of the government in the past year is that we believe in the right of freedom of expression and speech. She insisted that Prime Minister Imran Khan had not tried to curb the media at any level or at any forum.

"He did not communicate that the media be maligned through any personal action,"she said.

At the start of her address, Awan said that the day would be dedicated to the people of occupied Kashmir.

In the interest of the greater cause of Kashmir, we have put aside our political engagements and decided to take the national narrative forward."

She said that in the coming week, one ministry will be answerable before the media daily and briefly discussed the performance of various ministries over the past year.

Awan highlighted the Ehsas welfare programme as one of the achievements of the PTI government and said: "Ehsaas programme is close to the premier s heart. He believes that a society cannot change until people understand each other s situations."

Earlier, addressing the ceremony, Special Assistant to Prime Minister Naeem ul Haq said Pakistan is passing through a turning point in history in the backdrop of Kashmir situation.

He said the whole nation is united over protesting the unilateral and illegal act of India. The Special Assistant assured that the government will take every step to help Kashmiris achieve their aim of liberation.

Referring to domestic situation, he said when the government assumed power the economic situation was critical.

Naeem ul Haq said Pakistan sought friendly countries help as well as taking austerity measures and a number of steps to ameliorate the economic situation.

Special Assistant said the government also launched big projects like provision of housing for people of lower income backgrounds.


