Chandigarh: Man accused in rape case attempts suicide while in police custody

Kumar suffered an injury on his forehead and necessary treatment was administered to him (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Rajesh Kumar tried to smash a glass bottle on his head in an attempt to commit suicide The incident took place on Friday when Kumar was to be produced before a court Kumar had been booked on August 14 in a rape case

Chandigarh: A man accused in a rape case tried to attempt suicide on Friday while he was in police custody. The accused had been arrested by the Derabassi police and to be produced before a court. In an attempt to end his life, Rajesh Kumar smashed a glass bottle on his head.

The police said that Kumar was being taken to a court in Derabassi on Friday when he excused himself to go to the washroom. Kumar smashed the glass bottle on his head that had been lying inside the washroom.

After Kumar tried to hurt himself, the police registered an FIR against him under Section 309 (attempt to suicide) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Parveen Kaur, Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) said," While we were about to take Rajesh to the court from the police station, he told me, he wanted to go to the washroom. I sent a constable with him, but the moment Rajesh entered the washroom in the police station, he took a bottle which was lying there and hit himself on his forehead with the empty glass bottle. "

Kumar suffered an injury on his forehead and necessary treatment was administered to him. After his treatment, Kumar was produced before a court and was sent to judicial custody. Kumar had been arrested on August 14 for his alleged role in a murder case.

Man commits suicide at police post in Amritsar

In July this year, a man committed suicide while he was under preventive custody. The deceased was identified as Baljinder Singh. Singh's family alleged foul play in the incident. Singh hanged himself at the City Bus Stand police post.

The police said that Singh was found hanging from an iron rod of a window inside one of the cells. The resident of Khawala village, Anjala had several cases of theft and snatching registered under his name.

Delhi man excuses himself to drink water, jumps from balcony of police station

A similar incident came to light in May this year when a man jumped from the balcony of Bavana police station in Delhi. Identified as Balraj, the man had been brought to the police station for interrogation as his son had been booked in a murder case.

Gaurav Sharam, DGP Outer North said that Balraj had stepped out in the balcony after excusing himself to drink water. He then jumped from the balcony in a bid to end his life.
