Ex-Afghan NSA blames Pak for Kabul suicide blast, says neighbour backs Taliban to kill Afghans

Amrullah also commented on the heightened tensions between India and Pakistan post the Centre's decision to abrogate Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir. (Image | Reuters)

Blaming Pakistan for backing Taliban sponsoring terrorism, Ex-Afghan NSA Amrullah Saleh said that the Taliban were involved in the suicide bomb blast that took place in Kabul on Saturday night.

Amrullah, who is also a vice-presidential candidate, stated that backed by Pakistan, Taliban are the inventors of suicide bombings, sectarian violence and the massacre of Afghani civilians just to weaken the state.

"Their denial of bombing at the wedding party last night doesn't cleanse the stinking stain from their forehead. They are terrorists," said Amrullah after Taliban denied responsibility for the attack that killed 63 and left more than 180 people injured.

Backed by Pakistan, Talibn are the inventors of suicide bombings, sectarian violence & massacring of civilians in Afg just to weaken the State. Their denial of bombing of the wedding party last night doesn't cleanse the stinking stain from their forehead. They are terrorists. Amrullah Saleh (@AmrullahSaleh2) August 18, 2019

On Saturday night, a suicide-bomb blast ripped through a wedding party in Afghanistan's capital Kabul. The Associated Press reported that it could be the deadliest attack in Kabul this year.

Amrullah also commented on the heightened tensions between India and Pakistan post the Centre's decision to abrogate Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir.

Slamming Pakistan's support to terror, he tweeted, "India can take care of its entirety by itself post the change of Kashmir status. What Pakistan can do, as always, is to provide more killing devices to brainwashed Madrasa terrorists and ask them to kill Afghan civilians just because they are not anti-India."

The Islamic State group on Sunday claimed responsibility for the suicide attack.

IS said one of its fighters blew himself up at a "large gathering" in Kabul while others "detonated a parked explosives-laden vehicle" when security forces arrived, in a statement posted on the Telegram messaging app.

The groom, who only gave his name as Mirwais, recalled greeting smiling guests in the afternoon, before seeing their bodies being carried out hours later. The attack "changed my happiness to sorrow", Mirwais told local TV station Tolo News.

"My family, my bride are in shock, they cannot even speak. My bride keeps fainting," he said. "I lost my brother, I lost my friends, I lost my relatives. I will never see happiness in my life again."

There has been no let-up in fighting and bomb attacks in Afghanistan over recent months despite the talks between the United States and the Taliban since late last year.
