Coimbatore: Missing minor sexually assaulted by 24-year-old man; rescued by police

During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that the minor had been taken to Kochi (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor went missing from her school hostel on Monday The accused took the minor to Kochi and allegedly sexually assaulted her The minor has been sent to a rescue home

Coimbatore: A 16-year-old girl who had allegedly been taken to Kerala's Kochi by a man and was sexually assaulted has been rescued, the police said on Friday. The accused has been identified as M Santhoshkumar. Santhoshkumar is a resident of Nagammaputhur near Annur. He was arrested by the police on Friday.

The accused has been booked under relevant provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012. The police said that the accused had allegedly "lured" the minor and had taken her to a Kochi. The accused works at a mobile repair shop.

A police officer said that when the minor went missing from her school hostel on Monday, her parents approached the Race Course police and lodged a complaint. During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that the minor had been taken to Kochi.

A team of police officials then went to Kochi and rescued the 16-year-old girl. The minor was sent to a rescue home after being produced before the Child Welfare Committee (CWC). The accused has been sent to Coimbatore Central Prison.

Minor Delhi boy sexually assaulted in Dehradun boarding school

In August this year, the incident of an 11-year-old boy being sodomised by a school senior came to light from Dehradun. The incident took place at a boarding school in Dehradun. The minor told his parents about the incident after which, they approached the Raipur police and lodged an FIR against the accused.

The minor was allegedly taken to an empty room by his senior and was brutally beaten up. It was also alleged that the accused sexually assaulted the minor. After the incident surfaced, the school expelled the accused senior. A case was registered against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Hyderabad man arrested for attempting to sexually assault minor girl

A similar incident came to light from Hyderabad in the month of July where a man was arrested for allegedly sexually assaulting a minor girl. Identified as Jani, the accused allegedly took the minor to a parking area and sexually assaulted her.

The accused has been booked under relevant provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The eight-year-old girl was playing outside her grandfather's bicycle repair shop when the accused approached her. The accused then took the minor to a parking area where he sexually assaulted her. Her grandfather was not at the shop when the incident took place.
