‘The truck came straight, rammed our car before we could steer away’

Rape Survivor Shares With Kin Harrowing Experience Of July 28 Accident

Disclaimer: The survivor's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault

LUCKNOW: The Unnao rape survivor, who is currently recuperating at AIIMS-Delhi after meeting with an accident on July 28, has told one of her relatives from her hospital bed that she saw the truck coming towards their car and then ramming it on NH-31 in Rae Bareli The survivor said that while her advocate, who was driving the car, tried his best to put the vehicle in reverse gear so as to get out of the truck’s way, the truck rammed their car, the relative told TOI on Sunday over phone from Delhi. The advocate is also admitted at AIIMS and is still in an unconscious state.Along with her advocate and two aunts, the survivor was on her way from Unnao to the Rae Bareli jail when the truck collided with their car on July 28 afternoon. She lost both her aunts in the accident.The survivor, who is now 19, has accused now-expelled BJP MLA from Bangarmau Kuldeep Singh Sengar of raping her two years ago. Sengar is in the CBI custody and is being tried at a Delhi court at present.“I asked her what had happened and she told me she saw the truck coming straight towards them and colliding head-on. They had even raised an alarm when they realised that there was something unusual in the way the truck was being driven,” said the relative, whose mother had died in the accident. This relative has been by the survivor’s bedside, first at KGMU-Lucknow and now at AIIMS, since the day of the accident.“She also told me how her advocate had tried to put the car in reverse gear, so that they could be saved from the truck moving towards them. But he was unable to do so as the truck sped towards them,” the relative told TOI in an exclusive conversation.After gaining consciousness, the survivor, who is still critical, could manage to share a few details of the day to her relative. However, the CBI, which is investigating both the rape and the accident cases, has not been informed of these details yet.“She has shared this with me alone as she has been living with me ever since she left Unnao out of fear following the rape. She refused to meet CBI officials, who once came to meet her at AIIMS,” the relative said.As per the relative, the survivor has lost faith in the CBI. “She says she does not trust even the CBI now after losing all faith in the UP government. She had told the CBI several times about the threat to her life and yet no measures were taken to safeguard her,” the relative added.“The survivor has told me that ever since the state government transferred the rape case to the CBI in April last year, the agency sleuths had asked her the same questions over and over again, but failed to expedite the process of justice,” said the relative.
