71 transferred over AP woman’s assault by Assistant Sub Inspector

Assistant Sub Inspector

Renukaiah

punishment transfers

On January 20, a woman from Andhra Pradesh was reportedly assaulted by(ASI)at KS Layout police station. The video of the assault went viral. The woman and her family members had barged into the police station to take away her daughter, who had been rescued by KS Layout police over a family dispute case. Except one police sub-inspector and eight police constables, the remaining staff of KS Layout police station were transferred with immediate effect on Friday.A total of 71 police personnel including the police inspector were given their transfer orders by K Annamalai, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), South division. This is first in the history of the police department in Karnataka, where such massive transfers from a single police station have never been witnessed.The timing of the transfers has also reportedly resulted in the death of a 52-year-old police constable, Burahan Saab Nadaf, at his home town Mahalingapura in Bagalkot district. Nadaf, an ex-serviceman, is said to have gone to check the construction of a house. A family member called the police station and informed about the death. “Nadaf had gone on a 15-day medical leave from January 22. He is said to have died of complications due to low blood pressure on Friday,” DCP told Mirror.However, the DCP held that these were notbut a measure to bring in new faces, implement people-friendly measures and to address groupism at the police station concerned. “There was no point in transferring just a few policemen in the station as they would raise questions as to why only they were transferred and the rest were not,” the DCP added. Healso clarified that the transfers were made in consultation with the city police commissioner.While ASI Renukaiah was suspended on Tuesday for assaulting the woman from Andhra Pradesh, the DCP has also suspended a police constable for not doing his sentry duty properly and allowing the public to come into the police station to forcibly take away a victim.
