Delhi: Mentally ill girl reunited with parents after 4 months thanks to Google maps

Mentaly ill girl was brought o Delhi by her father for treatment. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Mentally ill girl was brought o Delhi by her father for treatment She went missing from her sister's house in Kirti Nagar in Delhi Police finally managed to locate girl's family with the help of Google maps

New Delhi: Technology has changed our world and it is really making a difference in people's lives. Using technology, the Delhi Police were able to reunite a 12-year-old mentally ill girl with her parents in Siddarthnagar district of Uttar Pradesh.

It took four months for the cops to search for the girl's parents using Google maps. The girl went missing in Delhi after her father took her to the capital for treatment.

According to a report, she was handed over to cops at Kirti Nagar police station by an e-rickshaw driver who found her on March 21.

When police asked the girl about her home address, she wasn't able to provide the exact location of her home. The girl only told cops that she belongs to a village called 'Khurja'. She said her father's name is 'Jeetan'.

As police started the search, the cops checked the databases of missing persons, but could not find any information about the missing girl.

The police said the victim could not provide much information as she was not mentally sound. The girl informed cops that she travelled to Delhi by train with an 'uncle' named Pintu.

The girl said the man took her to train's washroom and took off her clothes, but when she cried he fled. Suspecting sexual assault, the police got the girl's medical examination done, but doctors found no sign of sexual assault.

According to the girl's statement, the police filed a sexual assault case girl was and she was handed over to an NGO.

Based on girl's information, the police also took the girl to Khurja town in UP's Bulandshahr district but did not get any success as no one recognised the girl.

After this, the cops prodded the girl to name some areas around her village. The girl then told the cops that there is a place called Sakapar near her village. She informed cops that her mother belongs to one Sonbarsa village.

The cops then put the name of the villages on Google maps and found that there are places with name Sonbarsa nd Sakapar in Siddharthnagar district. Finally, the girl's family was traced by the cops on August 1.

According to police, the victim's father told them she went missing from her sister's house at Kirti Nagar in Delhi. However, he did not file any missing person complaint with the police.

Later, the police dropped sexual harassment case after confirming the sequence of events with the girl's father.
