Madhya Pradesh police gun down two history-sheeters in an 'encounter'

Three policemen also sustained minor injuries during encounter. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Encounter took place in the early hours of Monday Two criminals had 38 cases against them Three policemen also sustained minor injuries during encounter

Narsinghpur: The Madhya Pradesh police claimed to have gunned down two wanted history-sheeters in an encounter in Narsinghpur district. The encounter took place in the early hours of Monday.

The slain history-sheeters had rewards of Rs 30,000 and Rs 15,000 respectively on their heads. Three policemen also sustained minor injuries during the gunfight which took place in Kumhroda village.

According to a report in PTI, the slain criminals have been identified as Vijay Yadav and Samir Khan. The two were wanted in the murder of Congress leader Raju Mishra.

Apart from being involved in the killing of Congress leader, the deceased men had dozens of cases against them, said Inspector General (Jabalpur Zone) Vikas Sharma.

Vijay Yadav faced as many as 18 criminal cases against him, while Khan had 20 cases in different police stations. The encounter began after police a tip-off about the presence of criminals in a car in the area.

A team of police officials headed by Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP) Rajesh Tiwari reached the spot and on seeing the police, the accused fled. The duo opened fire on the police party in an attempt to escape.

The police party retaliated by opening fire triggering a heavy gunfight leading to the death of the two criminals.

According to police, Gotegaon police station in-charge Prabhat Shukla and head constable Rajesh Sharma received minor injuries during the exchange of fire.

A magisterial inquiry has been ordered into the gunfight between the police and the criminals, said Superintendent of Police (SP) Gurukaran Singh.

"When we tried to stop the car in which these criminals were travelling, they started firing at the police team. In the retaliatory fire, they got injured and died in a hospital, later on, the reported quoted ASP Rajesh Tiwari as saying.

Bihar SHO killed in an encounter with criminals

In October last year, a Station House Officer (SHO) was killed during a gun battle with criminals in a border area of Khagaria district of Bihar. During the encounter, a policeman was also injured, who was admitted to a hospital in Bhagalpur.

The SHO Ashish Kumar Singh had reportedly received a tip-off about the presence of notorious criminal Dinesh Muni in Diyala area in Mojama village.
