CBI gets 2 more weeks in Unnao rape victim accident case

New Delhi, Aug 19 : The Supreme Court on Monday granted two more weeks to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to conclude probe into the Unnao rape survivor accident case.

The CBI had sought four weeks saying the survivor and her lawyer Mahendra Singh, who also suffered critical injuries in the Rae Bareli accident last month, were not in a position to give statement.

An apex court Bench, comprising Justice Deepak Gupta and Justice Aniruddha Bose, also directed the UP government to pay Rs 5 lakh to the lawyer, as an interim compensation for his medical expanses.

The order came when amicus V. Giri said the victim's counsel was still in a critical condition. Though shifted to AIIMS, his condition was far from satisfactory and a lot of money was required for his treatment, he added.

The court also noted even though treatment at AIIMS being provided to him was free, there were other expenditures.

The court adjourned the matter for September 6 after observing that the CBI had done extensive investigation but some loose ends needed to be tied up.

"Some of the investigation relates to collating and analysing the material collected, especially the electronic records. Most importantly the statements of the victim and her counsel who was driving the car could not be recorded till date, as they are not in a position to make a statement," the court noted.

Some statements to media by the survivor's family members might help the accused in the case, the court observed and added, if the family members had any grievances, they must feel free to tell the court and it would help them.

The court had taken suo moto cognizance of a letter written by the victim's family alleging threats from aides of main accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar.

The rape survivor, brought to AIIMS last week, and her lawyer are in a critical condition and on advanced life support system. They are being treated by a multidisciplinary team of doctors from critical care, orthopaedics, trauma surgery and pulmonary medicine departments.

On July 28, the car in which the rape survivor, her lawyer and two of her aunts were travelling was hit by a speeding truck in Rae Bareli. Both aunts were killed in the accident.
