Army, Shehla Rashid lock horns over 'torture' charge

Army, Shehla Rashid lock horns over 'torture' charge

NEW DELHI, Aug 19 (Agencies): Terming them 'baseless,' the Indian Army on Sunday rejected two specific claims made by activist and Jammu and Kashmir People's Movement leader Shehla Rashid on the ground situation in Kashmir.

These were among the ten allegations levelled by Rashid in a series of tweets - based on "things that people coming from Kashmir say about the situation.

Rashid, meanwhile, told The Wire that she has had "detailed conversations with people about the situation there" and is willing to share "details" about the incidents she has mentioned with the Army if it were to "conduct an impartial investigation."

The activist tweeted on Sunday that the armed forces were "entering houses at night, picking up boys, ransacking houses, deliberately spilling rations on the floor, mixing oil with rice.."

Further, she wrote that in Shopian, four men were "called into the Army camp and "interrogated" (tortured). A mic was kept close to them so that the entire area could hear them scream, and be terrorised."

This, she wrote, "created an environment of fear in the entire area."

Accordingly, the Indian Army said the allegations were "baseless and rejected," and that "unverified" and "fake news" was being "spread by inimical elements and organisations to incite unsuspecting population."

So far, however, neither the Army nor the government has questioned the contents of the remaining tweets in her thread.

Rashid told The Wire: "Let the Indian Army conduct an impartial investigation. I'll be happy to share details with them. My thread is quite balanced. I've pointed out the positive work of the administration too. All the ten points are based on conversations with people."

"In the absence of internet, phones and media including newspapers, there are gross human rights violations occurring in Kashmir right now which are invisible to the world. There is an AFP report that suggests that 4,000 to 6,000 people have been arrested. Obviously, these are not voluntary arrests. People have been dragged from their homes, tortured and arrested. If the government has nothing to hide from the world, why impose a communication ban?" she added.

Ever since the Union government decided to read down Article 370 and split Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories on August 5, officials and a section of the Indian media have consistently been claiming that the situation is largely calm in the state.

A fact-finding team of four civil liberties activists Jean Dreze, Kavita Krishnan, Maimoona Mollah and Vimal Bhai who travelled across the Kashmir Valley, however, said last week that the whole of Kashmir is full of "anger and anguish" as they feel betrayed by the Union government's decision.

They said that young boys were being "abducted" by the security personnel for no fault of theirs.

"People are living in fear of harassment from the government, army, or police. They expressed their anger freely in informal conversation but no one was willing to speak on camera," a press release issued by the team said.

Meanwhile, authorities reimposed restrictions on movement in major parts of Srinagar on Sunday after violent overnight clashes between residents and the police. Dozens are said to have been injured in the clashes.

Telephone landlines were restored in parts of the city on Saturday after a 12-day blackout and the state government said most telephone exchanges in the region would start working by Sunday evening. Internet and cell phones remain blocked in Kashmir.

With every passing day, India is changing. You can feel the change in the air everywhere - on the streets, in workplace and family conversations, in parliament, on the internet, in the media. You see the nation being aggressively recast in a new muscular imagination. Some of us watch with cold dread, many others with feverish triumphalism.

Another India, imagined around the values that vitalised India's freedom struggle and the pledges and guarantees of its constitution, but so imperfectly realised, is rapidly crumbling. There seem to be only a few willing to stand tall in its defence. We are fast becoming a people with no patience for kindness and morality.

It is now abundantly clear that the Narendra Modi-Amit Shah leadership views the emphatic expanded mandate which they seized in May 2019 to be one to remould India into a majoritarian, authoritarian, militarist and amoral Hindu nation. A large part of this project was well under way in Modi's first tenure, but there was at least a formal acknowledgment of the constraints set by India's democratic constitutional framework. Therefore, we saw the steady destruction of the constitution by stealth, by a hollowing out and corrosion from within, by a persistent and dangerous chipping away at democratic institutions and practice, by the nurturing of a climate of everyday fear, and the encouragement of public hate.

But since their electoral triumph in May, we see the Modi-Shah regime impetuously setting aside all such pretences. For India's ruling establishment today, the three greatest enemies of the nation of its imagination are the morality of India's constitution; its Muslim and Christian minorities; and its Left and liberal dissenters. We are witness now to the open declaration of war against all these three enemies.

There were early signs on display of this new mood of Modi's second term. The cries of 'Jai Shri Ram' spread quickly from the halls of parliament to the streets, a rallying call for lynching which no longer needed to even pretend this was in defence of the holy cow.

Home minister Amit Shah thundered in parliament that his government would extend the National Register of Citizens to the whole country and deport 'infiltrators' from every inch of land. It would be a grave mistake to regard this as an empty rabble-rousing threat. Not with the Modi-Shah leadership today.
