Donald Trump asks Imran Khan to ‘moderate rhetoric’, after phone call with PM Modi

US President Donald Trump asked Pakistani PM Imran Khan to “moderate rhetoric” with India to reduce tensions over Kashmir issue. Trump made the statement after his telephonic conversation with Indian PM Narendra Modi on August 19, 2019.

Trump’s telephonic call with the Pakistani PM was the second one in less than a week. During the call, Trump highlighted the need to reduce tensions and moderate rhetoric with India over the situation in Jammu and Kashmir. Trump reaffirmed the need to avoid escalation of the situation and urged restraint on both sides.

Earlier on Monday, PM Modi had held a 30-minute call with US President Donald Trump, during which the two leaders discussed bilateral and regional matters. The call was marked by warmth and cordiality which characterises the relations between the two leaders. During the call, the Indian Prime Minister, PM Modi recalled his meeting with Donald Trump in Osaka on the sidelines of the G-20 summit in June 2019.

Following are the topics that were discussed between Modi and Trump:

1. Bilateral discussions

Indian PM Modi, while referring to his bilateral discussions with Trump in Osaka said that he hoped that the Commerce Minister of India and the US Trade Representative would meet at the earliest to discuss bilateral trade prospects for mutual benefit.

2. Regional Situation

PM Modi stated that extreme rhetoric and incitement by certain leaders in the region to anti-India violence was not conducive to peace. The statement was made by the Prime Minister in reference to the current situation, which has witnessed Pakistani leadership trying to stew up anti-India sentiments over Kashmir decision.

3. Cross-border terrorism

PM Modi stressed on the importance of creating an environment that is free from terror and violence and eschewing cross-border terrorism without exception.

4. Poverty and illiteracy

PM Narendra Modi reiterated India’s commitment to cooperate with anyone who followed the same path in fighting poverty, illiteracy and disease.

5. Afghanistan

PM Modi, while recalling that August 19 marked one hundred years of Afghanistan’s Independence, reiterated India’s longstanding commitment to work to create a united, democratic, secure and truly independent Afghanistan.

Background

The phone call between PM Narendra Modi and US President Donald Trump was their first interaction since the revoking of Article 370 and bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two UTs.

During the talks, PM Modi also brought up the topic of Afghanistan. The talks were held just two days after a suicide bomber attacked Shia-Hazara wedding in Kabul, Afghanistan killing over 63 people.

The attack comes as the US is nearing an agreement with the Taliban to pave the way for a complete US exit from Afghanistan. The Islamic State claimed the responsibility of the attack.

The Modi-Trump talks followed Trump's recent talk with Imran Khan during which he stressed that Pakistan should settle its issues with India bilaterally. The statement is a huge turnaround from Trump's previous comments during his meeting with the Pakistani PM when he had offered to mediate in the Kashmir Issue.
