Kerala: Nun who campaigned against rape-accused bishop 'locked up' inside Convent

Thiruvananthapuram

Franco Mulakkal

seeking justice

bishop

: The Vellamunda police has filed a case under IPC section 342 (wrongful confinement) against the authorities of the Franciscan Clarist Congregation (FCC) following a complaint lodged against them by Sr.Lucy Kalappura who has been in the forefront of protests demanding action against rape-accused Jalandhar bishopThe FCC early this month expelled the nun for failing to a satisfactory explanation for allegedly violating proper law of the FCC.The nun informed the police that she was locked up in the Karakamala convent in Wayanad. She said the doors were locked from outside when she tried to go out to attend the holy mass at 6.30 am on Monday. It was after she called the police that they came and unlocked the door.The convent authorities claimed they had locked the front door from inside and given the key to another nun.Sr Lucy said that she has been facing mental torture at the convent for nearly one year and the hostile treatment of the convent authorities has now reached its peak.Early this month Sr.Lucy was expelled by FCC for allegedly participating in protests against Franco Mulakkal. The order asked her to leave the convent in Wayanad within 10 days. She has now appealed against her expulsion with the Apostolic Nuncio, the Vatican's representative in India. Sr.Lucy has said she has full faith in the law of the land and she will continue her fight for justice."I have not sinned, so I will continue my fight. I am sure truth will prevail in the end," she said.Earlier she had received notices warning her of her expulsion. The notice sought an explanation from her for violating the vow of obedience. Her 'transgressions' at the time included speaking to the media and participating in channel debates.The Missionaries of Jesus congregation and the FCC have right from the beginning come out with vindictive action against nunsfor the rape survivor nun. The victim had accusedFranco Mulakkal of raping her on several occasions.Franco was arrested by the special investigation team in connection with the rape charge on September 21 last here. The Kerala HC later granted him conditional bail.The Kuravilangad police has registered a case against him under various sections of IPC including 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement) 376 (2) (being a public servant, takes advantage of his official position and commits rape on a woman in his custody).
