After Letter On Lynching To PM Modi, Activists Write To Mamata Banerjee On Violence In Bengal

With less than two years to go for the Assembly polls, incidents of political violence in West Bengal do not seem to be stopping any time soon. People are worried as the members of the ruling Trinamool Congress and Right wing groups backed by the BJP locking horns at every nook and corner of the state. Civil society members are making every possible effort to stop the political violence that has become quite frequent.

And now, a group of actors and activists, including actor-director Aparna Sen, has written an open letter to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. The letter has been written to Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee in order to condemn police action on teachers and the assault on a theatre actor in recent weeks. In the letter, the artists have made an attempt to draw her attention towards two recent incidents of attacks on teachers and a theatre artiste in the state.

The letter, written on behalf of Citizen Speak India, has described both the incidents as attack on all artistes propagating free though.

"We have been noticing with a great deal of anxiety that, instead of trying to resolve the peaceful democratic protests of teachers of this state through sane dialogue and debate, the administration has been resorting to undemocratic means of quashing these protests through police brutality," the civil society members of the CitizenSpeakIndia forum wrote.

According to the letter, data from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) showed there were 840 instances of atrocities against Dalits in 2016, and "a definite decline in the percentage of convictions".

"On 15th August 2019, at the Academy of Fine Arts complex, three small street plays were enacted at the initiative of 'Actors United' in front of a gathering united against communalism and fundamentalism. Shubhankar Das Sharma, a member of 'Actors United', was attacked and beaten by unknown assailants at Dum Dum while returning home at the end of the performance. Some sort of ointment or balm was applied to his eyes in order to blind him temporarily, so as to prevent him from seeing the faces of his assailants and identifying them later. He was not told why he was being beaten," the letter said.

The letter added that the severity of these incidents make them as bad as lynching and that they should be condemned just like lynching.

Mamata Banerjee has not made any comment on the letter from CitizenSpeakIndia yet

Earlier, 49 celebrities had written an open letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi on rising mob lynching cases across the country. In the letter, artists had urged PM Modi to intervene in incidents of lynching and the alleged weaponisation of the slogan "Jai Shri Ram" into a "war cry". A part of the letter read,

"Dear Prime Minister... The lynching of Muslims, Dalits and other minorities must be stopped immediately. You have criticised such lynchings in parliament Mr Prime Minister, but that is not enough... We strongly feel that such offences should be declared non-bailable..." the letter said.
