Have you come across ‘propaganda against India or security forces in Kashmir’? Here’s how you can report

Pic courtesy: @MajorPoonia | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights BJP member Major (Retd) Surendra Poonia urged the countrymen to report propagana campaign against India to NIA Army veteran Major (Retd) Surendra Poonia gave the direct link to the page where the complainant can register the complaint A lot of false and misleading news propaganda, mostly emanating from Pakistan, is being circulated on social media after the abrogation of Article 370

New Delhi: In order to fight propaganda campaign against the country and security forces on the social media, BJP member and Army veteran Major (Retd) Surendra Poonia on Monday urged the countrymen to report the matter to the National Investigation Agency (NIA).

Taking to Twitter, Major (Retd) Surendra Poonia said if anyone comes across any social media post in any group or page or handle containing propaganda, hatred for India or security forces on the issue of Kashmir, or any other topic, he/she should report to National Investigation Agency.

With the hashtag ‘Be Vigilant’, the BJP member also gave the direct link to the page where the complainant can register the complaint. He also gave an e-mail ID to report the matter.

Here’s his tweet:

URGENT !

If U come across any social media post in any group/page/handle containing propaganda,hatred for India/Security Forces on the issue of Kashmir/any other topic,Pl report to @NIA_India by filling form at https://t.co/dbMR47rTPY

Or mail on info.nia@gov.in#BeVigilant @adgpi pic.twitter.com/HaDCQ0ygkE — Major Surendra Poonia (@MajorPoonia) August 19, 2019

As of Tuesday evening, the tweet has had 1.9K retweets.

Following the abrogation of provisions of Article 370 which gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir, a lot of false and misleading news propaganda, mostly emanating from Pakistan, is being circulated on social media.

On Sunday, Pakistan's Federal Minister for Maritime Affairs Ali Haider Zaidi shared a 2017 video with a caption that inaccurately mentioned that it showed the sufferings of Kashmiris because of the policies of the Indian government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Meanwhile, Supreme Court lawyer Alakh Alok Srivastava had yesterday filed a criminal complaint against activist and former JNU student Shehla Rashid for purportedly spreading fake news against the Indian Army.

In a series of tweets on Sunday, Rashid had claimed that the paramilitary forces ransacked and tortured people in Kashmir by entering their houses.

"Armed forces are entering house at night, picking up boys, ransacking houses, deliberately spilling rations on the floor, mixing oil with rice, etc". Rashid had alleged that she got the information from the people coming from Kashmir.

"In Shopian, 4 men were called into the Army camp and "interrogated" (tortured). A mic was kept close to them so that the entire area could hear them scream, and be terrorized. This created an environment of fear in the entire area," Rashid had tweeted.

Supreme Court lawyer Alakh Alok Srivastava, in a letter to Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik, claimed that Rashid committed offences of "promoting enmity between the classes under Section 153, 153-A, 504 and 505 of IPC, Information Technology Act, 2002 and amongst others."

"Thus the complainant, being a concerned citizen of India and a practicing advocate, is personally aggrieved by the aforesaid anti-national and seditious acts of accused, which have been done solely to destabilise India and hence, the complainant hereby requests you to immediately register FIR against the accused Shehla Rashid and arrest her, and take most stringent criminal action against her," the letter further read.
