Soura: Unreported epicentre of anger

Each of the dozen or so entrances has been blocked with makeshift barricades of bricks, corrugated metal sheets, wooden slabs and felled tree trunks. Groups of youths armed with stones congregate behind the biggest obstacles. The aim: to keep Indian security forces, and particularly the paramilitary police, out of the area.

For more than a week, the young men of Soura, a densely populated enclave in Srinagar, have been taking turns to maintain a round-the-clock vigil at the entry points to their neighbourhood.

“We have no voice. We are exploding from within,” said Ejaz, 25, who like many other residents in Soura interviewed by Reuters gave only one name, saying he feared arrest. “If the world won’t listen to us too, then what should we do? Pick up guns?”

Soura, home to about 15,000 people, is becoming the epicentre of resistance to the government’s plans to remove the partial autonomy that was enjoyed by Jammu and Kashmir.

The enclave, which has effectively become a no-go zone for the security forces, is now a barometer of the ability of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government to impose its will in Kashmir after its dramatic move on August 5 to tighten its control over the region.

The change, the government said, was necessary to integrate Kashmir fully into India, tackle corruption and nepotism, and speed up its development, which Modi says is the key to securing lasting peace and defeating terrorism.

In Soura, it’s hard to find anyone who supports Modi’s move. Many of the more than two dozen residents interviewed by Reuters over the past week referred to the Prime Minister as “zaalim (tyrant)”.

The constitutional change will allow non-residents to buy property in Jammu and Kashmir and apply for jobs in local government. Some Muslims say they fear that Hindus will overrun the state, and Kashmiris’ identity, culture and religion will be diluted and repressed.

“We feel like we are guarding the LoC here,” said Ejaz.

Residents in Soura say dozens of people have been injured in clashes with the paramilitary forces over the past week. It is unclear how many have been detained.

A spokesman for the Jammu and Kashmir administration declined to answer questions from Reuters. The Union home ministry did not return calls and emails seeking comment.

The battle over Soura has received little coverage in the Indian media. That is partly because of the communications blackout in the region but also as many local TV channels and newspapers have emphasised the government’s position — that there is little resistance in Kashmir to its plans.

In Soura, the reality is different.

Landline phone service has begun to return to the region but not to Soura, which has a well-regarded teaching hospital.

Residents have found other ways to organise. When they spot security forces trying to enter the area, residents say they rush to a mosque and sound the alarm by playing a devotional song calling for people to “stand against illegal occupation”, or by issuing an alert over the loudspeaker.

At intersections in the warren of narrow lanes that make up Soura, a largely lower middle class area with a lake and marshy wetlands to its west, there are piles of bricks and stones for use against Indian troops.

At one barricade, concertina wire had been strung across the road. The young men patrolling the barrier said the wire had been stolen from the security forces.

A protest on August 9, when people took to the streets after Friday prayers, marked Soura as the focal point of resistance to the government’s decision. As residents from surrounding neighbourhoods joined the demonstration, the crowd swelled to at least 10,000, according to local police sources.

More than a dozen residents told Reuters that around 150 to 200 security personnel in riot gear attempted to enter Soura after the protests, resulting in clashes with residents that went on late into the night, as the police fired tear gas and metal pellets.

The government initially denied there had been a protest, and said there had been no gathering in Soura involving more than 20 people. It later said there had been a demonstration of 1,000 to 1,500 people, after TV footage of the crowd was broadcast by the BBC and Al Jazeera.
