2,300 held in Kashmir, says international news agency, citing officers, records

SRINAGAR: At least 2,300 people, mostly young male protesters, have been detained in Kashmir since the revocation of its special status, according to high-ranking Jammu and Kashmir police officials and police arrest statistics reviewed by Associated Press.Those arrested include anti-India protesters as well as Kashmiri leaders who have been held in jails and other makeshift holding facilities, according to the police officials, who have access to all police records but spoke on the condition of anonymity.Despite the clampdown, Kashmiris have staged near-daily protests since the August 5 order. Police officials said about 300 protests and clashes have taken place in recent weeks. One of the officers said most of the arrests have been in Srinagar . The official spokesman, Rohit Kansal, has repeatedly refused to divulge any details about arrests and detentions, saying only that they have been made to prevent anti-India protests and clashes in the region.Nearly 100 people have been arrested under the Public Safety Act, the arrest statistics showed. The law permits detaining people for up to two years without trial. At least 70 civilians and 20 police and soldiers have been treated for injuries sustained in the clashes at three hospitals in Srinagar, the officers said. Moses Dhinakaran, a spokesman for the CRPF, which now holds jurisdiction in Kashmir, said he didn’t know how many people had been detained because his agency has “no direct role in detention”.Families crowded outside police stations waiting for a turn to appeal for the release of their sons, husbands and other relatives on Tuesday. At least three dozen men and women along with their children sat on the street outside a police station in Srinagar waiting to hear about some 22 young men and teenage boys who they said had been detained by police and paramilitary soldiers in a nocturnal raid in one neighborhood.Ali Mohammed Rah said police and soldiers burst into his home and dragged his two teenage sons, age 14 and 16, from their beds. “They forced their entry, trained their guns at us while ordering us not to raise any alarm,” Rah said. “My heart-patient wife pleaded with them to let our boys go but they whisked them away. My wife collapsed and is now in hospital,” he said.A young woman, Ulfat, still recovering from her first childbirth, said her husband was arrested at their home around 2 am. “Who will provide our family with food and medicine? Where should I go with my baby?” she said with her newborn daughter in her lap.Raj Begum said her 24-year-old son was taken away barefoot and in shorts. “Soldiers hit me with a wooden plank as I tried to resist my son’s arrest,” she said. Her husband, Abdul Aziz, opened a bag containing shoes and clothes for their son. “Can they at least take these clothes?” he said.Kansal declined questions about specific cases of arrest and detention.In the Soura area of Srinagar, residents have barricaded the neighbourhood by digging trenches, laying barbed wire, and erecting steel poles and corrugated tin sheets to stop raids by police and soldiers. The residents, carrying axes and sticks, take turns on night patrol . They have also distributed stones at street corners for residents to use to defend against raids. The neighbourhood has seen some of the biggest protests and clashes in the last two weeks.Ali Mohammed, 52, said troops had made two unsuccessful attempts to raid the neighbourhood. “They’ll definitely try to come again, but we’re ready,” he said.
