‘Disgraceful misuse of power’: Modi govt using CBI, ED to character assassinate P Chidambaram, alleges Rahul

Rahul Gandhi attacks Modi govt over case against P Chidambaram | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi comes out in support of P Chidambaram in INX Media case Rahul claims Modi govt misusing CBI, ED to character assassinate Chidambaram Delhi HC yesterday dismissed Chidambaram's anticipatory bail pleas in INX Media case

New Delhi: With senior Congress leader and former finance minister P Chidambaram facing arrest in the INX Media scam, Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday slammed the Modi government for misusing central investigating agencies. In a tweet, the former Congress president said the central government was using central agencies as well as a section of the media to corner Chidambaram.

“Modi's Govt is using the ED, CBI & sections of a spineless media to character assassinate Mr Chidambaram. I strongly condemn this disgraceful misuse of power,” Rahul wrote on Twitter.

The remarks from Rahul Gandhi came as the former Union minister, who had both served in finance and home ministries, moved the Supreme Court for an urgent hearing after the Delhi High Court yesterday rejected his anticipatory bail pleas seeking relief from arrest in the case by the Central Bureau of Investigation as well as the Enforcement Directorate.

In his special leave petition, Chidambaram called as “completely baseless” the high court's observation that he was the "kingpin" in the INX Media or 9X Media case. The Congress leader said the FIR was "politically motivated and an act of vendetta".

In his petition submitted before the Supreme Court challenging the Delhi HC order, Chidambaram said: "The Judge's observation that the petitioner is the kingpin i.e. the key conspirator in this case is completely baseless and supported by no material whatsoever. The judge has ignored the crucial fact that the petitioner simply approved the unanimous recommendation of the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) which was chaired by Secretary, Economic Affairs and consisted of five other Secretaries to the Government of India."

He further countered the judge’s observations that denial of bail was justified considering the magnitude of the case, as manifestly "illegal and unjust".

"Both investment proposals (an original investment and the downstream investment) were examined and processed in the normal course and placed before the FIPB. It was FIPB which recommended grant of approval and the Petitioner simply approved the recommendation. None of the FIPB members have been attempted to be arrested," he said.

The former minister further asserted that his antecedents are "impeccable" and that he has never faced any accusation.

"There is no possibility of his fleeing from justice. Further, it is the case of the petitioner that despite having cooperated fully with the investigation the object of seeking his arrest is only to humiliate him and injure his reputation," the plea submitted.

Meanwhile, Congress leader and Chidambaram's counsel Abhishek Manu Singhvi denied that his client was absconding. "The hunger for sensationalisation in this case is deadly and could lead to character assassination of a towering political figure. How can somebody be an absconder who was with me till in legal conference with me till 6.30PM yesterday? (sic)," Singhvi tweeted.

The hunger for sensationalisation in this case is deadly and could lead to character assassination of a towering political figure. How can somebody be an absconder who was with me till in legal conference with me till 6.30PM yesterday?
