UK court: ‘Sleepwalking’ man not guilty of sexually assaulting his friend's girlfriend

Kelly is suffering from parasomnia, claimed his lawyer | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Kelly was accused of sexual assault by his friend's girlfriend He was sleepwalking at the time and had no idea of his actions: Kelly's lawyer Will wait for experts before exploring scope of punishment: Judge

New Delhi: A jury in northeast England acquitted a 21-year-old man accused of sexually assaulting his friend's girlfriend based on the argument that he was sleepwalking at the time of the incident and cannot be held responsible for his actions. A woman had accused Dale Kelly of committing the offence at a home in North Yorkshire in April of 2017.

In her complaint, the woman had stated that she went to a nightclub with her boyfriend and his friend Dale one night in April of 2017. The three returned to their home on the morning of April 17 of last year. Kelly, who fell asleep in the cab on the way back home, went to sleep as soon as the three reached home. While the woman and her boyfriend took one of the rooms, Dale occupied a separate room.

The woman alleged that she woke up to the sight of Kelly lying in the same bed as her and her boyfriend. She then alerted the local police and a case of sexual assault was registered against him. Dale was soon arrested and sent for a medical examination which revealed that he was suffering from a sleep disorder more commonly known as parasomnia, said a report. A jury at a York Court cleared Kelly of the charges made against him and said that he was not responsible for sexually assaulting the complainant while sleepwalking.

Arguing on behalf of Kelly, Eleanor Fry said that her client was dreaming at the time he climbed onto the bed and was thinking about a woman he was dating at the time. During the course of the trial, Fry told the jury and the court how her client had been suffering from parasomnia since childhood.

As a result, the jury found Kelly to be not guilty by reason of insanity. Such a verdict is usually returned when a court finds that a pre-existing condition has rendered the defendant helpless and unlikely to take responsibility for their actions. In this case, the condition was parasomnia. Usually, such a verdict is followed by a court order directing the defendant to seek medical treatment for the said condition.

While delivering the verdict, judge Simon Hickey said that the case was not an easy one. He added that the doctors told him how Kelly's mental disorder could be treated. Hickey said that he would like to hold on to his sentencing options before hearing from experts about improvement in Kelly's condition.
