After MNS worker commits suicide, Raj Thackeray urges supporters not to gather at ED office tomorrow

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena president Raj Thackeray | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The ED has summoned Raj Thackeray on Thursday for an investigation into the IL&FS scam A MNS activist set himself ablaze in the wake of the ED summons to Raj Thackeray The MNS withdrew the bandh it had announced in Thane district on August 22

Mumbai: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) president Raj Thackeray on Wednesday urged his supporters not to assemble outside the Enforcement Directorate (ED) office on Thursday. The ED has summoned Thackeray on Thursday for an investigation into the IL&FS scam.

Thackeray has also made an appeal to his party workers not to take any drastic step following the suicide of a young party activist.

The activist, identified as Pravin Chougule, had set himself ablaze in the wake of the ED summons to Thackeray. Chougule suffered over 70 per cent burns and succumbed to his injuries in Kalwe town this morning.

"Chougule mentioned to us how he apprehended Thackeray could be jailed in the matter, but we counselled him that the senior leadership would handle the issue. However, early today, he suddenly set himself on fire and was declared dead on admission to the hospital," one of his friends told media.

The Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief had on Tuesday stated that he would "honour" the ED summons. The MNS also withdrew the bandh it had announced in Thane district on August 22.

"Right since the time of inception of MNS, there have been innumerable cases against you all and me. Each time we all have honoured the notices sent by investigating agencies and the court of law. This time too we all must honour the summons sent by ED," Thackeray tweeted.

"I earnestly request that peace and harmony be maintained on 22nd of August...no harm or damage should come upon any public property and the common man should not suffer in any way. No party worker should come or assemble near the ED office," the MNS chief said.

"What I have to say, I will say at the appropriate time," he added.

In the meantime, Raj Thackeray’s estranged cousin and Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray extended support to the MNS chief.

Speaking to reporters, Uddhav Thackeray said: "I don't think there will be any outcome from his (Raj's) investigation by the ED tomorrow.”

The ED is investigating alleged irregularities related to equity investment and loans worth more than Rs 450 crore by Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services (IL&FS) in Kohinoor CTNL Infrastructure Company. Kohinoor CTNL is constructing Kohinoor Square tower in Mumbai's Dadar area.

The ED had also summoned Unmesh Joshi, the son of former Maharashtra chief minister and senior Shiv Sena leader Manohar Joshi, in the case. Unmesh Joshi’s statement was recorded under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act on Monday.
