West Bengal: Woman asks for refund, gang-raped by 4 men including panchayat member

Woman gang-raped by 4 men including panchayat member. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman gang-raped by four men including panchayat member Police say they is probing the matter

Kolkata: Asking for her money proved costly for a woman when she was allegedly raped by four men including a panchayat member in Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal.

The victim had reportedly asked for the refund of the 'bribe' which she paid to the accused in return for getting a house under some government scheme.

According to a report in IANS, the police complaint was filed on Monday, but the incident took place last week.

The accused have not been arrested so far. A senior police officer said that they are probing the matter and arrest will be made soon.

The report suggested that the accused allegedly took bribe from the victim promising her home under a government scheme.

As the victim realised that she may not get the promised house, the woman asked for refund of the 'cut money'.

The victim was gang-raped by the accused after she was asked to meet panchayat member at a particular place.

Minor gets pregnant, accused include panchayat member

In a case reported from Karnataka in July, a minor girl was found pregnant after allegedly being raped repeatedly by five men in Vittal village of Dakshina Kannada district. Reportedly, the victim was at her home completing her secondary school when she was found to be six-month pregnant. A gang of five men used to rape the minor which also included panchayat personnel. The victim was repeatedly raped by the gang and she was now found six months pregnant.

The gang members had threatened the girl not to tell the matter to anyone. However, when she was found pregnant by her parents they immediately reached the police to report the incident. The accused have been booked under Sections 376, 506 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, Section 3(1), W(1), (11) of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. The case was reported at the Vittal police station.
