Opposition blames govt for Kashmir’s miseries

Sardar Awais Ahmed Khan Leghari PHOTO: na.gov.pk

LAHORE: Opposition lawmakers claimed the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf-led (PTI) government failed to take prompt and appropriate measures at the time when Kashmir’s constitutional status was changed by India after revoking articles 370 and 35A.



The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz’s (PML-N) legislators also informed the government about Indian’s expected character assassination campaign against Pakistan on a global scale in the coming months. It urged the rulers to prepare to provide a befitting response.



The opposition lawmakers were of the view that a mistaken perception on Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Pakistan’s deteriorating economic conditions allowed India to take this step in which it revoked Kashmir’s status. They said Modi’s stance during his election campaign should have been taken seriously.



Lawmakers from both treasury and opposition benches seemed divided over the Kashmir issue. Both sides were busy defending their respective leaderships rather than speaking about Indian aggression and the miseries Kashmiris were facing.



PML-N lawmakers claimed that the PTI government compromised on the Kashmir conflict and that was the reason India revoked Kashmir’s constitutional status. On the other hand, PTI members claimed that PML-N leadership maintained a deep nexus with Modi and it (PML-N) had failed in raising the Kashmir issue on the international front.



However, both benches passed a unanimous resolution, strongly condemning the Indian act of revoking article 370 and 35A. The house demanded that the United States send members of human rights groups to Kashmir to play their role in restraining India from violence.



The house also demanded that permanent members of the UN Security Council play their role in the lifting of curfew in Kashmir. They also urged that the amendment, under which the constitutional status of Kashmir was changed, be withdrawn.



As Punjab Law Minister Raja Basharat presented the resolution, the opposition objected to it, claiming they were not taken into confidence and the resolution needed amendments. However, a final draft was prepared with the consultation of the opposition and then it was passed unanimously.



PML-N’s Sardar Awais Ahmed Khan Leghari intimated the government about the character assassination campaign against Pakistan on the world level by India. He said the Kashmir movement would be strengthened further after India’s cowardly act.



He also slammed US President Donald Trump, suggesting mediation rather than phone calls and press briefings. “Donald Trump is playing a ‘trap’ card which is looking like a ‘trump’,” he maintained.



Proceedings turned heated when Punjab Minister for Colonies Fayyazul Hassan Chohan lashed out at PML-N’s top leadership over Modi’s visit to Pakistan to attend a marriage.



Punjab Law Minister Raja Basharat pacified both sides and requested that lawmakers speak on the Kashmir issue rather than target each other. However, the spiralled went out of control when PML-N’s Tariq Masih Gill, in his speech’s opening remarks, said it was the PTI government which sold Kashmir to India.



The treasury members slammed the opposition members, due to which Gill withdrew his statement. However, Panel Chairman Mian Shafi told him to tender an apology after which Gill apologised.



Later, a PTI lawmaker pointed to the lack of quorum. After the opposition failed to meet the required number of legislators, the house was prorogued for an indefinite period.



Published in The Express Tribune, August 22nd, 2019.
