Russians appeal for release of three sisters who killed father after tolerating years of abuse

Angelina Khachaturyan in a court room in Moscow on June 26, 2019 | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Maria, Angelina and Krestina Khachaturyan were arrested from their father's home in July of last year Prosecution claimed that the killing was an act of pre-meditated murder If found guilty, the sisters face up to 20 years in prison First-time offenders who beat a family members in Russia face only a fine or two weeks in custody The mother Aurelia Dunduk said that Mikhail threw her from his apartment in 2015

New Delhi: Following a high-profile trial which garnered the attention of the polity, a court in Russia acquitted three sisters who allegedly killed their father last year. An investigation into the death of 57-year-old Mikhail Khachaturyan revealed that he subjected his daughters to mental torture and sexual assault almost every single day for three years before they gathered the courage to hit back at their abuser.

At the time police found him, Khachaturyan's body had over 30 knife wounds along with fatal injuries on his neck and chest. While narrating what happened on the night of July 27, 2018, the girls said that they had no other option than to kill him if they wanted to live without having to face regular abuse. Responding to a question about what prompted their decision, the girls said that their father called them in his room one by one and scolded them before spraying pepper gas in their faces. He then went to sleep which is when the sisters took the help of a knife, hammer and pepper spray to relieve themselves of their misery.

Counsels arguing on behalf of the girls said that his clients were victims of mental and physical torture at the hands of the accused every single day of three years. The girl's mother, who lives away from home told police officials that the father thrashed her mercilessly for several years before she decided to live separately from him. In her statement to investigators, the mother alleged that she approached local law enforcements several times over allegations against Khachaturyan but no action was taken against him. The mother, Aurelia Dunduk claimed that Mikhail kept her daughters as prisoners and even sexually assaulted them.

An extensive investigation into the matter revealed how the 57-year-old subjected his daughters, to physical and mental harassment. In fact, over 300,000 Russians signed a petition calling for the release of Maria, Angelina and Krestina aged 17, 18 and 19 at the time of their father 's killing last year. The court was also told that it was the girls who called the police and informed them about the death of their father. They were arrested from the scene of the crime and are still behind bars.

The case has captured the attention of Russian masses who are appealing for the release of the three sisters who they claim, took the drastic step in self-defence. One of the major reasons the case has made national headlines in Russia is the suppression of 'domestic abuse' cases in the country which are usually treated as "domestic matters" by police.


