Punjab: Tuition teacher's husband booked for sexually assaulting minor for three years

Contrary to the claims made by the minor and her family, the accused's family has alleged that it is a fake case (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place in Nangal area of Punjab A minor was allegedly sexually assaulted by her tuition teacher's husband A complaint has been registered against the accused and further investigation is underway

Chandigarh: An eight-year-old girl was allegedly sexually assaulted by the husband of her tuition teacher. The incident came to light from Punjab's Nangal on Monday. The parents of the minor girl have alleged that the accused had been sexually assaulting her for the last three years.

The accused has been identified as Naresh and a police complaint has been registered against him. According to the minor's mother, she learned about the incident on Monday. When the minor returned from her tuition, she said that she did not want to continue with the class.

While narrating her ordeal to her mother, the minor said that the 53-year-old accused used to intoxicate her before sexually assaulting her. She further alleged that it had been going on for the last three years.

The minor also said that the accused said that he would kill her if she shared the incident with anyone. When the eight-year-old girl's parents learned about it, they informed the police and lodged a complaint. Contrary to the claims made by the minor and her family, the accused's family has alleged that it is a fake case. The accused's family has also said that the minor's family is doing it over a past rivalry.

Tuition teacher's father rapes minor in the national capital

In March this year, a three-year-old girl was allegedly raped by the father of her tuition teacher. The incident came to light from Panjabi Bagh area of the national capital.

After the incident came to light, an FIR was registered against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Minor girls accuse dance teacher of touching inappropriately and showing obscene videos in Pune

A similar incident came to light from Maharashtra's Pune in the month of January. The students of a dance class in Hadapsar, Pune said that their teacher had been touching them inappropriately during practice. The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act after the allegations surfaced.

The complaint was lodged after one of the accused's students shared the incident with her mother. The 13-year-old girl's mother then approached an NGO and lodged a complaint with the police. Similar claims were made by another student of the dance class as well. According to the complaint, the accused used to show obscene videos to the girl students and used to touch them inappropriately. He had allegedly warned the students of telling anyone about the incident.
