After her tweet on Article 370 creates stir, Shehla Rashid says ‘will give evidence when Army holds probe'

Jawaharlal Nehru University's PhD scholar Shehla Rashid | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Shehla Rashid had on Sunday alleged that Army personnel "interrogated (tortured)" four men in Shopian A lawyer has accused Shehla Rashid of "spreading fake news with the intention to malign the image of Indian Army" I will give the evidence when the Indian Army constitutes an inquiry, says Shehla Rashid

New Delhi: Under fire over her ‘fake’ tweets, Jawaharlal Nehru University's PhD scholar Shehla Rashid on Thursday vowed to give evidence to substantiate her claims.

“I will give the evidence when the Indian Army constitutes an inquiry, I will give the evidence then,” said Rashid on the sidelines of a protest at Jantar Mantar.

The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) has organised a protest at Jantar Mantar today to register its protest against the Centre's decision to scrap the provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution, which had given special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

The J&K Peoples Movement leader had on Sunday tweeted: "Armed forces are entering houses at night, picking up boys, ransacking houses, deliberately spilling rations on the floor, mixing oil with rice, etc".

Rashid alleged that she got the information from the people coming from Kashmir.

"In Shopian, 4 men were called into the Army camp and "interrogated" (tortured). A mic was kept close to them so that the entire area could hear them scream, and be terrorized. This created an environment of fear in the entire area," Rashid had tweeted.

The Army had rejected Rashid's allegation, saying: "Allegations levelled by Shehla Rashid are baseless and rejected. Such unverified and fake news is spread by inimical elements and organisations to incite unsuspecting population".

Congress leader in Jammu and Kashmir, Salman Nizami, had also rejected her allegations, tweeting that "no such incident of Army torturing youth in open" took place.

"Some stone pelters & separatists wre arrested. Thz is common in Kashmir whenevr thre is violence like situation. I hve confirmed from locals & journalists no such incident of Army torturing youth in open to terrorise the people. Kindly don't spread fake news for political gains!" tweeted Nizami.

Earlier this week, Supreme Court advocate Alakh Alok Srivastava had written a letter to Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik to file an FIR against Jammu and Kashmir-based politician Shehla Rashid for "deliberately" spreading fake news.

In his letter, the advocate mentioned that the allegations by the "accused are absolutely false, baseless and concocted, which is evident from the fact that she has not produced any voice recording of the alleged torture or name, date, time or any other specific information about the aforesaid alleged incident".

Describing Rashid's act as "quite axiomatic", Srivastava said the "accused is deliberately and intentionally spreading the aforesaid FAKE NEWS with the intention to incite violence, to malign the image of the Army nationally as well as internationally and to create unrest in the Union Territory of J&K and other parts of the country."

"...(The act) is to promote disharmony, enmity, hatred and ill-will between different groups and also to provoke breach of peace. The aforesaid tweet of the accused is being shared by many Twitter users on international platforms, causing irreparable damage to India's reputation," he said.
