Jalandhar: 3 held for acid attack, victim's cousin main accused

JALANDHAR: Jalandhar Commissionerate police have arrested three accused involved in acid attack on a young woman on February 30. Main accused is a cousin of the victim and he hatched the conspiracy to teach her lesson after she spurned his advances.Commissioner of Police Gurpreet Singh Bhullar said that the main accused Gurdeep Singh (28), resident of village Ditta in district Una and sepoy in 17th Sikh Regiment of village Ditta, first conspired with his relative Jaswinder Singh ,30, of village Punjabar, Una district of Himachal Pradesh, and then they hired Ludhiana based Mani,22, and Preet of Ludhiana for throwing acid on the victim.While on the day of attack the victim Maninder Kaur had told that some powder was thrown on her, on Saturday police clarified that acidic toilet cleaner was used in the attack.Bhullar said that after Gurdeep was infuriated he conspired with Jaswinder and latter spoke to Mani, as both work in a dying factory in Ludhiana. A deal was struck with Mani and Preet in Rs 25,000 and Gurdeep even paid Rs 5,000 as advance money and he paid Rs 20,000 after the acid was thrown on the victim.“Before the incident on January 30, they had also conducted recce on January 26,27 and 28 too but the victim did not come on these occasions. On January 29, four of the accused again arrived on two bikes Pulsar (HP72-B-8405) and Splendor (PB10-DR-9975) and followed the victim to PAP Chowk to Transport Nagar but failed to do anything. On January 30 they again reached Transport Nagar and chased her on bikes. When the victim got out of auto at PAP Chowk, Preet threw the toilet cleaning acid on the victim, while Mani was driving the bike,” Commissioner said.The city police chief added that after committing the crime, four of them went back to Ludhiana and Gurdeep paid remaining Rs 20,000 to Mani and Preet before fleeing to Una. “Gurdeep and Jaswinder have been arrested from Una and Mani from Ludhiana while police teams are in Ludhiana to arrest remaining accused Preet who would reveal them about the source of toilet cleaning acid,” he said.He said that a case under sections 326-A, 120-B and 34 IPC has already been registered in Cantonment police station and accused would be taken on police remand for further interrogation.Victim discharged, escapes grave damageMeanwhile victim Maninder Kaur was discharged from Johl Hospital where she has been working as laboratory technician. “Her face has started healing and skin is getting clean. Initially we feared that her right eye could have been damaged much and she could lose eye sight. However some damage is there but her eye-sight is there and it would clear only after a few weeks that if there would be any damage to the eye sight”.
