Woman set ablaze after refusing to marry local goon in UP's Sitapur

The accused had allegedly been pestering the woman to marry him. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The incident took place in Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh The woman has suffered 60 per cent burns in the incident and is undergoing treatment

Sitapur: A local goon set a woman ablaze in Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh, on Wednesday after she refused to marry him. The woman was admitted to the hospital with 60 per cent burns. The police have registered a complaint against the accused and further investigation is underway.

After the police were informed, they reached the spot and launched an investigation. The accused had allegedly been pestering the woman to marry him.

LR Kumar, Superintendent of Police (SP) said, "Yesterday, we received information that a woman was set ablaze. She was admitted to a hospital. Medical examination revealed that she has sustained 60 per cent burn injuries." After preliminary treatment was administered to her, the woman was shifted to a speciality hospital for further treatment.

Woman and mother shot dead in Uttar Pradesh for rejecting marriage proposal

In April this year, a woman was shot dead along with her mother for rejecting a marriage proposal. The incident came to light from Mainpuri in Uttar Pradesh. The accused was identified as Shaitan Singh. An investigation revealed that Singh had used a 315 bore country-made pistol to kill the deceased.

Singh shot at the women when they were working on their farm. A cook by profession, Singh had proposed marriage to the deceased but she rejected it due to his weak financial background. After he was rejected, the accused decided to kill the woman and her mother. After shooting at the two women, the accused fled the scene. The woman's mother died on the spot while she succumbed to her injuries at the Saifai government hospital.

Hyderabad man stalks woman and proposes marriage, drives her to suicide

A similar incident came to light from Hyderabad in April where a woman committed suicide after being constantly harassed by her stalker. The accused, Rakesh Reddy and the deceased hailed from the same village.

Reddy had been proposing marriage to the woman for the past two years and the woman had denied all his advances. He allegedly used to call her to harass her. On the day of the incident, Reddy met the woman in a park. The woman had also called her parents on the same day but she did not mention the accused.

A few hours later, Shetty called the woman's father and told him that she had consumed poison. After calling the woman's father and admitting her to the hospital, the accused escaped. The police filed a complaint against him.
