When Chidambaram was home minister and Narendra Modi & Amit Shah faced probes

Delhi-based journalist with more than 20 years of experience in reporting for print, TV & digital media. Writes mostly on corridors of power.

The Congress is livid over its senior leader and former Union home minister P Chidambaram being sought by federal investigative agencies Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Enforcement Directorate (ED) and finally getting arrested by the former after a high drama on Wednesday.

However, the party may be glossing over similar acts of omission and commission in relation to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Union home minister Amit Shah and BJP’s ideological parent RSS during UPA rule and Chidambaram’s questionable role in them.

Sample the objections raised by top Congress leaders over the developments which have taken place with regard to Chidambaram so far this week.

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi called action against Chidambaram as “disgraceful misuse of power.

He said: “Modi’s Govt is using the ED, CBI & sections of a spineless media to character assassinate Mr Chidambaram. I strongly condemn this disgraceful misuse of power.”

Modi’s Govt is using the ED, CBI & sections of a spineless media to character assassinate Mr Chidambaram. I strongly condemn this disgraceful misuse of power. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) August 21, 2019

His sister and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra hit the Modi government harder calling it cowards.

She said, “An extremely qualified and respected member of the Rajya Sabha, @PChidambaram_IN ji has served our nation with loyalty for decades including as Finance Minister & Home Minister. He unhesitatingly speaks truth to power and exposes the failures of this government, but the truth is inconvenient to cowards so he is being shamefully hunted down. We stand by him and will continue to fight for the truth no matter what the consequences are.”

An extremely qualified and respected member of the Rajya Sabha, @PChidambaram_IN ji has served our nation with loyalty for decades including as Finance Minister & Home Minister. He unhesitatingly speaks truth to power and exposes the failures of this government,

1/2 — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) August 21, 2019

but the truth is inconvenient to cowards so he is being shamefully hunted down. We stand by him and will continue to fight for the truth no matter what the consequences are.

2/2 — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) August 21, 2019

Congress’s communications in charge Randeep Singh Sujewala labelled the government’s action as “brazen personal and political vendetta”.

“Over the last two days, India witnessed the broad daylight murder of democracy and the rule of law by a Government hell-bent upon using CBI and ED as personal revenge-seeking departments for the party in power. The vindictive, selective and malicious manner in which former Finance Minister & Home Minister, Shri P Chidambaram has been persecuted and prosecuted is nothing short of a brazen personal and political vendetta,” he said.

However, the BJP said there was no political vendetta behind the action against Chidambaram. “Law takes its own course. Chidambaram went to the court but did not get relief. The Congress’s act of blaming the central government is not proper as it is working without any vendetta,” BJP vice-president Shivraj Singh Chouhan told media persons.

The Congress is clearly feeling the pinch because the shoe is on the other foot.

Now cut to December 2008 when Chidambaram was shifted from finance to home ministry. He remained India’s home minister till July 2012.

During this period, those who had a brush with the law were Prime Minister Narendra Modi who was the then Gujarat chief minister, Union home minister and BJP president Amit Shah who was the then Gujarat home minister, the ruling BJP’s ideological compass RSS and other individuals such as Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, Lt Col Prasad Shrikant Purohit and Swami Aseemanand.

Narendra Modi

Eight years after the Gujarat riots, Modi as the state CM was interrogated in capital Gandhinagar for nine hours by a special investigation team (SIT) monitored by the Supreme Court.

The SIT was constituted to look into the accusations levelled by Zakia Jafri against Modi of deliberately letting the rioters run amok. He husband and former Congress MP Ahesan Jafri was killed by a mob in his Gulbarg Society in Ahmedabad.

On one occasion, Modi was grilled in two sittings on March 27, 2010 – first for five hours during the day time and second for five hours from 9 pm.

Emerging from the interrogation, Modi said law is supreme under the Indian constitution and as a common man, he was bound by it and law. “No one can be above the law,” he added.

Later the same year, SIT found no evidence against Modi and cleared him of the charge that he failed to discharge his constitutional duty to intervene swiftly and stop the communal riots.

Amit Shah

In January 2010 – more than four years after the alleged Sohrabuddin Sheikh fake encounter case – the Supreme Court ordered the CBI to probe it. The CBI served notices to Amit Shah on July 22, 2010 to appear before it.

Amit Shah resigned as Gujarat home minister on July 24, 2010 and the next day he appeared in the Gujarat BJP office and spoke with the mediapersons to defend himself. Claiming innocence, he said that charges against him were “fabricated, politically motivated and were on the instruction of Congress government (at the Centre)”.

But the Congress countered Amit Shah’s charges. Party spokesperson Abhishek Manu Singhvi said, “Do you think CBI is full of a bunch of fools who will risk their entire career by making false allegations, non-existing allegations which are going to be examined by the Supreme Court… Charge sheet is not made overnight. Charge sheet is a collection of evidence.”

Subsequently, Amit Shah proceeded towards CBI’s Gandhinagar office and surrendered himself. He went to jail and was released on bail in October 2010. However, while granting bail to him, the Gujarat High Court restrained him from entering the state.

Amit Shah remained in exile for two years till the Supreme Court allowed him to enter his state by an order on September 27, 2012. However, the trial was shifted to Mumbai.

In December 2014, a special CBI court discharged Amit Shah in the Sohrabuddin Sheikh alleged fake encounter case. On December 21, 2018, a special CBI court acquitted all the 22 accused in the case due to insufficient evidence.

RSS

Chidambaram and another senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh have been the strongest critics of the RSS and its ideology about nationalism. Singh had gone to the extent of demanding ban on RSS while Chidambaram called its ideology “dangerous”.

Both the leaders frequently started using the term “saffron terror” and “Hindutva terror” in the aftermath of terrorist incidents of 2007 Samjhauta Express and 2008 Malegaon blasts.

This was unacceptable to the RSS as well as the BJP and they protested the linking of the majority community with terror.

In retaliation to Digvijaya Singh’s allegations, RSS’s political wing BJP fielded Malegaon blasts accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur against him from Bhopal in the 2019 Lok Sabha election. Pragya emerged victorious while handing over a moral victory to the RSS.

Chidambaram’s arrest may have given another relief to RSS.

Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, Lt Col Prasad Shrikant Purohit and Swami Aseemanand

While Sadhvi Pragya was made an accused in the 2008 Malegaon blasts, Lt Col Purohit and Swami Aseemanand were accused of playing a role in 2007 Samjhauta Express train blasts.

All three were tried for several years when Chidambaram was the home minister. The three reportedly also suffered acute mental and physical torture at the hands of the investigative agencies.

As matters stand today, Sadhvi Pragya got bail in February 2017 because National Investigation Agency (NIA) could not get sufficient proof against her. She defeated Digvijaya Singh in the last general elections and is an MP now.

Lt Col Purohit was also absolved of all charges and has been recommissioned in the Army. Swami Aseemanand was acquitted by NIA earlier this year.

In a coincidence, more than 10 years after Chidambaram took over as the home minister, the tables have turned.

Narendra Modi is the second-term PM and Amit Shah is Union home minister as well as president of India’s ruling party BJP. Moreover, while NIA has given clean chits to Sadhvi Pragya, Lt Col Purohit and Swami Aseemanand, Chidambaram has been arrested by the CBI after the Delhi High Court said he was the key conspirator and kingpin of alleged money laundering in INX Media case.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
