USA: Michigan priest charged for committing 'sexually motivated crime' on minor boy

After the allegations surfaced in 2013, Stanley was sent on leave and was barred from public ministry (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A Catholic priest in Michigan allegedly wrapped a teenage boy in plastic and locked him inside the closet of the church janitor The incident took place in 2013 when the accused had been asked to counsel the teenager

Michigan: In the year 2013, a teenaged boy was wrapped in plastic and was locked inside a church janitor's closet by a Catholic priest. The police have called it a "sexually motivated crime". Identified as Brian Stanley, if the priest is convicted, he will be imprisoned for around 15 years.

The family of the teenager had asked the priest to counsel him when he decided to tape his mouth and eyes. Stanley left the boy in the janitor's room and came back only after an hour and freed him. The incident took place in 2013 at St Margaret's Church in Otsego.

The prosecutor has claimed that as per the records of the Diocese of Kalamazoo, the accused "had been engaging in this type of conduct with binding materials for decades". While the charges had been filed at the time of the incident, the police allegedly chose to stay mum and did not take any stringent action against Stanley, said the diocese. The records of the diocese were made public in 2018.

After the allegations surfaced in 2013, Stanley was sent on leave and was barred from public ministry. Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel said, "This is about taking on large-scale institutions that turn a blind eye to victims and making certain we hold them accountable - that includes unapologetically pursuing any and all individuals their power to victimize our residents."

The diocese said it will stay true to their commitment to protecting the interests of children and "vulnerable adults". "We continue to cooperate with the Office of the Michigan Attorney General in its ongoing investigation", the diocese added.

Priest arrested from Kochi after six boys flee from children's home, complain of sexual abuse

This is not the first instance where criminal charges have been levelled against a priest. In a similar incident from India, six boys fled from a children's home in Kochi after they were allegedly molested by a priest. In the month of July this year, Father George Alias Jerry Thareparambil was arrested after the allegations of molestation were made by the six boys.

After they were informed about the six boys, the police began an investigation and started searching the area. The boys were found on a road located near the children's home. During interrogation, the boys were hesitant on sharing the problem but they eventually narrated their ordeal to the police. The police later added that the priest had confessed to committing the crime.
