'Mentally unstable' woman beaten to death in Bihar over suspicion of child-lifting

Locals alleged that they had seen the woman in the nearby areas a few days ago (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A mentally unstable was beaten to death in Vaishali, Bihar over suspicion of child-lifting While a case has been registered, no arrest has been made yet

Patna: An angry mob thrashed a woman to death in Vaishali district of Bihar over suspicion of her being a child-lifter. It is being alleged that the woman is mentally unstable. The mob allegedly tied the woman to a pole in Sehdai Buzurg block of Vaishali and mercilessly thrashed her until she died, the police said on Friday.

The woman was beaten up with sticks by locals after being tied to a pole. While angry locals beat up the woman, others played mute spectators as they watched the woman being thrashed.

The police are suspecting that the woman lost her mental balance after her child went missing or after it died. The woman was caught by the locals when she entered one of the houses in the district while looking for her own child.

Locals alleged that they had seen the woman in the nearby areas a few days ago. At that time, the woman was seen attending to a pile of clothes as if it were a child. According to a report, the woman does not have any recollection of how she reached Vaishali.

On the night of the incident, the woman entered one of the houses. She was telling the people residing in the house that her child had gone missing. The people living in the house allegedly presumed her to be a child-lifter and started thrashing her. Within minutes, the family's neighbours joined and the woman was tied to a pole and beaten.

After the woman died, the locals threw her body away from the spot. The police reached the area and recovered the body. The body has been sent for a post-mortem and efforts are being made to arrest the accused.

This is not the first instance where people have taken the law into their hands and have lynched an innocent due to suspicion. Similar incidents have surfaced where people have thrashed women and men ruthlessly as they suspected them of being child-lifters or thieves. While these incidents are on a rise, no concrete step has been taken by the government to help these people.

Woman thrashed by mob in MP over suspicion of child-lifting

In July this year, another incident of mob violence came to light from Madhya Pradesh's Sagar when a woman was beaten over suspicion of being a child-lifter. It was later alleged that the woman was mentally disturbed. The incident took place in the Cantonment area of Sagar.

On being interrogated, the woman said that she was from Ratlam and that she did not know how she had reached Sagar. The police registered a case of assault in relation to the incident but none of the accused was arrested.
