Mumbai: Broken bones render 'raped' dog immobile

The dog allegedly raped last Wednesday in Kharghar (Navi Mumbai) has a name now — Lily — but the possibility of a pain-free life is still some distance off. Doctors say she is unable to stand due to multiple fractures from the alleged sexual assault and is still in trauma.



Lily's predicament came to light via a video circulated on social media on August 14. It showed a man forcing his genitals into her jaws. Vijay Rangare, an operations manager in Wipro who lives in Kamothe, traced those who shot the video and tracked down the dog to Kharghar.



He also nabbed the alleged rapist, 22-year-old Munna Kumar, who works at a dhaba, and dragged him to the police. Then he spent his day off (Wednesday) — which happened to be his birthday — coercing the Kharghar police to file an FIR under IPC Section 377 and not just dismiss it as animal cruelty that carries a fine of mere Rs 50. Under Section 377, the rape of an animal by a human is an unbailable crime and carries prison term of up to 10 years. He escalated the matter up to the Navi Mumbai's police commissioner, deputy police commissioner of Zone-II (Panvel) and Kharghar police station's senior police inspector to ensure justice for the little dog. The Kharghar police sent Lily to undergo medical tests to ascertain whether she has been sexually violated, and Rangare, who has not attended office since last Friday, has taken it upon himself to see to her well-being.



"The dog received multiple fractures and still she is in trauma. She is not able to stand. The fractures will take some days to repair and she should be fine after that. We have sent her DNA swabs to Kalina University for testing," said a doctor from Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals, which inspected her.



"I have kept Lily at a friend's shelter in Navi Mumbai," said Rangare. "She was admitted to the animal hospital at the FIR registered the dog was admitted to the hospital run by the Bombay Society for Prevention of Cruelty towards Animals (BSPCA) in Parel after the FIR was lodged, but I took her into my care. Dr Amit Patil from Navi Mumbai is treating her currently."



On Friday, after Rangare marched Munna Kumar to the Kharghar police, they released him after a warning, even though he confessed to the crime. He roped in an animal rights organisation, who helped him compel the police to register the case. "On Tuesday, I even took two witnesses — who had shot the video — to the police and they recorded their statements. Finally, on Wednesday, the Kharghar police arrested Munna," said Rangare.
