Purchase of 73K US-made assault rifles for Army OK’d

With the objective of modernising the infantry, the Defence Ministry has cleared a major deal for 73,000 assault rifles to be bought from Sig Sauer company of the US on a fast track basis.

The total cost of the modern assault rifles to be used by the Indian Army, especially troops guarding the Line of Actual Control (LAC) facing China and Line of Control (LoC) with Pakistan, is more than RS 700 crore. The nod for the crucial acquisition to equip the Army with this rifle was given by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman some days back.

The Sig Sauer rifle, largely used by the US Army besides several European countries, will be bought through fast track route, sources said here on Saturday. The US firm emerged as the lowest bidder after the Army issued a global request for proposal (RFP) last year.

The deal is expected to be finalised within a week with the condition that the US firm will have to deliver the consignment within a year from the date of signing the contract, they said.

The US firm emerged as the lowest bidder after the Army issued a global request for proposal(RFP) last year. The new rifle will replace the INSAS rifles currently used by the infantry soldiers. The Army was urging the government for the last some years to fast track the procurement of various weapons systems including infantry weapons considering the evolving security threats including along India’s borders with Pakistan and China.

Given this background, the Army in October 2017 started the process to acquire around seven lakh rifles, 44,000 light machine guns (LMGs) and nearly 44,600 carbines. Around 18 months ago, the Army had rejected an assault rifle built by the state-run Rifle Factory, Ishapore, after the guns failed the firing tests. The Army then began the process of procuring rifles from the global market.

The procurement of assault rifles has witnessed significant delays due to a variety of reasons including the Army’s failure to finalise the specifications for it. The Army needs around 7 lakh 7.62x51 mm assault guns to replace its INSAS rifles.
