Mumbai: Five including a juvenile rape mentally challenged woman, arrested

Juvenile accused has been sent to a children’s home in Dongri. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Police arrest four men and detain juvenile Police: Victim recognised all the accused Juvenile sent to a children’s home in Dongri

Mumbai: In yet another crime against women, a mentally challenged woman was allegedly gang-raped by four men including a juvenile in Mumbai. Police have arrested the four men and detained the juvenile.

The crime took place when one of the accused persuaded the victim to accompany him to a nearby hill and raped her. Later, the accused was joined by four other men, who also gang-raped the woman.

According to a report, the men left the victim on the hill after raping her. Senior Inspector Kishor Sawant that police have arrested all the accused in the case.

Later, the victim managed to reach her home and narrated her ordeal to her family who informed the police about the crime. According to police, the victim has identified her rapists, who live in her neighbourhood.

Inspector Kishor Sawant has said that the juvenile has been sent to a children’s home in Dongri. The juvenile accused is two months short of 18 years. The four other men have been remanded to police custody.

Assam: Mentally challenged woman gang-raped

In a similar case, a mentally challenged woman was allegedly gang-raped by five youths at the Kachua village in Nagaon district of central Assam on in March this year. The matter came to light when the woman returned home and narrated her ordeal before her family who decided to lodge an official police complaint in this regard.

An official familiar with the matter said that the woman went for a bicycle ride and did not return home until late. This prompted her family members to alert police officials and locals about her disappearance. Despite their efforts, the woman could not be traced on the intervening night of March 3. The woman returned home on Monday (March 4) morning and told her parents that she had been repeatedly gang-raped the previous night by five unidentified men.

Mentally challenged woman raped in Malwani

In another case reported from Mumbai on November 2018, a 20-year-old mentally challenged woman was raped by an unidentified man. She lived in a slum in Malwani area.

According to the police, the victim lived in the slums with her parents and was missing since November 15. Her parents searched frantically for her everywhere but they could not locate her. Finally, they lodged a complaint at the police station and during the investigation, police got information that someone had seen her in Malwani area.

Subsequently, cops located her and upon being inquired about what had happened to her in the time period that she had gone missing, she told police that she was raped. After this, she was sent to a hospital for medical examination.
