Dainik Jagran says Chidambaram has not set good example, his arrest not a revenge, says Dinamani

Monday, 19 August

Amar Ujala comments on India’s relationship with Bhutan. It says that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s recent trip there emphasises the strong relationship between the two countries: Bhutan takes India’s assistance in trade, education, space research, etc. while India can learn about life values and environment conservation from Bhutan. One major reason for the strong relationship between the two countries is China. India stood firmly against China when it was trying to build a road through Bhutan and showed Bhutan that it would not step back from protecting its interests.

Dainik Jagran reflects on discordant notes after the removal of Article 370. The paper says some people would raise a voice against the government’s step but they should not become a tool in the hands of those with their own political agenda. Article 370 had become a tool in the hands of separatists and the term `Kashmiriyat’ had started to be used as something different and special. Now one must think about what the move has done for the country: at a moment when morale of separatists and those leaders who support them is low, even Pakistan doesn’t know what to do. So, this is the right time for the whole nation to speak in one voice on Kashmir.

Tuesday, 20 August

Dainik Bhaskar argues that it is time for a socio-cultural revolution – “ab samajik-sanskritik kranti shuru karne ki zarurat hai“. It refers to the story from Bihar where a TB patient’s mother was going to sell her two daughters to pay for treatment. These stories should shake us, says Bhaskar. Instead, we are happy with the knowledge of an increase in dearness allowance, GDP growth rate and when will we become a $5 trillion dollar economy. According to government statistics, in 2016 a sexual assault complaint was lodged every 15 minutes. As a liberal democracy, a country like India cannot stop a father from drinking, or having multiple kids. It’s time, says Bhaskar for organisations like RSS to take the help of government and bring about a socio-cultural change.

Dainik Jagran says the Reserve Bank’s governor has made it clear that the economy is cooling off. The paper calls it “mandi ka daur“. The newspaper says that all indications are there of the economy entering a phase of recession. Government agencies should figure out how to boost manufacturing. Despite the `Make in India’ initiative, manufacturing contribution to the economy is just 15 per cent. There is also a need to give home and road construction projects as well as rural infra projects a boost.

Wednesday, 21August

Dainik Jagran looks at the problems for former Finance Minister P Chidambaram. It says that the Delhi High Court had made some adverse remarks while denying him bail. The court has said that the case of investment in INX Media is a clear example of turning black money into white. Most of these scams happen with the connivance of politicians and bureaucrats but the irony is that no politician gets punished – it mentions the 2G spectrum scam.

Thursday, 22 August

Amar Ujala says: “Shikanje me Chidambaram” (Chidambaram ensnared). The newspaper says that very few influential people ever get punished in corruption cases. In this case not just the truth, but also the case should reach its logical conclusion, it argues.

Dainik Bhaskar comments on how the country seems to be under the influence of ‘greatness’ over the last five years. “Mera Bharat Mahan” (our great nation) is at an all time high and we have lost a sense of reality. Such is our intoxication that when the defence minister talks about rethinking the no first-use nuclear weapons policy, we feel it would make Pakistan shiver with fear. Two days later, the Air Force chief said that for the last 44 years the country has been using only MiG 21 – “one doesn’t even use a car for so long” he said. This fighter plane is so accident prone and has killed so many that it is called a flying coffin.

Friday, August 23



Dainik Jagran and Dainik Bhaskar look at the arrest of P Chidambaram. Jagran says it would have been better if after his bail application was rejected by the Delhi High Court, he had surrendered to the CBI.

Dainik Bhaskar says it would have been better if Chidambaram had made an example of his behaviour. The way he behaved doesn’t send out a good message. It cites BJP leader L K Advani’s case. Advani had resigned from the Lok Sabha when he learnt that his name surfaced in CBI’s inquiry into the Jain Hawala case. He returned to public life only after his name was cleared. Congress could have accused BJP of political vendetta much more effectively if Chidambaram would have resigned and cooperated with the inquiry process.

Amar Ujala calls the persistent interference of Donald Trump on the Kashmir issue highly objectionable and unacceptable. Trump has been talking about mediating because he wants to please Pakistan which he needs as an ally in his attempts to withdraw troops from Afghanistan. This makes it clear that Trump cannot be an ally or friend to any one.

Tamil

Monday, 19 August

Dinamani comments on the PM’s trip to Bhutan. It says: “The prime focus of India-Bhutan relationship is hydropower. Bhutan has the capacity to generate nearly 30,000 MW electricity. It has only reached 1,614 MW till now. One-third of the country’s revenue comes from hydropower”. It adds: “In 2020, the world’s 15 big cities are going to be in South Asia. In this context, only if we understand that Bhutan can produce renewable energy, we shall understand the significance of the India-Bhutan relationship”.

Wednesday, 21 August

Dinamani considers the slowdown in the automobile sector. It says: “There is demand that the government help in reviving the declining motor vehicle manufacturing sector. A similar demand had come during decline in the aviation sector. It is funny to see people who argue against privatisation, the market economy and the state’s intervention demand government’s help and the tax payer’s money to help them get out of slowdown due to their own faults. But when the future of 10 lakh people is uncertain, the government cannot avoid intervening.”

Thursday, 22 August

Dinamani’s editorial is on the recent bifurcations of various districts in Tamil Nadu. It says the bifurcation was unavoidable. “It is meaningless to say that the administrative costs will increase due to this bifurcation. If we consider the increase in tax revenue, we realise that this will lead to the speedy development of small districts”.

Friday, 23 August

Dinamani’s editorial is on P Chidambaram’s arrest. It says: “We cannot accept the argument that this is the CBI’s revenge. Even if this is considered as a revenge, in a democracy, there is nothing wrong in inquiring into the previous government’s scams. It shouldn’t be considered political revenge. If such actions are not taken, corruptions and scams will not see the daylight,” it concludes.
