Vivek Oberoi Announces He Is Going To Produce A Movie Based On Balakot Air Strike And The Release Of IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman

Balakot Air Strike Movie: Vivek Oberoi, an actor in the Bollywood Industry, announced on August 23, 2019, that he is going to produce a movie that is based on the Balakot Air Strike 2019.

Vivek announced that the title of the movie is “Balakot – The True Story”.

The movie will be released in a number of dialects in India and will be based on the real-life events of the Balakot Air Strike.

It is reported that the movie is going to be released in Telegu, Tamil, and Hindi.

Vivek Oberoi said the movie will showcase the brave officers of India that managed to successfully carry out the attack.

Vivek Oberoi also mentioned Abhinandan and talked about how proud he is to be an Indian.

Also Read: Vivek Oberoi receives police protection after receiving death threats for tweeting about the personal life Aishwarya Rai and Salman Khan

During an interview with PTI, Vivek said, “As a proud Indian, a patriot and a member of the film fraternity, it’s my duty to highlight what our armed forces are truly capable of. This film is a powerful tool to underline the achievements of brave officers like Abhinandan, who went behind enemy lines and did what makes every Indian proud of them.”

Vivek Oberoi said the movie will be shot in Delhi, Agra, and Jammu and Kashmir.

The actor turned producer did not reveal the cast or the director of the “Balakot – The True Story”.

The movie will also highlight the release of IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, after he was captured by the Pakistan Army when the fighter jet he was using was shot down by the army of Pakistan.

When Oberoi was asked about if he followed the news when the Pulwama attack happened.

Oberoi said, “I followed everything in the news, right from the attack in Pulwama to the airstrike. There was a lot that was speculated and spoken about back then; this film will put all of that to rest, once and for all. I thank the IAF for trusting us with this story and we hope to do justice to it.”
