Madhya Pradesh: Stepfather, cousin rape minors as their mother watches

A few months ago, the mother of the two minors had left their first father and had shifted with the accused (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Two minor sisters were allegedly raped by their stepfather and cousin in Madhya Pradesh It is being alleged that the mother of the two minors was aware of the incident The stepfather of the minors has been arrested while their cousin is absconding

Indore: A man from Madhya Pradesh allegedly raped his two minor stepdaughters as their mother watched silently. Allegedly, a cousin of the two minors was also a silent spectator of the incident. Tired of being raped by their own family members, the two minor sisters went to the Khajrana police on Friday and lodged a complaint against their stepfather.

The stepfather of the two minors has been arrested while their cousin is still on the run. One of the minors is 13-years-old while the other is 15-years-old. The two sisters also told the police that they had been raped by their cousin as well. Initially, the elder sister was being raped by the accused but after some time, he started raping the younger one too.

A few months ago, the mother of the two minors had left their first father and had shifted with the accused. At that time, the minors had been living with their grandparents in another district of Madhya Pradesh. The minors' mother later got married to the man and called her daughters from their grandparents' house and asked them to shift with her.

After a few days, the stepfather starting raping the two minors. Preetam Singh Thakur, Khajrana police station in-charge said, "The elder girl said that her mother would watch the stepfather rape her. His cousin was then 'allowed' to rape her, too. And then, her younger sister was also raped by the stepfather."

The minor's mother and stepfather had warned them against sharing the incident with anyone. On August 15, however, the 15-year-old survivor narrated her ordeal to her aunt who took them to the police. Following which, a case was registered and an investigation was launched. The police have said that they are trying to arrest the cousin of the two minors.

Minor accuses stepfather of multiple rapes in Hyderabad

In March this year, a minor girl from Hyderabad alleged that she had been raped by her stepfather on multiple occasions. The minor was taken to Bharosa, a government-run support centre for women and children after she approached the police.

The incident came to light after the minor narrated her ordeal to her mother. The minor's mother took her to the Golkonda police station and lodged a complaint against the accused. The police booked the accused under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
