119 injured in Dahi Handi revelry

The celebrations were also subdued as many organisers decided to contribute large amounts to flood-affected.

As many as 119 govindas were injured during Dahi Handi celebrations across the city on Saturday, according to the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation’s (BMC).

Mumbai: As many as 119 govindas were injured during Dahi Handi celebrations across the city on Saturday, according to the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation’s (BMC).

Among the injured persons, 26 were admitted in the civic-run hospitals for treatment. Mumbai police stated that compared to previous year, where 147 injuries and one death was reported, lesser casualties reported this year. The celebrations were also subdued as many organisers decided to contribute large amounts to flood-affected.

Darshit Maru (10) was admitted to Nair Hospital for elbow injury, however, his vitals were said to be stable by Saturday night. Five other persons were admitted to the same hospital for face, limbs, chest and spine injuries. Mansi Bhoir (17) also visited JJ Hospital for suffering injuries, however she was released by Saturday afternoon.

Dean of JJ Hospital Dr Ajay Chandanwale said, “Mansi fell from a great height and injured her toe. She was soon released after the treatment and medication as it was nothing major.”

“Around 20 injured persons visited the hospital for mostly limbs and face related injuries. Out of those, two have been admitted to the hospital whereas others were treated and relieved soon,” said Dr Pravin Bangar, KEM hospital.

Mumbai police stated that no death cases were reported from any areas due to high security. “The police personnels were deployed at the site to look into violations related to height restriction and noise rules. This helped to keep everything under control,” said Pranay Ash-ok, PRO-Mumbai Police.

Meanwhile, clashes erupted in Dombivali when the police seized a ‘Dahi Handi’ depicting an EVM as people were shouting slogans against Modi government. The handi was allegedly being put up by MNS activist demonstrating the party’s demand.
