Delhi hospital refuses to let patient leave, holds him hostage over 'unpaid bills'

Patient was allowed to leave only after insurance company settled the bill | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Initially, hospital said it would secure permission for surgery After surgery, hospital refused to let the patient leave over bills Patient was allowed to leave only after the insurance company settled the bill

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, a leading hospital in the national capital allegedly held a patient hostage for five days after over 'unpaid' bills. The incident happened following surgery performed on 48-year-old Mohammed Umar.

Akin to adding insult to injury, the hospital also continued to charge the patient for the period he was forced to stay at the medical facility. The victim said that he initially made it clear to the hospital that he could not afford the surgery, but the hospital insisted that they will get the approval from his insurance company.

According to a report, the hospital initially claimed that it had received approval from the insurance company, but after the operation, the doctors told the patient that the company has refused to reimburse the amount.

After this, the hospital refused to allow the patient to leave until all the unpaid bills are cleared. In 2017, the Delhi High court had issued clear instructions that no patient will be held hostage for unpaid bills.

Umar's 'bladder neck incision' was conducted on August 11 and the patient was to be discharged the next day. But the hospital did not allow the patient to go until the insurance company approved the payment. The patient, who works as a security guard, had a bladder infection and was having difficulty in passing urine.

In the meantime, the hospital continued to charge Rs 1,000 per day to the patient for his stay in the general ward.

Responding to the allegations, the hospital rejected the patient's charges saying he was not detained. "The insurance company wanted some clarification about the operation. Also, the company wanted to make physical verification by visiting the patient. so we this as an opportunity to give better care to the patient as he was on a catheter," the report quoted hospital spokesperson as saying.

But the patient's son Imran has a different story to tell. Imran said the hospital was lying as an agent had already visited the hospital to meet the patient and doctor on August 10 for physical verification.

The patient's son also alleged that his parents were forced out of the general ward and made to sit at the reception. After this, Imran said he dialled the police control room and some policemen came to the hospital. After police intervention, he was again admitted to the general ward.

Imran also took the help of an NGO 'Campaign for Dignified and Affordable Healthcare' but to no avail. Finally, Umar was allowed to leave after the insurance company agreed to settle the bill, but not before the patient's family was forced to pay food bills for August 15 and 16.
