Fact Check: No, Indian forces did not burn alive a protestor in Srinagar

The claim made by Khaleej Mag based on the video.

Amid opposition by certain sections over the abrogation of Article 370 in Kashmir, a horrific video of a burning man has been going viral on social media with the claim that Indian forces set ablaze a protestor in Srinagar.

Twitter account 'Khaleej Mag' posted the video in which a burning man can be seen running in an open area in the presence of some men in khaki. The text along with the post reads, "A dark face of humanity. Indian forces burning a Kashmiri protester with fire in Srinagar."

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be false. The video is from Jhunjhunu district in Rajasthan where a man reportedly immolated himself to protest an anti-encroachment drive by forest officials in July this year.

The claim tweeted on Friday, was retweeted almost 2,000 times and liked by almost 1,600 users till the time of filing this story. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

'Khaleej Mag' is a digital media company based in Dubai, Kuwait, Qatar and Dublin. It has almost 20,000 followers on Twitter.

The post went viral on Facebook as well.

With the help of keywords, we found a news report by Times Now which carried the same video. As per reports, 40-year-old Baburao Saini had set himself on fire on July 7, 2019, when forest officials came to demolish his house which was allegedly built on forest land. Media outlet Patrika had also covered this incident.

A report by Dainik Bhaskar says that Baburao Saini died on July 11 in a hospital in Jaipur.

Last month, the same video was passed off with the claim that Dalits are being burnt alive under PM Narendra Modi's rule. At that time, Alt News had debunked this claim and found that the man in the video was not a Dalit.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim A Kashmiri protester is set ablaze by Indian forces in Srinagar Conclusion Video is from Jhunjhunu district in Rajasthan where a man immolated himself to protest an anti-encroachment drive. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
