Months before, he had attempted to assault her in Kerala

Brazilian student

Padmakar Nandekar

Cuffe Parade Residents’ Association

Kerala hotel

unprotected sex

sexual assault

Padmakar Nandekar; (right) Mirror’s earlier reports on the case

Cops attach screenshots of the victim’s chat with Nandekar and one of her friends soon after the alleged rape, in which she detailed her ordeal.A former office-bearer of one of Mumbai’s most active residents’ associations, who was booked for raping ain April this year, had attempted to sexually assault the same girl in Kerala three months before he assaulted her in Mumbai.According to the charge sheet filed by the Cuffe Parade police against, former secretary-general of the(he was sacked after the rape allegations surfaced), the girl, who was in India under an exchange programme, had managed to fend him off in Kerala.The 480-page charge sheet says that Nandekar took the victim to Kerala on the pretext of meeting a spiritual leader. He had asked her to keep the trip a secret from everyone, including her primary guardians in the city. The police have recorded the statements of theowner, waiters and the people whom they met on their trip.The charge sheet contains statements of 40 witnesses, including a doctor who the girl visited the day after she was allegedly raped. She did not tell the doctor anything about the assault but asked him to give her medicines to prevent any infection which could be caused byThe police have also attached screenshots of the victim’s chat with Nandekar and one of her friends. Police claim that the chats will constitute strong evidence against the accused. In the chat the victim narrated her ordeal to her friend.On Saturday, Nandekar’s lawyer, Ashok Saraogi, denied all the charges. Refusing to give a detailed reaction, Saraogi said that the police’s case against his client is false.After the rape, Nandekar allegedly was remorseful and offered the victim Rs 10,000. When she refused, he stuffed the money into her bag. The victim has told the police that as soon she left Nandekar’s house, she dumped the money in a trash can.The police also have the CCTV footage from the building where Nandekar lives. The cops have also recovered the bill from a five-star hotel where he took the victim for dinner before theThe victim was in the city under a youth exchange programme and was staying at the accused’s home. She stayed at his residence till March 23 before moving to another local guardian’s house in Bandra.On May 13, the victim told her guardians in Mumbai about the incident and the case was registered on May 20.
