Delhi: 23-year-old slits father's throat, stabs mother over constant taunts

This reportedly led to frequent arguments in their house and Amarjeet wanted Sabnjeev to join the family business. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused fled the spot while his parents are recuperating from the attack in the hospital Police have registered a case and further probe is underway Recently, Sanjeev started a business but it did not work, so from last few months he was unemployed

New Delhi: Irked by constant taunts and scolding, a 23-year-old man slit his father's throat and stabbed his mother on Friday evening. After committing the crime, the accused fled the spot while his parents are recuperating from the attack in the hospital. The Deputy Commissioner of Police, Gaurav Sharma said that they have registered a case of attempt to murder against the Sanjeev-the accused, although, he's still at large and the police are searching for him.

The victims were identified as Amarjeet and his wife Usha. According to a report, the preliminary investigation in the case revealed that Sanjeev's father is a leader of a local party and he also owns a business. Cops claimed that Sanjeev tried to start a business but he failed and currently he was unemployed. This reportedly led to frequent arguments in their house and Amarjeet wanted Sabnjeev to join the family business.

On Friday, a similar situation arose and the father-son duo was having an argument over a similar issue. In a fit of rage, Sanjeev went to the kitchen and grabbed a knife, he then attacked his father, slit his throat. Meanwhile, his mother tried to intervene but Sanjeev stabbed her as well.

Both of them feel in a pool of blood and Sanjeev fled from the spot. Heering the commotion in the house, the neighbours immediately came and rushed the couple to a nearby hospital, where they are still undergoing treatment. Reportedly, the doctors have claimed that the couple is now out of danger. Based on the parents' complaints the police have lodged a case against Sanjeev at the Shahbad Dairy police station.

Cops have formed teams to nab the accused in the case. Meanwhile, the police are tracking the CCTV footage of the area, tracking his mobile activity and have been questioning his friends and relatives about him.

However, further probe in the case is underway.
