Gujarat: Scolded for stealing petrol from bike, two men set youth ablaze

Victim Pankaj Patil has suffered 85 per cent burn injuries. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim set on fire after scolding youth for stealing petrol Pankaj Patil suffers 85 per cent burn injuries Victim's condition said to be in critical condition

Ahmedabad: In a gruesome incident, two men said to be brothers have set ablaze a youth after he scolded them for stealing petrol from bike in Isanpur area of Ahmedabad. The accused have been identified as Pradeep and Naresh Amarsingh.

The 20-year-old victim Pankaj Patil was called out from his home by the accused and set him on fire after pouring kerosene on the victim. The incident took place on Sunday evening at Ujala Society.

According to a report, the victim has suffered 85 per cent burn injuries and is being treated at LG Hospital in the city. Patil is said to be in critical condition.

Police have registered a case of attempt to murder and arrested the two accused. Patil's father said the condition of his son is critical and he has little chance of survival.

Police said the victim caught the two accused stealing fuel outside the Ujala Society and scolded the duo. Later he went home after reprimanding the two accused.

According to Isnapur Station House Officer (SHO) JM Solanki, the accused reached Patil's house the next day and started arguing with him. Pradeep and Amarsingh poured kerosene on Patil and lit the match before the victim's family could intervene and save him.

"We tried to douse the flames by throwing mud and blankets on him. Then we called ambulance service and shifted him to LG hospital. Doctors say there are little chances of him surviving as he has received 85 per cent burn injuries," the report quoted Patil's father as saying.

Police said they are interrogating the two accused. JM Solanki said they will add Section 302 (murder) if the victim doesn't survive.

UP woman set ablaze in UP

In a similar incident reported from Moradabad in Uttar Pradesh, a woman was allegedly set ablaze by her in-laws after she tried to save her son from getting reprimanded. The woman's in-laws had been scolding her son after he lost a tool. The police have registered a case against the woman's in-laws. The accused have been identified as Kaushar Ali and Phool Jahan. None of the accused has been arrested yet.

The incident took place on August 23 under the limits of Bhojpur police station. The deceased has been identified as Imrat Jahan. Jahan got married to Abid around ten years ago. Abid is a daily wage worker and the couple has six children.
