Bengaluru: 'Lover' held for setting ablaze woman's scooter after she turned down his proposal

However, the police have arrested them and they have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident happened in Bengaluru's CV Raman Nagar area during the wee hours of Saturday Both 26-year-old accused were residents of Suddaguntepalya area The police have arrested the accused and they have been booked under sections of the Indian Penal Code

Bengaluru: A 26-year-old man and his friend were arrested for allegedly setting ablaze a woman's scooter after she turned down his relationship proposal. The incident happened in Bengaluru's CV Raman Nagar area during the wee hours of Saturday. Reportedly, the three vehicles parked next to this vehicle also caught fire.

The accused were identified as Kethan Kumar and his friend Shiva Shankar both 26-year-old and residents of Suddaguntepalya area. According to a report, the accused had the set the woman's scooter ablaze right outside her PG accommodation. Reportedly, the 26-year-old woman and the accused Kethan both work with an auto consultancy firm.

Recently, Kethan proposed the woman and expressed his love for her. The woman turned down his proposal and upset over rejection, the accused decided to teach her a lesson. He then consumed a high quantity of alcohol and rode his bike to her PG accommodation. At around 2:45 AM, the accused reached near her house and set her scooter ablaze before speeding away. The flames somehow reached the vehicles parked next to the woman's scooter and three more two-wheelers were gutted in the fire, which was later doused by onlookers.

The woman later filed a complaint at the Byappamahalli Police station against the accused and his friend. However, the police have arrested them and they have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.

Woman set ablaze after refusing to marry local goon in UP's Sitapur

In a similar case reported from Uttar Pradesh on August 22, a local goon set a woman ablaze in Sitapur district after she refused to marry him. The woman was admitted to the local hospital and doctors stated that she sustained 60 per cent burns. However, the police had registered a complaint against the accused and further investigation is underway.

The accused had allegedly been pestering the woman to marry him and after she repeatedly denied he set her ablaze. LR Kumar, Superintendent of Police (SP) said, they received information that a woman was set ablaze and she was admitted to a hospital. After preliminary treatment, she was shifted to a speciality hospital for further treatment. Further probe in the case is underway.


