Mumbai: Man molests minor girls by luring them with chocolates, arrested

Accused tried to molest 10-year-old by luring her with chocolates. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused has been identified as 35-year-old Sachin Anant Shama Shama arrested from his home in suburban Ghatkopar Accused tried to molest 10-year-old by luring her with choclates

Mumbai: The city police have arrested a man accused of molesting a number of minor girls by luring them with chocolates and icecreams. The accused has been identified as 35-year-old Sachin Anant Shama, who is a resident of Bhatwadi area in suburban Ghatkopar.

According to a police officer, the accused was arrested after police received a tip-off and laid a trap to nab him from his residence at Ghatkopar.

The arrest came after the parents of a 10-year-old girl complained to police that the accused tried to molest the victim when she was returning from her dance class on August 13, said a report in PTI. The accused reportedly took the girl to an isolated spot and tried to molest her in Bhatwandi.

The accused fled from the spot after the girl started crying loudly. Later, a passer-by rescued the girl and took her to her parents, who were already searching for the girl. The accused had allegedly lured the girl with chocolate.

After reaching home, the girl narrated the incident to her parents, who then lodged an FIR with the police. The police booked a case under Section 354-B (assault or use of force with an intention to disrobe a woman) of Indian Penal Code and provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The police identified the accused as Sachin Anant Sharma after scanning the CCTV footage of the area. The police later launched a manhunt for Sharma and manage to arrest him from his home.

"During the interrogation of the accused, we came to know that the accused committed five such offences using the same modus operandi of luring minor girls with chocolates and ice cream," the report quoted an official as saying.

The police later produced the accused before a local court that sent him to police custody till August 29.

Minor girl from Meghalaya gang-raped

In another incident reported from Haryana, a 14-year-old girl was gang-raped by three men first in Gurugram and then in Delhi in August this year. The minor girl came to the National Capital Region (NCR) from Meghalaya last week in search of work.

The girl was raped repeatedly by three men and sexually assaulted by another. The victim was accompanied to Delhi by a man named Aman, who promised her to enrol with a placement agency in the city.

The minor was held captive and moved between Delhi and Gurugram while the accused raped her. The girl was rescued from Chauma village in Gurugram on August 6 by two men from Meghalaya and taken to Meghalaya House in Delhi.
