Over 5000 People join Catholic Sabhas in Mega Protest Condemning Manjeshwar Church Attack

Over 5000 People join Catholic Sabhas in Mega Protest Condemning Manjeshwar Church Attack

Over 5000 people join Catholic Sabhas of Kasaragod Zone, and Mangaluru Zone in Mega Protest Condemning Manjeshwar Church Attack

Mangaluru : In the wake of attack on Our Lady of Mercy Church in Manjeshwar in Kasargod, where a duo men hurled stones damaging the window panes in the front of the church- a mega protest was held on the evening of Sunday, August 25, under the leadership of Catholic Sabha of Kasargod zone,also joined by the Catholic Sabha of Mangaluru under the leadership of Rolphy D ‘costa condemning the recent Church attack and also atrocities carried out on the Christian community constantly.

Recalling the Church attack incident that occurred during the wee hours ( 2.24 am) of 19 August morning- where two men reportedly pelted stones at Our Lady of Mercy Church in Manjeshwar. Apparently two bike borne miscreants are said to be involved in the attack. The video of the dastardly act was captured by the Church CCTV cameras installed at the premises. The video footage shows one of the miscreants entering the compound of the church armed with stones in his hands and pelting the stones at the church. Both men wore helmets during the act. The window panes of the front portion of the church were damaged in the attack.

Following the incident, large number of Catholic faithful along with members of other communities gathered in the church compound by raising their voices about the cowardly act. Manjeshwar police had visited the spot, registered a case and the investigation is still on, with the culprits yet to be traced. It is learnt that the sand mafia gang had attacked a couple identified as Felix D’Souza and Rita D’Souza in Manjeshwar on the afternoon of Sunday, August 18. Grievously injured Rita was treated in a hospital at Mangaluru. And rumours are that since the church authorities inquired into the attack of this couple, the members of the sand mafia could have taken the revenge. But the exact reason behind the attack is yet to be ascertained, until the culprits are caught and proper investigation is done.

As per the media coordinator of the Manjeshwar Church, Derrick who spoke to Team Mangalorean said that the protest march on Sunday, 25 August started from the vicinity of Manjeshwar Block Panchayat, proceeded in front of the Manjeshwar church and culminated at Hosangadi Junction. “Over 5000 Catholic faithful took part in the protest march, under the banner of Catholic Sabhas of Kasargod and Mangaluru zones. The leaders of the protest march warned the district administration to hold fierce protest and also fast unto death, if the culprits are not arrested soon. Raju Stephen Kumble, president of Kasargod zone Catholic Sabha, presided over the protest meeting that was held after the march” added Derrick. .

Fr John Vaz, the Chief Priest of Kasargod zone and Parish Priest of Bela Shokamatha Shrine; Fr Mani Melvattam, the Parish Priest of Kasargod Kotekani Church; Rolphy D’costa and Naveen Braggs- the president and secretary respectively of Catholic Sabha Central Committee-Mangaluru; Fr Manoj from Thalassery, Joseph Crasta of Snehalaya, NGO; Roy Castelino -Social Activities- Mangaluru and Former President Karnataka Konkani Sahitya Academy; M S Thomas D’Souza- advocate and Jean Lavina Monteiro-Vice President of Manjeshwar Church Parish Council, were among the many others present on the dais during the protest, added Derrick. Fr J B Moras of Narampady, Fr Lukos-Infant Jesus Church-Hosangadi; Fr Melwyn Lobo and Fr Santhosh of Kasargod, Fr Ani D’Souza of Miyapadavu, Fr Daniel of Kollangana, Fr Francis Rodrigues of Varkady, Fr Valerian Katipalla, Fr Paul of Maniyampare, and Fr Augustine of Pavoor, were also present.

It is learnt that a sculpted the picture of Jesus Christ done using mud by Fr Manoj-from St Thomas Institute-Thalassery was the attraction during the protest, and everyone admired it. Raju Stephen welcomed the gathering, while Veenu Bela rendered the vote of thanks. While the attack on this Church has led to public outrage, and the pressure on police department in mounting to nab the culprits behind the incident, the miscreants are still at large. Police are sleuthing deep into this incident, and also going through the CCTV footage, where it could be seen clearly a person hurling stones standing right in front of the Church portico. Our Lady of Mercy Church priest Fr Vincent Saldanha speaking to Team Mangalorean said that he had led a delegation and met state director general of police Loknath Behra in the DC’s auditorium during Police Adalat and submitted a memorandum to him, after the incident.

“The DGP assured speedy investigation and expressed confidence on nabbing the suspects at the earliest. Currently, the security at the church is tightened. Forensic experts who had arrived at the Church few days ago have taken all the details and have assured of thorough investigations in this regard. Few days ago, Rajmohan Unnithan, MP of the district had also visited our Church and was very saddened to see the damages desecrated by miscreants” said Fr Saldanha .

Fr Saldanha further said, “Assuring me of his full support MP Rajmohan said, “There is no need to panic. All support will be given to take strict action against the culprits. I will not allow any mafia to take matters in their hands. I will put pressure on the police department to speed up the inquiry. There is no need to bend to any threat. As an MP, I am with you for all the support.”. I hope that the police will be able to nab the culprits at the earliest, so that the fear among the parishioners is gone. We look forward for the support from the law enforcement officials and also from the communities so that we could carry on with our work without any fear from such untoward incidents”

It is learnt that during MP’s visit to the Church, Block Panchayat president A K M Ashraf; President of Zilla Panchayat Standing Committee Harshad; President of Gram Panchayat Abdul Aziz; eminent leaders like- Rahmatullah Saheb, K M Abdul Khader, Hameed Hosangadi and Manjunath Alva had also accompanied the MP, and assured support from their side also.

Rolphy D’costa-the President of Catholic Sabha Mangaluru Zone speaking to Team Mangalorean said that the Catholic faithful will give few more days, since already a week time is over after the attack, and still the police have not traced the miscreants- and if no positive results are shown in the nearest future, we will go in for fast-unto-death protest in front of the Manjeshwar Church.

In conclusion, in my perspective- The Prime Minister claims to be a very strong PM, and that he cares for the citizens of India irrespective of caste or creed. What happens when it comes to ground realities? When you are not being able to protect a small minuscule community, how are you going to protect the whole of India. And this is happening right here in Kasaragod- and it could happen elsewhere too. The Catholic Faithful are looking only for justice and they want protection of their churches, just like the parishioners of Manjeshwar Our Lady of Mercy Church who are fighting for justice. The Catholic faithful are not demanding it as Christians but as citizens of India. Let this small community of Christians in India also get the security and freedom, like other communities, to live without fear and from attacks. “
