Fact Check: Did Indian forces set a Kashmiri protestor ablaze in Srinagar?

Screengrab of video shared by Khaleej Mag | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: While the government has been making all-out efforts to restore normalcy in Kashmir after the abrogation of Article 370, a foreign media shared a video of a burning man and claimed that he was set ablaze by the security forces in Srinagar.

The video, shared by ‘Khaleej Mag’ on its Twitter handle, shows a man running in flames in an open field while some police officials try to help him.

Khaleej Mag is a digital media company based in Dubai, Kuwait, Qatar and Dublin. Its Twitter handle has nearly 20,000 followers.

The video was posted on Twitter on Friday along with a caption that reads: “A dark face of humanity. Indian forces burning a Kashmiri protester with fire in Srinagar.”

However, the claim that garnered over 2000 retweets and more than 1000 likes on Twitter, turned out to be false. The video shared by the media organisation was not from Srinagar but from Rajasthan’s Jaipur where a man immolated himself to protests against encroachment drive by forest officials. The video of the incident surfaced on social media in July.

Times Now had last month reported that Baburao Saini had set himself ablaze in Buddha village near Rajasthan’s capital after local forest officials tried to demolish his house which was allegedly built on forest land. The 40-year-old succumbed to his burn injuries days after the incident.

Several other media organisations had also reported this tragic news last month and shared the video of the incident.

Ever since Jammu and Kashmir was stripped of its special status, several reports of violence and protests in the Valley have surfaced on social media platforms. However, the armed forces and the Central government have time and again categorically rejected these reports and urged people not to pay heed to “false” claims.

Earlier, the Jammu and Kashmir Police had debunked the reports of protest and violence in the Valley, asserting that the situation was normal and peaceful in the state.

It also warned people against “fabricated and motivated news” and said that they should not believe any mischevious and motivated news regarding firing incidents in the Valley.

On August 5, the Centre had announced its decision to revoke Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that gave Jammu and Kashmir special status and the right to take decisions for all matters except for defence, foreign affairs, finance, and communications. It also bifurcated the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories.
