Man sets himself afire at Khattar’s Sonepat yatra

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service & PTI

Panipat, August 26

A 45-year-old man set himself on fire near Rathdhana village of Sonepat district during Jan Ashirwaad Yatra of Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar on Monday.

The man has been identified as Rajesh of Rathdhana village. He set himself ablaze with petrol and sustained 60 per cent burns. He told reporters at a hospital in Sonepat where he was initially rushed to that he took the step because his son was jobless despite being “assured” a job when he had met the Chief Minister earlier.

Sources said Rajesh, who works at a gas agency in New Delhi, was disgruntled with the BJP government for not providing a job to his son. Incidentally, according to his neighbours, he has two sons and a daughter and the elder son is around 18 years.

Sonepat Superintendent of Police Pratiksha Godhara said the yatra was nearing a halt in Sonepat district when the man sprinkled some inflammable material and set himself on fire. Seven other people also sustained burn injuries when they tried to save Rajesh.

BJP Minister and MLA from Sonepat Kavita Jain said when the yatra reached the village, they saw a man engulfed in flames. Security officials were asked to rush to his help. “I was on board the yatra bus when we saw the man in flames. The seriously injured person has been referred to PGIMS Hospital at Rohtak, while the other injured are undergoing treatment in Sonepat civil hospital,” Jain said.

According to the SP, the man was rushed to the burn ward of PGIMS, Rohtak. In a statement issued in the evening, the PGIMS authorities maintained that Rajesh was found to have received 60 per cent burns. He has been shifted to Trauma ICU. Chand Ram of Begha village, who was one of the seven persons injured while saving Rajesh, suffered 20 per cent burns and was under treatment.

There was no breach of security and the man had not reached close to the yatra vehicle with the inflammable material, the SP said, adding that further investigations were on.

The MLA, meanwhile, said: “The reason why the man took the step will be probed, but the priority now is to save his life. The state government will extend all help.”

About Rajesh telling reporters that he attempted self-immolation because his son was jobless despite “assurances” by the Chief Minister, Jain said, “First of all we need to know why he took the step, what is his mental state and in what circumstances he took the step.”

‘Son didn’t get promised job’

Rajesh of Rathdhana village of Sonepat set himself ablaze with petrol and sustained 60 per cent burns.

He told reporters at a hospital in Sonepat that he took the step because his son was jobless despite being “assured” a job by the Chief Minister

Son a teenager, say neighbours

According to Rajesh’s neighbours, he has two sons and a daughter and the elder son is just around 18 years.

CM: There will be no unemployment in 5 yrs

Seeking support of people for one more term, Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar on Monday promised that there would be no unemployed in the state in the next five years. He was addressing a public meeting at Rai in Sonepat district.
