19-year-old stabbed to death in scuffle over misbehaviour with sister in Delhi's Keshopur area

This is when someone from the crowd stabbed him in his throat and fled the spot. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights 19-year-old youth who had gone to his relative's place to celebrate success in first year university exams During the scuffle, someone from the crowd slit his throat and fled the spot The police have booked a murder case and further probe is underway

New Delhi: A 19-year-old youth who had gone to his relative's place was stabbed to death after he intervened in a brawl over misbehaviour with his cousin. The incident happened on Sunday night in the Keshopur area of the national capital.

Family members told the Delhi Police that the victim had gone to his uncle's house after he cleared his first year's Delhi University exams to celebrate and distribute sweets. Meanwhile, as soon as he reached he found his uncle and other family members having a fight with their neighbour.

As per a report, his uncle had earlier alleged that a 14-year-old boy from their locality had passed lewd comments on his younger daughter. On being confronted about the inappropriate behaviour, the accused teenager's father thrashed the girl's father for levelling false claims against his son. Meanwhile, during the heated argument family members of both sides intervened and the victim tried to push away family members of the accused. This is when someone from the crowd stabbed him in his throat and fled the spot.

He was immediately rushed to a local government-run hospital where he was declared brought dead by the hospital staff. Meanwhile, the cops were informed about the incident and a murder case was registered with the police. As suspects, three people including a woman were arrested by the local police.

The force is also trying to nab three suspects who fled the spot. Deputy Commissioner of Police, Monika Bhardwaj told a media person that the family members did not refer to any incident of molestation or stalking while lodging the formal complaint. She added, that they will look into the matter and appropriate action will be taken against the accused if he is found guilty.

However, the police later found that the deceased's uncle had confronted the accused teen's father about the molestation of his daughter from another person in the locality. Further investigation in the case is underway.
