No country for daughters | India Today Insight

In 2017, the Sample Registration System (SRS), operating under the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, bracketed Bihar as the state with the highest birth rate in the country-26.4 against India's average of 16.8 in urban regions and 21.8 in rural regions. But, at the same time, according to the SRS, the state has also registered a sharp decline in its child sex ratio, down from 910 per 1,000 males in 2011 to 900 now.

Ironically, it is worse in urban Bihar where, in fact, the number stands at 865 females per 1,000 males, down from 884 as reported in the 2011 census. It seems, more girls are allowed to be born in villages instead of in the cities where the educated and elite live.

Senior pediatrician Dr Arun Shah doesn't believe that this is an indication of Bihar's rural population being more accommodating. "It is simply because those who live in villages don't have easy access to prenatal sex determination. Numerous patients visit me with their sons born after six daughters. There is still rampant neglect of girl child's healthcare and nutrition. In fact, Bihar's obsession with a male child has no rural or urban divide," he says.

Incidentally, more than 200 FIRs have been lodged in Bihar in cases of alleged sex determination since 2016.

In June 2019, when the state was rocked by the hundreds of Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) related deaths, of the first 129 deaths reported among children, as many as 85 were girls.

A majority of the deaths were caused by neglect of the girl child by impoverished parents who chose to feed their sons, letting their daughter go to sleep on an empty stomach or without an adequate amount of food. The hyperglycemia caused in malnourished children in the early morning hours, when the blood sugar levels dip anyway, coupled with consumption of lychees have been directly connected to AES deaths.

A Bihar health department document from 2015 brings to light more alarming details. As high as 43 per cent of pregnancies in Bihar are unwanted and 79 per cent abortions done in a non-facility setting using medical methods. Such apparent digressions hint at various possibilities, which include a preference for sons, says a health department official.

"Each conception is like flipping a coin: with an equal probability of a newborn being a boy or a girl. So, theoretically, we cannot have such twisted sex ratio as the one we have in Bihar. It is clearly a result of prenatal sex determination," says Dr Shah.

Some horror stories have also been reported from Bihar's rural outback. In October 2018, a family in Bihar's Sitamarhi hacked their eldest daughter-in-law to death after a soothsayer told them to "sacrifice" her so that a male child could be born in the house. In January this year, a woman was rescued in Arrah just before her husband and parents-in-law were about to set her on fire for having given birth to a girl. While the first case might be a rarity, the second, unfortunately, is quite common.

There are numerous cases of women being abused, battered and thrown out of their homes for not producing a male child. It is also common for men to opt for a second marriage in the hopes of gaining sons.

This is happening despite the fact that the status accorded to girls has gone up in Nitish Kumar's Bihar in the last decade and half. The government has offered various incentives to encourage educating girls, besides 35 per cent reservation for women in government jobs in the state. Women are now more likely to pursue rewarding careers in Bihar.

However, case studies from the ground show that they still don't enjoy a larger role in the family's decision-making process and face deep inequality and sexism. While Bihar is being seen as the fastest-growing state and is increasingly becoming more prosperous, the sex ratio imbalance is set to create a surplus of bachelors in the times to come.

Birth rate is a crude measure of fertility of a population but is a crucial determinant of population growth. Crude birth rate is the number of live births occurring among the population of a given geographical area during a given year, per 1,000 mid-year total population of the given geographical area during the same year. "Across economic status and education levels, the bias against daughters has a cause and effect corollary to women's inferior status in our society.

Sons are expected to carry on the family name and earn money to support family members in old age," says Dr Ajay Kumar, vice-president of the Indian Medical Association, Bihar. "There is, however, a faint silver lining. I can single out doctors as a community which promotes girl child. But it is also incumbent upon them to sensitise and educate their patients," he adds.

Raghunandan Sharma, professor of sociology in Patna University, describes Bihar's obsession with male children as a consequence of old, deep-seated beliefs. "A daughter is seen as more of a financial liability apart from being a cause for concern since they need extra protection. But what beats everything is the perception about karmic duties, as only sons are expected to perform the last rites for a parent to ensure the salvation of their soul. You cannot think of life without a son in Bihar," he says.

Of Bihar's 10.41 crore (Census 2011) population, nearly 5.42 crore are males. This is more than the entire population of New Zealand, or Norway, or Ireland. Bihar's obsession for boys has already created an imbalance and may very well lead to a demographic crisis. It is time for some thought and action.

Sex ratio at birth for Bihar (2011 to 2017)

Also read | Why the world's largest defence department is on strike

Also read | The Uddhav Manoeuvre
