Kashmir Updates: UN chief urges all parties to avoid escalation

The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) held a high-level meeting on Jammu and Kashmir on Tuesday. The meeting in North Block was chaired by the Union home secretary to discuss the implementation of the J&K Reorganisation Act, which bifurcated the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories.

Meanwhile, as reports of shortage of essential supplies keep coming from the Valley that is facing an unprecedented lockdown for weeks, the government has come out to reject the claims. Reports coming from the Valley suggested local pharmacies and hospitals are fast running out of essential life-saving drugs. The government said such reports are "baseless" and added that the administration has supplied Rs 32 crore worth of essential medicines to the Kashmir markets.

On the other hand, PM Narendra Modi met US President Donald Trump on the sidelines of the G7 Summit in France and clarified in person that Kashmir is a bilateral matter between India and Pakistan and Trump also agreed with him, thus ending the proposal of mediation.

Here are the top developments:

08.45pm: Faesal detained after he instigated people against country in his address: JK govt tells High Court

Justifying the detention of bureaucrat-turned-politician Shah Faesal, the Jammu and Kashmir government has told the Delhi High Court that he instigated people gathered at the Srinagar airport against the sovereignty and integrity of the country.

07.30 pm: High schools in Kashmir to reopen from Wednesday in areas without restrictions

High schools in the Kashmir Valley will reopen from Wednesday in areas where restrictions have been lifted, officials said. They also said shops and business establishments can open in areas where there are no restrictions.

07.10 pm: UN chief urges all parties to avoid escalation in Kashmir during his meeting with PM Modi

UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres urged all parties to avoid any sort of escalation in Kashmir during his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the sidelines of the G7 Summit in the French town of Biarritz, according to his spokesman.

06.55 pm: Govt may soon announce package for setting up infra to implement central laws in J&K

The government may soon come out with a package worth crores of rupees to set up necessary infrastructure for implementing over 100 central laws in Jammu and Kashmir after abrogation of the special status to the state earlier this month.

The 106 central laws would come into full force in the state from October 31, 2019. During the transition period, both central as well as the state laws will be in force till October 30.

04.10 pm: Tourism minister to visit J&K, Ladakh next month

Union tourism minister Prahlad Patel will visit Jammu Kashmir and Leh next month, along with a team of officials, to finalise the plans to boost tourism in the two newly-formed Union territories by November 1.

12.30 pm: A high-level meeting on Jammu & Kashmir has started in the MHA. The meeting is being attended by Secretaries of Govt of India and is being chaired by Union Home Secretary AK Bhalla. Top MHA officials, including Additional Secretary (Kashmir Division) Gyanesh Kumar are present at the meeting.

12.10 pm: 53rd Battalion of CRPF, Army and Jammu & Kashmir Police conducted a joint operation and apprehended two terrorists in Kashmir's Baramulla on Tuesday, said the CRPF.

10.50 am: Jammu and Kashmir government has asked for permission to file documents regarding the communication lockdown in Kashmir. Hearing on all petitions regarding Article 370, Kashmir lockdown and J&K Reorganisation Act to be held on Wednesday in Supreme Court.

10.40 am: Minority Affairs Ministry team to visit Kashmir from today to identify areas for implementing Central government's development projects.

9.55 am: A team of officials from the Union tourism ministry, led by minister Prahlad Patel, will be touring Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh next month to finalise the plans to boost tourism in the two newly-formed Union territories by November 1, reported PTI.

9.27 am: J&K Advocate General DC Raina said that there were some restrictions, some lawyers were not appearing, but on the whole government lawyers have 99% attendance in courts.

Some members of Kashmir bar Association detained but legal process is on, notice issued by court in their case, government will put its response soon.

8.25 am: A group of seven persons, including Kashmiri leaders Shah Faesal and Shehla Rashid have approached the Supreme Court challenging the Presidential Order revoking the special status of J&K, and also the J&K Reorganization Act. The petition will be heard on Wednesday along with other similar petitions on the Kashmir issue.

8.20 am: Suspected militants on Monday abducted two members of the nomadic Gujjar community from a forested area in Pulwama district and later shot one of them dead, reported PTI. Abdul Qadeer Kohli of Rajauri district and Manzoor Ahmed of Khonmoh area of Srinagar were abducted by unidentified gunmen from 'Dhok', a temporary shelter, from the forested area of Tral in Pulwama district around 7:30 pm.

8.15 am: The Jammu and Kashmir administration has said that it has supplied medicines worth Rs 32 crore to the Valley between July 20 and August 23. The medicines include a wide range of drugs from all categories, including antibiotics, anti-diabetic, proton pump inhibitors, anti-hypertensives, antacids, NSAIDs, anti-cancer drugs, cardiovascular drugs, anti-tuberculars, anti-depressants, psychotropics, an official spokesman said.

8.10 am: Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik has accused Rahul Gandhi of playing politics over his invitation to visit the Valley, saying he just wanted to refrain him from making "baseless statements". He said in a statement, "I want to make it clear that when I had invited Rahul Gandhi to Jammu and Kashmir, my intention was that he will refrain from making baseless statements about Kashmir by having the first-hand appraisal of the situation."
