New movies coming out in September 2019 - upcoming UK film releases

As we near the end of August, that can only mean one thing: it's time for a whole new month of film releases.

September 2019 is looking set to be a pretty good month for UK cinema releases, too, starting off with our return to the world of Stephen King nightmare Pennywise the Clown in the second part of It.

If costumed drama is more your cup of tea then we have the cinematic continuation of landmark period television drama Downton Abbey - complete more prickly remarks from the Dowager Countess (Maggie Smith).

Meanwhile, Brad Pitt blasts off into space in the epic James Gray film Ad Astra, as we get some potential award-winners in the form of all-star literary adaptation The Goldfinch and emotional indie drama The Farewell.

Here is what is coming to cinemas near you in September 2019.

New movies coming out in September 2019 - upcoming UK film releases

It Chapter 2

Image: Warner Bros Pictures) Warner Bros Pictures)

It’s time to return to Derry in the second half of this cinematic adaptation of the classic Stephen King novel It. 27 years after the Loser’s Club defeated Pennywise the Clown (Bill Skarsgard), the kids went their separate ways and now live very different lives as adults. However, It has returned to feed on the fear of the townsfolk of Derry once more, prompting the Loser’s Club to band together once more if they have any hope of destroying Pennywise for good. Stars James McAvoy, Jessica Chastain, and Bill Vader.

It Chapter 2 release date: September 6, 2019

Downton Abbey

It’s time for the doors of Downton to open once more. Five years since the end of the beloved television series, we catch up with the Crawley family and their servants in a time of great change for the entire cast of characters. Plus the addition of a royal visit throws everyone into chaos. Cast includes favourites like Hugh Bonneville, Dame Maggie Smith, Michelle Dockery, and Joanne Froggatt.

Downton Abbey release date: September 13, 2019

Hustlers

Inspired by a New York Magazine article by Jessica Pressler that went viral, former strip club employees band together to turn the tables on their Wall Street clients, led by veteran stripper Ramona Vega (Jennifer Lopez). Hustlers also stars Constance Wu, Julia Stiles, Keke Palmer, Lili Reinhart, Lizzo, and Cardi B.

Hustlers release date: September 13, 2019

Ad Astra

Image: Walt Disney Motion Pictures) Walt Disney Motion Pictures)

This sci-fi epic from director James Gray sees Roy McBride (Brad Pitt) journey across a lawless solar system to find his missing father (Tommy Lee Jones) - a renegade scientist whose research could pose a threat to all humanity. Ad Astra also features Ruth Negga, Liv Tyler, and Donald Sutherland, and will premiere at the Venice Film Festival.

Ad Astra release date: September 18, 2019

Rambo: Last Blood

Image: LIONSGATE) LIONSGATE)

Sylvester Stallone reprises his iconic role as Vietnam War veteran John Rambo for a whole new adventure. When a friend's daughter is kidnapped, Rambo crosses the U.S.-Mexico border to bring her home but finds himself up against one of Mexico's most ruthless cartels. Is this really the end of the line for Rambo?

Rambo Last Blood release date: September 19, 2019

The Farewell

This critically acclaimed Sundance Film Festival entry from director Lulu Wang sees lead character Bill (Awkwafina) and her family return to China under the guise of a fake wedding to stealthily say goodbye to their beloved matriarch - the only person that doesn't know she only has a few weeks to live. The emotional film is partially based on Wang's own life experiences.

The Farewell release date: September 20, 2019

The Kitchen

In this female-led crime drama set between 8th Ave. and the Hudson River, the Irish mafia runs 20 blocks of a tough New York City neighborhood known as Hell's Kitchen. But for mob wives Kathy (Melissa McCarthy), Ruby (Tiffany Haddish) and Claire (Elisabeth Moss), things are about to take a dramatic and radical turn. When the FBI sends their husbands to prison, the three women take business into their own hands by running the rackets and taking out the competition.

The Kitchen release date: September 20, 2019

Hotel Mumbai

Terror strikes in the heart of Mumbai, India, as members of Lashkar-e-Taiba storm the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel in a series of coordinated attacks throughout the city. Amid the gunfire and mayhem, a brave chef and kitchen worker decide to risk their own lives to try and protect the frightened guests. As the militants continue their assault on the hotel, a desperate couple must do whatever they can to protect their newborn baby. Stars Dev Patel, Nazanin Boniadi, Armie Hammer, and Jason Isaacs.

Hotel Mumbai release date: September 27, 2019

Ready Or Not

In this critically-acclaimed horror, Grace (Samara Weaving) couldn't be happier after she marries the man of her dreams at his family's luxurious estate. There's just one catch - she must now hide from midnight until dawn while her new in-laws hunt her with guns, crossbows and other weapons. Also stars Adam Brody Andie MacDowell, Mark O'Brien, and Henry Czerny.

Ready Or Not release date: September 27, 2019

Skin

A young man named Byron Widner (Jamie Bell) makes the dangerous choice to leave the white supremacist gang he joined as a teenager. With his former friends against him, he is determined to create a new life for himself - if he can make it out alive. Also stars Vera Farmiga and Jaime Ray Newman.

Skin release date: September 27, 2019

The Last Tree

In this coming-of-age drama, after growing up in quiet, rural Lincolnshire, teenager Femi struggles with unfamiliar surroundings and cultural differences when he moves in with his mother in London. Stars Nicholas Pinnock, Denise Black, and Jammal Ibrahim.

The Last Tree release date: September 27, 2019

The Goldfinch

Image: Warner Bros Pictures) Warner Bros Pictures)

Based on the Pultizer Prize-winning novel by Donna Tartt, The Goldfinch follows young Theo Decker (Ansel Elgort, Oakes Fegley) who is left reeling after the death of his mother. The tragedy changes the course of his life, sending him on a stirring odyssey of grief and guilt, reinvention and redemption, and even love. Through it all, he holds on to one tangible piece of hope from that terrible day... a painting of a tiny bird chained to its perch. The Goldfinch. Stars Aneurin Barnard, Finn Wolfhard, Sarah Paulson, Luke Wilson, Jeffrey Wright, and Nicole Kidman.

The Goldfinch release date: September 27, 2019

What films will you be seeing in cinemas in September? Let us know in the comments below.
