This Man Has Prepared Two Lakh Girls To Fight Off Molesters And Eve Teasers In UP

Abhishek Yadav Abhi was deeply pained by the shocking incident that happened in Delhi on the night of December 16, 2012, where a paramedical student was brutally abused by a group of men on a moving bus.

Abhishek, a resident of Gorakhpur, like most of the country was outraged about the lack of security of women in this country and wanted to do something to change it.

And he didn't have to look much farther. The multi-discipline martial arts expert decided to use his skills to train women and girls on how to defend themselves against any kind of attackers.

Since then Abhishek says he has given free self-defence training to more than 2.5 lakh girls across Uttar Pradesh.

The 28-year-old who runs an NGO called Abhiself Protection Trust train the girls under their ‘Meri Raksha, Mere Haathon Mein’ programme, where most of the girls are from rural areas.

Abhishek is an exponent of Aikido, a Japanese martial art which he initially used to train the UP Police.

"I began training the UP Police commandos in martial arts in 2007. But after the 2012 Delhi Gang rape, we began a movement to teach the same defence techniques to girls. This week-long training will empower them and enable them to take on any abusers all by themselves," Abhishek said.

His camps often have hundreds of students and in 2016, he set a Limca world record for training a whopping 5,700 girl students in self-defense techniques in Kunda, Pratapgarh.

Abhishek, who began training in martial arts in 2002 is also an international gold medalist in Karate. He has a team of around 12 people who also help him with the training programs.

"We aim to empower every girl and make them stronger as individuals who can take on any challenges. We use Aikido training which has a lot of holds and moves that anyone can master with regular training and are useful in real-life situations," Abhishek explained.

"We go from school-to-school, where we tell the student why it is important to learn self-defence, especially given how bad the situation is in our country when it comes to women safety" he said.

After providing martial arts training to girls in UP, Abhishek now aims to expand his training programme beyond Uttar Pradesh. He will soon start giving self-defence training to girls in Delhi and Haryana also.
