HC asst registrar to appear in kidnapping case against Punjab ex-DGP Saini

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Satya Prakash

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, August 27

A Delhi court has summoned an Assistant Registrar of the Punjab and Haryana High Court to appear as a witness on Wednesday in a 25-year-old kidnapping case against former Punjab Director General of Police SS Saini.

Special Judge Anju Bajaj Chandna summoned the Assistant Registrar – who has not been named in the court order – to prove certain documents relating to the case.

Saini is facing trial along with three others for alleged abduction of automobile businessman Vinod Kumar, his brother-in-law Ashok Kumar and their driver Mukhtiyar Singh. While Vinod and Mukhtiyar were picked up by the police from the parking lot of the Punjab and Haryana High Court on March 15, 1994, Ashok was allegedly abducted from Ludhiana the same day.

A criminal case was registered against Saini and others by CBI on the orders of the Punjab and Haryana High Court on March 24, 1994. The case was transferred to Delhi by the Supreme Court in 2004 after Vinod’s mother Amar Kaur expressed apprehension that Saini being a senior IPS officer might influence witnesses.

Kaur—who waged a 24-year legal battle for her lost son and had deposed in a wheelchair against Saini before the trial court—died here on December 12, 2017.

Last month, a CBI Superintendent of Police who probed the case against Saini and others—turned hostile and refused to support the prosecution case.

“I have no knowledge…”, “I do not remember…”, “I do not recollect now” and “I am unable to identify…” These were the standard replies given by 77-year-old Investigating Officer Dharampal Singh (since retired) to the questions from CBI’s Special Public Prosecutor Kumar Rajat.

Singh—who had filed the chargesheet against Saini and three others in the case – was declared hostile after he showed “aggressive behaviour” to the Special Public Prosecutor and tried to controvert him “without listening (to) and understanding the query…”

As Singh failed to support his own chargesheet, the Special Judge had said. “It appears that the witness (IO) has made up his mind to counter every question of the learned Special PP and even though he has been warned (and asked) to understand his duty and responsibility towards the court and to understand the questions and depose in a decent and graceful manner.”
