Ludhiana: Rape victim’s newborn sold off, six booked

The Ludhiana police Tuesday booked six persons, including two employees of the Civil Hospital in the district, for allegedly selling the newborn baby of a 19-year-old rape victim.

The victim had delivered a baby boy at the Civil Hospital in July last week, police said. However, her family had not reported the rape incident. Refusing to accept the baby, they handed him over to one Surjit Singh, a class IV employee at the hospital.

However, on August 23, the victim’s mother filed a police complaint alleging that her daughter was raped by her 32-year old paternal uncle and they want legal action against him. Sub-inspector Manjit Kaur, SHO Dehlon police station, said the mother claimed that they did not file a complaint earlier as their daughter was unmarried and they feared social boycott.

Police arrested the accused after which it was discovered that the baby delivered by the victim was sold off by Surjit Singh and Jasvir Singh — both sanitary workers at Civil Hospital. They too have been arrested.

However, police said that the main conspirators and dealers — Ajit, Karan and Raj — all three from Ludhiana and identified only by their first name — are still absconding. The trio had contacted one Neelam alias Guddi of Dehradun and asked her to arrange a ‘customer’. Neelam further allegedly found a customer in Bijnore of Uttar Pradesh where the baby was sold.

“Surjit and Jasvir sold baby to Ajit, Karan and Raj for Rs 50,000 and the trio then contacted Neelam in Dehradun. They sold the baby to a party in Bijnore. Neelam also received Rs 50,000 but the actual amount in which baby was sold to Bijnore party will be clear only after Ajit, Karan and Raj are arrested,” the SHO said.

Police recovered the baby Monday from Neelam’s possession in Dehradun. “As soon as she got to know that police party from Punjab is arriving, she went to Bijnore and got the baby back,” the SHO said. Neelam too has been arrested.

Police have now filed an FIR under sections 376 (rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of IPC against victim’s uncle at Dehlon police station. Two more sections, 370 (trafficking of persons) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy), have been added against six accused — Surjit Singh, Jasvir Singh, Neelam, Ajit, Raj and Karan.

Since the family is not ready to accept the baby, a policewoman is looking after him, the SHO said, adding, “Application has been moved in court to shift the baby to an orphanage or a shelter home after medical examination”.
