Kashmir in pursuit of normalcy

Srinagar/New Delhi: High schools in the Kashmir valley will reopen from Wednesday in areas where restrictions have been lifted, officials said on Tuesday.

They also said shops and business establishments can open in areas where there are no restrictions.

Addressing a press conference, Jammu and Kashmir director of information and public relations Sehrish Asgar said, “The education department has decided to open all high schools in Kashmir valley from tomorrow in the areas where relaxations have been provided.”

She said restrictions on the movement of people have now been eased in 81 police station areas across the valley.

“The restrictions have been eased out in more police station areas, now taking the total number to 81. The curbs will be eased out in 10 more areas on Thursday,” she said.

Asgar said landline telephone services will be restored in 15 more exchanges by Tuesday evening.

Briefing the reporters about the status of schools, director education Kashmir Younis Malik said that 3,037 primary schools and 774 middle schools have re-opened across

the valley. He said there has been significant improvement in the attendance of teachers in the schools in the past one week.

“We are making best efforts to increase student attendance in the schools,” he said.

Giving details about the situation, SSP Srinagar, Haseeb Mughal, said no major untoward incident has been reported from anywhere in the valley.

However, two nomads were killed by terrorists in the higher reaches of Tral in south Kashmir after they were abducted from their ‘dhok’, a temporary shelter, last week, officials said on Tuesday.

Abdul Qadir Kohli, hailing from Jammu region’s Rajouri district, and his cousin Manzoor Ahmad Kohli were abducted on the intervening night of August 18 and 19 from Pulwama district’s Tral area by terrorists believed to be from the Jaish-e-Mohammed, they said.

While the bullet-ridden body of Abdul Qadir was found at Litchinag in the higher reaches of Tral on Monday, the body of Manzoor Kohli, a resident of Sangri Khanmoh, was recovered from Tral’s Lachi Top Behak forest area on Tuesday, the officials said.

This is the first militant attack after the BJP-led NDA government abrogated provisions of Article 370 and announced bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union territories on August 5.

It is pertinent to note here that top officials of major central ministries and departments on Tuesday met to discuss ways to carry forward the process of bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two UTs and bring back normalcy as early as possible.

Under the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act 2019, which was passed by Parliament this month, the two UTs – Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh – will come into existence on October 31.

More than 15 secretaries of major central ministries and departments, including finance, agriculture, road transport, power, rural development and industries, attended the meeting chaired by Union home secretary A K Bhalla.

“The meeting was held with various departments to assess the implementation of central schemes in Jammu and Kashmir and initiatives to be taken to expedite return of normalcy,” a home ministry spokesperson said.

A six-member minority affairs ministry team led by its secretary arrived in the Kashmir valley on Tuesday for a two-day visit during which it will identify the areas to implement centrally-sponsored development projects after provisions of Article 370 were abrogated, officials said.

Minority affairs ministry secretary Shailesh, joint secretary (Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram) Nigar Fatima, National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation chairman and managing director Shahbaz Ali, and Central Waqf Council secretary S A S Naqvi, are part of the team that left for Srinagar by a morning flight.

The team will explore development possibilities – where schools, colleges, skill development centres can be opened.

The team will look at all possibilities of social-economic development projects, he said.

The team will also visit Jammu and Ladakh at a later date.
