West Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh booked by state police for his 'beat TMC goons, cops' remark

BJP MP Dilip Ghosh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights BJP MP Dilip Ghosh reportedly told people in East Midnapore to 'beat TMC goons, cops' if they were attacked West Bengal govt lodged a suo motu case against Ghosh for trying to incite violence

Kolkata: The West Bengal government on Wednesday filed a case against state BJP president Dilip Ghosh for his statement in which he reportedly attempted to instigate public to assault Trinamool Congress (TMC) workers and police.

Taking strong exception to Ghosh’s speech at Mecheda in east Midnapore on Monday, the Mamata Banerjee government has registered a suo motu case against the BJP leader at Kolaghat police station.

Ghosh has been booked by the police for allegedly making provocative statements against police and members of a political party.

As per reports, while addressing a gathering in east Midnapore, Ghosh reportedly told the crowd to thrash TMC workers and police without any fear of consequences.

“Don't be afraid of TMC goons and police. If you are attacked, beat up TMC workers and police personnel. Don't be afraid. We'll manage if there's any problem,” Ghosh purportedly said.

Ghosh, who represents Medinipur constituency in the Lok Sabha, on Monday also warmed TMC workers that would meet the same fate as senior Congress leader and former finance minister P Chidambaram, who is currently in CBI custody in connection with the INX Media corruption case.

While addressing the gathering, he also said, “Don't be afraid of TMC goons and police personnel. Incidents of attacks on BJP workers in various parts of the state have become regular. Instead of arresting the culprits, the police are implicating our boys in false cases.”

Ghosh is also said to have claimed that TMC leaders and police personnel were “nothing compared to the BJP.”

"If former union home minister P Chidambaram can be put behind bars, these TMC leaders are nothing but mosquitoes and insects to us," he reportedly said.

Meanwhile, reacting to the news of the West Bengal police lodging a case against him for allegedly trying to incite violence, Ghosh said that he was not bothered about it.

"The West Bengal police has earlier registered 22 cases (against me). This will be just one more case. I am not bothered," he was quoted as saying.
