Don’t want another Unnao: SC lawyers file petition in Chinmayanand sexual harassment case

Chinmayanand is a three-time Lok Sabha MP and was a minister of state in the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government

A group of Supreme Court lawyers has filed a petition to the Chief Justice of India to take suo motu cognizance of media reports of a missing law student in Uttar Pradesh's Shahjahanpur.

The girl went missing after she accused BJP leader Chinmayanand of sexual harassment.

In their petition, the Supreme Court lawyers said they did not want a repeat of the Unnao rape case.The girl is a student of the Swami Shukdevanand Postgraduate College in Shahjahanpur, and on August 23, she had posted a video on Facebook where she alleged that Swami Chinmayanand had threatened to kill her and her family if she made the evidence of abuse public.

The case has a striking similarity to the Unnao rape case in which BJP strongman Kuldeep Singh Sengar is the main accused. The Unnao rape case has witnessed a series of mysterious deaths, starting from the arrest and custodial death of the victim's father, to the death of the witness who testified on the death of the father.

Chinmayanand's lawyer, meanwhile, has refuted all allegations and said a conspiracy is being hatched by some to defame Chinmayanand. He also said Chinmayand is the actual victim in the case and not the girl. He said that the girl posted the video to save herself.

He also accused the girl and her family of extortion and challenged her to release the evidence if she has.

A counter-complaint has also been lodged by the supporters of Swami Chinmayanand. According to the counter-complaint, an anonymous call was made to Chinmayanand demanding Rs 5 crore.

The complainant claimed that the caller threatened that if the money was not paid, videos would be put out on social media. Police are investigating the matter after receiving complaints from both sides.

Reports say that the woman has been untraceable since Saturday. Before she went missing, her video had surfaced on social media. She sought the intervention of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in the matter.

An FIR has now been lodged against Swami Chinmayanand by the Uttar Pradesh Police.

Shahjahanpur Superintendent of Police (SP) S Chanappa said Chinmayanand was booked late Tuesday night under IPC sections related to kidnapping and criminal intimidation based on a complaint by the father of the girl.

(With inputs from Shivendra Srivastava)

ALSO READ | UP woman accuses Swami Chinmayanand of sexual harassment, goes missing

ALSO READ | Maharashtra: MCOCA slapped on nine accused of dacoity, assault

ALSO WATCH | 5 ways friends and family can help a sexual assault survivor heal
