Kashmiri Journalist Fahad Bhat arrested and tortured by Indian Army?

-

NEW DELHI, India: Social media claims that the Indian army arrested Fahad Bhat, a Kashmiri Journalist, but photos used for his torture scenes are of an Indian actor and a film scene. However, nothing more could be found about Fahad Bhat being a journalist except social media news about arrest and some photos related to his alleged torture.

In social media, it is claimed that Indian occupation forces arrested Fahad Bhat from his house on the night of August 25-26, and subjected him to brutal torture in the jail.

Everything is blur for media because all internet and communication services and TV Channels remain closed in the India Occupied Jammu and Kashmir since August 5 and no information is coming out from impartial sources. The local newspapers in the beleaguered Valley could not update their online editions while majority of them could also not be printed due to restrictions.

Even when the leaders of India’s main opposition party ‘Congress’ including Rahul Gandhi reached Jammu and Kashmir via a plane on August 24 to examine the ground situation themselves; they were barred from roaming around the Valley and forced to return from Srinagar airport.

It’s been 20 days since the people of Jammu & Kashmir had their freedom & civil liberties curtailed. Leaders of the Opposition & the Press got a taste of the draconian administration & brute force unleashed on the people of J&K when we tried to visit Srinagar yesterday. pic.twitter.com/PLwakJM5W5 — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) August 25, 2019

It’s been 24 days since the fascist Modi-led New Delhi government breached all human norms and laws by scrapping Jammu and Kashmir’s Special Status on August 5, 2019.

Anticipating the Kashmiris’ wrath its unjustified move, the Indian government imposed unprecedented restrictions in Jammu and Kashmir, and converted the Valley particularly Srinagar into a military garrison by deploying troops and paramilitary personnel in every nook and corner to prevent the people from staging demonstrations.

Yet thousands of Kashmiris defied the restrictions and took to streets against India’s atrocities and abrogation of their autonomy. In order to quash the protesters, the Indian forces fired bullets, pellets and teargas shells on them.

In the meantime, due to severe blockade, the residents are now facing acute shortage of essential commodities including baby food and life-saving medicines, and the Valley represents a humanitarian crisis.

Besides being subjugated with force and deprived of civil rights, the Kashmir women are also being subjected to rape and sexual assault by the Hindu Indians.

Even after the Indian government withdrew Kashmiris autonomy and permitted non-Kashmiri Indians to buy lands in the Valley and marry Kashmir women, a number of Indian politicians from the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) made sexist comments directed towards Kashmiri women.

It’s also pertinent to mention here that inspired by Hitler and Mussolini’s fascist ideologies, hardline Hindu group Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) is the parent organisation of BJP.

Last week, the US-based global organization ‘Genocide Watch’ issued a warning alert for the Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir, stating that the Kashmiri Muslims are being locked down and subjected to arrest, torture, rape, and murder.

The organization called upon the United Nations and its members to warn India not to commit genocide in Kashmir.
