Haryana jails a cesspool of apathy; women inmates touched inappropriately by cops, reveals survey

There should be no discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, colour, language, religion, political, national, social origin, property, birth, or any other status. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

After interviewing 475 inmates across 19 prisons in Haryana, a team of Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) released a report- 'Inside Haryana Prisons' to decipher the complexities of the Indian prison system. The report intended to shed light on the alleged gruesome custodial violence that an inmate goes through when lodged in any of the Haryana jails on a daily basis.

Tying private parts with a rope and suspending a brick on the other end, administering electric shocks, the ever-present threat of molestation, rape of women inmates, brutal beatings, a variation of water-boarding are just some of the torture techniques allegedly used by the Haryana policemen. The part-III of the report named 'Voices from Within' lists testimonies of several inmates who have spent days in the prison, experiencing the most inhumane torture techniques by the police personnel.

One such inmate named Kumar* was a minor who was so severely tortured by the Central Intelligence Agency of the Haryana Police that he sustained grievous internal injuries in his scrotum that kept him from walking properly. His age had deliberately been doctored in the papers to project him as an adult, claims the report. Reportedly, in a statement to the team he claimed, “I can never forget those four dreadful days of my life when I was in police custody after my arrest earlier this year. Beating me continuously with a baton was not enough for them (police), they tied my private parts with a rope and hung at brick from it, tugging at my private parts.”

The report was prepared following a study commissioned by the Haryana State Legal Services Authority and it is written by Sabika Abbas and Madhurima Dhanuka. The study revealed that 227 which is over 47 per cent of all the inmates who were interviews were subjected to inhumane methods of torture during the police remand. The stories by inmates revealed that officers also used to extract coerced confessions and one such inmate named Alam said that he was in the police custody for four days and he was forced to 'confess' to a crime on video. However, this 'confession' had been extracted after immense torture, immersing his face in the water and hitting him on his soles using a baton.

The torture, allegedly, was not limited only to male inmates, female inmates alleged that they were threatened with molestation and rape by the male personnel of the Haryana Police. A woman named Reema* stated, “Drunk policemen touched my private parts while I lay naked on the floor of the cell. If I resisted, I was punished with severe physical torture in the form of electric shocks, immersing my face in the water and beating me with sticks,”. She was kept in police custody for seven days without being produced before the magistrate.

Another woman named Zainab*, 39-year-old too was kept in police custody for 15-16 hours. She had been issued rape threats and asked to remove her salwar in the presence of policemen.

These harrowing narratives of the inmates are a sheer violation of the laws including non-compliance of the checks within the criminal justice system vis-a-vis the protection of inmates from any form of violence.

What laws are being violated?

When inmates are subjected to torture, it is an absolute violation of several international and national laws. This includes the charter of the United Nations which came into force on October 24, 1945 (to which India is signatory). It simply stated that prisoners shall be treated with inherent dignity and are to valued as human beings.

Adding to it that, there should be no discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, colour, language, religion, political, national, social origin, property, birth, or any other status. Meanwhile, the prisoners shall retain the human rights and fundamental freedoms set out in Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the optional protocol as well as such other rights as are set out in other United Nations covenants.

Meanwhile, not only the International laws but the laws in Indian Constitution too are violated here which includes provisions of the Prisons Act, 1990, which states that it is the duty of the government for the removal of any prisoner detained under any order or sentence of any court, which is of unsound mind to a lunatic asylum. Along with it, the rights of the prisoners granted under the Constitution of India also includes the right to not be subject to cruel and unusual punishment, the right to be not subjected to custodial violence and/or death in police lock-ups or encounters, and the right to live with the dignity that is accorded to humans.

While the political leaders continue to turn a blind eye to the spectrum of torture, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), a statutory body created under the Protection of Human Rights Act (1993) cleared in its annual report (2015-2016) that custodial violence continues to be rampant in the country. The report stated that "Custodial violence and torture continue to be rampant in the country. It represents the worst form of excesses by public servants entrusted with the duty of law enforcement."

The CHRI report further stated that no prison accepted complaints from inmates about the torture they experienced after admission. And during their first medical examination, if inmates complained about the torture they were simply just given painkillers.

*Report says: All names have been changed in this chapter to withhold the identity of the inmates
