Renault launches Triber in India at Rs 4.95 lakh: Key features and specifications

Renault on Wednesday announced its brand new multi-purpose vehicle, Triber, which is available in India within a price range of Rs 4.95 lakh and Rs 6.49 lakh.

With 1.0 litre, 3 cylinder petrol engine, it produces 72 Ps power and 96 NM torque.

Triber also has a unique seating layout, with a 100+ seating combination, which converts the Triber into a 6 seater or a 7 seater.

Apart from the flexi-seating arrangement, other features include 4 airbags which are situated in the driver's seat, passenger's seat and the front sides of the car.

It has a fuel tank volume of 40 litres and a ground clearance of 182 mm.

It also comes with touch screen features, MediaNavEvolution which is compatible with Android Auto, Apple Carplay.

This is Renault's aim to capture the large chunk of the Indian market by doubling the sales volume of the company in India.

Key features of Renault Triber:

Renault Triber is a joint project by Indian and French Renault teams. The car is specifically made for Indian market after research by Indian and French Renault teams for two years.

Triber has everything new and is similar to Renault Kwid but its sculpted clamshell bonnet, upright stance, headlights, grille, are all new with its CMF-A platform. It is a no-frippery car with lots of volume to fit your loving family in it. Extra space can be made by cleaving and turning the third seat of the second row. One can easily sleep on the back with a slanting position.

An 8 inch LCD adds light to the two shaded colour of the interior. One can watch movies on Apple CarPlay or Android Auto in the car’s centre. The car’s vital information is transmitted from the 3.5-inch in the bunch of mechanics. It has speed alert commuter’s airbag, back camera for its safety. It has 72hp, 96Nm rotatable speed with a capability of 1.0-litre SCe petrol.

Technical specifications of Renault Triber:

Technical features of Renault Triber:

1. Gearbox- 5 speed Manual Transmission

2. Power- 72 Ps @6250 RPM

3. Torque- 96NM @3500 RPM

4. Fuel tank volume- 40 litres

5. Displacement- 999cc
