Punjab: Hospital staff sells baby after rape survivor's family refuses to accept newborn

The accused Neelam also received a payment of Rs 50,000 for selling baby. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Ludhiana police book six people for selling rape victim's baby Victim was allegedly raped by her paternal uncle One of the accused Neelam also received a payment of Rs 50,000 for selling baby

Ludhiana: In a shocking incident, two employees of a government hospital allegedly sold the newborn child of a rape survivor in Ludhiana district of Punjab. Taking prompt action in the case, police have booked six persons, including the two hospital employees.

The 19-year-old rape survivor had delivered a baby boy at the hospital in July this year. The baby was handed over to Surjit Singh, one of the class IV employees at the hospital after the family of the girl refused to accept the newborn.

According to a report, initially, the victim's mother did not file a rape complaint, but on August 23 filed an FIR naming victim's 32-year-old paternal uncle as the man who raped her daughter.

Giving the reason for not filing a rape complaint earlier, the victim's mother said they feared social boycott as her daughter was not married.

"After the arrest of the two hospital employees, Surjit Singh, and Jasvir Singh, both sanitary staff at the hospital, we found out that the baby was sold off by them," said Manjit Kaur, Station House Officer (SHO), Dehlon police station.

Police claim that the main conspirators in the case-Ajit, Karan and Raj-are still at large and efforts are on to nab them. All three accused are from Ludhiana. According to the police, the three accused contacted a woman from Dehradun and asked her to find a customer for the baby. The woman identified as Neelam found a customer in Bijnor district in Uttar Pradesh and sold the baby.

Initially, Jasvir and Surjit sold the baby to the trio from Ludhiana for Rs 50,000. Later, Ajit Karan and Raj connived with Neelam to sell the baby to the third party in Bijnor.

SHO Manjit Kaur said that the accused Neelam also received a payment of Rs 50,000, but there is no information yet on how much amount the baby was sold to the party in Bijnor. Police said the actual amount in which the baby was sold to the third party will be known only after the trio is arrested.

On August 26, police recovered the baby from Neelam's possession in Dehradun and arrested her. Before her arrest, Neelam got the baby back from Bijnor.

An FIR has also been filed against the victim's uncle under Section 376 (rape), 506 (criminal intimidation) of Indian Penal Code (IPC) at Dehlon police station. Police have charged two hospital staff, Neelam, and the trio with section 370 (human trafficking), 120B (criminal conspiracy).

A woman police officer is now looking after the child. Police have also moved an application in the court to transfer the baby to an orphanage as the victim's family is not ready to take the child back.
