Naamkaran actor Nalini Negi accuses roommate, Preeti Rana & her mother of physical assault; files FIR; Read on

-TV actress Nalini Negi, known for shows such as Naamkaran, in a shocking incident, has accused her roommate, Preeti Rana and her mother, Snehalata Rana of physical assault. That’s right! As per reports, Nalini has filed an FIR against Preeti and her mother at the Oshiwara police station. It all started when Nalini asked the mother-daughter duo to vacate the house as her parents were planning to visit her soon. Since the past few years, Nalini and Preeti used to stay together but Nalini decided to move out of the flat to stay alone and therefore, she shifted to a flat in Oshiwara. Thereafter, Preeti contacted Nalini since she was unable to find a place for herself and when Preeti contacted Nalini for help, and requested Nalini to stay with her for a few weeks till she finds a place for herself. Since Nalini knew Preeti, she decided to help her and as a result, Preeti moved in. According to a report, Nalini said that “I accepted her request as it was a matter of few weeks and I have a 2-bhk, so my privacy was not being compromised. Also, in that period, my folks were not in town as they were with my sister in Delhi,”



Since 29-years-old Nalini’s parents were to come and visit her soon in Mumbai, Nalini asked Preeti to vacate the house as she would need the room for her parents. However, within a few days, Preeti’s mother arrived and started staying as well, but Nalini thought maybe she has come to help Preeti in moving out. But things took an ugly turn when Preeti’s mother picked up a fight with Nalini and started abusing her for no rhyme or reason. “I asked her what the matter is but she refused to calm down and started using foul language. Next thing I know is she calls her daughter Preeti and starts complaining that I have been talking to her with disrespect,” Nalini said. Next, Preeti arrived and the mother daughter duo started yelling at Nalini and during their argument, her mother, as per reports, attacked Nalini with a glass and therefore, Nalini lost control and Preeti and her mother “jumped on me and started hitting me brutally. They almost killed me,” Nalini informed.



After the incident, Nalini’s parents arrived in Mumbai to be with her daughter, and after Nalini filed the case in the police station, the Oshiwara police will now submit the case in court. Nalini Negi is also known for shows such as Diya Aur Baati Hum, Laal Ishq, Porus, Doli Aemaani Ki and others.

ALSO READ: Naamkarann's supporting actor Nalini Negi to quit the show
