Bengaluru music composer held for allegedly sending nudes to woman on promise of films

Bengaluru music composer held for allegedly sending nudes to woman on promise of films

The woman alleged that he sexually harassed her by sending nude pictures and demanding that she have a physical relationship with him in order to get a break in the film industry.

news Crime

Police in Bengaluru have arrested a 42-year-old man, who claimed to be a music director, on charges of sexually harassing a woman. This after he allegedly sent his nude pictures to her on WhatsApp.

The accused has been identified as Muraldihar Rao alias Murali, a resident of KS Layout in Bengaluru. He was arrested and was later released on bail. He has been booked under section 354A (sexual harassment) of the Indian Penal Code.

According to police, Murali had befriended the complainant on Facebook in 2017 and boasted of his connection with the Kannada film industry by showing photos of himself with big stars.

The Times of India quoted the woman as saying, “He claimed he is an influential man in Sandalwood film industry and has helped many youngsters by giving them roles in movies, vernacular serials and advertisements. One day, he asked me whether I was interested in acting and I answered in the affirmative.”

She alleged that he sexually harassed her by sending inappropriate messages, jokes and pictures to her. She further alleged that he started sending her nude pictures of himself, making it clear that she would have to develop a physical relationship with him to get an opportunity in the film industry.

The Hindu reports the woman, a homemaker was initially promised advertisement assignments which will give her lakhs in remuneration. He had also allegedly asked the woman to come to his home for a photoshoot and promised her a debut in Kannada movies.

But before she went for the photoshoot, the man started sexually harassing her and started sending nude pictures of him. When the woman resisted, she was asked to compromise in order to get a break in the industry.

Police are also probing if he had sexually assaulted other women as well on the same pretext.
