It's 'Mission 75' For BJP In Haryana Polls, Says Manohar Lal Khattar To News Nation

highlights BJP will get comfortable majority in Haryana, says Manohar Lal Khattar

People of Haryana have full trust on the Bharatiya Janata Party: Khattar

Haryana has rejected dynastic politics, says Manohar Lal Khattar

New Delhi:

In an exclusive interview to News Nation’s Deepak Chaurasia, Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar spoke on a wide range of issues. Khattar, who is on his Jan Ashirwad Yatra, said that the people of Haryana will provide comfortable majority to the incumbent BJP government in the upcoming state polls. Khattar further added that the people of Haryana have witnessed the positive changes that the current government has brought in the state.

During his interview, Khattar launched a scathing attack on the previous governments for ignoring the plights of the people of the state. Ahead of Haryana Assembly polls 2019, the state Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar kicked off his statewide tour ‘Jan Ashirwad Yatra’ in a bus from Panchkula’s Kalka on August 18. He will reach all the 90 assemblies of the state in a 22-day journey till September 8 and will seek blessings from the people for the next five years.

On the issue of dynastic politics, Khattar said that not only Haryana but the entire country have also rejected this kind of politics. When asked whether the abrogation of Article 370 will play a pivotal role in the upcoming polls, Khattar said that scrapping of Article 370 has always been on the core agenda of Bharatiya Janata Party.

Also read: In Pakistan's Letter To UN, Not Only Rahul Gandhi, Manohar Lal Khattar Mentioned Too

Manohar Lal Khattar on Wednesday said his government has put in all possible efforts to carry out equitable development in all parts of the state. Targeting the previous Congress regime in the state, he claimed earlier people were not getting adequate ration under the Public Distribution System (PDS), but now with the introduction of online system, they were getting full quota of their ration.

The chief minister was speaking at public functions in Faridabad. Earlier in the day, he also addressed gatherings at Gurgaon as part of his 'Jan Ashirwad Yatra', which was flagged off on August 18 ahead of the assembly polls in October.

The yatra will culminate in Rohtak on September 8, following which Prime Minister Narendra Modi will hold a public rally there, BJP state unit president Subhash Barala said.

Speaking at a public function in Faridabad on Wednesday, Khattar mentioned his government's plan to connect Faridabad and Gurgaon via metro. "The state government is considering running metro train between Faridabad and Gurugram," he said, according to an official release. In May, the chief minister had directed officials to work actively for extension of the metro rail line in the national capital region in Gurgaon, Faridabad, Sonipat, Jhajjar and Rohtak districts.

Also read: To provide jobs to youth, Haryana to set up human resource department: Manohar Lal Khattar

He had then said that control of all metro rail projects in Haryana should be under the Haryana Metro Rail Transport Corporation so that the state would not have to rely on organisations such as the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation.

During his rally in Faridabad, Khattar said people of the state elected the BJP government in Haryana in 2014 and his dispensation has worked hard to live up to their expectations.

Highlights of the interview:

4.16 pm: Scrapping of Article 370 is a historical step: Haryana CM

4.15 pm: People of Haryana have rejected dynastic politics: Haryana CM

4.14 pm: Those who have committed crimes will be brought to books: Haryana CM

4.13 pm: The opposition parties do not have any issue against the state BJP government: Haryana CM

4.13 pm: We are running an accessible government, people’s problems are getting solved within 30 days: Haryana CM

4.12 pm: Previous government’s never wanted to solve the hardships of the people: Manohar Lal Khattar.

4.11 pm: The people of Haryana are constantly supporting us: Manohar Lal Khattar.

4.10 pm: The people of Haryana have full faith on the BJP government: Manohar Lal Khattar.

4.10 pm: We are always committed in working for the people of the state (Haryana): Manohar Lal Khattar.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
