Islamabad vs Delhi: missile launch and Gujarat ports targeted

The two strategic moves exacerbate tensions over Kashmir. The ports of Mundra and Kandla remain on high alert. Since 2016, at least 27,000 people have been harmed, 205 children left orphaned, and 900 women raped.

Islamabad (AsiaNews/Agencies) – Pakistan today tested a surface-to-surface ballistic missile, one that can deliver a warhead up to 290 km, announced a Pakistani Armed Forces spokesman.

“Pakistan successfully carried out night training launch of . . . missile Ghaznavi capable of delivering multiple types of warheads,” General Asif Ghafoor said.

Meanwhile, Indian forces have gone on maximum alert off the coast of Gujarat, following reports about the possible infiltration of Pakistani military boats in Indian waters.

Since the Indian government on 5 August scrapped Art 370 of the Constitution, which granted the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir a special autonomy, tensions between India and Pakistan have been high.

For more than 70 years Pakistan has disputed India’s control of the state, whose population is predominantly Muslim. The two countries fought three wars over the territory, in 1947-48, 1965 and 1999 (the Kargil war).

Officially, the missile launch was a drill. After reports appeared about Pakistani-trained commandos attacking Indian ports, Pakistani authorities refuted the claim. “India is trying to divert the attention of the world from Kashmir,” a Pakistani source said.

In India, the ports of Mundra and Kandla remain on high alert. Run by the Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone Ltd, the former is India's largest private port. The latter is major hub for crude oil and agricultural commodities.

In Kashmir, life is on hold. The curfew imposed by India 25 days ago remains been in place, whilst communications via telephone and internet continued to be limited.

According to the Kashmir Media Service, a local news agency, some 27,000 Kashmiris have been tortured or injured by Indian security forces and more than 11,000 have been arrested since 2016. More than 10,000 protestors have been shot at with banned pellet guns.

In all, 91 women have been widowed and 205 children have been orphaned. About 900 women have been gang-raped or molested and more than 3,000 buildings, including business and homes, have been destroyed.
