Woman, who married Gujarat man for their love for PM Modi, accuses husband of torture, abuse

Alpika Pandey has accused her husband, Jay Dave, of using her image for his own publicity in BJP and social media. (Photo: Twitter)

Remember the couple who married for their love for Prime Minister Narendra Modi? The woman, Alpika Pandey, has now accused her husband, Jay Dave, of torturing and abusing her. Pandey has even accused Dave of using her image for his own publicity in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and social media.

A few days ago, a Gujarat man had posted on Twitter that he commented on one of Congress chief Rahul Gandhi's post which the woman had liked. "We talked, met and found out that we both support you [Narendra Modi] because we both want to live for India. So, we have decided to do it together." The post had a picture of the couple donning 'NaMo again!' t-shirts attached.

oops! deleted by mistake while I was trying to delete something else pic.twitter.com/nFFNdc2OEh — (@TheJayDave) January 29, 2019

The tweet soon went viral and shared a number of times. The couple reportedly got married on December 31, last year.

Almost after a month, the girl took to Twitter and accused Jay Dave of harassing her and his parents of supporting him.

"Here's the other side of the story that you have been hearing about @thejaydave who met a girl on @facebook who liked one of his comments on @RahulGandhi's page. They fell in love and got together as they both supported @narendramodi. Well, I am that girl."

Alpika Pandey said her husband tortured her "both mentally and physically till the extent that I tried committing suicide".

"I didn't have the freedom to even step out of their house without a member accompanying me in the name of honour."

He tortured me both mentally and physically till the extent that I tried committing suicide. His family supported him in doing so. I didn't have the freedom to even step out of their house without a member accompanying me in the name of honour. @ndtv @GujaratPolice @MinistryWCD — Alpika Pandey (@AlpikaPandey) February 2, 2019

"My loyalty for him was doubted to the extent that he clarified many times what was I doing even when I was in the bathroom. I had to show him each and everything I did on my phone or he would snatch my phone away. He never respected my personal space," Alpika Pandey wrote in her Twitter post.

Alpika Pandey also accused Jay Dave of pressurising her to marry him. According to the reports, Alpika Pandey has been staying with her parents since February 1. Her in-laws have reportedly been pressuring her to delete the tweet.

Also Read | Hampi world heritage site vandalised by hooligans, video goes viral

Also Read | Man holds deadly octopus in bare hands. Internet horrified at viral video

Also Read | This TikTok tune is making India dance, from rooftops to bedrooms. Watch viral videos
