DNA report of foetus nails step father, gets lifer for raping minor

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a man to life imprisonment for rape of his minor step daughter. The court of Additional Sessions judge Rashmi Sharma also imposed a fine of Rs.1.6 lakh on the convict of which Rs.1.5 lakhs is to be paid by convict to the victim as compensation. Besides other evidences, the court took note of the DNA report confirming that the foetus borne to the girl, was of the accused.

Awarding the sentence, the judge held, “Such deplorable thought of treating one's daughter as a plaything is an attitude of savage and must be inexorably and mercilessly punished in the severest terms. Biological connection through blood is not always needed to relegate a person to the stature of father. A step father is clothed with same rights, duties, responsibilities towards his children.”

On June 4, 2017, Meherban police had booked the accused, who is a native of Uttar Pradesh under section 376 of IPC (rape) and sections 3 and 4 of protection of children from sexual offences act for violating his step daughter.

As per the prosecution, the mother of the victim, who got separated from her husband, got married to the accused about five years prior to the incident. She had two sons and a daughter, who is the surivivor from the wedlock. From her second marriage, the complainant had two daughters. The complainant said that she and the accused along with their children were living in the same house.

She further added that on June 2, 2017, she had gone to Chandigarh and when she returned after two days, her daughter told her that on June 3, 2017 at 1.30 pm the accused had forcible physical relations with her. The complainant informed police about the incident following which the accused was booked and arrested. Later during the course of medical examination of the girl, it came to light that she was pregnant. Later blood samples of victim and the accused were taken and aborted foetus were taken for DNA examination. In the report, DNA samples of the accused and foetus matched proving the crime of the accused.

During trial of the case additional public prosecutor S S Haidar sought strict punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence. He added that DNA report confirmed that the foetus was of the accused which proved the offence against the accused among other evidences. The court after taking note of the evidence and statements convicted and sentenced the accused.

In the detailed judgment, the court cited the couplet of Sudarshan Fakhir “Mera Qatil Hi Mera Munsif Hai, Kya Mere haq Mei faisla Dega” and remarked that the celebrated couplet is a gruesome reminder and sordid reminder of the paradox with which court is “being confronted in the case in hand-to adjudicate upon the adequacy of sentence upon a father for the beastly act of ravishing his daughter.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
