CBI vs Kolkata Police: Supreme Court directs Kolkata top cop Rajeev Kumar to join probe, Mamata Banerjee hails verdict, next hearing on Feb 20

CBI vs Kolkata Police LIVE updates: In what could trigger a fresh war between the Trinamool Congress and the BJP, the West Bengal Police on Sunday detained members of a CBI team which had arrived at the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar to question him in connection with Rose Valley and Saradha ponzi scams around 7 pm. Reports said the Kolkata Police didn’t allow the CBI sleuths to enter the Loudon Street residence of Rajeev Kumar, a 1989 batch IPS officer who allegedly destroyed proof in the chit fund scam in which lakhs of people from both West Bengal and Odisha were duped to the tune of Rs 25,000 crore. The Rose Valley scam is worth over Rs 15,000 crore

After minor altercations, five CBI officers including its Deputy Superintendent Tathagata Bardhan were bundled into three vehicles and taken to the Shakespeare Sarani police station forcibly. The CBI team was trying to locate Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar who had gone missing after the agency summoned him in connection with chit fund scams.

A visibly upset Mamata Banerjee rushed to Kumar’s residence and was closeted with other top officers. Later, she alleged that National Security Advisor Ajit Doval was giving instructions to the CBI at the behest of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP President Amit Shah to arrest Kumar. Tomorrow they (CBI) may come to my house, Mamata Banerjee said.

Minutes later, the West Bengal chief minister staged a sit-in at Metro Channel in Dharamsala area and the police commissioner also joined her.

Meanwhile, the CBI has decided to move the Supreme Court against the West Bengal government. Congress leader and lawyer Abhishek Manu Singhvi will appear for the Mamata Banerjee government in the SC today.

Apart from that major Opposition parties including the Congress have supported the Mamata Banerjee government’s stand.

West Bengal: Police detains the CBI team which had reached the residence of Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar. The team has now been taken to a police station. pic.twitter.com/YXJJ3d11LL — ANI (@ANI) February 3, 2019

Here are the LIVE updates of CBI vs Kolkata Police case:

Highlights

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
