Missing UP girl found: SC asks for ‘exact location’, tells police to produce the law student before it today

Supreme Court of India | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Missing UP law student found in Rajasthan SC tells UP govt to produce the girl before it The girl's parents had accused Swami Chinmayanand of sexually harassing her

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Friday ordered the Uttar Pradesh Police to produce before it the missing UP law student, whose father had claimed that BJP leader and former union minister Swami Chinmayanand had sexually harassed his daughter. The UP Police earlier today said the missing girl has been found in Rajasthan with a friend.

Issuing the order to the UP Police, the top court said it will reassemble in open court after interacting with the girl.

The Supreme Court bench headed by Justice R Banumathi had earlier asked the police as to when can she be produced before the court. To this, Uttar Pradesh government told the bench that the law student had already reached Fatehpur Sikri.

“We can send a written email to the authorities and they will re-route with security. She can reach Delhi in two and a half hours. The boy along with her will also come with her. The entire security will be re-routed,” the UP government counsel informed the court.

As soon as the counsel for UP government had informed the court that the girl had been found, the bench asked the UP government to inform about the “exact location” of the missing law student “in five minutes”.

The young woman was untraceable since August 24. Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh said the girl was fine and was being brought to Shahjahanpur.

The missing complaint was filed by the girl’s parents on August 27 and in the complaint, they had blamed college director Swami Chinmayanand. The student had alleged that the former Union minister and BJP leader had sexually harassed her.

DGP OP Singh today said the BJP leader had filed a counter FIR in the matter and accused the girl of trying to extort Rs 5 crore from him.

“FIR was registered by BJP leader and former union minister Swami Chinmayanand. As per the FIR, the girl was demanding Rs 5 crore and threatening to go for media trial. Appropriate legal action will be taken,” the UP Police chief said.

Meanwhile, expressing relief over is daughter being finally traced, the law student’s father today said, “I'm relieved that she has been located. I would not like to say anything about Swami ji (BJP leader Swami Chinmayanand) until I hear what my daughter has to say.”

According to Chinmayanand's counsel Om Singh, the girl was misguided by the people who were working against the BJP leader. She was being used to serve their interests, the counsel added.

It may be recalled that the law student, who was studying at the college run by Chinmayanand's trust, had gone missing a day after she had posted a video on the social media and levelled accusations of sexual harassment against a "senior leader of the sant community". She had also alleged that the person had threatened to kill her.

While the girl had not named Chinmayanand in the video, her father said in the initial complaint to the police that his daughter and some other women were sexually harassed by the BJP leader.

According to Shahjahanpur Police, the FIR was filed against Chinmayanand and he was booked for abduction for murder and criminal intimidation.

In 2011 as well, an FIR was filed against the BJP leader for raping a woman who stayed at his ashram. Chinmayanand had disputed the charge.
