Modi Govt Releases Rs 47,436 Cr For Afforestation, 16-Yr-Old Sikh Girl Abducted In Pakistan + More Top News

Modi Government Gives Major Push To Environment, Releases Rs 47,436 Crore For Afforestation In Various States

BCCL

Amid all the growing concerns about the rapid deforestation in India, the Modi government has given a major push for the environment and green cover with the release of Rs 47,436 crore to 27 States for afforestation. Union Minister for Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Prakash Javadekar, handed over Rs 47436 crore of Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) funds to various states, in presence of MoS Babul Supriyo. Read more.

Here are the other top news of the day:

1. Protests In Pakistan After 16-Year-Old Sikh Girl Abducted, Converted To Islam And Married Off To A Muslim Man

A Sikh family in Nankana Sahib town, the birthplace of Guru Nanak Sahib has alleged that their daughter, Jagjit Kaur who is a minor was abducted, converted to Islam and married off to a Muslim man. According to Bhagwan Singh, a granthi at Gurdwara Tambu Sahib and father of the girl, his daughter went missing a few days ago and returned as a married. Read more.

2. Heavy Rain Causes Leakage In Bengaluru's Kempegowda International Airport, Video Goes Viral

Passengers at the Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) in Bengaluru were in for a shock on Thursday evening after heavy rains caused mayhem there. Water was seen gushing from the roof of the airport after the city experienced heavy rains the same day. Read more.

3. UN Draft Report Warns Melting Glaciers Will Affect Us Badly, Rising Seas Might Displace Millions

AFP

In a draft United Nations report, the same oceans that nourished human evolution are poised to unleash misery on a global scale unless the carbon pollution destabilising Earth's marine environment is brought to heel. As the 21st century unfolds, melting glaciers will first give too much and then too little to billions who depend on them for fresh water, it finds. Read more.

4. Moirangthem Loiya Has Single-Handedly Replanted A 300 Acre Forest In Manipur And Saved Over 250 Species Of Plants

Manipur: Moirangthem Loiya from Uripok Khaidem Leikai in Imphal West, has replanted Punshilok forest in Langol hill-range in 17 years, says,"Today,forest area covers 300acres. 250 species of plants&25 species of bamboo grow here&its home to a variety of birds,snakes&wild animals" pic.twitter.com/PIP0GQXydM — ANI (@ANI) August 30, 2019

In recent years, there are several people who continue to raise awareness about our depleting forest cover but some have gone the extra mile. One such man, who has turned a barren land into a lush green forest is Moirangthem Loiya from Uripok Khaidem Leikai in Imphal West. His story is an inspiration for all given how much flora and fauna he has saved single-handedly. Read more.

5. Protests Across Mumbai As BMC Approves Cutting Of 2,700 Trees In Aarey Forest From Metro Car Shed

BCCL

Concerned citizens and environmentalists in Mumbai are up in arms after the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) Tree Authority cleared the proposal for cutting of 2,702 trees in Aarey Forest for the Metro-3 car shed. Read more.
