India authorities bar Kashmiris from attending funeral prayers

At least 500 incidents of protest have broken out in occupied Kashmir during last three weeks.

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – Following a ban on the prayers, the Indian government on Wednesday barred banned Kashmiris from attending funeral prayers in the occupied Kashmir.

According to international media, protest were held at 500 places during the last three week and dozens of innocent Kashmiris were injured during clashes with the puppet forces.

The Indian forces have failed to bring the situation in occupied Valley under control.

According to a report of Al Jazeera, at least 500 incidents of protest have broken out in Indian-occupied Kashmir since New Delhi stripped the region of its autonomy and imposed a military clampdown more than three weeks ago.

The Kashmir valley is under a strict lockdown, imposed hours before India s decision to bring Kashmir under its direct rule.

Movements are restricted in the region and phone and internet services have been cut. Police have been using pellet guns and tear gas to disperse crowds of protesters in the main city of Srinagar.

The lockdown, as well as the deployment of tens of thousands of extra troops to reinforce the 500,000 based in Kashmir, was ordered amid fears of unrest in the disputed region where an armed rebellion against Indian rule has been waged since 1989.

But protests have broken out, including in the main city of Srinagar, with police using pellet guns and tear gas to disperse the crowds.

Nearly 100 civilians have been injured so far, with a further 300 police and more than 100 paramilitary troopers hurt, the official added. "The number of protests could be much higher and bigger without the blockade in force," the official said, adding that "anger and public defiance is constantly rising".

"Efforts for easing the conditions are made all the time but nothing seems to be working for now. There is nervousness spreading in the security establishment."

While authorities have allowed schools to reopen, students have been staying away. Told to keep open all day or "don t open at all", some shops have remained shut. At least 4,000 people have been detained across the valley, including businessmen, academics, activists and local politicians, with a few released since then.

Another senior government official said that at least 1,350 protesters - described by the police as "stone-pelters" - have been arrested since August 5.

The detentions came as the Supreme Court on Wednesday gave the government a week to respond to a legal challenge calling for the communications blackout to be ended to allow for media reporting.

The court also said several petitions challenging the removal of the constitutional clause on Kashmir s autonomy would be held in October.
