From NAM to Art. 370, Indian PMs derive strength from domestic mandate

Conventional wisdom suggests public opinion as a relatively impotent force in India’s foreign policymaking. It is believed that matters of “national importance” are not politicized at the hustings rather left to the wisdom of a handful of “experts.” Those suggesting poverty of electoral debate vis-à-vis foreign policy, which seems reasonably true, fail to recognize the importance of mandate received by Indian premiers as a crucial factor in their global norm-setting ability. The Indian prime ministers who have etched indelible marks in international history were recipients of a strong electoral mandate with little ideological opposition at home. Lest their ideas are contested back home intensely by a belligerent opposition, their international projection might have been weaker.

Idea of a democratic mandate

In 1949, among the first foreign affairs decisions that the interim government in New Delhi headed by Jawaharlal Nehru had to make was of joining the Commonwealth. The interim government was formed on a limited franchise as the constitution making was underway. Nehru, without taking anyone into confidence, had unilaterally announced India’s participation at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in London. On his return, when Nehru moved the motion of joining the Commonwealth for ratification, it met with strong opposition. Speaking against the motion, Prof. Shibban Lal Saksena, also belonging to the Congress party, noted that the decision to join the Commonwealth “can only be properly decided by the new Parliament of the Indian Republic, which will be elected under the new constitution on the basis of adult suffrage.” Prof. Saksena’s words are indicative of the primacy of parliamentary majority needed by a prime minister for foreign policy conduct. It also implies stronger the mandate at home, freer the hands of the premier. Beyond people’s mandate and parliamentary nod in some cases such as war, the constitutional design has not levied any further inhibitions in the scheme of foreign policymaking. There are some clichéd peace and harmony statements as state principles under Art. 51 which are entirely non-binding.

Power of mandate

Nehru, during most of his lifetime, enjoyed not only a brute majority in the parliamentary but also witnessed little substantial opposition. In the first general election, for which Prof. Saksena was requesting to wait, the Congress party received a three-fourths majority. The second biggest party in the parliament, the Communist Party of India (CPI), could not secure one-tenth of the seats compared to Congress. The Bharatiya Jana Sangh (BJS), the precursor to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), fared even worse. There was hardly any opposition—ideological or electoral. Those on the left and right of the spectrum challenging Nehru’s policy pronouncements were so faint and feeble to only register themselves as a footnote in the annals of history. Numbers in the parliament eventually decimated those articulate and savvy who contradicted Nehru in public meeting and columns.

Nehru’s single most significant contribution to India’s foreign policy was the invention and institutionalization of non-alignment. Despite criticisms from the Communists and Praja Socialists on the left and the Jana Sangh and the Swatantra on the right, Nehru continued pursuing non-alignment to the extent of not joining any bloc. Nor did the multipronged criticisms inhibit him from acting as per exigencies. For example, during the 1962 Chinese excursion, Nehru wrote three letters to the White House to seek squadrons of jets loaded with ordnances. The move was wrapped under the spin of an act “without any political strings attached” to minimize the damage; nevertheless, Nehru did not fear domestic fallout in the pursuit of such brinkmanship. Nehru enjoyed a free reign then, so did Indira and Rajiv in their days during the Bangladesh and Sri Lanka crisis respectively.

Premiers falling back on unfavorable coalition partners, as the history suggests, could not conduct themselves with such patented aplomb. Atal Bihar Vajpayee, as the foreign minister in the politically vulnerable Morarji Desai government, was scared to take a position on Arab-Israeli conflict publicly despite the pro-Israel political pedigree of Jana Sangh. As the candid Vajpayee once conveyed to president Carter, the need for survival trumped all ideological affinities. With changing times and a much stable coalition in the early 2000s, Vajpayee could accommodate high-level bilateral visits including that of Israeli PM Ariel Sharon to New Delhi. Unfortunately, some premiers were sacrificed at the altars of political instability before they could even lay the foundation stone of their foreign policy. IK Gujral envisaged a pacifying doctrine for India’s neighbors in an era of escalating tensions. He could not last enough politically to finish his first trick.

The cry of “domestic compulsions” due to the lack of stable mandate was a staple for Manmohan Singh. During the ratification of the Civil-Nuclear Deal in the parliament, his government was saved by the bell. Dr. Singh, with all his alacrity for pursuing the peace process with Islamabad, knew that he was not the recipient of the political mandate in that government. As the media overheard him in Yekaterinburg in Russia, he told Pakistan prime minister Yusuf Raza Gilani that he had “limited mandate” (from party?) to convey that terrorist activities from Pakistan soil should not be allowed. Manmohan Singh, in his first term, was aware of the bounds of a “selected PM.”

The Modi Mandate

Modi rules in an India of political unipolarity. A politically impaired Modi hinging on an opportunist Nitish, a pesky Uddhav, or a vigilant Chandrababu would never have been able to make his move on Art. 370. The last dyke of the Rajya Sabha was also blown by the deft floor managers of the BJP. On abrogation of Jammu and Kashmir’s special status, Modi reigns supreme entirely unperturbed by the human rights columnists in the media within and without. On the contrary, his standing gets stronger, the more censures he receives. Beyond the idea of “legacy” that all world leaders secretly desires, such short-term political gains further fuel unimaginable gambits like Kashmir. Even if the Supreme Court overturns his move deeming it unconstitutional, he has little to lose domestically. It shall still broaden his fan base for the courage and conviction displayed. The deluge of public opinion is such that even the Congress top brass has to toe his line, albeit reluctantly. With a stable political hegemon like Modi to stay, even his international counterparts are investing political capital in him. It is therefore not surprising every major trading partner of India have either backed the J&K move under the euphemism of bilateral framework or chosen to remain silent save for China.

It is therefore a folly to look for policies in Modi’s election speeches. He goes out there to secure people’s “blessing,” (or as we call it a commanding mandate) which has empowered every prime minister since Nehru.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
