Asked for immediate remedial action: MEA on abduction, forced conversion of Sikh girl in Pakistan

MEA official spokesperson, Raveesh Kumar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights A 19-year-old girl, identified as Jagjit Kaur, was forcefully kidnapped and converted to Islam MEA shared these concerns with the Government of Pakistan and asked for immediate remedial action

New Delhi: Taking note of reports of abduction and conversion of a Sikh girl in Pakistan, the Ministry of External Affairs has asked the neighbouring country for immediate remedial action in the matter.

"The Ministry has received a number of representations from various quarters of civil society in India, including Sikh religious bodies in India, at the reports of the incident of abduction and forced conversion of a minor Sikh girl in Pakistan. We have shared these concerns with the Government of Pakistan and asked for immediate remedial action," said the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) official spokesperson Raveesh Kumar.

Meanwhile, Sardar Gurcharan Singh from Canada threatened to boycott International Sikh Convention tomorrow in Governor House Lahore, Pakistan over the incident.

Delhi MLA, Manjinder Singh Sirsa, who is a member of Akali Dal, thanked Sikh diaspora for a united stand on the issue and Gurcharan Singh for boycotting International Sikh Convention. "Freedom of religion is a basic human right and violations of this right won’t be accepted," he tweeted.

Earlier, Kumar had said that Pakistan should fulfill all its obligations towards protecting minorities instead of commenting on others as "a fire was raging there". He further said that India has from time to time raised the issue of treatment of minorities in Pakistan.

"We have talked of harassment, violence, forced abduction, forced conversion, persecution of minorities. I feel that the minorities who are there, they have some obligations, which Pakistan should fulfil," Kumar said.

He also said the biggest thing is that before speaking of others, Pakistan should know what is happening in their house. "And everybody knows what is happening in their house. A fire is raging there," he said.

A 19-year-old girl, identified as Jagjit Kaur, was forcefully kidnapped and converted to Islam and made to marry a Muslim man. Kaur, daughter of Bhagwan Singh, a 'granthi' (priest) of Gurudwara Tambu Sahib, was reportedly converted to Islam at gunpoint. Two people were arrested in this regard.

The incident triggered a huge outrage across India and several political leaders called for stern action against the perpetrators.

Earlier today, Governor of Pakistan's Punjab province Chaudhry Muhammad Sarwar met the father of the Sikh girl.
