MP govt to control illegal sand mining, new policy to come in two months, says CM Kamal Nath

BHOPAL: Amid a political slugfest over illegal sand mining in Madhya Pradesh, chief minister Kamal Nath Friday said that his government has instructed strict action to curb illegal mining in the state. Nath further said that the new mining policy has stricter regulations and it will be implemented within two months."On sand mining, I have instructed to take full control of illegal mining. We have prepared and approved a new sand mining policy in the state cabinet. We are working on this policy. I am hopeful that in two months we will be able to give a new sand mining policy to the state", Nath told reporters in New Delhi, on Friday.Illegal sand mining was one of the major political issues during assembly and Lok Sabha elections in the state. The Congress government after assuming power had promised to curb illegal mining in all sensitive districts and assured strict action against mining mafia. However, sporadic incidents of illegal mining continued to pour from various districts with complaints from Congress ministers and MLAs against local authorities.The Congress government had promised to bring a new sand mining policy with minor changes aimed at increasing revenue and curb illegal mining. In May last, the state cabinet had approved the Sand (Mining, Transportation, Storage and Marketing) Rules, 2019. Under the provisions of this rule, sand mine groups will be formed and auctioned. While on one hand, this will fetch revenue to state's coffer, the other side provisions will also be made to manage the funds for panchayats."With the e-auction of mines there will be transparency. Machines will not be used to dig out sand from the Narmada river . Permission to use machines for sand mining in other rivers will be given on the basis of environmental approval", state public relations minister PC Sharma had revealed.He also said that sand will be supplied from legal mines for the government and public works being undertaken by the panchayats themselves. The royalty amount paid by the panchayats for such works will be returned by the department. The construction works being undertaken by the panchayats, which have been given on contract, will not be exempted from royalty.The government, however, is likely to make further amendments in the new mining policy which according to chief minister Nath, is likely to come up in two months. So far, the government has withdrawn sand mining rights from panchayats as decided by the previous BJP government in November 2017.As per the new policy, the mines will be auctioned by the government and process of identifying new mines will be taken up to increase the revenue. The new policy is though, is eagerly awaited.In the meantime, incidents of illegal mining increased despite a ban during monsoon.The matter drew wider attention when senior cabinet minister Govind Singh recently, shocked the ruling government stirring a political debate and alleged that sand mafia is looting the state and the government is unable to stop them. He also said that 90% of policemen and 10% of mining officials were involved in illegal sand and stone mining businesses and plundering natural resources in the state. Even a town inspector (TI) is making Rs 50 lakh a month, he had alleged.As the minister's statement triggered political row, chief minister instructed the officials and mining minister Pradip Jaiswal to control the situation, who in turn shot a missive to all district officials to act stringently against illegal mining in their areas. "I have written letters to all district collectors and SPs that in case of complaints regarding illegal mining in their areas, they will be held responsible. I have also urged the Congress MLAs and ministers to cooperate with the district authorities and come forward to control the illegality," Jaiswal had stated.Following a discussion over the matter with the CM, minister Govind Singh clarified that his statements regarding illegal mining in the state were meant to take effective action against mining mafia. However, the Opposition BJP continued its attack on the ruling government alleging large-scale corruption and irregularities. Now, the BJP said that Congress government has failed to control illegal mining during existing laws. How will it change after the implementation of the new policy."Every Congress minister is trying to get hold of illegal mining business in his region hence, complaining. Sand mining is already banned during monsoon. When the government cannot act on the complaints of its own ministers how can it control the illegality across the state", said BJP state spokesperson Rajneesh Agrawal.
