‘Kashmir Hour’ observed at noon across Pakistan

ISLAMABAD: On Prime Minister Imran Khan ’s appeal, Pakistanis observed “Kashmir Hour” on Friday across the country to protest against India scrapping the special status of Jammu and Kashmir on August 5.At noon, as sirens blared for “Kashmir Hour” across major Pakistani cities, all traffic signals turned red for several minutes. This was followed by broadcasts of the national anthems of Pakistan and part of Kashmir under its control on all TV and radio stations.While all chief ministers and parliamentarians gathered outside the CM secretariat buildings in provincial capitals, PM Khan addressed a rally of thousands outside government offices on Constitution Avenue in Islamabad, vowing to continue the fight for Kashmir until its “liberation from India’s occupation”.“Our Kashmiri brothers and sisters are going through a very tough time. We are with them in their testing times. The message that goes from here today is that as long as Kashmiris don’t get freedom, we will stand with them,” he said, while comparing Prime Minister Narendra Modi ’s administration to Nazi Germany ’s Third Reich.“We have to understand the ideology of BJP and RSS. The RSS believes Hindus are superior to all others — their manifesto is based on either to force out Muslims from India or treat them as third-class citizens. The RSS rhetoric has captured India just like the Nazi party had held Germany hostage,” he reiterated.Khan said the entire world should have already taken a stand for Kashmiris but religion proved a decisive factor in their way. “Had the oppressed people in Kashmir not been Muslims, the world’s reaction would have been much stronger,” he said.Khan reiterated that India was planning a “false flag” operation to divert attention from “atrocities in Kashmir”. “I want to tell Narendra Modi that Pakistan would respond with greater force if that happened. Our armed forces are ready,” he warned.Khan told the gathering the world needs to realise that “India’s toxic ideology” will eventually affect everyone. “They can choose to stay silent right now but they will face the problem down the line. The international community must know that any conflict between two nuclear-armed countries will be destructive for the entire world,” the PM said.“We will run a worldwide campaign involving overseas Pakistanis, international human rights organisations, activists, celebrities, and influential people to inform the world about the situation in Kashmir. Such a campaign can help turn the world’s attention to the grave humanitarian crisis in the Himalayan region,” he said.Another “Kashmir Hour” even in Islamabad was held at the Presidency where President Arif Alvi addressed a gathering. “I pray to God that in our lifetime we see an independent Kashmir in which the rights of its people are not repressed, their women are not raped and their people are not martyred,” Alvi said.The events organised on Friday were the first in what will be weekly nationwide rallies until PM Khan leaves for New York next month to attend the United Nations General Assembly . He vowed to raise the Kashmir issue at the UNGA.
