Narendra Modi-Amit Shah duo a threat to India, its democracy: Arvind Kejriwal

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday (February 03) slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi and said he has made a complete "mockery of democracy and federal structure".

Kejriwal was reacting news about a team of CBI officials trying to question Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar in relation to a chit fund scam.

Police have arrested five CBI officials soon after West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee arrived at the spot.

Coming in support of Mamata Banerjee, who has defended the Kolkata Police Commissioner, Kejriwal slammed Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah for using federal agencies and making a mockery of the country's federal structure.

Modi ji has made a complete mockery of democracy and federal structure. Few years back, Modi ji captured Anti- Corruption Branch of Del govt by sending paramilitary forces. Now, this. Modi-Shah duo is a threat to India and its democracy. We strongly condemn this action https://t.co/Vay723LON9 Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) February 3, 2019

"Modi ji has made a complete mockery of democracy and federal structure. A few years back, Modi ji captured Anti-Corruption Branch of Del govt by sending paramilitary forces. Now, this. Modi-Shah duo is a threat to India and its democracy. We strongly condemn this action," he said.

Follow this story for all live developments in the case

The CBI had been trying to locate Rajeev Kumar to interrogate him in connection with the Rose Valley and Saradha ponzi scams.

However, Mamata Banerjee had lashed out at the Bharatiya Janata Party earlier in the day for practicing the worst kind of political vendetta.

"The highest levels of the BJP leadership are doing the worst kind of political vendetta. Not only are political parties their targets, but they are also misusing power to take control of the police and destroy all institutions," she said.

Coming to Kumar's defence, Mamata Banerjee said the Kolkata Police Commissioner is among the best in the world and his bravery and integrity are unquestioned.

"The Kolkata Police Commissioner is among the best in the world. His integrity, bravery, and honesty are unquestioned. He is working 24x7, and was on leave for only one day recently. When you spread lies, the lies will always remain lies," he said.
