Rape or AIDS: Mumbai police, kin wrestle over death of 19-year-old assaulted on birthday

While the Mumbai police stand firm that a 19-year-old woman, who allegedly drugged and gang-raped, died due to AIDS, and not from physical injury of the sexual assault, her family hold that the trauma destabilised her already frail health.



After her death on Wednesday, the police have refused to update the case to reflect the relevant IPC sections, and are awaiting the post mortem report.



The teenager was allegedly drugged and raped in Chembur on July 7. She was visiting her brother, a labourer, and had gone to meet a friend. Her brother says she came home late that night and ran high fever the next day. He took her to a local clinic, where they gave her some medicines. However, her health started deteriorating. In three days, her leg was paralysed, then her hand and she slowly lost her speech. She didn't inform her brother, who noticed eventually and called his father, who came from Aurangabad to take her home.



"I asked her if anything was wrong, but she denied it," said her brother. She was admitted to a hospital in Aurangabad, where the doctors said she had been sexually assaulted and pumped with drugs. "The doctors there informed Begumpura Police Station and submitted a medical report supporting their findings," says the brother. "The police registered an FIR based on this report. My sister was not in a condition to say anything or give a statement."



She was moved to the ICCU ward as her condition deteriorated, but all paths of treatment failed because her immune system was already compromised by the HIV infection.



"My daughter was crying in the hospital but was unable to speak," said the father. "I asked her whether she was raped and she replied yes. I asked her how many people, and she gestured 'four'."



The family knew she was HIV+. "We knew about her condition, but her health got worse after the assault. That's what killed her, not AIDs."



On July 30, the Begumpura police managed to register the case and transfer it to the Chunabhatti police station in Mumbai. After her death, the family has been urging the police to ass murder charges in the case to nab the absconding youth, but the police hold that she died because of her frail condition. "The deceased was living with the condition for eight years and was in the last stages of the disease. Her chances of survival were less," said an officer.



"We are waiting for the postmortem report," said DCP Shashi Meena, "Then we will know the exact cause of death and will add the sections accordingly."

Pinning down the cause Police are waiting for post mortem results to confirm cause of death. They hold that it was because of AIDS and not sexual assault The family wants murder charges to be linked to the four absconding men, who had allegedly raped the 19-year-old after her birthday celebrations
