Rs 485cr bitcoin scam ‘kingpin’ killed, 5 held

DEHRADUN: Police on Friday uncovered what they claimed was a Rs 450-crore Bitcoin scam that led to the murder of the alleged kingpin, Abdul Shakoor , 35, in Dehradun in the intervening night of Wednesday and Thursday. Shakoor’s body was dumped by five men at a private hospital on the Dehradun-Mussoorie road. The men had fled after leaving the body in the emergency ward.Police on Friday arrested the five accused — Faris Mamnoon, Arvind C, Asif Ali, Sufail Mukhtar and Aftab Mohammad — all hailing from Kerala, on charges of beating Abdul Shakoor to death.Providing details of the case, Dehradun SSP Arun Mohan Joshi, said, “Crypto-currency worth hundreds of crores led to the murder of Abdul Shakoor. The accused, who are all members of Shakoor’s business team, tortured him brutally at a house in Prem Nagar (on the outskirts of Dehradun) that led to his death.”Dehradun SSP Arun Mohan Joshi said that police were on the lookout for five more persons, identified as Aashiq, Arshad, Yasin, Rehaab and Muneef, who were the members of Shakoor’s core team, and hail from Manjeri town in Kerala.Shakoor had allegedly collected around Rs 450 crore for investing in crypto-currency from the residents of Manjeri, Pandikkad and Malappuram city in Kerala, with the help of his core team members and their respective sub-teams.Police said that animosity among the team members started when Shakoor allegedly suffered losses in the Bitcoin business and he, along with his core team members Aashiq, Rehaab, Arshan and Muneef, escaped from Kerala sometime back. However, people in Kerala who had invested money in Bitcoins through close associates of Shakoor kept chasing them, forcing them to hide at different places and keep changing their locations.During questioning, the accused told police that Shakoor also deceived his close associate Aashiq by claiming that his Bitcoin account had been hacked, and that he was going to launch his own crypto-currency to pay back the investors’ money.Not convinced with Shakoor’s arguments, Aashiq along with his close associates, all of whom were arrested by Dehradun police on Friday, hatched a plan to find the password of Shakoor’s Bitcoin account. “Aashiq was of the view that Shakoor still has hundreds of crores in his Bitcoin account and they can access that money by getting the password of his account,” said SSP Arun Mohan Joshi.Outlining the timeline, Joshi said that on August 12, Aashiq along with Abdul Shakoor reached Dehradun and started searching for a house to rent. On August 20, the duo moved into a house at Suddhowala in the Prem Nagar area, where they were joined by other members of the group on August 26. “All the other members started pressuring Shakoor to share the password of his account, which apparently he was not willing to do so. They subsequently started torturing him, which led to his death. There are injury marks all over his body,” the SSP said.Things came to a pass after Shakoor became unconscious during one of the torturing sessions. “With their hopes of getting the account password fading away, Shakoor’s associates made a last-ditch effort to revive him by taking him to two hospitals. They first took him to a hospital near Ballupur Chowk where doctors declared him dead. Then they rushed him to a super-specialty hospital on the Dehradun-Mussoorie road, where the doctors’ response was the same. All of them escaped from the hospital leaving their vehicle in front of the emergency ward,” said a police official investigating the case.
