'Our sister hasn't returned': Brother of Sikh girl abducted and converted to Islam in Pakistan

'Our sister hasn't returned': Brother of Sikh girl abducted and converted to Islam in Pakistan

The girl, identified as 19-year old Jagjit Kaur, was allegedly abducted and forced to marry a Muslim man in Pakistan. The incident came to light on Thursday after a Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA, Manjinder Singh Sirsa shared a video of the girl's family alleging that the girl was abducted and forcefully converted.

A Sikh girl who was allegedly abducted and forcibly converted to Islam in Pakistan has returned home to her parents, Nankana Sahib police claimed on Friday.

Police said they had arrested eight persons in connection with the incident.

The boy who allegedly married the girl hasn’t been arrested and the girl was taken back by the government from the family in its ‘protection’ saying ‘formal documentation needs to be done’.

Meanwhile, the girl's family alleged that the assertions were not true.

Brother of Sikh girl who was allegedly abducted and converted to Islam in Pakistan: Our sister has not been returned to us till now, these reports are wrong,neither arrests made yet. I appeal to PM Imran Khan,Army Chief and Punjab Governor to ensure justice to us. pic.twitter.com/zjIvpFv3k9 — ANI (@ANI) August 31, 2019

The move came after immense pressure from the Sikh community amid reports of a possible boycott of the Sikh convention. The girl was handed back to her parents after the federal interior minister intervened. Eight people have been arrested after

The girl, identified as 19-year old Jagjit Kaur, was allegedly abducted and forced to marry a Muslim man in Pakistan. The incident came to light on Thursday after a Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA, Manjinder Singh Sirsa shared a video of the girl's family alleging that the girl was abducted and forcefully converted.

The incident had drawn the attention of Sikhs worldwide and sparked anger in the community. The girl's father, identified as Bhagwan Singh, is a 'granthi' (priest) at Gurudwara Tambu Sahib.

The matter had raised a furore in India, with several political leaders across parties asking for action to be taken against the perpetrators.

With inputs from PTI
