Uttar Pradesh: 3 specially-abled men thrashed over suspicion of being child-lifters in Kanpur

Meanwhile, the police reached the crime spot and immediately rushed the three men to a nearby hospital from where they were later discharged. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The incident happened in Bilhaur area, a town in Kanpur district of the state Three men in shabby clothes were roaming in Simauli village when some youths suspected them to be child-lifters The identities of the victims have not been established yet

Lucknow: Three days after the Uttar Pradesh police arranged awareness campaigns to curb the instances of mob lynching fuelled by rumours of child-lifting, three mentally challenged persons were brutally thrashed by a mob on suspicion of being child-lifters. The incident happened in Bilhaur area, a town in Kanpur district of the state on Friday.

The Station House Officer, Simauli, Gyan Singh said that three men in shabby clothes were roaming in Simauli village when some youths suspected them to be child-lifters. Reportedly, when the victims started running to save themselves, the crowd nabbed them and began to brutally thrash them.

Meanwhile, the police reached the crime spot and immediately rushed the victim men to a nearby hospital from where they were later discharged. The SHO further mentioned that the police is conducting raids to nab the culprits, who have reportedly gone underground to evade the arrest. Also, Superintendent of Police (rural) Pradyumna Singh said that a case has been registered against 20-25 people under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code for assaulting the three mentally challenged men.

Reportedly, Singh added that the police will not spare those involved in the attack. In order to curb such incidents, strict instructions have been issued to make arrests of those involved in mob violence at the earliest.

As of now, the identities of the victims have not been established and the probe in the case is underway. Reportedly, in the last week, more than 20 cases of mob lynching over suspicion of child-lifting were reported from India's most populous state.

The Deputy General of Police, OP Singh, also told media persons that patrolling has been intensified across the state of Uttar Pradesh to curb such instances of mob justice. He also said that law enforcement agencies are also closely monitoring social media platforms to keep a check on such rumours.
