Gang-raped by boyfriend and his friends, Class 10 girl commits suicide by consuming pesticide

The gang-rape survivor consumed pesticide at her home in West Bengal (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The minor was rushed to SSKM hospital in Kolkata where she was declared dead on arrival Police have arrested four boys, including a minor, on charges of gang-rape Raids are underway to nab the prime accused in the case, said police

Kolkata: A 16-year-old girl committed suicide in the capital city of West Bengal, a day after she was allegedly gang-raped by her boyfriend and his friends. A student of Class 10, she was rushed to the SSKM hospital in the city where doctors declared her dead on arrival. Based on a complaint by her family, police have arrested the accused with the exception of the prime accused who is still on the run.

In their complaint to police, the girl's family members alleged that she had gone to meet her boyfriend on Friday. Identified as the prime accused in the case, the boyfriend took her to an isolated field in Purba Medinipur district where his friends took turns raping her. They even recorded a video of the heinous act and threatened to upload it on social media platforms if she were to approach the police and report their crime.

Upon her return home, the girl narrated her ordeal before the parents. Before they could even process what had happened, the girl consumed pesticide. She was rushed to the SSKM hospital in Kolkata where she was declared brought dead. The grieving parents later lodged a police complaint which led to the arrest of four boys, including a minor.

An officer with Kolkata Police said that the three accused have been sent to police custody while the minor has been sent to a welfare home. Raids are underway to track down and nab the prime accused, he added. Those arrested are likely to be charged under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Information Technology Act.

The horrific incident comes less than 48 hours after a rape victim in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao along with her mother attempted to self immolate themselves in front of the District Magistrate's office on Thursday. Alleging police apathy in their case, the mother-daughter duo were prevented from setting themselves on fire but the instance has raised serious questions about the working of the Uttar Pradesh Police.

Earlier this month, a 19-year-old girl who was gang-raped in Mumbai succumbed to internal injuries at a state-run hospital in the city. The victim was sexually assaulted by four of her friends hours after she celebrated her birthday party in the suburbs. Following her death, the Maharashtra State Commission for Women directed Chunabhatti police station to submit a detailed investigation report in this regard by the end of this week.
