Mumbai: Teen's autopsy report finds no signs of gang rape

The post mortem report of the 19-year-old from Aurangabad pins the cause of her death as complications arising from AIDS, and finds no indication of rape or sexual assault. The report, received by the Begumpura Police of Aurangabad on Saturday night, says the cause of death is Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML), one of the most dreaded complications of an HIV infection, and retroviral disease.



With this, the police have dismissed the teenager's family's claims that she was raped by four persons on July 7 after her birthday celebrations in a chawl in Chembur. The family had said that she had to be admitted for treatment of grievous injuries and complications caused by the assault, and when she passed away on 28 August, the father had been putting pressure on the police to add murder charges to the case.



The Begumpura police conducted the autopsy on Saturday evening, in the presence of three city-based doctors in Ghati Hospital. The whole process was recorded live by the police team. "The post mortem report revealed that the teenager was not raped or gang-raped. It said she died due to a longstanding illness and was unconscious when admitted to the hospital," said Investigation officer Police Sub-Inspector N.B. Shimbre of Begumpura police station.



When it emerged earlier in the week, through medical reports, that the Aurangabad-resident had been living with HIV for nearly eight years, the Chunabhatti police suspected foul play on part of the relatives. Sources close to the case say the police had their doubts about whether this indeed was a case of group sexual assault, and suspected that the family may have concocted the story to mask the stigma of losing a child to AIDS.



While the father insisted that his daughter indicated there were four persons involved, one of whom she knew, police sources say that CCTV footage of the area taken on the day did not back up his theory. It has not been clear who the four 'absconding' alleged rapists are and whether the police had zeroed in on some suspicious names.

Complex Case The post-mortem report puts the cause of death as Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML), a dreaded complications of an HIV infection Symptoms of PML include loss of coordination, difficulty in walking, loss of vision, trouble speaking and weakening of muscles. Police have long suspected that the 19-year-old’s parents may have concocted the gang rape story to mask the stigma of losing a child to AIDS





According to the parents, the teenager was drugged and raped in a Chembur Chawl on July 7. She was visiting her brother, a labourer who lives in the area, and had gone to meet a friend to celebrate her birthday, who allegedly took her to a chawl, where three of his friends were present. Her brother says she came home late that night and ran a high fever the next day. He took her to a local clinic, where they gave her some medicines.



However, her health started deteriorating. In three days, a kind of immobility set in -- her legs were paralysed, then her hand and she slowly lost her speech. Symptoms of PML include loss of coordination, difficulty in walking, loss of vision, trouble speaking and weakening of muscles.



Her father had to be called from Aurangabad on July 14, to take her home. In Aurangabad, she was admitted to a hospital, where the doctors allegedly said she had been sexually assaulted and pumped with drugs. "The doctors informed Begumpura Police Station and submitted a medical report supporting their findings," says the brother. "The police registered an FIR based on this report. My sister was not in a condition to say anything or give a statement."



However, Begumpura police said on Friday that they had not filed a case of rape on the basis of a medical report; it was done based on the father's account. The woman, by then, had to be moved to the ICCU because her condition had deteriorated, and she was not in the state to give a statement. "My daughter was crying in the hospital but was unable to speak," her father had said. "I asked her whether she was raped and she replied yes. I asked her how many people, and she gestured 'four'."



With seven days having lapsed between the alleged rape and medical examination, the police were not sure forensic evidence would be reliable. Sources say police suspected that paths of treatment had failed because her immune system was already compromised by the HIV infection.



With political parties latching on to the case to give it traction in a poll-bound state, the woman's family has been asking for compensation and job for members of the family. Sources in Aurangabad say the parents are her adoptive parents, and the brother was not a blood relative.
