Man who immolated himself at police station in Mathura dies while under treatment, wife critical

Tired of inaction, the couple set themselves ablaze at the police station. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Wednesday, Jugendra Singh and his wife Chandrawati set themselves ablaze within the premises of a police station The couple was allegedly being constantly harassed by another local and they had approached the police The two resorted to taking the drastic step when the police allegedly did not take any action

Agra: A man who had attempted sel-immolation outside a police station in Mathura, has died during treatment in Safdarjung hospital, New Delhi. A married couple - Jugendra Singh, 40, and his wife Chandrawati - had set themselves ablaze in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh on Wednesday at a police station to protest the alleged apathy of cops. According to a recent development, the man has died on Sunday morning while undergoing treatment and the wife is said to be in a critical condition.

The couple was allegedly being harassed by a local goon and they had also approached the police in relation to the same. Disillusioned over alleged inaction of the police, the duo set themselves ablaze right outside the police station. The couple resided in Sudhir Kala village which falls under the limits of the Sureer police station in Mathura. It was alleged that the couple had been seeking help from the police for over a year, against the harassment meted out to them in their locality, but the police officials did not give them the apt response.

Days after the self-immolation bid by the two, on Saturday, the police registered a complaint lodged by the couple's son alleging that when his parents had gone to the police station, five persons named Satyapal, Than Singh, Mohanshyam, Babloo and Shibboo set them on fire. The police have registered the complaint under Section 147 (rioting), Section 307 (attempt to murder), Section 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace) and Section 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Jagdish, a relative of the deceased, however, said that the police had put pressure on the couple's 14-year-old son to file a fresh complaint and to accuse other people in the incident.

The administration has said that compensation will be provided to the couple's son. Brijesh Kumar, Additional District Magistrate (ADM) Brijesh Kumar said that they will allot a plot of land to the 14-year-old boy and assured that he will write to the government, urging them to pay compensation to the minor.

Initially, three cops had been suspended by the police. They have been identified as Inspector Anoop Saroh, Sub-Inspector Sunil Singh and Deepak Nagar. They had been booked under Section 166(A) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). One day after the suspension, the authorities transferred constable clerks Saurav Kumar and Sher Singh to police lines along with constable Parvendra Sharma. Saurav Kumar, Sher Singh and Parvendra Sharma have been transferred until the completion of the inquiry.
