Another Hindu girl abducted, converted to Islam in Pakistan

The girl was allegedly abducted by one of her classmates Babar Aman, along with Mirza Dilawar Baig who is a member of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI).

A Hindu girl has allegedly been abducted and forced to marry a Muslim man in Pakistan's Sindh Province, sources told India Today TV. This is the second abduction and conversion of a minority girl within a week in Pakistan.



The victim's father in a police complaint said that his daughter, who is a student of BBA, had left for college on August 29 and did not return home.

Media reports said that the girl was forcibly converted to Islam. She was abducted by one of her classmates Babar Aman, along with Mirza Dilawar Baig who is a member of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI).

The girl was allegedly taken to PTI worker Baig's Sialkot home, where she was allegedly forced to convert and marry Babar Aman.

Meanwhile, reports said the police has arrested Babar Aman's brother. The whereabouts of the abducted girl and accused Babar Aman remain unknown.

Condemning the incident, a Pakistan-based Hindu NGO 'All Pakistan Hindu Panchayat' said this was the third case within a period of two months when a minority Hindu girl has been abducted, forced to convert and marry a Muslim man.

"This is a very sad moment for all Hindus. We must work out on this issue. This is the third case in two months and we are still sitting calmly. Are we waiting for any saint or special person to come from the sky to lead us? We must think about this," Ravi Dwani, General Secretary of All Pakistan Hindu Panchayat said.

This incident follows the case of 19-year-old girl, who was similarly abducted and converted to Islam before being married to a Muslim man in the country's Punjab province.

The incident came to light on Thursday after a Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) MLA, Manjinder Singh Sirsa shared a video of the girl's family alleging that the girl was abducted and forcefully converted.

The incident had drawn the attention of Sikhs worldwide and sparked anger in the community. The girl's father, identified as Bhagwan Singh, is a 'granthi' (priest) at Gurudwara Tambu Sahib in Nankana Sahib.

In a viral video, the family of the girl had complained to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan claiming that their daughter was kidnapped by six persons at gunpoint on the night between August 27 and August 28. Even though an FIR had been filed, nothing was done to bring back the abducted girl, the family alleged.

The kidnapped girl later emerged in a video in which she claimed she had 'converted' to Islam.

The family of the girl begged Imran Khan for justice, stating that they'd self-immolate if their daughter did not return.

The matter had raised a furore in India, with several political leaders across parties seeking action against the perpetrators.

(With ANI inputs)
