Factory worker held for rape of minor relative

Ludhiana: Police on Sunday afternoon arrested a man for allegedly raping his minor sister-in-law. The accused is 29 years old, and a native of Nepal, working in a factory in Ludhiana. The survivor’s father — who had been living in the state for the past 19 years — told cops he had four sons and three daughters. He added that two years ago, they married his elder daughter to the accused, and they lived in their neighbourhood.

The complainant told police officials that on August 22, his daughter told her mother that her brother-in-law had raped her many times in June while she was going to cook meals at her sister’s home when she was unwell. He added that the accused even threatened her of dire consequences if she revealed about the matter to anyone. The complainant further said after his wife told him about the matter, they took their daughter to the hospital where the doctor told them she was pregnant.

After probing the matter on their own, they were shocked to know their own son-in-law had actually committed the crime, and later informed the police, who started a probe into the matter. Police booked the accused under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (rape) and sections 4 and 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (Pocso). Investigating officer (IO) of the case, sub-inspector Manju Choudhary, said after registering a case into the matter, the accused was arrested near Phullanwal Chowk on Sunday afternoon. She added that his medical examination would be done at the civil hospital on Monday, whereas that of the girl would be done on Wednesday.

The IO said DNA samples of the accused and the girl would also be taken during the medical examination, as per Supreme Court guidelines. She added that the number of months months for which the girl was pregnant would be known after an ultrasound test. Meanwhile, the girl’s father said she had studied up to class VIII. He added that the accused had a year-old son.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
