Kulbhushan Jadhav: What to expect beyond consular access

Sand art by renowned artist Sudarshan Patnaik pressing for Justice for Kulbhushan Jadhav, to whom India has got consular access nearly three-and-a-half years after he fell into the custody of Pakistani agencies, who are believed to have got him from a terror group that abducted former Indian Navy officer from Iran. (Photo: Twitter/@sudarshansand)

One-and-a-half months after the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled for India getting unfettered consular access to former Indian Navy officer Kulbhushan Jadhav, the judgment takes effect on the ground today. An Indian delegation is meeting Kulbhushan Jadhav in Islamabad today.

This is only one part of the ICJ verdict that held Pakistan guilty of violating the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations (VCCR). Consular access gives India an opportunity to learn the complete story of Kulbhushan Jadhav.

Till now, the story of Kulbhushan Jadhav has been woven on the basis of intelligence inputs gathered from Iran, Indian sources in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and intelligence sharing by friendly countries. The other side of Kulbhushan Jadhav story has largely been a well-scripted propaganda by Pakistan.

The consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav will lift the veil on exactly what happened with him after he reached Iran and how he ended up in the custody of Pakistani authorities in March 2016.

Review of sentence?

The second part of the ICJ verdict warrants Pakistan to undertake an effective review and reconsideration of the conviction of Kulbhushan Jadhav. He had been tried and convicted by a military court in 2017 on the charges of espionage and terrorism.

No concrete evidence of his involvement was produced by Pakistan to back its claim against Kulbhushan Jadhav except a confessional statement recorded while he was under Pakistani custody for months.

The military courts -- the Field General Court Martial (FGCM) in Kulbhushan Jadhav's case -- of Pakistan had been granted jurisdiction -- in early 2015 -- over civilians for criminal trials following the 2014 terror attack on a military school in Pakistan.

The original jurisdiction of the military court in this matter was for two years. It was done through a constitutional amendment. After it lapsed it was extended for another two years. It was during this extension that Kulbhushan Jadhav was tried, convicted and sentenced to death by the military court.

The constitutional amendment that empowered Pakistani's military courts -- which do not have a trained judge and where a knowledge of law is not mandatory -- to try civilians lapsed in April this year. The ICJ verdict came in July this year.

Pakistan is cornered but...

India's consular to Kulbhushan Jadhav becomes even more significant in the backdrop of these developments. Pakistan has to undertake an effective review and reconsider the process of trial and conviction of Kulbhushan Jadhav.

Pakistan has two options. It can review the case through a civil court of law or go back to the military court, which is actually a quasi-judicial body lacking authority for criminal trial of a civilian.

In that situation, the Imran Khan government of Pakistan would be tempted to bring back the lapsed amendment. But the dangling sword of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) may be preventing it from doing so.

The Asia Pacific Group of FATF recently gave a negative report on Pakistan and if in its October review the Paris-based inter-governmental body finds it falling short of the action plan prescribed by it, Pakistan would face the risk of being blacklisted.

The FATF on Saturday added a new target for Pakistan, that is, of monitoring sale of jewellery and prize bonds that may be financing terror activities in Pakistan. A fear of action from the FATF -- though it has got a new head as China -- is likely to keep Pakistan follow the norms of international standard of criminal jurisprudence.

The military court option, if Pakistan chooses that path, is likely to stonewall India's options within Pakistan as far as Kulbhushan Jadhav case is concerned. India would then definitely approach the ICJ once again seeking clearer direction -- in the form of interpretation of its July judgment -- to Pakistan for a Kulbhushan Jadhav trial in a civilian court.

Hope for Kulbhushan

If and when this happens, India could be able to engage a lawyer to represent Kulbhushan Jadhav in a civilian Pakistani court. A qualified judge would hear his side of story -- of how he was abducted from Chabahar area of Iran, where he had some business interests.

Intelligence sources of more than one country confirmed that Kulbhushan Jadhav was abducted from Chabahar and handed over to Pakistani agencies in lieu for money.

Hope for a safe release of Kulbhushan Jadhav from Pakistani jail hinges on a review of the military court trial by a civilian court, which will definitely be under the lens of international community. But that hinge is still at some distance into an unseen future.
