DCW chief issues notice to Delhi police for inaction in Kanjhawala rape case

Delhi Commission for Women chief, Swati Maliwal, issued a notice to the concerned SHO of Delhi Police seeking reasons for not pressing relevant serious charges and for not intimating the Commission regarding the incident, as mandated by the Delhi High Court, where a 16-year-old girl, who went missing earlier this year, was gang-raped and thrown from the terrace of a house in the Central Delhi. The notice also seeks the details of the police personnel involved in intimidation of the RWA President and the action taken against them.

"Crimes against women and girls are growing in the Capital. This girl went through unbearable suffering before succumbing to her injuries. She was from a very poor background and her father had already expired a few years back. The Commission shall leave no stone unturned to seek justice for her. We will also file an application in the court to seek victim compensation for the family," stated Maliwal in the notice.

As per the parents of the victim, the young girl went for a job training to Connaught Place on January 16, 2019. When she did not return home, the parents lodged a missing person's complaint at the Connaught Place police station. They were informed that their daughter was found injured near Karol Bagh and admitted to Lady Hardinge Hospital.

On reaching the hospital, they were told that due to the grievous injuries suffered by the girl as she had fallen from a great height, she was sent to Safdarjung Hospital for treatment. The girl succumbed to her injuries at Safdarjung Hospital on January 20. She was unfit for giving her statement all this time.

Although the PCR van received intimation regarding the injured girl at around 10.45 am in the morning of January 17, they say there was no eye-witness of the incident in the Military Road area of Prasad Nagar.

The Commission has now also issued notices to Lady Hardinge and Safdarjang Hospital asking for medical reports of the deceased.

In their complaint, the parents said that though the Delhi Police has arrested five men in this case, they have failed to press charges of rape, murder, kidnapping, POCSO and destruction of evidence in their FIR. Moreover, the RWA President of Ekta Vihar, who is helping the victim's traumatized mother in seeking justice for her daughter, has been receiving threatening calls from police personnel to withdraw his support to the victim's family.
