Teenager dies of horrific internal injuries after gang rape at her own birthday

The 19-year-old was pounced on by up to four men as she cut her birthday cake at a home near Mumbai, India, on July 7

Teenager dies of horrific internal injuries after gang rape at her own birthday

A teenager brutally gang-raped by four friends at her own birthday party has died in hospital, according to reports.

The 19-year-old was pounced on by her attackers just as she cut her birthday cake at a home near Mumbai, India, on July 7.

It is understood she had travelled from her hometown of Aurangabad 200 miles away to take part in the celebrations.

Despite suffering severe injuries, she did not tell her family about the incident and refused to report the sex attack to authorities, the Gulf News reported.

But several days after the incident, she was admitted to hospital in Aurangabad after complaining of severe pain.

Doctors suspected that she was the victim of a sexual assault and she decided to reveal details of her horrifying ordeal.

Image: REX/Shutterstock) REX/Shutterstock)

She says she was overpowered and then raped by her four attackers after being duped into going to one of the boy's homes.

Her condition was critical and she died of her multiple injuries at a government hospital on Friday.

Police have launched an investigation and details of the case have been passed to Mumbai police.

The victim's shocked family members have said they would not accept her body for the last rites till the police charged the culprits.

India has grappled with numerous high-profile cases of rape and sexual violence against women in recent years.

Earlier this month, a three-year-old girl was reportedly gang-raped and beheaded after being abducted by a stranger at a train station.

Image: SANJEEV GUPTA/EPA-EFE/REX/Shutterstock) SANJEEV GUPTA/EPA-EFE/REX/Shutterstock)

The child had been sleeping with her mum and mum's partner in Jamshedpur city when a man picked her up and walked away with her.

Terrifying CCTV shows the moment a man dressed in shorts and a t-shirt casually picks the child up and then carries the girl away.

The girl's decapitated body was found nearby by police.

In July, two young sisters were gang-raped at gunpoint in another sickening sex attack in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh.

The girls had reportedly been accosted by the men as they went to search for their mother near a sugarcane field.
