Amit Shah urges Interpol to expedite Red Notice requests: How agency issues notices -- and why it rejects them

Zakir Naik, who is wanted in India. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The purpose of a Red Notice is to seek the arrest and location of persons wanted for either prosecution or serving a sentence. A notice has to compile with the constitution of the Interpol and meet all conditions for processing information as per the organisation’s rules on data processing. A Red Notice should not be mistaken for an international arrest warrant. Last year, 13,516 Red Notices were issued by Interpol.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah has urged Interpol to speed up the issuing of Red Notices against terrorists and high profile economic offenders. Jürgen Stock, the Interpol secretary general, met Shah in New Delhi, on Saturday, and discussed a host of issues.

India has requested the Interpol to issue a Red Notice against Zakir Naik, the Islamic preacher currently in Malaysia who is wanted in connection with multiple cases in India.

The union home ministry in a statement said: “The home minister expressed concern about the delay in publication of Red Notices and an urgent need for proactive pre-publication consultation for ensuring expeditious publication of Red Notices.”

INTERPOL Chief Jürgen Stock met with senior government and #police officials in #India including Home Minister, National Security Advisor, CBI Director and Director Intelligence Bureau to discuss how the Organization’s global network and capabilities can support law enforcement pic.twitter.com/d36JmIzhSS — INTERPOL (@INTERPOL_HQ) August 31, 2019

What is a Red Notice?

A notice issued by Interpol is essentially an international request for cooperation or an alert that allows police forces of member countries to share important information linked to crimes.

Such notices are published following a request by a national central bureau, and all member countries have access to them.

A notice may be used by International Criminal Tribunals, UN or International Criminal Court for seeking persons wanted for crimes such as war crimes, genocide and hate crime.

Notices can also be used by the United Nations, International Criminal Tribunals and the International Criminal Court to seek persons wanted for committing crimes within their jurisdiction, notably genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.

Though most notices are not shared with the public, in some cases the public get alerted.

The purpose of a Red Notice is to seek the arrest and location of persons wanted for either prosecution or serving a sentence.

In 2016, 91 Red Notices were sent by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to Interpol, of which 87 were published; in 2017, the CBI sent 94 such notices to the Interpol and 84 were published. Last year, the number of such notices shot up to 123 and 76 got published by Interpol, according to union home ministry figures.

This year, 41 Red Notices were sent to Interpol till July 15, of which 32 were published.

Can Interpol refuse to publish a notice?

A notice has to compile with the constitution of the Interpol and meet all conditions for processing information as per the organisation’s rules on data processing.

A notice may not be published if it violates an article of the Interpol’s constitution that bars it from undertaking activities or interventions that are military, political, racial or religious in nature.

A court order by judicial authorities or an arrest warrant issued in a country may become the legal basis to issue a Red Notice.

For many member countries, a Red Notice is ground for provisional arrest. Red Notice requests are checked by a task force which ensures that it is in compliance with Interpol rules. A Red Notice should not be mistaken for an international arrest warrant. Last year, 13,516 Red Notices were issued by Interpol.
