Man rapes, impregnates tenant's minor daughter; accused on the run

Accused raped victim when her parents were not at home. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim was residing as a tenant at the house of the accused Accused raped victim when her parents were not at home Police have filed a case against the accused

Samastipur: In a shocking incident, a man raped and impregnated the daughter of his tenant in Samastipur district of Bihar. The matter came to light after the girl student became pregnant. The minor girl is now five months pregnant.

The crime occurred under the limits of Dalsinghsarai police station limit. The girl student lives with her parents as a tenant in a room in the locality.

According to a report, the girl told police that the accused had been raping her for months by threatening her with dire consequences. The girl was taken to a doctor after her health deteriorated. Later, the doctor confirmed the girl's pregnancy.

Initially, the crime took place when the parents of the victim went to Kolkata after the accident of his father. In the meantime, finding the girl alone, the landlord sexually assaulted the girl repeatedly. The accused also threatened the girl not to inform anyone about the incident.

The Dalsinghsarai police have filed a case on the basis of the statement of the girl. The accused landlord is absconding after the incident.

Sub Divisional Police Officer (SDPO), Dalsinghsarai said, "We have received a complaint of the minor girl getting pregnant. We have filed a case and a search has been launched to nab the accused. We will soon arrest him."

In a similar incident reported from Hamirpur district in Uttar Pradesh in June this year, a class 12 student was gang raped by her tenant and his friend. The accused also made an MMS of the crime and blackmailed the victim.

The victim was blackmailed by the accused for over a year. Fed up with the blackmail, the girl informed her parents about the incident who in turn reported the matter to the police. The incident was reported from Rath Kotwali area in Hamirpur.

The accused was residing at the victim's home as a tenant. One day, the accused barged into the victim's room and raped her along with his friend.

The accused reportedly raped the victim often by blackmailing her with MMS. Initially, police showed no interest in registering the complaint but were forced to file a case after the matter was highlighted by the media.
