Docs protest killing of colleague, abstain from work in Jorhat

Healthcare services in Jorhat district of Assam were affected on Monday, as medicos in government and private hospitals stayed away from work to protest against the killing of an elderly doctor by a mob, officials said.

However, services in the emergency and the Outpatient Department (OPD) were kept out of the purview of the agitation, they said.

The agitation in Jorhat will be followed by a state- wide stir on Tuesday, when doctors will withdraw services from 6 am, barring the emergency departments, said president of the Assam Branch of the Indian Medical Association (INA), Satyajit Borah.

In Jorhat town, doctors, pharmacists and para-medical personnel held a dharna in front of the deputy commissioner's office, demanding justice for 73-year-old Deben Dutta, who was assaulted by a mob on Saturday following the death of a patient in a tea estate hospital.

Dutta later died at the JMCH.

Doctors at the Jorhat Medical College Hospital (JMCH), Civil Hospital, family referral units and primary health centres abstained from work on Monday, the officials said.

The medicos also stayed away from duties in private hospitals and did not attend consultation chambers, they said.

The agitating doctors submitted a memorandum to the deputy commissioners across the state, demanding a law to ensure security of the doctors.

A statement issued by the IMA heaquarters in New Delhi said it strongly condemns the killing of Dutta.

"The medical profession of the nation is aghast at the level of violence prevailing in the community against doctors. It defies reason. In June this year the entire medical profession had risen as one across the nation seeking justice and security.

"Government of India is seized of legislating a Central Law against violence in healthcare institutions. Even such a heavy deterrence may not work in such an atmosphere of mob violence," the statement said.

IMA demands immediate arrest and diligent prosecution of everyone involved in the crime, and appropriate compensation to the family, it added.

Meanwhile, a total of 26 people were taken into custody from the Teok Tea Estate where Dutta was attacked, police said.

Inspector General of Police (Law & Order) Deepak Kedia has visited the tea estate to take stock of the situation.

Jorhat Deputy Commissioner Roshni Aparanji Korati ordered a magisterial inquiry into the assault of Dutta, who was working in the hospital after his retirement without remuneration.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
