Greater Kailash abduction solved: Servant killed 92-year-old man, carried his body away in fridge

Kishan (right) had been working for Krishna Khosla (left) and his wife since the past one year and was angry with the elderly couple.

The Delhi Police has finally uncovered the mystery behind the abduction of the 92-year-old man from South Delhi's Greater Kailash II area.

A retired government employee, identified as Krishna Khosla, was kidnapped by his domestic help Kishan who locked him in a refrigerator and carried it away in a tempo. Khosla had been missing since Saturday night.

Now, the police investigation has revealed that Kishan, along with others killed Khosla.

READ | House help in Delhi locks 92-year-old employer in fridge, takes him away, arrested

What happened on Saturday

Krishna Khosla lived with his wife Saroj in a flat in Greater Kailash II.

Their servant Kishan, who had been working for them since the past one year was angry with the elderly couple.

He planned to rob the Khoslas. On Saturday, Kishan helped his accomplices break into their house and the gang stole jewellery and cash.

In the meanwhile, he mixed some sedatives in the couple's tea which left Saroj unconscious.

However, Krishna Khosla was still conscious. So Kishan strangled Khosla and stuffed him inside the refrigerator.

Kishan and his accomplices kept the stolen goods as well as the refrigerator in a tempo and sped off from the area.

Later the accused buried Khosla's body in an abandoned plant in Sangam Vihar. While Kishan was originally from Bihar, he used to live in Sangam Vihar.

The incident first came to light when Saroj Khosla woke up on Sunday morning and realised her husband and servant were missing.

The security guards of the area claimed that they saw the domestic help carrying the refrigerator in a tempo along with his accomplices. He told the guards that he was taking the fridge for repair when they questioned him, police said.

The CCTV cameras in the area including one at the parking lot near the couple's building were not functioning so there was no video footage available which could have helped in the investigation, the police officer said.

The police nabbed the accused on Monday and they confessed to killing Khosla.
