91-Year-Old Retired Bureaucrat Dies After Being Stuffed Inside A Refrigerator By Domestic Help

In a rather bizarre crime, an elderly man in Delhi was killed by his domestic help and with the help of his accomplices, he kidnapped the body in a refrigerator. The incident happened in Greater Kailash-II on Saturday.

According to Saroj Khosla, the wife of the deceased their domestic help, a man identified as Kishan drugged her and her husband Krishna Khosla by spiking their tea.

The incident came to light only on Sunday when Saroj woke up after being unconscious due to the spiked drink.

After noticing that her husband and the domestic help was missing the woman informed the security guard who alerted their son who lives nearby.

The police initially launched a probe, assuming that he was abducted. The first indication of a foul play surfaced after the security guard told the cops that Kishan had come to the couple's home on Sunday with some of his friends on a tempo and left with a refrigerator, claiming that it was to be repaired.

By Monday, the domestic help and four of his accomplices Deepak Yadav, Pradeep Sharma, Sarvesh and Prabhudayal were arrested by the police.

On interrogation, Kishan admitted that he had killed Khosla, stuffed his body inside the refrigerator and dumped it at a remote location in Sangam Vihar.

According to the cops, Kishan claimed that he was ill-treated by the elderly couple whom he had been working for nearly a year, which made him plan the murder.

However, police haven't accepted his version completely and are looking into other motives. They have also confirmed that some cash and jewelry have been missing from the couple's residence.

It is believed that Kishan was planning to kidnap Khosla and demand a ransom from his family. But he died of suffocation after being stuffed inside the refrigerator, forcing him to abandon the plan and dump the body.

According to the police, Khosla had served in the United Nations missions in Libya and Iraq and had moved to the rented house some two years ago.
