Pune: 4 men claiming to be ‘dons’ stab shopkeeper to death over a cigarette

Kadam asked for the money, the four men took offence and began abusing and threatening him. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The deceased was identified as 32-year-old Santosh Kadam The complaint in the case was lodged by the deceased's relative named as Ramprabhu Mote The police had arrested the all accused on Monday

Pune: In a case reported Pune, four men allegedly stabbed a paan stall owner to death after he asked them to pay for the cigarette. The incident happened on Banter road of the city on Sunday. The deceased was identified as 32-year-old Santosh Kadam, who was operating his outlet near DMart for the last few years.

The complaint in the case was lodged by the deceased's relative named as Ramprabhu Mote, who witnessed the crime and he informed the police on Sunday night. The four assailants were identified as Somnath Chatur, Abhishek Korade, Vishal Shinde and Prashant Kamse all aged 21 and were natives of Sangvi.

However, the police had arrested the all accused on Monday. Inspector Vaishali Galande, Chatushrungi police stated that the four men are school dropouts and all are unemployed. The accused reportedly do not have any previous criminal record. According to a report, the complainant stated that four accused men arrived at Kadam's Swara Paan Shop at around 2:30 pm on Sunday. One of the bought a costly cigarette but he did not pay for it. Meanwhile, Kadam asked for the money, the four men took offence and began abusing and threatening him.

The accused claimed that they were dons after which one of them slapped the deceased. Reportedly, at this point, Mote intervened and the four accused left the spot, threatening Kadam with dire consequences. Meanwhile, at around 5:30 pm, they returned to the stall on two motorcycles and once again picked up a fight with Kadam. In a fit of rage, one of the accused stabbed Kadam in the stomach multiple times.

Immediately, the four accused fled from the spot and Mote noted down the registration number of one of the accused. Kadam was immediately rushed to a private hospital where he died while undergoing treatment on Sunday night. Mote then informed the police about the entire incident and registered a case against the four accused.

After a thorough investigation in the case, the police established the identity of the bike's owner and later traced and arrested the rest of the accused on Monday. However, they will be produced in front of the court on Tuesday.
