Bihar Bandh today: Armed with lathis, RLSP workers call CM Nitish Kumar a dictator

Bihar's Grand Alliance supporters stop a train during state's shutdown in protest against the alleged lathi charge on RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha, in Patna, on February 4, 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

Gaya: Two days after former Union Minister Upendra Kushwaha and some Rashtriya Lok Samata Dal activists were injured in a police lathicharge during a protest in Patna, the RLSP is on Monday observing a bandh in Bihar. The Bihar bandh is being supported by the Grand Alliance or mahagathbandhan.

Party sources had alleged that RLSP chief Upendra Kushwaha sustained injuries in his head, leg and hand in the incident on Saturday. He was released from a hospital after undergoing an initial treatment.

The Bihar government has, meanwhile, beefed up security situation in the state in order to avert any untoward incident.

With placards and party flags in hands, a number of RLSP leaders and workers held marches across Bihar. The workers, armed with lathis (sticks), further raised slogans against Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and called him a "dictator".

"During the peaceful Jan Akrosh rally on Saturday under the leadership of our chief Upendra Kushwaha, the police on the direction of the dictator Nitish Kumar's government tried to kill Kushwaha. He and various other leaders were severely injured that is the reason we are protesting today," said RLSP general secretary Santosh Kumar in Gaya.

Commenting on the support extended by mahagathbandhan partners to the bandh call, Kumar said: “I want to thank various grand alliance partners for coming forward and supporting us.”

RLSP leader Upendra Khushwaha and several other party leaders had received injuries in a clash with the police on Saturday after they were stopped from marching towards the Raj Bhavan. The protesters were seeking educational reforms in the state.

Kushwaha had in 2018 quit the BJP-led NDA and joined the 'grand alliance' of RJD, Congress and Hindustani Awam Morcha led by ex-Bihar chief minister Jitan Ram Manjhi.
