Ghaziabad: Army truck with Rs 250 cr worth of helicopter parts stranded for 4 hours

. The police officials added that the robbers held the duo hostage and beat them up with the butt of the gun and they also burnt their hands | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police officials said that the accused were unaware about the consignment that was being carried The robbers held the duo hostage and beat them up with the butt of the gun The accused tried to withdraw the money at the Raj Nagar Extension ATM using victims' cards but they reportedly failed

Ghaziabad: The Ghaziabad police arrested three men for allegedly robbing the driver and the helper of an Army truck which was carrying helicopter parts worth Rs 250 crore on Monday. The police officials said that the accused were unaware about the consignment that was being carried to Imphal from Delhi cantonment area.

The parts of helicopters which were being transported had been sent to the national capital for inspection as these helicopters were deployed in the border areas. According to a report, the Delhi police said that the truck had left Delhi cantonment at around 11 pm on Friday. Senior Superintendent of Police, Sudhir Kumar Singh said that an Army personnel, Vishal and a driver were assigned the duty to accompany the vehicle but they handed over the truck to driver Atul and helper Anil somewhere in Delhi while Vishal had asked them to pick him up from his house on the way.

At around 1:30 am when the truck reached near the New Bus Stand in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, a Swift car came from the back and intercepted the vehicle. Some men came out of the car and snatched Rs 20,000 cash and ATM cards from Atul and Anil at gunpoint. Meanwhile, another helper Ashok somehow managed to escape. The police officials added that the robbers held the duo hostage and beat them up with the butt of the gun and they also burnt their hands, other body parts with cigarettes in order to the know the pin number of the ATM cards.

Meanwhile, the SSP added that the accused tried to withdraw the money at the Raj Nagar Extension ATM using victims' cards but they reportedly failed. The accused then dumped the duo around 7.5 km away from Raj Nagar Extension and fled the spot.

Meanwhile, the victims informed the army personnel at the Delhi cantonment and filed a police complaint at the Sihani Police station. The police conducted the investigation and the three accused were arrested on Monday. Accused were identified as Sonu Prajapati, Sonu Tyagi, and Praveen Das. During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that the car used for the crime was second hand and Sonu's father Rakesh Prajapati was the owner. Meanwhile, the police detained Rakesh who stated that his son had taken the car on the day of the robbery and since then he had not returned home.

However, an FIR was lodged in the case and accused were arrested on Monday. The stolen money, ATM cards, illegal pistols and some live cartridges were confiscated from the accused possession.
