India: House help kills 92-year-old man, carries his body away in fridge

In a bizzare incident, a 92-year-old man was abducted from his residence in the Indian capital city of Delhi's Greater Kailash area. His abductors who killed him carried him out in a refrigerator.

The Delhi Police has finally uncovered the mystery behind the abduction of Krishna Khosla who was missing since Saturday night.

According to a report on timesofindia.com, the retired government employee's body was found buried in an open plot in Sangam Vihar in South Delhi. The refrigerator was also recovered.

The domestic help who is accused of orchestrating this chilling murder and his four accomplices have been arrested

What happened

According to indiatoday.in, Krishna Khosla, lived with his wife Saroj in a flat in Greater Kailash II. Their house help Kishan, who had been working for them since the past one year was angry with the elderly couple.

He planned to rob the Khoslas. On Saturday, Kishan helped his accomplices break into their house and the gang stole jewellery and cash.

In the meanwhile, he mixed some sedatives in the couple's tea which left Saroj unconscious.

However, Krishna Khosla was still conscious. So Kishan strangled Khosla and stuffed him inside the refrigerator.

Kishan and his accomplices kept the stolen goods as well as the refrigerator in a tempo and sped off from the area.

Later the accused buried Khosla's body in an abandoned plant in Sangam Vihar. While Kishan was originally from Bihar, he used to live in Sangam Vihar.

The incident first came to light when Saroj Khosla woke up on Sunday morning and realised her husband and Kishan were missing. She informed her son, who lives in the same neighbourhood. The family informed the police and a case for roberry was registered.

Twitter users who shared news reports were shocked. "Heights of Brutality," wrote tweep @ashaanu0418.

According to the police, when the guard spotted him taking the refrigerator out along with the acomplices, and questioned him. He told the guards that he was taking the fridge for repair when they questioned him.

There was no security footage of the incident as the CCTV cameras in the area were not functioning, the police officer added.
