After fling, boss sets woman ablaze in Bengaluru

JB Nagar

Sarjapura

Indian Penal Code

Married boutique owner tries to get rid of woman after she started demanding that he take care of herA 30-year-old woman working in a boutique is battling for her life after the boutique’s owner poured petrol on her face and set her ablaze. The two were allegedly in a relationship.The boutique owner, Mahadeva, is said to have been tired by the woman, Susheela’s demands that he take care of her. Mahadeva is married and did not want his wife to come to know of his affair. Susheela is separated from her husband.Mahadeva’s plans to keep the affair a secret were foiled by Susheela’s repeated calls to him. Soon his wife suspected there was something going on and she made her husband to bring Susheela home claiming that her monetary demands would be fulfilled. When Susheela came to Mahadeva’s house, the two women got into a verbal argument. This was when Mahadeva brought petrol from his bike, poured it on Susheela’s face and set her ablaze. When she started screaming for help, neighbours informed the police who then shifted her to the Victoria Hospital.Susheela stays with her brother in. She is a mother of three daughters.She is said to have separated from her husband whom she was married to 12 years ago. She was working in a boutique located in. Mahadeva initially helped her by getting her a house and was also helping her maintain her family. He was also giving her a monthly salary of Rs 6,000. During all this, his wife was away from town. Trouble began for the businessman after his wife returned home. Soon he started avoiding Susheela, and the latter kept pestering him to take care of her like before. Unable to bear the demands, he made her vacate the house which he had got her, after which she moved to her brother’s house in JB Nagar.“When she was neglected, the victim kept calling Mahadeva. The victim has said in her statement that the accused owed her two years’ salary, which she demanded from him. He then called her on Tuesday around 12 noon, telling her that he would give her the money. When she went to Sarjapura bus stand, the accused is alleged to have beaten her and then taken her to his house on the behest of his wife,” said an officer on part of investigations.After the victim went to his house, the wife Mahitha is alleged to have beaten her with a broom. So the two women indulged in a heated argument and Mahadeva rushed outside to collect petrol in a plastic bowl from his bike. He then threw it on her face and threatened to kill her and asked her to leave the house. When the victim threatened to filed a complaint against him, accusing him of cheating, Mahadeva lit a match stick and set her ablaze.“She is undergoing treatment in the burns ward of the Victoria Hospital. Her statements have been recorded in the hospital on Thursday. She has sustained nearly 40 per cent burns on her face and other upper part of the body. Her condition is critical. Along with her employer, she has also filed a complaint against his wife. Mahadeva has been arrested and the search for his wife is on,” said the officer.A case of attempt to murder under section 307 of thehas been registered against Mahadeva and his wife Mahitha, residents of Sarjapura, by the Sarjapura police.
