Rajasthan: Man studying in Russia returns to ‘marry’ girl; rapes her instead

Based on the complaint, the police have registered a case under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused and the survivor both met on social networking platform Facebook The couple booked a room at a nearby hotel and decided to meet there The state police have sought help from the Indian Embassy in Russia to nab the accused

Jaipur: A Rajasthan-based man residing in Russia was booked for raping a minor girl on the pretext of marrying her, in Dungarpur district of the Sagwara area. The accused belongs to the same area in Rajasthan that of the minor. The accused and the survivor both met on the social networking platform Facebook and eventually fell in love.

The minor told the police that the accused flew back to Rajasthan to marry the minor girl. According to a report, the couple booked a room at a nearby hotel and decided to meet there. She further added that she was instead raped by the man in the hotel room. Reportedly, the accused is said to have fled back to Russia after committing the crime.

Meanwhile, the police investigation in the case revealed that the accused had gone to Russia to pursue his MBBS. However, based on the complaint, the police have registered a case under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Meanwhile, the police officers investigating the case found that the girl befriended the man around a year ago on Facebook and eventually they started talking over Instagram and WhatsApp.

However, the victim further mentioned that the accused promised her that next time when he will come to India, he would marry her. But reportedly, the accused broke all ties with the girl as soon as he returned to Russia following which the girl registered a police complaint. However, the state police have sought from the Indian Embassy in Russia to nab the accused man. Further probe in the case is underway.

In a similar case reported from Haryana, a man was arrested from Panchkula on the charges of wrongful confinement and cheating a Russian woman on the pretext of marriage. They said the woman got in touch with Deepak, a resident of Rattewali, Panchkula, last year on social media. He asked her to come to India from Russia by giving her the false impression of marrying her. She came to India on July 18 with USD 14,606.

Reportedly, on July 24, Deepak took her to Yamuna Nagar on the pretext of meeting his parents. Soon after reaching there, he left her on road after snatching away the money and her mobile phone. The motive of the accused was to loot her, said the Deputy Superintendent of Police Yamuna Nagar. However, the case was entrusted to the Crime Investigation Agency (CIA) of Haryana Police and Deepak was arrested in less than 24 hours from Sector 10 in Panchkula.
