Delhi Horror: 42 YO gang raped by auto drivers in room, moving auto

Gurugram: Boarding an auto-rickshaw from Manesar on NH-8 to settle down financial issues with her late husband’s former company on Saturday ended as a horrible nightmare for a 42-year old woman who was found in an unconscious state on the expressway.

The woman was allegedly gang-raped, multiple times, repeatedly by several auto men including others, first in a room and later in a moving auto before she was dumped behind a dhaba.

Similar horrific incident occurred in May last year where three men had gang-raped a 19-year-old woman and killed her eight-month-old baby by throwing her off the moving auto in Gurgaon.

The Gurgaon police have now arrested five auto drivers, including the main accused who had first picked the woman to drop her at the office.

The search is on for the sixth accused in this latest case.

According to reports, the victim boarded an auto-rickshaw from Nakhrola Chowk on NH-8 around 2.20pm to reach the company in IMT-Manesar where her late husband worked with to settle some financial issues with the company, where he worked as a contractor. He had passed away in 2013.

Instead of taking the victim to IMT-Manesar the auto driver identified as Ankit along with whom another auto driver Deepak was also present drove the auto to Deepak’s room at Bhangrola, around 4km from the pick-up spot on NH-8 where a third man was waiting for them.

The two auto drivers took turns in raping the victim while the third man molested her, TOI reports.

The two drivers then put her in the auto around 9pm and drove her to Rampura mod near NH-8, where they handed her over to two other auto drivers.

The two drivers then called another man and while one drove the auto around the area for over an hour, the two others men raped her in the auto.

Finally, the men dumped her behind a dhaba near Rampura flyover past midnight in an unconscious state.

She was found by a passerby on Sunday and he helped the woman to go to the police station.

Based on the woman’s complaint, police arrested Ankit, Deepak, Mahipal, Ajit and Sunnu on Sunday. While Deepak hails from Bhangrola, the other four belong to Rampura village. All of them are auto drivers and in the age group of 24-27 years, said police.

The police have registered an FIR against the accused under sections 376-D (gang rape), 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC at the women’s police station, Manesar.

The Police are conducting raids to arrest the sixth accused in the case while the two auto-rickshaws have been seized.

“We are questioning the men to find out their roles in the crime. We have identified a couple of others and are conducting raids to nab them. They will also be arrested soon,” said inspector Kanta Yadav, SHO, the women’s police station, Manesar.
