Delhi: Man beaten to death for entering Pandit Gali, family claims mob took him to be Muslim

Chandrabhan (right) accused Sahil (left) of trespassing into the Pandit lane and thrashed him.

A 23-year-old man in Delhi was lynched for the mere act of entering the Brahmin lane.

A man named Sahil, who lived in the Adarsh Mohalla of Maujpur was brutally beaten up on August 30. Sahil was involved in a fight with some people of the same locality on Friday evening and had sustained injuries.

On Friday, Sahil's friends were passing through Gali no. 5 of Vijay Park in Maujpur. A man named Chandrabhan, his son Ayush and some others stopped the group.

Chandrabhan allegedly asked the group why they were passing through a lane inhabited by pandits and then started beating the group of friends.

Upon hearing of the scuffle, Sahil rushed to the spot to help his friends. Chandrabhan also accused Sahil of trespassing in the Pandit lane and thrashed him too.

Sahil was beaten so brutally that he fainted. He was taken to his home where he started vomiting and was having difficulty breathing. When his family took him to the hospital, he was declared dead.

Police have arrested Chandrabhan and Ayush.

Family alleges son mistaken to be Muslim

Sahil's father Sunil Singh has claimed that his son was killed because the attackers mistook him to be a Muslim who had entered a Hindu area.

He said, "My son's name was Sahil. The area was a pandit's lane. They thought he was a Muslim."

He alleged that the accused were drunk when the incident took place.

Sahil's mother Suneeta also said that communal sentiments were behind her son's death. She said that the accused thought Sahil was a Muslim name and hence he was beaten up.

Sahil was the sole breadwinner of his family. He was taking care of his father's construction material business. His father had stopped working due to a heart ailment.

The 23-year-old had two other siblings -- a sister Anjali and a 13-year-old brother Aditya.

"My son came home running. He had been beaten up very badly. He told his sister he could not breathe. Then he lay down in my lap and said he had been attacked in Gali no. 5...as he said this, he died in my arms. My 23-year-old son left me and I was not able to do anything," a desolate Suneeta said.

However, when an Aajtak team visited the scene of the crime, locals dismissed the allegations, saying that people of all faiths live in the Pandit wali Gali.

Sunil Singh alleged that the police was refusing to listen to him and was instead siding with the accused. He said police was hiding evidence in the case.

"The heartbreaking part is that the police is not willing to help me. They are trying to save the accused. A whole mob beat up my son. But police arrests only 2 people. They have also hidden the CCTV footage," Sunil Singh said.

Police deny claim

According to police, Sahil was returning from a friend's birthday on Friday. When he was passing through the Pandit lane, he was stopped by a drunk Chandrabhan.

Police claim that Chandrabhan said that how can you pass through our lane. As an argument ensued, Chandrabhan started beating Sahil. A crowd gathered and hit him with sticks and lathis.

DCP Northeast Atul Thakur dismissed a communal angle to the crime and said that the matter was just an argument.

A case under sections 302 (punishment for murder) and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC has been registered at the Jafrabad police station and two accused arrested.
