DK Shivakumar arrested: Protests across state, roads blocked, buses damaged

Protesters in Bengaluru damaged buses, burnt tyres and raised slogans against the BJP government on Wednesday

Confusion over bandh

BENGALURU: Thousands of Congress workers and supporters across the state staged protests over former minister DK Shivakumar ’s arrest, condemning the central government, pelting stones at KSRTC and private buses and burning effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah.Ramanagara district, which falls under the parliamentary constituency of Shivakumar’s brother DK Suresh, witnessed large-scale violence. The town observed a bandh with schools, colleges closed and shop owners downing shutters.Traffic on the ever-busy Bengaluru-Mysuru Road was disrupted in the morning and police diverted motorists from Bengaluru at Bidadi and from Mysuru at Srirangapatna to the Malavalli route. Traffic chaos continued till late evening.Police records show miscreants set one KSRTC bus and three motorbikes on fire, while six KSRTC buses were damaged in stone pelting incidents in Ramanagara. However, no arrests were made. Buses plying between Ramanagara and Bengaluru and Kanakapura and Malavalli were cancelled in the morning.“One KSRTC bus belonging to Kanakapura depot was gutted at Chunchi Colony in Kanakapura and protesters attempted to set ablaze another bus at Harohalli near Ramanagara, but they only damaged three passenger seats,” a KSRTC official said.KSRTC officials said a total of 16 buses were damaged across the state. On Tuesday night, 13 buses were damaged and three on Wednesday. “A dozen buses were damaged in Kanakapura and one each in Uppinangady Town (Dakshina Kannada), Chikkanahalli Gate (Kolar) in Bengaluru,” an official said.The corporation has deputed chief traffic manager and chief security-vigilance officer to Ramanagara to monitor operations.Meanwhile, KSRTC officials said Fly Bus services to Kempegowda International Airport will continue to run. “We are operating Fly bus services from KIA to Mysuru via Nelamangala, Kunigal, Bellur Cross and Pandavapura,” said an official. On the Mysuru – Bengaluru route, only a few services are operating via Magadi and Huliyurdurga.Parents and students of a few schools and colleges in Bengaluru were confused over a “possible bandh announcement”. “Parents of pre-school children panicked on hearing about a bandh,” several parents said. “A few play schools messaged parents, asking them to pick their wards earlier than the regular time. This created confusion.” Schools and colleges in Ramanagara district will remain closed on Thursday too as a precautionary measure.
