Explosion at Indian Firecracker Factory Kills 23 People

Rescue workers search for survivors after a blast at a firecrackers factory in Gurdaspur, India on Sept. 4, 2019. (Stringer/Reuters)

Explosion at Indian Firecracker Factory Kills 23 People

NEW DELHI—A large explosion at a fireworks factory in northern India on Wednesday, Sept. 4, killed at least 23 people and caused the building to catch fire and collapse, officials said.

Police officer Mukhtiar Singh said 15 other people were injured in the blast in Batala, a town in Punjab state about 285 miles north of New Delhi.

“Police, firefighters and disaster management personnel are at the site looking for any extra bodies in the debris,” inspector general Surinderpal Singh Parmar said Wednesday.

Deepak Bhatia, a state government administrator, said the cause of the explosion was being investigated.

Images about the incident show a brick-lined building that had completely collapsed from the force of the explosion.

Footage on social media shows rescue workers and dozens of people can be seen milling around the large collapsed structure.

Singh said the blast was so strong that it shattered the windows and collapsed some walls of nearby buildings. A few pedestrians in the area at the time of the explosion were also injured, said Parmar.

News18 television news channel quoted opposition Akali Dal party leader Bikram Singh Mathijia as saying that it was an illegal factory that had existed for years without a license in a residential area.

Punjab chief minister Capt. Amarinder Singh said on Twitter that he had ordered a magisterial probe into the blast.

Have ordered a magisterial probe into the Batala firecracker factory blast. My prayers & thoughts are with the family members of the deceased and I wish a speedy recovery to those injured. I have announced an ex-gratia grant for those injured & the kin of deceased. — Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) September 4, 2019

Indian President Ram Nath Kovind offered his condolences on Twitter, writing: “Saddened to learn about the loss of lives due to an explosion at a firecracker factory in Batala, Punjab. Condolences to bereaved families impacted by this tragedy and wishing an early recovery to those injured.”

Saddened to learn about the loss of lives due to an explosion at a firecracker factory in Batala, Punjab. Condolences to bereaved families impacted by this tragedy and wishing an early recovery to those injured #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) September 4, 2019

Residents complained that authorities had failed to take any action against the factory. An earlier explosion there in 2017 killed one person, according to the news channel.

Fireworks manufacturing is big business in India, with firecrackers often used in festivals and weddings.

India marks Diwali, the festival of lights, next month when revelers set off countless fireworks. Many illegal factories produce firecrackers that are cheaper to buy than legally made ones.

On Saturday, at least 12 people were killed and 58 injured after an explosion at a chemical factory in the western state of Maharashtra.

India’s Home Minister, Amit Shah, wrote on Twitter: “Anguished to learn about the loss of lives due to explosion at a chemical factory in Dhule, Maharashtra, adding, “State govt is doing everything possible to assist the people in need. My condolences with the bereaved families. May injured recover soon.”

Anguished to learn about the loss of lives due to explosion at a chemical factory in Dhule, Maharashtra. Have spoken to CM @Dev_Fadnavis, state govt is doing everything possible to assist the people in need. My condolences with the bereaved families. May injured recover soon. — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) August 31, 2019

Reuters and The CNN Wire contributed to this report
