Challaned Rs 25,000 for drunken riding, Delhi man sets bike on fire in Malviya Nagar

According to the police, the man was in an inebriated condition. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: A man allegedly set his motorcycle on fire on Thursday after Delhi traffic police issued him a challan of Rs 25,000 for violating traffic rules in national capital's Malviya Nagar area. According to police, the man was in an inebriated condition when he set his bike on fire and a case will be registered against him in this regard.

According to reports, traffic police have stopped the man and after inspection, he was found under the influence of alcohol. Later when his bike was being impounded as per law, he mischievously set it on fire at Triveni Complex in Malviya Nagar.

The incident happened just a day after a report surfaced from Delhi's neighbouring city Gurugram where a man was fined Rs 24,000 for multiple traffic rules violations. Elsewhere, a Bengaluru youth paid Rs 17,000 in penalties after he was caught driving under the influence of alcohol and found guilty of other offences as well.

Ever since the Central government rolled out the revised penalty regime for traffic rules violations on Sunday, a host of incidents have been reported from across the country where violators have been imposed heavy fines by traffic police.

Several cases of autorickshaw drivers paying hefty fines have also been reported since September 1. In Gurgaon, an auto driver was handed over a challan of Rs 32,500 after he was found to have jumped red light signal while in Bhubaneswar, a drunk autorickshaw driver was fined Rs 47,500.

The drunk autorickshaw driver from Bhubaneshwar had bought the second-hand auto only seven days back for Rs 26,000. He said, "Police not only slapped a fine of Rs 47,500 on me but also seized my vehicle. This is not fair at all."

According to the newly amended Motor vehicles Act, there is a penalty of Rs 10,000 for drunk driving while Rs 5,000 for riding without driving licence. For not wearing a helmet, the violator would have to shell out Rs 1,000 in fine while the pillion rider will be charged the same amount for riding without a helmet.
