Pakistan seeks Oman’s support to solidify OIC stance on Kashmir

President Dr Arif Alvi on Thursday sought support from Oman to solidify the stance of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) for the people of Indian-held Jammu and Kashmir.

“Every Muslim must feel the pain of the innocent Kashmiris, who are subjected to blatant human rights violations by Indian security forces through ghastly clampdown, involving a month-long curfew and suspension of basic amenities of life to the people,” the president said while talking to Chairman of Majles A’Shura of the Sultanate of Oman and head of delegation Sheikh Khalid bin Hilal Al Maawali here at the Aiwan-e-Sadr.

The president said the international community must pressurise India to respect the resolutions of United Nations Security Council, which give an inalienable right of self-determination to the people of Kashmir. He said the Indian fascist regime, previously involved in the Gujarat Massacre, has now endangered the regional and international peace because of its access to the nuclear button.

Highlighting the close interaction between the two parliaments and formation of friendship groups in the upper houses of both the countries, the president said that Pakistan attaches great importance to its relations with Oman and is keen to further enhance these brotherly relations in all spheres. In this regard, the creation of Pak-Oman Friendship group in Majlis A’ Shura of Oman will further connect the two countries, he added.

The president also extended invitation to the Sultan of Oman to visit Pakistan.

Sheikh Khalid bin Hilal Al Maawali said the formation of friendship groups in the upper houses of both countries will go a long way in further bolstering the bilateral relations. He said Pakistani diaspora in Oman is playing an invaluable role in the progress and prosperity of Oman.

Separately, Prime Minister Imran Khan has said the world must take notice of the plight of Muslim Kashmiris in Kashmir facing atrocities at the hands of Indian security forces.

In a meeting with Oman’s parliamentary delegation, headed by Chairman Majles Al’Shura Sheikh Khalid Bin Hilal Al Maawali and comprising Mohammed Ali Amer Baqi, Mohameed Khamis Abdullah Al Badi, Mohameed Ramadhan Qasim Al Balushi, Yoonis Yaqoob Issa Al Siyabi, Murad Ali Yousaf, Salim Hamad Saed Al Mufarraji and Ambassador Al Sheikh Omar Al Marhoon, the two sides reiterated the need to further enhance bilateral trade ties and to strengthen mutual cooperation in various areas.

Keeping geographical closeness in view, Pakistan and Oman have agreed to enhance cooperation in the fields of economy and trade. According to Radio Pakistan, the understanding was reached at a meeting between Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi and the parliamentary delegation of Oman.

Qureshi said the two countries can take bilateral cooperation to the new heights by improving economic ties. Oman’s Majles A’Shura chairman said Pakistan has the status of a gateway for Oman to access to the Central Asian states.

On the occasion, Qureshi also apprised the Omani delegation of the prevailing appalling situation in Held Kashmir.

He said India has held Kashmiris hostage for four weeks through continuous curfew in contravention to the international laws and the UN Security Council resolutions. Expressing concern over the situation in the occupied valley, the Omani delegation said the dream of progress in the region can be made a reality through peace. They said Oman believes in resolution of issues and conflicts through talks.

Also on Thursday, Pakistan and Oman agreed to further strengthen relations in the field of aviation sector. The agreement reached during a meeting of Minister of Aviation Ghulam Sarwar Khan and Ali Sheikh Muhammad Omar Ahmed Sultanat of Oman’s Ambassador to Pakistan who called on him here.

Air Services Agreement between Pakistan and Oman was initialed in December 1972. The ASA stipulates multiple airlines designation. PIA and Airblue are the designated carriers of Pakistan while Oman Air and Salam Air are the designated carriers of Oman.
