Teacher to hang for raping pupil, 4, so badly she had to have intestines realigned

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get daily headlines and breaking news alerts for FREE by signing up to our newsletter

A teacher has been sentenced to hang after raping a four-year-old student so badly she had to have her intestines realigned.

Mahendra Singh Gond is due to be hanged next month after he launched his sickening attack on the youngster on June 30 last year in India's Madhya Pradesh district.

Gond was arrested within hours of the horrific attack after he dumped the student's body in a jungle area - assuming she was dead.

A desperate search was launched, before the girl's family found her with agonising injuries and rushed her to hospital.

Her injuries were so severe, she was then airlifted to a Delhi hospital where she had an operation to realign her intestines, reports Times Now News.

The brave girl was able to make a statement during her recovery, which helped to convict her twisted attacker.

The teacher was sentenced to capital punishment on September 19 last year. A judge said the crime was the “rarest of rare".

Gond is due to be executed at 5am on March 2.

However, the hanging can still be stopped by the Supreme Court or the President.

In a separate case in India earlier this month, the body of a 16-year-old girl was found beheaded with her breasts cut and doused in acid in a suspected 'honour killing'.

The girl's family claim she was raped but police suspect her father handed her over to be killed.

Hundreds of protesters took to the streets after her body was found close to the family home.

(Image: patrika.com) (Image: Google)

The girl, who activists have called Anjana, was found dead in the holy city of Gaya, Bihar, in northeastern India.

Her father filed a police report on January 6 claiming she went missing on December 28, NDTV reports.

However, senior police officer Rajiv Mishra says her mother and sisters told them a conflicting story.

They said she returned home on December 31 and her father sent her away with a man known to them at 10pm that night.

There is no suggestion the two cases are linked.

In September 2018, a 19-year-old student was abducted from a bus stop and then raped by up to 12 men for eight hours.

The atrocity rocked India, after the victim was left with a string of injuries after her ordeal and is barely able to speak, according to her mother.

It has emerged that the suspects knew the girl and her family and had been following her in the run up to an apparently well-planned attack.

The identity of the one of the suspects, a soldier in the Indian army, has caused further outrage.

"If an army personnel is involved in the crime we will ensure that the person is caught and booked for rape. We do not shelter criminals," Lt Gen Cherish Mathson told NDTV.

The girl was abducted on Wednesday morning in Mahendergarh, in the northern state of Haryana, after two of the accused saw her at the bus stop. They offered her water which she believes was spiked and then put her in a car.

She told police she was taken to a house about 25 miles (40km) away where a number of other men arrived. The gang then took it in turns to rape her, according to The Times of India.

She was eventually driven back to the bus stop and dumped. One of the men phoned her family and told them to collect her.

Three of the alleged attackers have been identified as Pankaj, who is in the army, Nishu and Manish. There have been no arrests yet but police have released pictures of the three men in an attempt to find them.

The victim is in a local hospital where she has been treated for injuries to her back, shoulders and genitals, according to The Times of India.
