DCs asked to tackle stray cattle menace, check cess utilisation

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Rajmeet Singh

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, September 5

Alarmed at the growing incidents of fatal and non-fatal accidents due to attacks by stray cattle, Local Bodies Minister Brahm Mohindra on Thursday asked the deputy commissioners (DCs) to form strategies to tackle the stray cattle menace.

Citing reports that funds collected as cow cess through the Urban Local Bodies, Excise and Taxation Department and Transport Department were not being utilised properly, the Minister has tasked the DCs with the responsibility of overseeing the proper utilisation of these funds.

In a letter to all DCs, Braham Mohindra has pointed out that the government was collecting cow cess for setting up gaushalas and was releasing financial assistance ranging from Rs 25 to Rs 30 per cattle. “As many as 20 cattle ponds set up, one in each district, have little impact to tackle the stray cattle menace,” he wrote.

Calling upon the DCs to evolve workable strategy as they were better informed about the ground reality, the Minister has asked them to team up with volunteers to tap additional resources to contain the menace.

Already, the minister had sought detailed, year-wise report on collection of cow cess by the Excise and Taxation Department and Transport Department. “I am also enquiring into the utilisation of cow cess in cow shelters. Despite measures being adopted by the government, the results have been far from satisfactory. A lot more needs to be done,” he maintained.

“In light of the above alarming situation, there is great resentment amongst the people, who are holding the government squarely responsible for not effectively dealing with the issue of stray cattle. Therefore it has become imperative for the Local Government Department to effectively tap every source of its financial input,” the minister added in the letter.

Over Rs 70-crore cow cess not used

Though the government has levied cow cess on liquor, fuel and some other items, it is yet to release the entire revenue collected as cow cess by different departments since 2016. Excise Department owes nearly Rs 40 crore, Transport Department owes nearly Rs 16 crore and PSPCL owes Rs 20 crore collected under this head.
