3 church priests allegedly rape teen girl, charged under POCSO Act in Mysuru

3 church priests allegedly rape teen girl, charged under POCSO Act in Mysuru

The girl was allegedly taken to Mangaluru under the pretext of being given a job, while her mother was told that the family would receive financial assistance, police said.

news Crime

Police in Mysuru are investigating a complaint issued by the mother of a 16-year-old girl, who has alleged that her daughter was sexually assaulted, raped and abused by three priests of a church. The girl and her mother are reportedly natives of Mysuru. Narasimha Raja Police Station in Mysuru had filed the FIR against the three men who hail from Mangaluru and have been booked under the Prevention of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The accused have been identified as Sebastian, Bennet Amman and Joshua Amman, who all are natives of Balmatta in Mangaluru.

Speaking to TNM, Mysuru City Police Commissioner K T Balakrishna said, “The preliminary investigations are underway. The mother had given the complaint, but the address and personal details are not accurate and we have not been able to trace either the victim or her mother. However, investigations are underway and we will take strict action against those involved.” He further noted that the accused have yet to be apprehended and are currently absconding.

The girl was allegedly taken by the three priests to Mangaluru in November after they had promised to give her a job and reassured her mother of financial assistance she needed to build a house. As per the complaint, however, the girl has been sexually abused since mid-December and was made to do physical work and chores around the house.

“The complaint given by the woman states that the victim was subject to sexual assault by the three men. They had promised to give her mother 1 lakh rupees to assist her in building a house and also said they would help secure a job for her,” adds Balakrishna. He also stated that the girl was not allowed outside the house and was threatened into keeping silent.

Mysuru police have formed teams and are currently working to track down the men who have been named as accused in the case.

This comes days after a Bengaluru-based woman accused a bishop of sexual harassment and had attempted to take her own life after threats from him. The woman, who is undergoing treatment at CSI Hospital, is said to be recovering while the Shivaji Nagar police have registered an FIR against the accused.
