From extending $1bn credit line to MoU on defence, trade: Key takeaways from PM Modi's Russia visit

Prime Minister Narendra Modi with Russian President Vladimir Putin | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights India and Russia signed 15 documents including 13 MoUs/agreements and one B2B agreement Unveilling India's "Act Far East" policy, PM Modi announced extension of $1 Billion Line of Credit For Russia PM Modi on September 4 said that Russia will train the Indian astronauts for Gaganyaan mission

Prime Minister Narendra Modi returned from his two-day Russia visit on Friday. The Prime Minister had gone to participate in the 20th India-Russia annual summit and the Eastern Economic Forum (EEF), where he was the chief guest. The forum took place in Vladivostok, located in Russia's the Far East.

During his visit, PM Modi held meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin. The two countries signed agreements in the field of defence, trade, industrial cooperation, investments, connectivity corridors and energy.

20th India-Russia Summit

New Delhi and Moscow signed 15 documents including 13 MoUs/agreements and one B2B agreement. The documents include a strategy document for trade and investment, an intergovernmental agreement on joint production of spares for Russian/Soviet-made military equipment, an MoU for joint audiovisual production, and one for oil and gas cooperation.

The two countries also signed a customs agreement as well as an understanding in the field of geology.

Russian officials praised the results of the 2018 All India Tiger Estimation, which established that India was home to 75 per cent of the global tiger population with 2967 tigers. India welcomed the Russian initiative to hold the Second International Tiger Conservation Forum in 2022 (also called the Second Tiger Summit; the first Summit was held in Saint-Petersburg in 2010).

Modi invited President Putin to visit India next year for the 21st India-Russia Annual Summit.

$1 billion line of credit for Russia

Unveiling India's "Act Far East" policy, PM Modi on September 5 announced an extension of $1 billion line of credit for Russia. The Prime Minister also asserted that India will walk shoulder-to-shoulder with Russia in its development of the resource-rich Far East region.

"I firmly believe that today's announcement will be the take-off point of our 'Act Far East Policy'," Modi said, addressing the plenary session of the Eastern Economic Forum.

Kashmir issue

India and Russia are against “outside influence” in the internal matters of any nation, PM Modi said after talks with Putin. The remarks, which were made at a press meet with the Russian president, came amid tensions between India and Pakistan after New Delhi revoked Jammu and Kashmir’s special status.

Russia has backed India’s move on Jammu and Kashmir, saying that the changes in the status are within the framework of the Indian Constitution.

Manufacturing of Kalashnikov rifles

New Delhi and Moscow agreed to a joint venture for manufacturing AK-203 Kalashnikov assault rifles in India. During the announcement of the joint venture, Modi said the move will bring bilateral cooperation in the military and technical area to a new level.

"As far as a joint venture on producing the AK-203 is concerned, it will enable us to bring our cooperation in the defence area beyond the narrow framework and create a reliable basis for developing our joint production," Modi said after talks with Putin on the sidelines of the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok.

Modi, in March, had announced the Indo-Russia Rifles Pvt Ltd joint venture, which will produce the AK-203 assault rifles at an Ordnance Factory Board plant in Korwa, Amethi.

Russia to train Indian astronauts for Gaganyaan

PM Modi on September 4 said that Russia will train Indian astronauts for the country's ambitious manned space mission -- the Gaganyaan.

The first Gaganyaan flight scheduled for 2022 will carry three astronauts, who will be picked from among the test pilots in the armed forces.

Russia will help train Indian astronauts for the manned space mission -- the Gaganyaan project, Modi said in a joint press meet with Putin.
