Delhi: Gang-rape accused arrested while attempting to murder survivor

Kasim and his friends allegedly held the girl at gunpoint and raped her (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A girl was allegedly gang-raped by five men in Delhi's Rohini area One of the accused Kasim attempted to murder the survivor when she was on her way to a court The police arrested Kasim by laying a trap for him

New Delhi: A gang-rape accused allegedly tried to murder the survivor in Delhi, the police said on Saturday. The survivor was going to depose before a magistrate at Rohini court when she was attacked. The police arrested the accused and confiscated a double-barrel pistol from him.

The accused has been identified as Kasim alias Raji Ahmed. The police said that apart from being accused of gang-rape, Kasim was also involved in a shootout. The shootout had taken place at a party in Geeta Colony. A case was also registered against Kasim under the Arms Act. He had come out of jail when he allegedly gang-raped a girl.

According to the police, Kasim has a criminal record. He had been evading arrest ever since an FIR was registered against him.

How it happened

On July 26, Kasim's friend called the survivor, asking her to come to a birthday party which was taking place at an apartment in Rohini. The girl agreed but when she reached there, Kasim and his friends were at the apartment.

Kasim and his friends allegedly held the girl at gunpoint and raped her. They threatened to murder her family members when she tried to raise an alarm. A few days after the incident, the survivor approached the police and an FIR was registered against the five accused.

After registering an FIR, the police started searching for the accused. When Kasim learned that the police were trying to locate him, he started making attempts to escape arrest. A police officer said, "He procured a double-barrel pistol and decided to eliminate the girl to prevent her from recording her statement before a court."

When the survivor learned that Kasim was planning to kill her, she informed the police about his intentions. The police laid a trap for Kasim and arrested him.

Kota woman forcibly taken to forest, gang-raped by neighbour and his friends

Another incident of gang-rape came to light from Kota in September where a woman was allegedly raped by five men in the Jhalawar district. One of the accused was identified as the survivor's neighbour. In her complaint, the woman alleged that she had been taken to a forest against her will and was raped by five men.

The woman was grazing cattle in a field when the accused took her to a forest and took turns to rape her. Following this, the accused abandoned the woman and left the jungle. She reached home the next day and told her husband and in-laws about the incident. The survivor and her husband then went to the Gangdhar police station and lodged a complaint against the accused.
