Dalit Ill-Treatment A Deep-Rooted Legacy in AP

Hyderabad: The alleged insult of a Dalit MLA from the ruling YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) at a Ganesh pandal in Amaravati last week, highlights the deep-rooted caste discrimination that exists in Andhra Pradesh where politics is brazenly played along caste lines.

Undavalli Sridevi, a member of the state Assembly, was allegedly insulted by few men, said to be from an upper caste. The accused reportedly prevented the legislator from performing puja at the pandal on the occasion of Ganesh Chaturthi. The accused said that if the MLA breaks a coconut there, the place will lose its sanctity. The legislator, who represents Tadikonda Assembly constituency in Guntur district, was left in tears.

Also Read: Dalit MLA Not Allowed To Perform Ganesha Pooja In Thullur

The issue took a political turn as the accused belongs to the opposition Telugu Desam Party (TDP). The police registered a case against four men under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and arrested them.

Also Read: Four TDP People Arrested For Insulting Tadikonda Dalit MLA

The MLA's incident was not the first. Instances of caste discrimination were not new to the state, where politics has deep roots in casteism. Political analysts have said that incidents of caste discrimination keep happening in the state. Senior journalist Telakapalli Ravi said that two Dalits were beaten to death this May on suspicion of stealing mangos in East Godavari district. "Dalits faced social boycott by caste Hindus in Garaparru village in West Godavari district over the installation of a statue of Dr Ambedkar near the panchayat office," said Ravi, referring to the conflict that began in 2017 but continued for several months. In the past too, Dalit MLAs in Tadikonda constituency faced humiliation at the hands of some upper caste people belonging to the TDP . Since Dalits supported the YSRCP in a big way, both the TDP and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) were trying to project them as Christians. "A kind of communal polarization is being attempted here now, leading to further tensions," he said.

"Andhra Pradesh politics is divided among Kammas, Reddys and Kapus. Political leaders over decades fuelled these differences for their political gains," said another analyst P. Raghava Reddy. The caste factor had dominated the recent elections with YSRCP, which enjoyed the support of the Reddys, highlighting how the TDP government led by Chandrababu Naidu went out of the way to favour senior police officials belonging to the Kamma community. The TDP is considered as a party dominated by Kammas . The YSRCP led by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy stormed to power in the state with a landslide majority. Besides the Reddys, Kapus, BCs, SCs, STs and minorities were believed to have supported the YSRCP.

The Reddy community traditionally dominated the politics of undivided Andhra Pradesh. However, with the emergence of the TDP on political scene in early 1980s changed the scenario. The party floated by popular actor N.T. Rama Rao changed the caste equation with support of the backward classes and weaker sections of the society. However, an incident during N.T. Rama Rao's regime rocked the state. On July 17, 1985, six Dalits were killed and 20 injured in an attack allegedly by Kamma landlords in Karamchedu village, Prakasam district. Nearly 23 years after the attack, the Supreme Court in 2008 awarded life sentence to the main accused and three years imprisonment to 23 others.

The second major attack on Dalits occurred on August 6, 1991 at Tsundur village of Guntur district. Eight Dalits were killed and many others were injured in the attack allegedly by people belonging to Kapu communities. Houses of Dalits were looted and set afire and several families were forced to flee from Tsundur and adjoining villages.

In 2014, the Andhra Pradesh High Court set aside 2007 order of a special court that sentenced 21 people to life imprisonment and 35 others to one year's jail for Tsundur massacre. The Court struck down the sentence for lack of evidence in the sensational case, which had attracted national attention. The Supreme Court later stayed the High Court order.( IANS)

Also Read: Dalits Have Taught TDP A Lesson, Yet Yellow Party Misbehaviour Goes On: Eliza
