Mean streets

The Humsafar Trust

LGBTQI community

homosexuality

Members of The Humsafar Trust, along with founder Ashok Row Kavi and actor Chitra Palekar, celebrate the first anniversary of the Supreme Court judgement, on September 6, that decriminalised homosexuality

sexual encounter

One year of freedom: Understanding gender, sexuality and LGBTQIA+ lives post striking down of Section 377 12:20

Section 377 may have been read down, but a year later, the harassment of LGBTQI people on the ground continues unabated.Sanjeev was a regular at the cruising spots in midtown Mumbai, where gay men typically go to find partners. Two months ago, he met a man in a station toilet and, after a brief conversation, was invited to the man’s place to have sex. As soon as the two stepped out of the toilet, they were accosted by a man claiming to be a plainclothes policeman, who began to threaten Sanjeev. The man Sanjeev had just met, also joined in — clearly the two were part of a set-up — and demanded money. They escorted him to an ATM and waited outside (careful to avoid the ATM cameras), while Sanjeev cleaned out his account and paid them Rs 25,000.In other circumstances, Sanjeev may have stood up to his extortionists. But the junior manager at a corporate firm is a married man with two children. He was terrified that his family would get to know that he was homosexual. “Such incidents have been common for many years,” says Tinesh Chopade, advocacy manager with, a resource group for the. “But after Section 377 was read down last year, we’d hoped that the number of ‘crisis incidents’ — where people are exploited because of their sexual orientation — would come down. That hasn’t happened. In fact, we’ve seen an increase in the numbers.”Even though the Supreme Court has decriminalisedwith its landmark judgement on September 6, 2018, one year on, activists say nothing has changed on the ground. LGBTQI people are still harassed, blackmailed, abused and assaulted by law enforcers (like beat cops), goons or just about anyone trying to make a quick buck off their situation. Despite the judgement, homosexuality still remains unacceptable to society at large, forcing many gay men and women to remain in the closet. This, in turn, makes them particularly vulnerable to exploiters, says Humsafar Trust director Vivek Anand.“There’s a bigger fear beyond Section 377, and it’s a social one. The only reason people pay up, or stay silent even after being subject to abuse, is the fear of being outed to their families, friends and colleagues. The law may have changed, but this leverage continues to exist for anyone who wants to take advantage of unsuspecting victims.” For instance, Anand adds that goondas could never threaten people with Section 377. “With them it was always, ‘If you don’t give us money, we’ll follow you home or to your office, and tell everyone about you’.”Sanjeev probably got off easy. Counsellors talk of cases where men have been hauled to the police station on the pretext of being booked for public indecency, only to be abused by cops seeking sexual favours in return for their silence. “Queer men have been beaten up, brutalised or driven to suicide by harassment,” says LGBTQI rights activist Harish Iyer. “Violence is so much a part of the police system, and used as a mechanism to instil fear, that it isn’t easy to get rid of. But even outside that, we have heard of at least three cases, post Section 377, of people killing themselves because they were bullied for being gay.” As per Humsafar records, between September 2018 and 2019, some 64 ‘crisis incidents’ have been reported — almost double the number from a corresponding period in 2017-18, before the Supreme Court ruling.This could also be because of cases being reported more freely and frequently now. With more people coming out today, instances of sexualityrelated abuse have increased. And not just with cruising. Dating apps like Grindr and Planet Romeo have facilitated hook-ups, but they’ve also created new opportunities for deception and blackmail. “They’re actually more dangerous because people tend to hide their identities,” says human rights lawyer Vijay Hiremath. “If you meet someone online and decide to invite him home, you might end up having your drink spiked and your house robbed. Dating websites have only increased the risks for the LGBTQI community, just as they have for heterosexual people.”Avinash thought he had that covered when he asked a transgender person he had met on a dating site, to come to his hotel. After they had sex, she demanded money. When a stunned Avinash protested, she insisted that her Grindr status listed an amount — she had changed it when he wasn’t looking — and began creating a row. Almost on cue, three or four of the hotel staff barged in and began beating Avinash up, saying they would turn him over to the police for engaging in ‘criminal activities’. Eventually, he had to pay them all off.“Social media has made our attackers smarter too,” says Iyer. “They’ve bettered their game by doing online research to locate the perfect victim: someone who is still in the closet.” In an incident from December 2018, a bank employee was horrified to learn that his blackmailer (whom he had resisted), had somehow managed to get the IDs of all his colleagues, and shot off an email blast outing him, quite explicitly, with photos of theirGroups like Humsafar have been holding sensitisation programmes with the police long before the Section 377 judgement. But it’s a hard to get a buy-in from cops if they don’t even acknowledge the problem. ACP (west region) Manoj Sharma says that all police officers are aware about the changes to Section 377 and what it entails. “We would like to help sexual minorities feel safe in public spaces. However, in order to do this, they need to approach us with their problems and trust that we will handle the matter in an unbiased manner.” Humsafar has tried that — but with mixed success. “We first draw up a map of all the cruising sites in the city, and then reach out to the police stations that are close by,” says Anand, adding that the organisation now runs such programmes in 27 states, with a focus on non-urban India. “But post-training assessment shows that retention of the workshop is not the best. Besides policemen also get transferred, so we have to start over, which we often cannot do.”According to DCP (operations) Pranay Ashok, who is also the Mumbai Police spokesperson: “Our job doesn’t allow us to distinguish between sections of society. We make sure the officers manning our police stations behave in a way that does not make anybody feel threatened to come to us for any assistance, or to tell us about something wrong that happened with them.”Transgender activist Sharmila disagrees. “One of my ‘sisters’ was picked up off the street by the police once, and at the station a senior officer, after roughing her up and addressing her in the filthiest of terms, insisted that she service him,” she says. “The cops believe that since we have sex with men, we are free game for them, too.” Transpersons are particularly vulnerable to abuse and sexual assault, says Sharmila. “We are easily identifiable because of the way we dress, and most of us have no money or family to support us. So we’re always at the receiving end of violence, from both criminals and cops.”The problem may be one of percolation: Senior officers may be aware of changes in the law, but not the constable on the street. Indeed, one sub inspector Mirror spoke to, said he was clueless about what constituted sexual minorities, despite having attended a workshop on this. “The workshop focussed on female and child victims of sexual assault,” he says. “There was not much about Section 377.” A possible remedy, says Hiremath, is to provide additional protection to the LGBTQI community in the form of other laws. “What we also need is an anti-discrimination law or an equality law, or some other mechanisms to prevent discrimination,” he says. “But most importantly, we need society itself to change and become more accepting of social minorities. Till that happens, they will continue to be vulnerable.”Some names and professions have been changed to protect identities
