1995 triple murder case: BJP MLA acquitted, five others get life term

The court also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 on each of them. The convicts, who were out on bail, were taken into custody and sent to Bahraich district jail.

A sessions court in Bahraich district on Saturday acquitted BJP’s Mahasi MLA Sureshwar Singh and three others for lack of evidence in a 1995 triple murder case.

However, his elder brother Brijeshwar Singh and four others were sentenced to life imprisonment. The court also imposed a fine of Rs 50,000 on each of them. The convicted men, who were out on bail, were taken into custody and sent to Bahraich district jail.

“Additional District Judge Sunil Kumar Mishra on Saturday pronounced the judgment, acquitting MLA Sureshwar Singh and three others for want of evidence,” said government counsel Manoj Kumar Singh.

“Nine prosecution witnesses, including three who were at the spot, were examined by the court. Among the five convicts, two are aged around 75,” he said. Two other accused – Nankunna and Bindra Lodhi – died of natural causes during trial.

The court also examined four defence witnesses, said the counsel.

Sureshwar Singh said he will move the Allahabad High Court against the judgment.

According to prosecution, the case dates back to June 29, 1995 when Gokharan Singh, his brother America Singh, nephew Bajrangi Singh and a few others were returning home on motorbikes from Kaiserganj tehsil. They had gone to complete legal formalities needed to buy a land.

When they reached near Pasiyanpur village, a group of people ambushed them and fired at them, killing Gokharan, America and Bajrangi and injuring their relative Munijar Singh, said the prosecution.

The victims were residents of Sisaiya Churamani village under Hardi police station area of Bahraich. The firing occurred a few metres from their village.

On Gokharan’s cousin Shivmagan’s complaint, Hardi police lodged an FIR against 11 persons, including Sureshwar and his brother Brijeshwar who are also from Sisaiya Churamani village. It was alleged that the murder was fallout of a dispute over a panchayat election.

Police arrested all accused, who were later released on bail.
