Jordanian conspiracy against Dubai exposed

Vijaya Laxmi Tripura

Following the dispute between Dubai’s ruler Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum and his sixth junior wife, Princess Haya Bint Al Hussein, Jordanian regime has become desperate in taking revenge on Sheikh Maktoum. According to intelligence sources, Princess Haya’s full brother Prince Ali Bin Al Hussein has been pursuing his half brother the King of Jordan as well as some of the top aides of the Jordanian royal family, including Iraq’s former dictator Saddam Hussein’s daughter Raghad Hussein for taking some “immediate measures” against Dubai’s ruler as the later has been reportedly making frantic bids in getting Princess Haya deported from Britain. It may be mentioned here that Raghad Hussein is one of the top patrons of Islamic State.

Meanwhile, sensing Jordanian royal family’s grudge on Sheikh Maktoum, Dubai’s silent rival Qatar has expressed willingness of providing the fund to help the Jordanian royals in achieving their target of taking retaliation from Sheikh Maktoum.

Sources told this correspondent that, Prince Ali and some of the members of the Jordanian royal family are considering several actions against the Dubai ruler, which includes terrorist attacks on its key economic centres as well plot of getting Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum assassinated. Last month Prince Ali reportedly had secret meetings with notorious terrorist Ahlan Tamimi and Saddam’s daughter Raghad Hussein seeking their help for several terrorist attacks targeting Dubai’s key economic centres. Meanwhile, Prince Ali has made contact with an individual named Galina, a former KGB operative and secret assassin in St Petersburg, offering her an unknown amount of money in exchange of assassinating Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum. The Jordanian royal family also are trying to bring several female maids inside the Dubai royal palace under their control by offering a substantial amount of cash. They also have established contacts with a number of anti-Dubai individuals including an individual based in Mumbai with the request of locating family members of some of the Filipina and Indian maids inside the royal palace. It may be mentioned here that, a large number of Filipino and Indians are working inside the royal palaces in the United Arab Emirates.

In January 2006, Mohammed’s brother and Dubai’s ruler, Sheikh Maktoum, died of a heart attack and Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum became ruler. The day after, the UAE’s Federal National Council elected him as vice president. Under his rule, Dubai became the financial centre of the Middle East.

Dubai began to hit its stride as Sheikh Mohammed Rashid Maktoum was made Dubai’s crown prince by his brother in January 1995.

In 1979, Sheikh Mohammed married Sheikha Hind bint Maktoum, his first wife, with whom he has had 12 children. Sheikh Mohammed has 23 children in total from six wives. But another source said, Sheikh Maktoum actually has over a dozen of wives and junior wives alongside dozens of concubines. It may be mentioned here that, a junior wife does not enjoy the status of a full wife while she actually is considered as a pleasure woman.

According to Hindu religious scripture, god Krishna, an avatar of the god Vishnu in the Dwapara Yuga (epoch) has between 16,000-16,100 junior wives besides his eight principal queens (full wives). Krishna accepted them as his wives upon their insistence to save themselves from the society who saw them as slaves of the demon king Narakasura. The most prominent amongst Krishna’s junior wives was Rohini.

The plot of terrorist attacks in Dubai

According to intelligence sources, at the request of the members of the Jordanian royal family, Raghad Hussein and Ahlan Tamimi are actively plotting series of terrorist attacks targeting key economic centres in Dubai to destabilize country’s economic boom. Meanwhile, Princess Haya Bint Al Hussain is also trying to establish secret connections with some of the relatives of Sheikh Maktoum – particularly the members of Abu Dhabi and Sharjah royal families. It may be mentioned here that, Ahlan Tamimi is a fugitive terrorist who is amongst most wanted by the US law enforcing agencies. She is one of the kingpins of mega-terrorist outfit Hamas.

Another source said, there could actually be terrorist attacks on Sheikh Maktoum’s business establishments.
