Armed assailants waylay couple, gang rape woman in front of husband in UP

Police have detained two persons in connection with the case. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Couple was on their way back home when assailants gang raped woman Crime took place in Bijnor's Chandpur area in Uttar Pradesh Police have detained two persons in connection with the case

Bijnor: In yet another incident of law and order breakdown in Uttar Pradesh, a woman was gang-raped by armed assailants in front of her husband in Amroha district of the state. The crime took place on Saturday when the couple was on their way back home in an e-rickshaw.

The assailants dragged the woman into a field and violated her. According to the victim, the assailants also fired at her husband when he attempted to stop them.

According to a report, the police have launched an FIR and a manhunt has been launched to nab the culprits in the area. The woman told the police they were heading to Amroha after seeing a doctor in Chandpur area of Bijnor.

"My husband and I were returning from Chandpur on Saturday evening in an e-rickshaw. When we reached close to Kuakhera where my parents live, four assailants from the same village stopped our e-rickshaw, robbed the driver and threatened him. He left us there and sped away in fear," the report quoted the survivor as saying.

The woman also said that the assailants took the couple into a field and raped her at gunpoint. The survivor further told police that her husband was shot at and stabbed when he resisted their act.

Some villagers and passers-by rushed to the spot when the couple screamed for help. The accused fled from the spot sensing trouble. Later, the couple reached the police station and filed a case.

"Based on the woman's complaint, we have registered a case. We have sent the woman for a medical examination. The police are investigating the case further," said Amroha SP Vioib Tada.

Police have detained two persons and are questioning them. They said they haven't found any bullet injury on the arm of woman's husband as claimed by the couple.

Woman gang-raped in front of husband and child in Muzaffarnagar

In a similar case in October 2017, a 30-year-old woman was gang-raped by four men in front of her husband and an infant son in Muzaffarnagar in Uttar Pradesh.

The criminals intercepted the family which was on a bike on a deserted stretch of road and dragged them to a sugarcane field. They tied her husband to a tree and threatened to harm the child if they raised an alarm. They then took turns to rape the woman.

The attack took place when the victim and her family were on their way back from a doctor's clinic after a medical check-up of their child.
