Pedophile Teacher Sentenced to Hang for Raping 4-Year-Old Schoolgirl

Pedophile Teacher Sentenced to Hang for Raping 4-Year-Old Schoolgirl

he death sentence was confirmed by the high court last month

© press The death sentence was confirmed by the high court last month

A pedophile teacher in India who raped a girl so so violently that doctors had to realign her intestines will be sentenced to hang next month.

The former teacher, Mahendra Singh Gond, will become the first person to be executed in the country under the new law that has implemented the death penalty for child rapists.

The victim was kidnapped by Gond last June, who left her body in the jungle following the horrific assault.

© press The schoolgirl (pictured being airlifted to hospital) spent months in a New Delhi hospital having her intestines realigned

The death sentence was confirmed by the high court last month, and the date of his execution has been fixed for March 2, according to the Times of India.

The 4-year old school girl spent months in n a New Delhi hospital as doctors desperately tried to realign her intestines.

Gond is now in prison in Jabalpur, in the state of Madhya Pradesh in central India.

Judges confirmed the attacker's death sentence, saying:

"Courts cannot evade their duty to be tough with hard-core criminals so that there is some deterrent against indulging in such gruesome crimes.

"The incident assumes greater significance because the person involved is a teacher who is supposed to teach lessons in morality to his students."

According to NDTV who was reporting at the time of the attack, Gond was drunk and had kidnapped the girl from her cot after speaking to her father.

It was believed that Gond led the girl away from ger the house and attacked her before dumping her close by.

© press Last year, the Indian government approved the death penalty for pedophiles who rape children below 12

'Taking advantage of the situation, Gond took the girl away from her house and raped her. After the sexual assault, he dumped her into the bushes,' a prosecutor said.

Last year, the Indian government approved the death penalty for pedophiles who rape children below 12 years of age in the ordinance to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO).

The new law is to tackle the epidemic of pedophilia and gang rape in India which saw a series of assaults since 2012, inclduing a student was gang-raped and murdered on a moving New Delhi bus

The men who responsible for the rape and murder of the medical student in New Delhi have been sentenced to death and remain on death row.

India’s top court upheld the death sentences in 2017, and a petition to overturn them was rejected.

One of the suspects was found dead in his cell.

The case triggered massive protests across the country.

Another suspect, who is underage, is serving time at a correction facility.
