Does Wearing A Mini Skirt Make Me A Slut? Then So Be It. I Am A Slut.

Slut. There’s something about the word that makes people cringe. It’s a very good example of when vocabulary is used as a weapon--to shame, to subdue, and to control the person it is directed at. “She wore such a tiny skirt. What a slut!” It is almost always used in a context that involves women and their clothing choices. Bra strap showing? You’re a slut. Wearing shorts or a mini skirt? Slut. Showing cleavage? Total slut.

So, let’s get down to the bottom of what this means. The Cambridge Dictionary defines slut as, “a woman who has sexual relationships with a lot of men without any emotional involvement.” Basically, a “slut” defines a man, with the gender reversed. Men are applauded for sleeping with multiple women and called “studs”, but if women exhibit the same behaviour, we’re sluts.

Thankfully, women are out in full force to reclaim the word “slut”. To remove from it the deep connotations of shame, that it has been associated with for far too long. Canada started the Slut Walk in 2011, in response to a police officer saying that women would not be sexually assaulted if they didn’t dress like sluts. Women went out in droves, dressed in whatever they felt like, to put out the message that no matter what we wear, nobody should touch us without our consent. The Slut Walk gained traction all around the world. Even Delhi had its version of the event in 2011.

Don’t want men to get the wrong idea

Whenever I wore a mini skirt or a short dress as a teenager, my mother always warned me that it would give men “the wrong idea” and that people would think I’m a slut. That somehow, my clothes are a signal to men that I am sexually available to them. That women who wear revealing clothes are “asking” to be raped. Let’s take a step back and examine that.

Just last month, a 5-year-old child was raped in a Delhi school by the school’s sweeper. Was she wearing a mini skirt? Of course not. She was in her normal school uniform.

In 2017, the country was shocked when a 100-year-old woman was raped by a drunk man in Meerut, UP. Do you think she was wearing a skimpy dress?

The 2012 Nirbhaya rape case did not occur because she was out wearing heels, heavy makeup, and skimpy clothing. The whole country was united in its protest against the continued sexual assault against women.

Were any of these women “sluts”? Did any of them “ask for it”? One of them was a child too young to even understand the concept of sex and rape; another too old to even fathom anyone looking at her as a sexually attractive being anymore. The problem is clearly not what women wear.

Teach men respect

Clearly, the problem lies in the men doing the raping. Rape is not about lust. It’s about power. It is about the ability to show women that they are inferior and should know their place. Similarly, calling a woman a slut has nothing to do with the clothes she wears, but has everything to do with trying to control her.

Men are the ones who need to be taught respect. That a short dress doesn’t mean an invitation to sex, just like how wearing an Armani suit is not an invitation to be robbed. Not just men, even some women have internalised the idea that women are “asking for it” if they wear skimpy clothing. These women also need to be taught to respect other women’s choices instead of denigrating them further.

Just last month, Mira Kapoor was mercilessly trolled for going out grocery shopping in a mini skirt. She became the proverbial “slut” who wears tiny clothes to get attention.

Think about it. We can never win. We wear mini skirts and we’re sluts, but if we are covered up all the time, we’re prudes. We’re either shamed for being too available or we’re shamed for being seen as not available at all. So, we might as well wear what we want. If we get called sluts, so be it. At least sluts have the freedom to do what they want.




