UP law student accuses Swami Chinmayanand of rape, files complaint with Delhi Police

A postgraduate law student from UP's Shahjahanpur who had earlier levelled harassment charges against Swami Chinmayanand last month has accused the former BJP MP of raping and physically exploited her for a year.

The LLM student, who studies at a college run by Chinmayanand, alleged that the Shahjahanpur police was not registering the rape case and filed a complaint Delhi police which has forwarded it to the Special Investigation Team formed by the Uttar Pradesh government.

“Swami Chinmayanand raped me and even exploited me physically for one year,” she told mediapersons in Delhi.

“On Sunday, the SIT quizzed me for about 11 hours. I have told them about the rape. Even after telling them everything, they have not arrested Chinmayanand yet,” she said.

She said the Delhi Police registered her complaint at Lodhi Road police station and forwarded it to UP Police.

Last week, on the directions of the Supreme Court, a special team of the Uttar Pradesh police headed by an officer of the rank of Inspector General and comprising a Superintendent of Police among others was formed to probe serious charges of sexual exploitation levelled against Chinmayanand.

The order came from the Supreme Court after it spoke at length with the victim, an LLM student, who posted a video on Facebook on August 24 and went missing after she claimed to have evidence of how the institution she was studying at, that was run and managed by the former MP, had many more girls like her being sexually abused and exploited.

Taking suo moto cognizance of serious allegations, the bench of Justices R Banumathi and AS Bopanna, which ordered the girl to be brought to Delhi, spoke to her and her parents at length in order to know her state of mind and ascertain what further relief could be provided to the victim who apprehended danger to her and family.

After speaking to the victim, the bench directed the UP Chief Secretary to constitute the special police team immediately. While directing the girl to continue her stay at the All India Women's Conference for another 10 days, the bench tasked the UP Chief Secretary to ensure full protection to the family of victim on return to their native village.

The Shahjahanpur police had on August 27 lodged an FIR against Chinmayanand on the complaint of the victim's father after she went missing following her allegation in a video clip. The father accused Chinmayanand of sexually harassing her, a charge denied by the former MP.
