Shahjahanpur Student alleges Swami Chinmayanand had raped and physically exploited her for 1 year

Shahjahanpur (UP): The post-graduate student, who had levelled harassment charges against Swami Chinmayanand, alleged Monday that she was raped by the BJP leader who also physically exploited her for one year.

Addressing mediapersons here, she claimed that the Shahjahanpur police was not registering the rape case. “Swami Chinmayanand raped me and even exploited me physically for one year,” the girl alleged, her face covered with a black scarf.

The victim has also approached the Delhi Police with a complaint accusing the BJP leader of raping her. A senior Delhi Police official said Monday they received a complaint at a police station in south district which has been forwaded to the special investigation team (SIT) of the UP Police.

“The Delhi Police has registered this complaint at the Lodhi Road Police Station and has forwarded it to Shahjahanpur police, which is not registering the rape case,” the girl informed.

“Sunday, the SIT quizzed me for about 11 hours. I have told them about the rape. Even after telling them everything, they have not arrested Chinmayanand yet,” said the girl.

The girl alleged that when her father gave a complaint to police here about her physical exploitation, Shahjahanpur District Magistrate Indra Vikram Singh ‘issued threats’, asking her father to file ‘a missing complaint’ instead.

“I have all the proof. The hostel where I lived has been sealed. It should be opened in front of the media,” the law student said and added that she would reveal proof including video clips, at an opportune time against the 72-year-old BJP leader.

On the FIR registered by Swami Chinmayanand’s lawyer alleging that she was demanding rupees five crore, she said, “It should be probed. This is a fake allegation.”

The girl also said that she was not the only victim of Swami Chinmayanand. “He (Chinmayanand) has ruined lives of many girls. I can’t tell the exact number. I am the only one to muster the courage and stand up,” the girl said defiantly.

The SIT, headed by Inspector General Naveen Arora, was set up by the Uttar Pradesh government on a Supreme Court directive. It had called members of the girl’s family at the district Police Lines here Sunday afternoon for recording their statement.

The team visited the residence of the BJP leader, his ashram and the college run by him where the victim studied. It also went to Divya Dham, the residence of Chinmayanand but could not meet him as he was out of town.

The apex court had earlier said that an Allahabad High Court bench would monitor the probe. The IG meanwhile said Monday that the report would be submitted to the Supreme Court in a sealed envelope after the inquiry.

PTI
