Several historic and landmark decisions taken by the Government at an unprecedented scale in its first 100 days: Harsimrat Kaur Badal

Chandigarh: “This government took office with the motto of `Nation First’. In the first 100 days, it has demonstrated a tremendous will to carry out social and economic reforms that were earlier perceived to be impossible.’’ said Smt Harsimrat Kaur Badal, Union Minister for Food Processing Industries . The government’s first 100 days are also a reflection of an aspirational India which is confident to reach its full potential ensuring ‘Sab Ka Saath, Sabka Vikas Sabka Vishwas’. She was addressing a Press Conference here today on the completion of 100 days of the Union Government.The Minister also inaugurated a photo exhibition on ‘Furthering India’s Development – 100 days of Bold Initiatives & Decisive Actions’ and released the booklet ‘Jan Connect’ in Punjabi. The Booklet contains a compendium of key decisions of the government in hundred days.

.Smt. Badal further said that the government has taken several historic and landmark decisions at an unprecedented scale. She also highlighted the sensitivity and encouragement of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi towards the dedicated scientists at ISRO that boosted the morale of the scientific community at large. With Chandrayan II, India made unprecedented strides in space and established its Global Positioning, she elaborated.

The minister also informed that the first parliament session of this new government exemplifies the decisive nature of its leadership. By ending the ‘Triple Talaq’ in its very first week, despite stiff opposition, this government has demonstrated its commitment to restoring the honour and dignity of women. This legislation is a strong step towards protecting and empowering muslim women by ensuring gender justice as enshrined in the Constitution of India.

Further, the minister highlighted the landmark legislation for the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2019, that provides death penalty for aggravated sexual assault on children. This is another illustration of this government’s single-minded focus on social reforms. The government has also tried to uplift marginalized sections and create a level playing field by providing an income support of Rs.6000 to every farmer and extending Pension Schemes to labourers, small traders and farmers, she added.

Smt. Badal elaborated on the three-pronged strategy of the government that focuses on- Harnessing India’s human resource potential to shape new India; weeding out corruption through a Clean-up action and Infrastructure push. As far as the achievements of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is concerned, a total of 66 unit schemes, 30 cold chain and 10 APCs were sanctioned during 100 days of the new Government, the minister informed.

Smt. Harsimrat Badal highlighted the other key decisions of the government, including abrogation of Articles 370 and 35A with a view to the betterment of life of common people of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh; steps towards achieving the vision of making India a $5 trillion economy; large scale investment in infrastructure and social sector; Ease of Doing Business; reduction of physical interference and transparency in GST and IT return filing process; Jal Shakti Abhiyaan; Har Ghar Bijli Yojna; Ujjwala scheme, providing electricity in around 18000 villages. She said that lakhs of farmers in the country are already linked with PM Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana . The poor are getting better treatment under the Ayushmaan Bharat scheme and getting medicines at cheap rates, the government has constructed toilets and is working to provide drinking water to every household by the year 2024.Also, SC, ST and other backward sections have received scholarships, she said.

The Additional Director General (Region), of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting Smt Devpreet Singh and Joint Secretary MoFPI, Ms Reema Prakash were also present at the occasion.
