Congress cuts ties with ally in Kerala over killing of its worker

Kerala Congress has come heavily down on the PFI for its involvement in the murder of Congress worker Noushad

Thrissur: Some 40 days after the murder of a Congress worker in Kerala's Thrissur district, police finally arrested the prime accused in the murder case. According to reports, the accused is a leader of Popular Front of India (PFI) which is an ally of Congress in the state. In the wake of the arrest, the Congress has announced that it will snap ties with both Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) and its sister organisation PFI.

Kerala Congress has come heavily down on the PFI for its involvement in the murder of Congress worker Noushad. While speaking to media, one of the Congress workers said that the grand old party has never believed in communal politics and it has nothing to do with the PFI or SDPI anymore because they are communal organisations.

"We have always been against the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and the Communist Party of India (CPI). We believe that they are two sides of the same coin. We don't believe in communal politics and don't want any such parties in the alliance," said the Congress worker.

Earlier on July 31 this year, 40-year-old Noushad was hacked to death by bike-borne assailants in Thrissur. Kerala Police had then nabbed five other accused in the case, however, prime accused Arakkal Jamaludheen had been absconding ever since.

Jamaludheen, who is the Chavakkad area president of the PFI, was arrested from Tamil Nadu by the investigation officials.

Jamaludheen has been charged under sections 302 (Punishment for murder), 143 (Unlawful assembly), 147 (rioting), 148 (Rioting, armed with deadly weapon), 323 (Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 324 (Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means), 120B (Criminal conspiracy), 153 (Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot) of the Indian Penal Code and section 27 (Punishment for possessing arms) of the Arms Act.
