Jharkhand: 'Baba' rapes woman on pretext of treatment, arrested

The accused has denied all the allegations levelled by the woman. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman raped by Bharu Baba on pretext of treatment The incident took place at Lal Baba Ashram in Salukchapra area of Dhanbad Accused denies all allegations levelled by the woman

Dhanbad: In yet another of crime against woman, a Dalit woman was raped by a self-styled Baba in Salukchapra area of Dhanbad district in Jharkhand. The incident took place at Lal Baba Ashram and the accused has been identified as Bharat Acharya alias Bharu Baba.

Police have booked the 'Baba' and arrested him on the complaint of the woman. The woman was sent for medical examination at Patliputra Medical College and Hospital (PMCH).

According to a report, the woman, who got married just two months ago, was taken to the Bharu Baba for treatment of an unknown illness. The woman alleged that Bharu took her to an isolated place and sexually assaulted her by tying her hands and legs.

The woman said Bharu also thrashed her when she resisted the assault and threatened to kill her with magic. After some time the woman informed her parents about the misdeeds of the Bharu Baba.

The parents of the woman approached police against the man and filed a complaint last Saturday.

Meanwhile, the accused has denied all the allegations levelled by the woman. He said the rape charge is an attempt to malign his image. Police are now interrogating the accused.

German woman alleges molestation by 'babas' at ashram in Varanasi

In a similar incident in July this year, police in Uttar Pradesh's temple town of Varanasi arrested a man for allegedly molesting a German woman at a local ashram. In her complaint, the foreign national claimed that she was molested by three men who were living in the same dharamshala as her. A case was registered on the basis of her complaint by Varanasi Police.

The 32-year-old woman had been living at an ashram which doubles as a dharamshala, said an officer investigating the matter. The officer also said that she had been in Varanasi for almost two months now. A case was registered against the accused after the woman approached Shivpur police station along with a fellow disciple and narrated her ordeal. The complainants alleged that the three accused barged into the woman's room and began touching her inappropriately.

In 2017 too, a 24-year-old German woman was raped by unidentified men in Mahabalipuram town of Tamil Nadu which is about 50 kilometre from the state capital Chennai.

The woman was part of a group of tourists who were visiting Tamil Nadu. Police claimed that the woman was resting on a private beach owned by a local resort in the area when she went for a stroll. The woman wandered far from the rest of the group and ended up on a remote part of the beach where she was allegedly raped by unidentified men.
