Modelling contest finalist, 27, is 'punched by a stranger as she got off a train after a night out'

A finalist in a modelling competition has been left with horrific injuries after she was attacked on her way home.

Emma Clark suffered a broken nose when a male stranger punched her repeatedly in the face after she stepped off a train at Simonside in South Shields, South Tyneside.

The 27-year-old had been competing in the North East Calendar Girls Grand Final at House of Smith in Newcastle city centre having made it to the final 75 from 1000 girls.

Emma Clark, 27, says her nose is now squashed against her face and says she cannot breathe out of her nose after the attack. She was a finalist in a local modelling competition at the time of the incident

Ms Clark, who was attacked on Sunday night, said: 'It was a horrible end to a lovely night.

'It's left me shaken. My self esteem has dropped. I don't want to go out. 'I want people to see what he's done but I don't want to walk around like this.

'I am just hoping the doctors can fix me. I was shocked. I felt like it happened so fast.

'I can't even breathe out of my nose, it's so hard.'

She said: 'It's a canny bad break, it's squashed against my face. It's awful.

She had been competing in the North East Calendar Girls Grand Final at House of Smith in Newcastle city centre having made it to the final 75 from 1000 girls

'It's painful. It's numb but it's a horrible feeling. My eyes starting to go really black. I haven't been able to sleep at all.

'If my mam hadn't got her phone out and said she was going to take a photo he could have done a lot worse. And if I had been on alone it could have been an even more awful attack.'

Ms Clark recently completed a mental health nursing degree and was looking for her dream job.

She said: 'I was waiting for a job interview and I was doing my driving lessons. Now I feel I can't go out.

'I have suffered low self esteem all my life and getting through to the final was a massive boost. It was a massive step forward I was so proud.

'I can't look at myself anymore. 'It's knocked me down again. It just feels like every time I go up the steps I get knocked back down.'

Ms Clark says she had just got off the Metro train at Simonside with her mum, Trish Clark, 45 and her auntie, Paula Ray, 43 when they were approached by a male stranger.

'We were walking and talking and he stopped us and said to me: 'You live in Madras Street'

'I thought he was taking the mick because my hair is red and a Madras curry is red.

'I told him I'd never heard of the street. 'He was really angry, pointing his finger.

'Then he grabbed me and we both fell over. He sat on me and started punching my nose again and again.

'I heard a crack and felt the blood just trickling down. 'My mam had to grab him by the shirt and pull him off me. 'My aunty was already on the phone to 999.

Ms Clark says she had just got off the Metro train at Simonside with her mum, Trish Clark, 45 and her auntie, Paula Ray, 43 when they were approached by a male stranger. The station is pictured above [File photo]

'He ran off. I took my heels off and ran straight after him even though my nose was flowing with blood.

'I'm so thankful to my mam and and aunty that they got him off me. I dread to think what would have happened if I was on my own.

'I keep repeating it over and over in my head. I just hope the perpetrator is caught and brought to justice.'

A Northumbria Police spokesperson said: 'Shortly after 11.55pm (on Sunday), police received a report of assault at an address on Collin Drive, South Shields.

'It was reported that a 27-year-old woman had sustained injuries to her nose after being assaulted.

'Officers attended and a 55-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of assault.

'He has been released under investigation and enquiries are ongoing.'
