Delhi man found dead with slit nape in Lajpat Nagar; police probe underway

eanwhile, the Police are questioning his partner and are looking for CCTV camera footage of the area.

Key Highlights The man was found dead with a sharp cut on his nape at his residence A forensic team subsequently examined the scene of crime with a dog squad The Police are questioning his partner and are looking for CCTV camera footage of the area

New Delhi: The Delhi Police was informed about a 28-year-old Nepalese man, who was found lying in a pool of blood at his rented flat in South Delhi's Lajpat Nagar area. The man was found dead with a sharp cut on his nape on Tuesday.

The deceased was identified as Sunil Tamang, who lives with his partner from the past one year. The deceased used to work at a restaurant in the national capital. Reportedly, the police were apprised of the death by the landlord, A K Datta. Meanwhile, as soon as the police reached the spot, they found blood was splattered all over the floor around the body. Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southeast) Chinmoy Biswal said that a sharp cut was found on the back his neck.

During the preliminary investigation in the case, the police said that the victim's partner had gone to meet her friend in Greater Noida on Monday at 11.30pm. Meanwhile, when she returned home on Tuesday at around 2 pm, she found the door of the room was unlocked from inside and the body was lying in a pool of blood. She immediately informed the landlord who then informed the police.

However, a forensic team subsequently examined the scene of crime with a dog squad too pressed into service to sniff clues. The police have also registered a case of murder and the body has been sent to AIIMS mortuary for post-mortem.

Meanwhile, the Police are questioning his partner and are looking for CCTV camera footage of the area. The phone call records of the deceased are also being traced. His partner told police that two had spoken over the phone till late on Monday night.

However, the police have informed the family of the deceased and the cause of death will be ascertained only after the post-mortem. The deceased's mother belongs to a village in Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh.

In another case reported from the national capital, a man allegedly killed his own 20-day-old infant daughter after having an argument with his wife in Bindapur area. The incident took place on Friday.

The accused was identified as Mukesh, who was angry after having an argument with his wife about her going to her maternal home. He reportedly then took his daughter to his room, first strangled and then drowned her in a plastic water tub. Mukesh got married in the year 2018 and was living with his wife in a joint family and had a business as a confectioner.

After the incident, the family called the police and a case was registered.
