Asia Bibi, Jagjit Kaur's names echo at UNHRC chamber as India hits out at Pakistan in its right of reply

India hit out at Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi in its right of reply at the United Nations Human Rights Council as it raised the plight of minorities in the neighbouring country.

First Secretary at the Permanent Mission of India to UN Vimarsh Aryan said Pakistani," rhetoric will not distract international attention from Pakistan’s persecution and elimination of religious and ethnic minorities – be it the Christians, Sikhs, Shias, Ahmadiyas and Hindus."

India gave examples of Asia Bibi, a Christian woman who was incarcerated for years under blasphemy laws and Abdul Shakoor a the 82-year-old Ahmadiya, who was charged under the Anti-Terrorism Act for selling books. New Delhi also gave the example of minor Sikh girl Jagjit Kaur who was abducted and converted just a few weeks back in Pakistan's Punjab province.

India's diplomat slammed Islamabad for raking Kashmir at the Geneva-based institution.

Indian diplomat Vimarsh Aryan said, "We're not surprised at Pakistan's hysterical statements with false narratives aimed to politicise and polarise this forum. Pakistan realises that our decision cuts away ground from under its feet by creating obstacles in its continuing sponsorship of cross-border terrorism."

New Delhi highlighted how "some Pakistan leaders have even gone as far as to call for ‘Jihad’ and to encourage violence both inside Jammu and Kashmir and in third countries, in order to paint a picture of ‘genocide’ which even they know is far from reality"

Calling Pakistan, "epicentre of global terrorism", Aryan said, Pakistan "forgets that terrorism is the worst form of human rights abuse."

It's interesting to know India sent a diplomat from who hails from Jammu and Kashmir to respond to Pakistan FM.

Earlier in the day Pakistani FM Qureshi had spoken from UNHRC and spoken about the situation in Jammu and Kashmir in the aftermath of the removal of special status for Jammu and Kashmir.
