Lashkar terrorist Asif Bhat who attacked fruit trader's family shot dead in Kashmir's Sopore

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Security forces in Kashmir shot dead on Wednesday a suspected member of a Pakistan-based militant group Lashkar e Taiba, who was accused of attacking the family of a fruit trader, the state police chief said.

The terrorist has been identified as Asif Maqbool Bhat and was also responsible for shooting at migrant labourer Shafi Aaalm in Sopore, the Jammu and Kashmir police tweeted.

Tension is running high in Jammu and Kashmir since India withdrew the region's special status by abrogating Article 370.

Also Read: Pakistan revives seven terror launch pads to push 275 jihadis in Kashmir: Report

Last week, militants attacked the home of a fruit trader in Sopore, the region's main fruit-growing area, for carrying on with his business despite widespread protest boycotts, wounding his son, granddaughter and another family member, Indian authorities said.

On Wednesday, police killed a militant identified as Asif, who police said was a member of the Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistan-based group fighting Indian rule in Kashmir, in Sopore, state police chief Dilbagh Singh said.

The terrorist has been identified as Asif Maqbool Bhat of LeT.He was responsible recent shoot out and injuries to 03 family members of a fruit trader of Sopore The injured also included a young girl.

Was also responsible for shooting at Migrant labourer Shafi Aaalm at Sopore. https://t.co/gsApDbHxlT Also Read 'Pride, Unity and Integrity': PM Modi, Amit Shah, other political leaders.. — J&K Police (@JmuKmrPolice) September 11, 2019

Singh said Asif was responsible for the assault on the fruit merchant's home and an earlier attack on a labourer. Pakistan, which also claims Kashmir, has vowed what it calls the fullest possible response to the Indian decision to revoke the region's special status.

While the injured fruit trader family was out of danger, the two-year-old girl Usma Jan was critical. National Security Adviser Ajit Doval had asked authorities to bring the girl to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi for better medical care. However, her family members had reportedly resisted the move.

Also Read: India slams Pakistan at UNHRC, says 'concocted charges over J-K by terror epicenter'

Hundreds of apple trucks have been moving out Sopore, 45 km from Srinagar, to deliver their produce to the rest of the country in what authorities hailed as a sign of normalcy.

Earlier on Monday, eight Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorists, who were involved in threatening and intimidation of locals, were arrested in south Kashmir.

The eight arrested are accused of preparing the threat posters and circulating them in the locality. The terrorists were identified as Aijaz Mir, Omar Mir, Tawseef Najar, Imitiyaz Najar, Omar Akbar, Faizan Latief, Danish Habib, and Showkat Ahmad Mir.

Posted By: Talib Khan
