Infosys techie kidnapper was planning a murder

Infosys

Anurag Sharma

Hosur Road

Three men held for Chennai techie’s abduction-robbery days after incident, and in the nick of timeThe gang which had abducted and robbed a 25-year-oldstaffer has been arrested by Parappana Agrahara police. The gang is alleged to have been involved in few more similar cases. The gang had abducted and robbed, who reportedly works with Infosys in Mysuru as a senior systems manager and is originally from Chennai, of Rs 45,000 along with other valuables.The police have arrested Ganesh alias Touchhu, 29, of Surajakkanahalli in Anekal, Sridhar, 30, and Umesh, 20, of Haragadde. The police are on the lookout for another accused identified as Venugopal. The South East division police who has made the arrest claims to have recovered a Maruti van which was used to kidnap the Sharma.Sharma was abducted while returning home after attending a family event in Bengaluru. He was dragged into a car and was blind-folded, assaulted and robbed. He is said to have been kept in the custody of the accused for almost eight hours.On January 31, Sharma was to leave for Chennai in a private bus at around 11.50 pm. As the bus did not arrive at Bommasandra, which was his pick-up point, he kept waiting. In the meanwhile, the accused came in a Maruti van and two of the accused pulled him inside. Two others, who were waiting at the bus stop, also got inside the vehicle.“The accused started punching him and snatched his wallet and mobile phone. After he was threatened at knife point, he is said to have shared his debit card PIN. He was then taken to four ATM kiosks from where the accused withdrew nearly Rs 45,000. The accused had wrapped him in a thick blanket and had put him on the van’s floor. At around 8.30 am on Friday, the accused threw him outside the vehicle in Naganayakanahalli at Suryanagar near Anekal and escaped,” said an investigating officer.Sharma had to undergo medical treatment at Narayana Multi-Speciality Hospital onAmong the accused, Ganesh who is a professional thief, is said to have come out of prison recently. He ganged up with the other accused and started robbing victims in Parappana Agrahara, Suryangar and other areas. He had also planned to kill one of his relatives, identified as Shobhraj, which he confessed during interrogation. Further investigations are on.
