'In-camera' proceedings to record Unnao rape survivor's statement begin at AIIMS

The Delhi High Court had on Friday approved recording the rape survivor's statement at AIIMS' Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre

The woman's statement is being recorded by district judge Dharmesh Sharma in an 'in-camera' proceedings not open to public or the press. She is presently admitted to the hospital following an accident on July 28.

Expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar was brought to AIIMS in New Delhi, where a temporary court has been set up for recording the statement of Unnao rape survivor. Sengar, along with Shashi Singh, is accused of sexually assaulting the woman in 2017.

The Delhi High Court had on Friday approved recording the rape survivor's statement at AIIMS' Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre.



A notification to this effect was issued by the high court from the administrative side, which said special judge Sharma, who is conducting trial in the cases, shall record her testimony.

The rape survivor was air-lifted from a Lucknow hospital to Delhi on the orders of the Supreme Court.

The notification came after the apex court asked the high court to expeditiously decide on the request of a special judge for setting up a temporary court at AIIMS to record the statement of the Unnao rape survivor.

The special judge had recently written a letter to the Delhi High Court seeking permission to hold in-camera proceedings at AIIMS after doctors said it was 'not advisable' to bring her to the court premises.

Sharma informed the registrar general of the high court that the CBI, the woman and her family have 'no objection' to such deposition.

The apex court also directed the CBI to complete its probe within two weeks and file a chargesheet in the road accident case, in which the rape survivor was injured. It also indicated that if the special judge needed more than 45 days to complete the proceedings, it may consider the request.

While transferring the cases related to the Unnao incident to Delhi, the Supreme Court had fixed a time limit of 45 days for the trial court to complete its proceedings.

The apex court had earlier said it wanted a 'fair and speedy trial' in the cases of the rape of the woman, when she was a minor, allegedly by Sengar in Unnao in 2017.

In July, a truck rammed into the car she was travelling in with some family members and her lawyer. Two of her aunts died in the road accident.

She was airlifted from a hospital in Lucknow and brought to AIIMS for better care as she continued to be critical.

On August 1, the apex court directed the Uttar Pradesh government to provide Rs 25 lakh to the rape survivor as an interim compensation. It also directed the state government to pay Rs 5 lakh to the lawyer, who is in a critical condition and undergoing treatment.

The court had earlier ordered transfer of all the five related cases in the matter to Delhi but later modified its order putting in abeyance shifting of the accident case till the probe was completed.
