Chhattisgarh Congress MLA Shows Up Late At Airport And Then Abuses Air India Staff For Missing The Flight

A Congress MLA from Chhattisgarh has been accused of misbehaving with the ground staff of Air India after he missed his flight.

According to ANI, the incident happened at the Raipur airport on August 7 when Vinod Chandrashekar, the MLA from Mahasamund Constituency arrived late for boarding.

The Air India staff denied him permission to board the plane after he was late, which infuriated the MLA. He allegedly humiliated a female Air India staff and misbehaved with her.

Twitter

ANI, quoting the initial probe report of Air India reported that "The boarding card of the MLA was taken out in advance at 17:36 hours. All the passengers were boarded except five passengers. Repeated announcements were made at the security hold area (SHA) and also check-in area at 18:12 hours," said the report.

The report further adds, "One passenger reported and informed that others were on way. Airport manager, Raipur, (female staff) of Air India along with Air India Air Transport Services Limited (AIATSL) in-charge, other Customer Service Agent (CSA) waited for them."

"Passengers did not show up till 18:13 hours, and all Airport Manager (APM) and others had gone to flight; trim was taken out at 18:15 hours; flight door closed at 18:18 hours, and flight took off 18:30 hrs," the Air India report said.

BCCL

Chandrakar, however, rejected the charges against him and told ANI "I am an MLA. I know how to behave with a person. I reached the airport at around 17:30 hrs."

"My baggage was checked twice. Due to security checking of my baggage, I reached the final gate at 18:05 hrs. We got late to reach the last gate because of double security check. The female staff of Air India was shouting at me and did not allow us to board," the MLA said.

The Air India subsidiary company (Alliance Air) flight 9I-728 on August 7, from Raipur to Ranchi, was scheduled for 18:30 hrs but the MLA was denied to board the plane by Air India staff at Raipur Airport as he reported late at the airport.

"I challenge the female staff of Air India if she can prove what she has alleged against me. I urge the AI administration to check CCTV footage of the airport," Vinod Chandrakar added.

The initial inquiry report further stated that "after the departure of the flight, the passenger came in the check-in area - started shouting at the top of voice in public."

Vinod Chandrakar started saying that he is MLA of Congress which the female staff was not aware of until then. Her identity card was grabbed. The MLA spoke to the station manager with her mobile. Later he refused to hand over her mobile phone."

BCCL

"Lady staff -- Airport Manager (APM), Raipur, was escorted by the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and another staff to airport back gate cargo and walked more than 2 km late night at 20:30 hours. In drizzling rain as being a lady saving herself she traveled alone 24-km to home in late hours in fear," said the report.

According to an Air India official, "the staff acted as per the standard operating procedure (SOP) at the D-20 boarding gate and tried to avoid the delay of the flight as flight was having onward connection scheduled to Ranchi/Kolkata sector. Any delay would have consequential delay effect on further schedule."

When contacted, Air India spokesperson Dhananjay Kumar said, "The matter came to our notice. Air India management has taken it seriously and ordered detailed inquiry. After the final inquiry report, further action will be taken."

This is not the first time politicians have been accused of misbehaving with airline staff. In March 2017, Shiv Sena MP Ravindra Gaikwad was accused of assaulting a senior Air India staffer over a seat. The incident snowballed into a massive controversy after Air India and later private carriers banned him on their flights. It also led to the Aviation Ministry coming up with a no-fly list where any unruly behaviour onboard or in the airport will invite suspension from flying for a minimum of three months. The maximum penalty could be grounding for two years or more.
