Pune man, his elderly mother thrashed for refusing to donate for Ganpati festival

Pandals are being organised across the country (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Ganesh Chaturthi will last from September 2 to September 12 The incident took place in Pune's Wakad area earlier this year Pune Police have arrested five men and booked them for attempt to murder

Pune: With Ganesh Chaturthi celebrations underway in Maharashtra and other parts of the country, street corners are lit up with pandals decked with decorative items. Put together usually by organisation committees more commonly known as 'mandals', these pandals house idols of Hindu god Ganesha and are constructed temporarily until the immersion of these idols. The festival which began on September 2 this year, will last until September 12. The dates (in Gregorian calendar) and duration vary every year as it is based upon the Hindu calendar that is set on lunar phases and not solar days/dates.

In most cases, these pandals are put together through donations received from residents of the neighbourhood where it is being organised. For this, the 'mandals' are known to issue receipts recording the amount donated by the locals. It is not uncommon to see groups of young adults running around localities with receipt books, seeking donations for pandals.

However, this collection of donation from locals for the Ganpati pandal has led to a violent altercation in the city of Pune where a shopkeeper and his elderly mother were mercilessly assaulted after they refused to pay a donation for the Ganpati festival. The matter came to light when a video of the physical assault went into wide circulation on social media.

Soon after, Pune police took cognizance of the video and launched an investigation into the matter. A preliminary probe revealed that the incident took place after five residents of Pune's Wakad area approached shopkeeper Ramesh Choudhari for a donation. When Choudhari refused to pledge money for the cause, he and his mother were allegedly thrashed by the five boys.

Based on video evidence, Pune Police have arrested five people and booked them under various sections of the Indian Penal Code for assaulting the shopkeeper and his elderly mother. The exact date of the crime is yet to be determined as the matter is under active investigation and more details are awaited in this regard. An officer with the Wakad police station confirmed that the accused have been booked under section 302 of the IPC which corresponds to punishment for attempt to murder.

A similar incident had come to light from Pune in 2016 when members of a Ganesh pandal reportedly harassed employees of a bakery after they refused to make donations for the pandal. A video of the accused making the workers doing sit-ups went viral on social media and sparked a fresh controversy about the imposition of religious norms. The incident had reportedly taken place in Bhosari area of the city. While an FIR was filed in this regard, no arrests were made.
