Delhi: 2 held for sexually assaulting minor domestic help in Moti Nagar area

She was reportedly employed as domestic help and her employer had asked her to bring some household items at about 9 a.m. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused sexually assaulted her on pretext of providing jobs A call was received at Moti Nagar police station at about 3.30 am informing about the minor girl The victim is a resident of Sandesh Khali, West Bengal and had come to Delhi about three months ago

New Delhi: The Delhi Police have arrested two persons for allegedly sexually assaulting a 16-year-old girl on the pretext of a job in Delhi's Moti Nagar area. The victim hails from West Bengal. The accused have been identified as 25-year-old Ravi and 24-year-old Ankit Chaudhary both residents of Basaidarapur area in Moti Nagar.

The Deputy Commissioner of Police (West) Deepak Purohit said that a call was received at police station Moti Nagar at about 3.30 am, where the caller informed about a girl standing alone near the ESI Hospital. Reportedly, the call was made by the security supervisor of the hospital.

He informed the police that the girl was new to the city and could not exactly tell about the location of the incident and neither could she remember the address of her employers. The police immediately reached the spot and during the preliminary investigation found that the victim is a resident of Sandesh Khali, West Bengal and had come to Delhi about three months ago through a distant relative.

She was reportedly employed as domestic help and her employer had asked her to bring some household items at about 9 am on Monday. After which she decided to go to a nearby park where Ravi and Ankit met her and sexually assaulted her. The duo befriended the girl on the pretext of providing another job with a good salary and accommodation.

They then asked her to come to an isolated and abandoned staff quarter of the hospital. Reportedly the accused then raped the minor. However, the Delhi Police team retraced the route taken by the victim and found out the exact sequence of events. Reportedly, via technical surveillance through CDR analysis, the accused were finally arrested from their homes within a record time of 6 hours. The accused have been booked under sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act.
