Rajasthan: Minor abducted, raped by 3 men in Bhilwara; ran without clothes for 500 mts, says rescuer

The doctor who conducted the minor's medical examination claimed that the girl had scratch marks all over her body. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The 15-year-old girl was raped by three men while she was on her way to temple She was accompanied by two of her friends The girl had scratch marks all over her body, said doctor who conducted minor's medical examination

Jaipur: A 15-year-old girl was abducted, thrashed and raped by three men while she was on her way to a temple along with her friends in Central Rajasthan's Bhilwara district. The minor was rescued after one of her friends ran back to the market area which was just some distance away. The incident happened on Monday.

According to a report, the survivor was so traumatised that she tried to escape the man who was trying to rescue her. She ran for almost half- a-kilometre without her clothes and when she eventually stopped the man covered her with clothes and took her home.

Although the accused had fled the spot, they were later arrested by the police. The accused were identified as Raju Kahar and Kailash Kahar who were in their 20s and the third accused was 40-year-old Narayan Gurjar.

Bhilwara district police chief Harendra Mahawar said that the minor and her two friends were heading towards the temple when the three accused who were consuming alcohol near the road, came behind them. While the minor's friends managed to escape, the accused abducted the teen and took her to an isolated place where the trio brutally raped her.

Acting promptly, the survivor's male friend escaped and ran towards the market area where he informed a shopkeeper named Chand Khan Rangrez about the incident. Rangrez told media that the boy narrated the story and said that three men who abducted his friends are now raping her in an isolated place.

Reportedly, Rangrez immediately rode his bike and when he reached the spot he found that the three men were beating the minor. After seeing him, the accused fled the spot. The minor was reportedly so terrified that she ran without her clothes for half-a-kilometre. Upon convincing that Rangrez was here to help her, he gave her clothes and rushed her to home. The girl told Rangrez that her father was unwell and asked him not to take her to the hospital.

However, after listening to the incident the family decided to lodge a police complaint in the matter and a case was registered under the Protection fo Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO Act). The police added that the accused were residents of Shahpura which is 60 km away from the crime spot.

The doctor who conducted the minor's medical examination claimed that the girl had scratch marks all over her body.
