Karnataka: Dalits dragged out of their homes, thrashed with iron rods for refusing to dig grave

The incident took place in Nelamangala (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The incident took place in Nelamangala on September 8, said police As a result, nine people have been hospitalised for severe injuries Two accused have been arrested while a lookout has been issued for the others

Bengaluru: In an appaling incident that is coming to light from the state of Karnataka, some members of the Dalit community in Nelamangala town were mercilessly thrashed by the so-called "upper-caste" men allegedly following a minor scuffle earlier this month. Police officers investigating the matter said that the incident took place on September 8 in Nelamangala which lies on the outskirts of state capital Bengaluru.

Going by inputs, the "upper-caste" men asked members of the Dalit community to dig up a grave for the burial of a family member. However, they resorted to mindless violence after the Dalits refused to indulge in the demeaning act. As a result, nine people have been hospitalised in one of the most shocking instances of caste-based violence to have come to the fore in recent times.

Eyewitness accounts suggest that as many as 30 "upper-caste" men descended on the victims' homes and orchestrated a mindless orgy of caste-based violence. The accused barged into their homes and dragged them out by their hair, said a police officer probing the matter. The assailants did not even spare the women and threw them into the sewage drains while assaulting the males of their family on the streets with iron rods in full public view.

Taking cognisance of the matter, Nelamangala police have arrested two men and are on the lookout for others who participated in the brutal assault. While more details are awaited since the matter is under active investigation, the incident sheds a light on the mindless caste-based violence which continues to thrive in not just Karnataka, but across the length and breadth of India.

In an unrelated case, a 23-year-old Dalit officer committed suicide in Uttar Pradesh's Lakhimpur Kheri district earlier this month allegedly after he was humiliated and harassed by the village head. The deceased was found hanging from the ceiling at his home in Shivsagar area of Lakhimpur, less than 150 kilometres from state capital Lucknow. Trivendra Kumar Gautam left a suicide note where he blamed the district president of a farmers' outfit and the head of Rasoolpur village along with the son of another village head for his death.

Similarly, another time a question paper made for Class 6 students in Tamil Nadu was found carrying the question, "Are Dalits untouchables?". The question paper was reportedly distributed among students of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan Schools. While KVS termed the question paper fake, CBSE claimed that it had no role in the framing of question papers for internal examinations.
