Custodial death: Kin take up cudgels against police

Ludhiana: Tempers flared on Wednesday afternoon at civil hospital where the Shimlapuri police had taken a 21-year-old rape accused who died in their custody. The kin of the deceased accused cops of thrashing him to death, while the latter refuted all allegations.

Initially, the kin refused to allow post-mortem, but later agreed and gave an ultimate to the police for registering a case against Shimlapuri SHO else they would intensify the agitation and not cremate the body.

In December last, Gurwinder Singh, 21, of Mallakpur village in Payal was booked for kidnapping a minor girl on the pretext of marriage. He was arrested and later released on bail. On Tuesday, the Shimlapuri police added Section 376 (rape) after receiving the medical report of the minor.

Balbir Singh, father of Gurwinder, said, “On Tuesday, the Shimlapuri police called us up and informed that we would have to bring Gurwinder. We took him to the police station around noon and returned home. Around 11.30pm, I received a call from the police station that Gurwinder’s health has deteriorated and they were taking him to civil hospital. We reached the civil hospital by 1.30am and were informed that he was no more.”

Following this, the kin gathered at civil hospital on Wednesday morning and refused to allow post-mortem. Police force was deployed and officials started convincing the kin for autopsy.

By late afternoon, the family relented and the post-mortem was conducted in the presence of a magistrate. The report has not ascertained the cause of death and the doctors have sent viscera to a Kharar-based laboratory.

Balbir Singh alleged, “My son was completely fine when he went to the police station. He had no health issues, then how could he die suddenly hours after being arrested? I am sure the cops beat him to death. We will not cremate him unless Shimlapuri SHO inspector Pramod Kumar is booked under murder charges.”

Parminder Singh, cousin of Gurwinder, said there was a home guard in the police who had an old rivalry with Gurwinder. “We suspect him of hatching the murder conspiracy. We have given cops time till Thursday 11am to take action or face intensified protest,” he added.

Additional deputy commissioner of police (II) Jaskiranjit Singh said a judicial inquiry has been marked and they would wait for its report.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
