Landlord’s son is a clear and present danger for a dentist in Whitefield

Margaret Jacob

Kolkata

In top two frames, Edlyn can be se­en throwing the dentist’s signboard; in the frame above, he is approaching the camera to break it

CCTV footage

Bangalore

A woman who had rented a space for her dental clinic from an elderly woman, has filed a complaint of harrassment by the owner’s son.The woman, Sonu (name chan­ged) who is a dentist running a private clinic in Whitefield, was paying a rent of Rs 20,000, when she moved here three years ago. Later the rent the rent was raised to Rs 40,000. For all these years, Sonu was paying rent to her owner,(71), a resident ofwho has been in the city for the last 30 years. Recently, Jacob’s son Edlyn (47) told Sonu to pay him the rent, instead of paying it to his mother. Sonu, who knew Edlyn to be an alcoholic, refused to do so. She had seen Edlyn fight with his mother for money.Angry with Sonu because she refused to pay him rent, Edlyn, who works as a driver at a travel agency, started harassing her.According to Sonu, Edlyn would often cut off the power supply to the clinic inconvenience her and ensure that she could not work in her clinic without power. He hoped that patients would stop visiting the clinic due to this.Edlyn also vandalised the clinic’s board, threw garbage in the bathroom and damaged other things in clinic. All his acts have been recorded on the CCTV camera installed at the clinic. Theavailable withMirror shows Edlyn throwing the clinic board down from the first floor and damaging CCTV cameras installed at the clinic. Not just this, Sonu alleged that Edlyn misbehaved with her by blocking her way and touching her inappropriately. Sonu also added that he sent her abusive messages.Finally after facing harassment for more than a year, Sonu filed a complaint against Edlyn at the local police station. Police officials recognised him since he was arrested once before for assaulting his mother in 2017.Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Sonu said, “Edlyn has been abusive and has been troubling me for a long time. His behaviour towards me had become very violent. He used to threaten abuse and send filthy messages when he was drunk. I’m a mother of two kids, but the accused posted derogatory things about me on Facebook. He has about seven to eight Facebook accounts under different names, where he would post details about my personal life. I tolerated his harassment only because Margaret Jacob had requested me not to file a complaint against her son and that she would advise him. The accused crossed his limit when he tried to touch me inappropriately, block my way and threatened me to kill. Since my family’s life was in danger, I mustered up the courage to file a complaint against him. I have decided to vacate the building as staying here has become too risky for me.”One of the officials from Whitefield police station told Bangalore Mirror, “The accused is in custody and will be produced before the court. He was arrested once before in an assault case and further investigations are on.An FIR has been registered at the Whitefield police station under section 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty).
