Kleptocrat's Club aspires to seize power: Jaitley on Mamata's dharna

Calling opposition parties the 'Kleptocrat's Club' Jaitley in his blog said, "Mamata Banerjee's disproportionate over-reaction to the CBI wanting to interrogate the Kolkata Police Chief has flagged several issues for a public discourse. The most important being that a Kleptocrats Club now aspires to capture the reigns of India."

: Senior Bharatiya Janata Party leader Arun Jaitley on Tuesday hit out at West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee and opposition parties who are supporting her against Central Bureau of Investigation's bid to question Kolkata police chief in chit fund scam cases.

He further elaborates, "It would be a gross error to assume that she did this because of a routine investigation involving a Police Officer. She did it to defocus from other opposition aspirants for the highest office and to project herself as the nucleus of Indias opposition."

Jaitley who is currently in the US for treatment, slammed Banerjee for 'assualting' Federalism.

"Can a state government prevent the Income-tax department from collecting taxes in a State? Can another State Government prevent the NIA from proceeding to arrest a Terrorist located in the State? Can the Enforcement Directorate be prevented from investigating or arresting a smuggler or money-launderer physically located in a State? Obviously the answer is No. If any of these is visible, it would be a case of a State assaulting Federalism. The prevention of a Central investigating agency discharging a function given to it by the Supreme Court is a direct assault on Federalism," he said.

"2019 Election will be either Modi Vs. Chaos or Modi Vs. Anarchy. Mamata Banerjees latest acrobatics are the best evidence of the kind of governance Indias opposition can provide," he added.

"More importantly those who have lent support to the West Bengal Dharna are those who are battling serious allegations of economic improprieties, criminal misconduct and even corruption. Can "New India" be ever run by this Kleptocrats Club?" he asked.
