Kulbhushan Jadhav: No plan for 2nd Jadhav meet with Indian officials: Pakistan

ISLAMABAD/ NEW DELHI: India said it will continue to press for full implementation of the International Court of Justice ruling in response to Pakistan saying on Thursday that there was no second meeting planned between imprisoned Indian national Kulbhushan Jadhav and Indian officials.“There is no second meeting planned. I cannot share any further details of the meeting between Commander Jadhav and Indian Consular Officer,” Muhammad Faisal, spokesperson of the foreign affairs ministry, was quoted replying to a question during a weekly press briefing.Asked for a response in Delhi, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said India will continue working for full implementation of the ICJ judgement which had ordered Pakistan to provide Jadhav consular access and assistance. Indian charge d’ affaires Gaurav Ahluwalia met Jadhav on September 2."The judgement was in our favour. We have been telling Pakistan consistently that the ICJ judgement should be implemented fully. We have heard their statement. We will still try for full implementation of the ICJ verdict," Kumar said during a media briefing.While officials haven’t revealed if they have sought another consular meeting, sources said only a private meeting with Jadhav will fulfil the mandate of the ICJ judgement. Ahluwalia’s meeting with Jadhav happened in the presence of Pakistani officials. Jadhav, as MEA had said, appeared to be under "extreme pressure to parrot a false narrative to bolster Pakistan's untenable claims’’ in his case.Kumar also said India will remain in touch diplomatically with Pakistan over the issue. Earlier this month, the meeting with Jadhav took place at an undisclosed place in Islamabad which was declared a sub-jail.The meeting took place six weeks after the Hague-based ICJ directed Pakistan on July 17 to immediately inform Jadhav of his rights under Article 36 of the Vienna Convention and provide consular access to him. Pakistan must undertake an “effective review and reconsideration” of Jadhav’s conviction and sentencing, and grant consular access to him without delay, the court had said.The Indian national was convicted by a secret “black” military court to death for alleged spying.Islamabad had first offered consular access to Jadhav in early August but it was rejected by India for being contrary to the terms of the ICJ judgement, and coming with too many conditions.According to Pakistan, Jadhav, 49, was arrested on March 3, 2016, from Balochistan province. Delhi, however, said he was a retired Indian Navy officer who was abducted from Iran. His arrest was made public by Pakistan’s military weeks after his capture by airing his purported confessional statement on TV channels.A secret military court, which had tried Jadhav on charges of espionage, sentenced him to death in April 2017. His appeal against the conviction was rejected by the military appellate court.
