Delhi: 'Civil services' aspirants take family hostage, flee with Rs 40 lakh

Robbers threatened family at gunpoint and them locked all in a room. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Five men pose as civil services aspirants, robs family of RS 40 lakh Robbers threatened family at gunpoint and them locked all in a room Later, household help untied the family who then informed police about robbery

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, five men posing as prospective tenants, entered a house in Delhi's Mukherjee Nagar and robbed a businessman's family of Rs 40 lakh after taking them hostage at gunpoint.

The men reportedly told the family that they were looking for a room to prepare for the civil services examination. As the robbers entered the house, they threatened the businessman's wife and son with weapons and asked them to hand over all the cash and jewellery kept in the house. Later, they tied the family members and locked them in a room and fled.

According to a report, the robbers were caught in a CCTV camera, but their faces were found to be covered. The robbery took place in Parmanand Colony on Wednesday morning.

The robbers struck when the businessman Rakesh Mittal was preparing to leave for his factory that manufactures plastic sheets.

According to the businessman, five men came looking for an apartment on rent and forced their way in around 9:15 am. The robbers then brandished pistols and took them into a room asking them to hand over keys of the locker.

While two of the robbers filled the bags with cash and jewellery, the other two kept a watch around and the fifth stood nearby pointing a gun on the family.

The family was able to inform the police when their domestic help arrived and found the door locked from outside. She later opened the door and untied the family, who then called the police at around 2 pm. The victim told police that the men were between 20-30 years of age.

In the past, Mittal had rented a part of his apartment to students in the area. Meanwhile, police have filed a case and are probing the matter. The police are also looking into the role of people known to the businessman.

In a similar incident on Aug 6, two persons were shot dead and one other was critically wounded for resisting a robbery in Ghaziabad's Loni. The robbers also got away with cash and valuables worth over Rs 3 lakh.

A provision store owner, Dharmavir Sharma, and his neighbour Sonu were killed during the robbery that took place in Pooja Colony under Tronica City police station limits around 3 am.

Six armed robbers reached the provision store where the owner, Sharma, was sleeping outside the shop as his house is under construction and the store shutter was partly opened because of its ramshackle condition.

One of the robbers asked Sharma to fetch him a glass of water. When Sharma entered the house, they also barged inside and overpowered the whole family and robbed them of Rs 70,000 in cash and gold ornaments worth around Rs 3 lakh.
