Couple found dead inside park in Central Delhi, had eloped from their village in Haryana

No suicide note was recovered from the spot where locals spotted bodies (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Parents of the couple filed missing person complaints on Tuesday Girl's family also lodged a complaint against the boy, said police No suicide note was recovered from the spot where locals spotted bodies

New Delhi: Police officers in the national capital found a couple dead inside a park in Central Delhi's Paharganj area on Thursday afternoon. The deceased have been identified as residents of Haryana who had fled their homes earlier this week reportedly after their respective parents refused to bless their union.

The couple ran away from their village in Haryana on Tuesday and arrived in Delhi. Following their disappearance, family members of the boy and girl filed a missing person report for each of their children. In fact, the girl's family even went further to lodge a police complaint against the boy.

Locals spotted the boy and girl lying motionless inside a public park in Paharganj sometime on Thursday afternoon and alerted Delhi Police. A team of officers arrived at the spot following a PCR call in this regard at 6:30 pm. The couple was rushed to a nearby hospital where doctors declared them dead on arrival. According to a report, there were no injury marks on either of the bodies. This has led police to suspect that the boy and girl may have consumed a poisonous substance.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Central) Mandeep Singh Randhawa told media outlets that the respective families of the boy and girl have been informed about their demise, adding that a post-mortem of the bodies will be conducted soon. As per the most recent inputs, no suicide note was recovered from the spot where locals found the two bodies. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

A similar incident came to light from Bihar earlier today where locals found the bodies of a man and woman hanging from a tree. The horrific sight triggered horror among residents of Paraiya village in the state's Gaya district. A police officer familiar with the case said that the couple was believed to be in an extra-marital affair and their deaths may have been an act of vengeance. The senior superintendent of police said that the murders were committed by the woman's husband and his friends. He further added that the accused have been taken into custody.

In August this year, the bodies of a young couple were found hanging from a tree in Uttar Pradesh's Barabanki district. A police investigation into the deaths revealed that the couple might have succumbed to their family's opposition to their relationship. Several such instances have come to light from various parts of the country in recent months.
