Recommendations to transfer HC judges are non-negotiable, says SC: The process of shifting judges, explained

Supreme Court | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights President decides on the selection or transfer of judges Supreme Court and High Courts in consultation with the apex court collegium In case of selection and transfer of High Court judges, the collegium consists of CJI and two senior most judges of the apex court When a judge is elevated to the post of chief justice, he/she is generally transferred to High Court other than his present court

The Supreme Court Collegium on September 12 conveyed to the Centre each of the recommendations for transfer of chief justices and judges of various High Courts was based on "cogent reasons". Supreme Court's secretary-general Sanjeev S Kalgaonkar said the reasons for transfer of judges were not disclosed in the interest of the institution but the Collegium would not hesitate to disclose them in the circumstance it becomes necessary.

The statement comes at a time when a row has arisen over the transfer of the Madras High Court Chief Justice VK Tahilramani to the Meghalaya High Court by the SC collegium. Justice Tahilramani, who as acting chief justice of the Bombay High Court in 2017 had upheld the conviction and life imprisonment of 11 people in the Bilkis Bano gang-rape case, resigned on September 6, after the apex court Collegium did not accede to her request for reconsideration of her transfer.

The Collegium, headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, recommended transfer of Justice Tahilramani on August 28. She was elevated as the Madras High Court's Chief Justice on August 8 last year.

About 2,000 advocates in Maharashtra's Latur district, the region from which Justice Tahilramani hails, have decided to boycott court proceedings on Friday to protest against the transfer, news agency PTI reported quoting advocate Balaji Panchal, a former vice president of the Latur Bar Association.

Process of selection and transfer

The President decides on the selection or transfer of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts in consultation with the apex court Collegium. The Collegium consists of Chief Justice of India and four seniormost judges.

In case of selection and transfer of High Court judges, the collegium consists of CJI and two seniormost judges of the apex court.

When judges are transferred
