Mumbai Police arrest tutor for asking 13-year-old student to have sex with him

Police is probing whether the accused targeted other children (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Mumbai Police have booked the accused tutor on the basis of a complaint He has been booked under various sections of the POCSO Act Police is probing whether the accused targeted other children

Mumbai: In a shocking incident which is coming to light from Mumbai, a tuition teacher has been booked and arrested for allegedly passing sexually inappropriate comments on a minor girl. The matter was brought to the attention of Powai police by the 13-year-old girl and her mother who filed a complaint in this regard.

In her statement to the police, the girl's mother said that the accused called her daughter inside his cabin where he passed lewd comments on September 11. He even told the minor that he wanted to have sex with her. Aghast at his behaviour, the girl returned home and narrated the incident before her mother at their residence in Powai Hiranandani area.

Without wasting any time, the girl's mother took her to the police station where an FIR was filed against the accused tuition teacher. A case was registered against him under section 354A and 12 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. According to a report, inspector Anil Pophale with Powai police said that the matter is under active investigation and police is currently making attempts to determine whether the tuition teacher from Mumbai targeted other students, all minors.

Earlier this month, a special POCSO court in Budaun district of Uttar Pradesh sentenced a school teacher to life imprisonment after evidence pointed out that the accused had raped a nine-year-old girl inside the school premises in 2014. The girl's father had told police officers probing the case that the accused picked up his daughter from school and offered to give her a ride. He was caught red-handed by locals who ran to the vehicle on hearing the child's screams.

On the same day, another 50-year-old teacher was arrested by police Uttarakhand's Roorkee for allegedly molested at least four minor girl students. The girls told police officials that the teacher attempted to seduce them each day in class. In fact, parents had made multiple complaints to the management of the state-run school but no action was taken against the errant teacher.

This incident comes a day before two girl students accused their botany teacher in Tamil Nadu of sexually misbehaving with them. He, too, was booked under the POCSO Act after the victims narrated the incidents before police and even mentioned the same in an official complaint registered with local law enforcement. Several other cases where teachers or tutors have taken advantage of minors in order to sexually exploit them continue to emerge from various parts of the country each day.
