UP: Two Cops Suspended for Thrashing Youth After Video Goes Viral

New Delhi: Two police officers in eastern Uttar Pradesh’s Siddharthnagar district were suspended after a video showing them thrashing a young man went viral on social media.

According to a report in Indian Express, police sub-inspector (SI) Virendra Mishra and head constable Mahendra Parasad assaulted the 25-year-old youth, identified as Rinku Pandey, in front of his five-year-old nephew. One of the policemen dragged the young man across the road, while the youth begged for mercy.

As per reports from the Hindustan Times, the youth was coming back after taking his nephew to a doctor, when he was stopped by the two cops who asked him to show his licence and papers. The youth, who was identified as Rinku Yadav by HT, was not carrying his papers at the time and requested the cops to allow him to get them from his house.

In the video, the youth can be seen telling the policeman, “If it is my fault, you can lock me up in jail”. When one of the policemen tries to snatch the keys of his motorcycle, the man refuses to give it to him and asks, “Tell me, what is my fault?”

#WATCH: Man thrashed by two police personnel in Siddharthnagar over alleged traffic violation. UP Police have taken cognisance of the incident and suspended the two police personnel. (Viral video) pic.twitter.com/0dWvnSV0lL — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) September 13, 2019

A departmental probe has since been ordered into the incident.

Also read: Police in India Endorse Encounter Killing, Mob Punishment: Study

Speaking to NDTV, a senior police official said that it was being claimed that the youth was drunk. “The two policemen beat him up badly, pushed him to the ground and behaved badly with him. Both of them were in uniform. It is disgraceful to the police department,” said senior police officer Dharm Veer Singh, whom Express identified as Siddharthnagar SP.

Singh told the paper that the accused policemen had been suspended after the department received information.

“On Tuesday when Muharram was marked, we received information by one Akhtar that Pandey was abusing a Muslim youth in an inebriated state. Sakarpar police outpost in-charge Virendra Mishra and head constable Mahendra Parasad reached there,” he said and added that the officials had been suspended for their “unacceptable behaviour”.

“It was a disgusting and condemnable act of indiscipline,” he said.
