Villagers assault SI; 4 cops sacked for inaction

editorial@tribune.com

PK Jaiswar

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, September 14

The Punjab Police have dismissed three cops and a Home Guard jawan for allegedly remaining a mute spectator when Sub-Inspector (SI) Baldev Singh was being thrashed by residents in Chogawan during a raid here yesterday.

Baldev Singh, who was posted at the Kutcha Pucca police station in Tarn Taran, was accompanied by ASI Sawinder Singh, Head Constable Gurvinder Singh, Constable Nishan Singh and Punjab Home Guard jawan Darshan Singh.

Following a probe by SPS Parmar, IG, Border Range, the police have dismissed all four for inaction and dereliction of duty.

The videos that went viral show the cops accompanying him doing nothing to save him. People were seen abusing and dragging him by his hair. His turban was tossed in the assault. They also beat him with sticks.

Terming the incident as disgraceful, Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh, in his social media post, said five cops looked on while their leader was being severely beaten. “This act of cowardly behaviour is unacceptable in a uniformed force. These cops have been dismissed and those who assaulted the officer have been arrested on the charge of attempt to murder,” read the Facebook post of the CM.

The police have arrested six persons in the case. They have been identified as Gurjinder Singh, Shubh, Dilbagh Singh, Surmail Singh, Shamsher Singh and Gagandeep Singh.

Yesterday, the police had suspended Jhirmal Singh, Kutcha Pucca police station SHO, for his alleged lack of supervision of his team. However, investigations revealed that the SI had failed to inform his seniors before conducting the raid and the SHO was reinstated after a few hours. He was shifted to the Police Lines following his explanation was found satisfactory. The police have booked over 20 persons in the case, out of which six have been arrested.

SI Baldev Singh had gone to conduct a surprise check at the residence of a Chogawan resident, Amandeep Singh, on a tip-off. He said a drug trafficker, Jugraj Singh, alias Bholu, was arrested a few days ago, who had informed him that he used to sell drugs along with Amandeep and Gagandeep Singh.
