65-year-old dies in Mumbai's Sion Hospital; family alleges medical negligence, lack of ventilators

The deceased was identified as 65-year-old Nabi Ahmed Ansari, resident of Ambernath | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The family members of the deceased alleged that he was not provided with a ventilator The efforts to sustain him with using an Ambu pump were proven futile Sion Hospital's Dean Dr Mohan Joshi said that he was unaware of the number of ventilators available

Mumbai: A case of medical negligence has been reported in Mumbai's Sion Hospital, where a senior citizen died on Monday. The family members of the deceased alleged that he was not provided with a ventilator and efforts to sustain him with using an Ambu pump were proven futile.

The deceased was identified as 65-year-old Nabi Ahmed Ansari, resident of Ambernath in Thane district of Maharashtra. The deceased suffered brain haemorrhage last week and was shifted from a private hospital to the state-run Sion Hospital in Mumbai.

According to a report, deceased's brother-in-law Noor Ansari said that for nearly two days, they could not arrange a ventilator and were using an Ambu pump every two hours, as directed by the hospital authorities. Reportedly the deceased's relatives had inquired about the ventilator in other civic hospital but all efforts were in vain as it was not available in any hospital.

Meanwhile, the Sion Hospital's Dean Dr Mohan Joshi said that he was unaware of the number of ventilators available in the hospital. He further added that the use of Ambu pumps to minimise the work of ventilators in such cases was a common practice at the medical facility. Sion Hospital is one of the biggest medical facilities in the city.

Sion Hospital made headlines earlier this year when the hospital's staff protested against attacks on medical professionals and about 200 resident doctors thronged the psychiatric ward. The protesters later sought for consultation on coping with fear psychosis. The staff was staging protests after a first-year resident doctor at the same hospital was physically assaulted by family members of a patient who succumbed to long-term kidney disease in the medical ward.

This incident comes barely months after resident doctors called for a nationwide protest over the brutal attack on one of the doctors by a patient's relatives at the Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College in Kolkata. The relatives of an elderly patient who passed away at the state-run hospital reportedly broke open the gates and assaulted an intern doctor who later suffered a skull fracture.

Within hours, the protest reached the national capital and the resident doctors at Delhi's AIIMS and Safdarjung hospitals demanded legislation to safeguard medical professionals against such attacks.
