Law student records statement against former BJP Union Minister in Uttar Pradesh court

The Special Investigation Team is expected to register a fresh FIR in the case on the basis of the young woman’s testimony.

The law student from Shahjahanpur who accused former Union Minister and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Swami Chinmayanand of rape and exploitation on Monday recorded her statement at a court in the central Uttar Pradesh district.

Amid heavy police protection, the student, her face covered by a black dupatta, was brought to the judicial magistrate court in Shahjahanpur to record her statement under Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) Section 164.

Fresh FIR

The Special Investigation Team (SIT) probing the case is expected to register a fresh First Information Report (FIR) in the case on the basis of the young woman’s testimony. However, it was yet to do so till Monday evening.

The initial FIR lodged in the case against Mr. Chinmayanand, on the complaint of the student’s father, accuses him of criminal intimidation and kidnapping in order to murder. However, after the student was recovered from Rajasthan by the police, new allegations surfaced, with her accusing the former MP of rape and physically exploiting her for a year. Mr. Chinmayanand is the director of the college where she studies and the student claims she recorded her exploitation by him on her spectacles fitted with a sypcam she purchased online.

The student reportedly submitted a 12-page written complaint to the Delhi Police, which was forwarded to the Uttar Pradesh Police, alleging sexual assault, exploitation and blackmail against the leader. However, she has repeatedly stressed that despite her testimony, the police was hesitating to book Mr. Chinmayanand for rape.

SIT questions

It was only last Thursday that the SIT questioned Mr. Chinmayanand.

When Om Singh, Mr. Chinmayanand’s lawyer, was asked if the student recording her statement under CrPC Sec.164 could now put pressure on the State police to arrest him, he sought to downplay it.

“This is part of the investigation. This is the SIT’s work. I don’t want to comment on that,” he said.

Mr. Singh, while claiming that his client was being falsely implicated, said Mr. Chinmayanand “has full faith in the SIT probe”.
