Spike in murder cases in Thoothukudi

Police say lack of awareness of ‘100’ helpline one of the reasons

Thoothukudi

Over the last few months, the number of murder cases have been on the rise in the district.

Close on the heels of the double murder in Thoothukudi on Sunday evening, yet another person was hacked to death near Pudukottai on Monday.

K. Sorimuthu, a 36-year-old lorry driver, was hacked to death at Ramachandrapuram in the wee hours of Monday when he reportedly objected to a few drinking liquor at the house of lorry cleaner Vallinayagam. He, along with Vallinayagam, came on a two-wheeler to the house, when they noticed them drinking on the terrace. Three persons were arrested and a hunt is on to arrest two more.

Kadai alias Kaliyappan, a history-sheeter hailing from Thiru V. Ka. Nagar, and others were involved in the murder, said the FIR. The victim, who sustained injuries on his arms, died on the spot.

Earlier on Sunday, two persons — T. Murugesan, 40, a marine engineer, and P. Vivek, 40, who works at a shipping company — were hacked to death by a gang at Sivanthakulam. The incident took place after the deceased had objected to their rash driving a few hours ago. Following the murders, eight persons were arrested and a search is on to arrest one more.

In the recent past, a number of murders, including the one that resembled an honour killing, had taken place.

Since July, there have been 18 murders, while in 2019, there have been 54 murders so far. In 2018, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the figures stood at 60, 67, 64 and 76 respectively.

DYFI district secretary M.S. Muthu said that crimes were on the rise due to lack of jobs. “The coordination between the police and the people should be improved,” he said, adding that the use of drugs among the youth had seen an increase.

“The number of antisocial cases [involved in murder] has gone up,” says Superintendent of Police Arun Balagopalan. He says one of the reasons is the lack of awareness of police helpline ‘100’.

The police have clocked an average response time of 14 minutes to distress calls in the district. “As the helpline is controlled in Chennai, it is systematic and the response will be quick,” he says. However, the number of calls to the helpline remains at only around 16 per day, he adds.

In the case of the recent double murder, he says that calling the helpline could have proved to be life-saving. “If the problem had been reported earlier [when the rash driving incident took place], the murderers would have been dissuaded due to the involvement of the police,” he says.

The SP further added that the police have been cracking down on drug offences in the district. “In 2019, 44 persons have been arrested under the Goondas Act,” he added.
