Tamil Nadu: Gang drinks alcohol in residential area, hacks man to death for confronting them

When the argument escalated, the gang allegedly hacked the 36-year-old man to death with a machete (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 36-year-old man was hacked to death by a gang of four men after he asked them why they were drinking alcohol in a residential area The incident took place in Tuticorin district of Tamil Nadu on Monday The deceased's body has been sent for a post-mortem and efforts are underway to nab the accused

Madurai: A gang in Pudukottai area of Tamil Nadu's Tuticorin district hacked a man to death after confronted them for drinking in a residential area. The incident took place early morning on Monday. The deceased was a truck driver and he was identified as S Sorimuthu.

The 36-year-old deceased was a resident of Therku Mela Kottangadu in Pudumkottai. S Sorimuthu was being accompanied by Vallinayagam, his truck cleaner when the incident took place. They were going to drop Vallinayagam when the incident took place. The police have registered a case.

On Monday morning, S Sorimuthu and Vallinayagam were on their way to the latter's house. When they reached the locality, they noticed that four men were drinking liquor near Vallinayagam's house.

Two of the accused men have been identified as Kadai alias Kaliappan and Peter. After seeing the four men, 36-year-old S Sorimuthu stepped out of the vehicle and asked them why they were consuming alcohol in a residential area. Following this, the gang and S Sorimuthu had an argument.

When the argument escalated, the four men allegedly hacked the 36-year-old man to death with a machete. According to a report, S Sorimuthu died on the spot while the accused managed to escape. The locals saw the incident and informed the police. The Pudukottai police reached the spot and sent the body to the Thoothukudi Government Medical College and Hospital for an autopsy.

After registering a case in relation to the incident, the Pudukottai police started searching for the four accused men. No arrest has been made yet. Further investigation is underway.

Delhi Police launches 'Operation Prohibition', over 100 booked for drinking in public

In an attempt to keep a check on consuming alcohol in public places, the Delhi Police launched an initiative called 'Operation Prohibition' in July this year. The cops even booked over 50 persons who had been caught consuming alcohol at public places in the national capital. The operation was launched by the police to ensure that the persons drinking alcohol in public places were put behind the bars.

The police booked the accused persons under the Delhi Excise Act. Senior officials like the Station House Officer (SHO) and Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) actively participated in the operation, along with other police officials. To facilitate the crackdowns, the cops formed separate teams and raided dim-lit areas like under-construction buildings and nabbed people who were consuming liquor.
