India v Pakistan: Imran Khan issues nuclear warning - ‘Fight to the death’

India Pakistan: Kashmir issue cannot keep boiling says PM Khan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Mr Khan said Pakistan will not be the first to strike with nuclear weapons if the two countries started a war over disputed Kashmir - but said his country would “fight to the death”. He told Al Jazeera: “Pakistan would never start a war, and I am clear: I am a pacifist. I am anti-war.

“If, say Pakistan, God forbid, we are fighting a conventional war, we are losing, and if a country is stuck between the choice: either you surrender or you fight until death for your freedom – I know Pakistanis will fight to death for their freedom. “So when a nuclear-armed country fights to the end, to the death, it has consequences.” Meanwhile, Mr Khan also assured residents of Kashmir today that he will expose years-long Indian oppression and human rights violations in the region when he addresses the UN general assembly this month. He made the comments in his first speech to a 20,000-strong rally in Pakistan-held Kashmir since the revocation of the special status of the disputed Himalayan region by India on August 5.

Imran Khan issued a fresh warning to India

Tensions between Pakistan and India have increased since August 5, when New Delhi downgraded the autonomy of Kashmir. This region is divided between Pakistan and India but both have claimed it. The two neighbours fought two of their three wars over control of Kashmir since they gained independence from British colonial rule in 1947. They nearly went to war again in February, when a suicide bombing in Indian-administered Kashmir killed 40 paramilitary soldiers. READ MORE: India-Pakistan WARNING: Pakistan’s aggression against India

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan has hinted Pakistan could use nuclear weapon against India

India at the time responded by bombing an alleged militant training camp in Pakistan. Pakistan then said it shot down two Indian air force planes and captured an Indian pilot who was later released. Mr Khan also requested that rally-goers today should not march towards the heavily militarised Line of Control that separates Kashmir between Pakistani and Indian sides, saying they should wait for his call. He said: ”Don’t go to the Line of Control until I ask you and I will tell you when to do it.” Mr Khan was attempting to calm down angry youths who this month clashed with police in Pakistan-held Kashmir after being stopped from marching toward the frontier, where Pakistani and Indian troops are in close quarters. DON'T MISS

Pakistan-India crisis: Khan sends war warning to Modi over 'extremism' [INSIGHT]

India-Pakistan crisis hots up as minister mocks Modi [EXPLAINED]

India vs Pakistan: Modi’s hypersonic missile push risks World War 3 [WARNING]

Kashmir has been a disputed territory between India and Pakistan for many years

The appeal to angry youths came days after thousands of unarmed young people marched toward the frontier to protest the crackdown in Indian-administered Kashmir, triggering clashes with police. Pakistani and Indian troops often exchange fire, causing troops and civilian casualties. The rally also comes a day after the country’s military said Indian fire killed one of its soldiers in Kashmir in the latest cease-fire violation. Mr Khan urged the world community to pressure India to give the right of self-determination to Kashmiris.

India and Pakistan increased their tensions earlier this year

Trending
