Pakistan's 'coward' Army following policy of rape and pillage: Balochistan leader Mehran Marri

Baloch leader Mehran Marri | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Baloch leader said that Pakistan Army is notorious for its policy of rape and pillage He had earlier alleged that Islamabad is committing "genocide and human rights violation" in Balochistan Pakistan has been alleging human rights violations in Kashmir

London: While Pakistan has been alleging human rights violations in Kashmir, a Baloch leader has exposed the country's hypocrisy and accused its army of raping women. Baloch leader Mehran Marri also demanded that the Pakistan Army should be held responsible for all the crimes they have committed against humanity.

“Pakistan Army is notorious for its policy of rape and pillage like they conducted Operation Searchlight in Bangladesh. It is resorting to the same policies in Balochistan now,” the Baloch leader said in London

“In a span of one month, a lady from Mardan and another from Gwadar has been raped by this coward army. They (Pakistan Army) have to be held accountable, be it (Qamar) Bajwa, (Pervez) Musharraf or any of these dictators, they have all committed crimes against humanity,” he added.

Earlier, the Baloch leader had alleged that Islamabad is committing "genocide and human rights violation" in Balochistan and yet they go to the international community with a "facade of carrying about human rights in Kashmir".

"Today in Geneva the Pakistani foreign minister was inviting foreign journalists and media to Pakistan-occupied Kashmir to come and see how people are living over there. The man has no shame they are committing genocide and human right violations in Balochistan,” he said.

Last week, Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi had flagged the issue of Kashmir at the UNHRC and made the claim that Jammu and Kashmir "had been converted into prison with people being denied access to basic amenities". The minister had demanded a UN probe into India's actions in Kashmir and had expressed fears of "genocide".

India, however, strongly rejected Pakistan’s claims and categorically asserted that Jammu and Kashmir was an internal matter and that the country won’t tolerate interference of foreign powers.

Vijay Thakur Singh, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs, termed Pakistan’s allegations as "fabricated narrative" and "concocted charges."

"One delegation has given a running commentary with offensive rhetoric of false allegations and concocted charges against my country. The world is aware that this fabricated narrative comes from the epicentre of global terrorism, where ring leaders were sheltered for years,” he said.

The Imran Khan government has time and again been left red-faced after its repeated attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue fell flat with countries like the US, France, Russia, UAE siding with India.

While Pakistan has been making all-out attempts to corner India over its decision to abrogate Article 370, New Delhi has maintained that Kashmir is a strictly internal matter and Islamabad has no locus standi on the issue.
