Mentally challenged woman gang-raped at public park in Delhi, left for dead

Seven police teams have been formed to crack the case and arrest the accused | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Locals found the woman's body inside Indraprastha Park, said police Seven police teams have been formed to crack the case and arrest the accused There were bite marks on her body suggesting physical assault

New Delhi: Police in the national capital are investigating the alleged gang-rape of a girl who was found in a semi-conscious state at a public park near the Sarai Kale Khan bus station on Monday. Aged 22-23, the survivor has been shifted to a hospital in Delhi where she is undergoing medical treatment. Most recent reports suggest that the girl is in critical condition.

The matter came to light on September 16 when locals alerted the police about a girl lying in the bushes at the Indraprastha Park. Further inquiry revealed that the girl had been living at the Sarai Kale Khan bus stand for the past few days and had gone for a stroll in the park when she was attacked. Two unidentified men spotted her alone and pulled her behind the bushes where they took turns raping her.

Delhi Police: A mentally depressed woman was allegedly gang-raped at a bus-stop in Sunlight Colony area by two men who approached her on the pretext of providing food, on 15 September. pic.twitter.com/MCTJYWqyII — ANI (@ANI) September 17, 2019

Assuming that the survivor is dead, the perpetrators of this horrendous crime fled the spot while leaving her behind. The girl's body was later spotted by locals who alerted police and an investigation was launched into the matter. Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (South) Chinmoy Biswal while confirming the incident said that seven police teams have been formed to identify and nab the men responsible for the heinous act.

Furthermore, reports suggest that the survivor may be mentally challenged which is why she has not been able to give the police a detailed description of the assailants. The sheer brutality of the act can be summed up by the fact that the police personnel found the victim with all of her clothes torn and bite marks on her body along with severe injuries which suggest that she may also have been mercilessly thrashed by the accused. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and the matter is under active police investigation.

The incident has raised serious questions about the safety of citizens in Delhi's public parks. In July of this year, a five-year-old girl was gang-raped by two boys at a park in Kapashera which is located near the Delhi border. The child was found by her mother who rushed her to the nearest hospital and alerted the local police. Similarly, a 61-year-old woman was raped by a man half her age at a park near the Lajpat Nagar Metro station in April of this year. A police investigation later revealed that the victim worked as a cook near East of Kailash and lived with her sister.
