Life in occupied Kashmir remains paralyzed for 44th day

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – Life in India-occupied Kachmir (IoK) remains paralyzed on Tuesday as the Indian curfew in the held valley has entered 44th consecutive day with massive Indian forces’ fortified and bullet-proof bunkers returning to Srinagar and other parts of IoK.

According to Kashmir Media Service, curfew and other restrictions have generated a humanitarian crisis as shortage of daily commodities has hit hard the residents of Kashmir valley and parts of Jammu region. All shops remained shut and public transport was off the roads. Education, too, has taken the worst beating because of the military clampdown.

HRW urges India to release detainees in Kashmir

A global rights body called on the Indian government to immediately release detained people in occupied Kashmir.

“Indian authorities should immediately release detained Kashmiris who have not been charged with a recognizable offense,” Human Rights Watch (HRW) said in a statement.

Screams of people heard from Indian army camps at night

Screams of people are often heard from Indian army camps at night, as troops pick up youth from Shopian villages and torture them at their camps ‘to make them an example for other villagers’.

Around two dozen young men in the villages of Shopian shared such terrible stories with the media. “The army is making examples of two or three young men from each village,” said one resident of Shopian who has compiled a list.

The soldiers came after midnight, Abid Khan said, his hands trembling, one of around two dozen young men in just one part of occupied Kashmir who say they have been tortured by the Indian army.

The abuse, residents say, is aimed at creating a climate of fear after India stripped the long-restive, blood-soaked region of its special status on August 5.

EU to discuss Kashmir issue in session

On the other hand, European Union will deliberate upon the escalating Kashmir unrest following abrogation of Article 370 by Narendra Modi-led Indian government today.
