20-Year-Old Mentally-Challenged Woman Gangraped At Public Park In Delhi And Left To Die

A mentally-challenged woman was gangraped at a public park in Delhi and was left to die by the perpetrators on September 16. She was found in a semi-conscious state at the Indraprastha Park near the Sarai Kale Khan bus station.

Aged 22-23, the survivor has been shifted to a hospital in Delhi where she is undergoing medical treatment. A report by Times Now suggests that the girl is in a critical condition.

The incident came to the fore on September 16 when policemen were alerted by locals about a girl lying in the bushes in the Indraprastha Park.

“Further inquiry revealed that the girl had been living at the Sarai Kale Khan bus stand for the past few days and had gone for a stroll in the park when she was attacked. Two unidentified men spotted her alone and pulled her behind the bushes where they took turns raping her,” said a report by Times Now.

BCCL

The perpetrators fled the scene assuming that the girl is dead.

The girl’s body was spotted by the locals who soon alerted the police for further investigation. Reports suggest that seven police teams have been formed to identify and nab the perpetrators behind the heinous crime.

Reportedly, the survivor is said to be mentally-challenged woman which is why she is unable to give a clear description of assailants to the police.

Delhi Police: A mentally depressed woman was allegedly gang-raped at a bus-stop in Sunlight Colony area by two men who approached her on the pretext of providing food, on 15 September. pic.twitter.com/MCTJYWqyII — ANI (@ANI) September 17, 2019

Police found bite marks on the body of the girl and all her clothes were torn along with several injuries pointing to the fact that she may have been brutally thrashed by the perpetrators.

The matter currently is under investigation.

In August, yet another horrendous incident of rape came to the light after a semi-conscious body of a woman was found at a South Delhi park. A second year JNU student was allegedly raped by a cab driver who first drugged her in a moving cab while she was returning from her friend’s house.

BCCL

The 21-year-old woman told the police that she had boarded the vehicle from Mandir Marg area and the cab driver drove around for three hours after raping her, per a report by The Times of India.

The aggrieved woman was found in a semi-conscious state in a park in South Delhi by some locals who got her admitted to a hospital. The doctors confirmed sexual assault.
