Madras High Court receives bomb threat, security tightened

Madras High Court receives bomb threat, security tightened

The letter came from an alleged pro-Khalistan operative who warned that he would plant multiple bombs inside the court buildings.

news Security

The High Court of Madras received a bizarre bomb threat in the form of a letter, following which the city police have intensified security in and around the court premises.

An official announcement from the city police confirmed that security had been intensified to ensure foolproof safety inside the high court campus.

“All advocates, even in advocate dress code are bound to produce their identify card on demand by security police personnel. Vehicles are also subjected to security check,” the circular by the Additional Deputy Commissioner of police, High Court Security, read.

On Monday, a short letter from a man who identified himself as a pro-Khalistani operative found its way to the High Court Registrar General. The sender of the letter warned that multiple bombs would be planted inside the High Court buildings in the end of September.

The man who sent the letter identified himself as Hardarshan Singh Nagpal, and referred to himself as a member of a Khalistani group - one among many separatist groups demanding a separate country for Sikhs.

“I want to inform you that on date September 30, I will plant multiple bombs inside the high court buildings with my son,” the letter by Hardarshan read.

The letter claimed that he was in hiding and often changed his location from the South of India to Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and then Delhi.

At the end of the letter, the man disclosed his name along with his address - a location in West Delhi.

“C - 13, First floor, Sudershan Park, Moti Nagar, West Delhi,” his address read.

While TNM has not been able to independently ascertain the veracity of this letter, sources from the court and city police have said that they are still investigating the incident.

On Tuesday, the decision to beef up security inside the court premises was taken after a high level meeting within the police department which included the city police commissioner.

Cooperation of all advocates of the Madras high court as well as of all associations working inside the court has been sought to ensure maximum safety.
