Indian man, 74, has four-inch devil horn removed from his head

A 74-year-old Indian farmer has had a four-inch (10cm) devil horn removed from the top of his skull.

Shyam Lal Yadav, of Rahli village in Madhya Pradesh, suffered a head injury in 2014 which reportedly led to the formation of a rare cutaneous horn.

The benign growth, also referred to as devil's horn, sprouted from his head and over five years escalated to the point where it towered above his skull.

Shyam Lal Yadav, 74, from India, had to have a four-inch horn removed from the top of his head

The benign growth sprouted from his head and over time and escalated to the point where it towered above his skull

The horn is made out of keratin, found in toenails and human hair. The farmer had been asking his barber to trim it until it started to grow uncontrollably

Mr Yadav had been getting the growth shaven down by his barber for years. But the horn began to grow aggressively, prompting the farmer to seek medical help.

The rare growths are made out of keratin, found in toenails and human hair, and mostly occur in older adults.

An operation to remove the growth was performed at Bhagyoday Tirth Hospital in Sagar city.

Surgeon Dr Vishal Gajbhiye said: 'Around five years ago the patient had hurt his head after which a lump started growing.

'Initially, he ignored it as it did not cause any discomfort. Also, he got the growth cut by the local barber.

'But, when the lump hardened and started growing further, he approached the hospital at Sagar.

'As the horn is composed of keratin, the horn can usually be removed with a sterile razor. However, the underlying condition will still need to be treated.'

The farmer spent ten days in hospital recovering from the surgery and a biopsy of the growth confirmed the horn as harmless.

Surgeons used a razor to remove the horn and the farmer had to stay in hospital for ten days to recover

The operation to remove the growth was performed at Bhagyoday Tirth Hospital in Sagar city

Dr Gajbhiye added: 'Treatments vary, but they can include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.

'Immediately after its removal, skin was grafted on the wound which has now healed completely.'

The cause of horns is still unknown, but it is believed that exposure to radiation or sunlight can trigger the condition.

Details of the case have been sent to the International Journal of Surgery because of how rare this type of growth is, doctors said.
