Boy, driver rescued from kidnappers after 21 days

Bengaluru

kidnappers

Nadu

Reddy

From left: The car driver Keshav Reddy who was kidnapped too; the accused M Tangabala, M Naveen and C Prashanth

lethal weapon

A team ofRural police rescued a businessman’s 17-year-old son and his car driver from threeafter opening fire at the abductors in the wee hours of Tuesday. The minor boy and the driver were kidnapped on August 26.The accused had demanded a ransom of Rs 3 crore from the businessman. The police had a tough time in tracing the accused as they used to constantly change their hideouts. The accused are M Tangabala, 25, of Tamil, C Prashanth, 25, of Yeshwanthapura and M Naveen, 24, of Ullala. Of the three, Prashanth is a habitual kidnapper and was involved in another kidnap case in Jnanabharathi police station limits in 2014. Naveen is a carpenter by profession and Tangabala is a construction labourer. The police are on the look-out for four other accused involved in the case.The minor boy was found unconscious at the time of his rescue and has been hospitalised. The businessman’s driver has been identified as Keshava. Along with the minor boy, a few policemen who were injured, are also hospitalised.The businessman, who runs an automobile showroom, is a resident of Mathru Layout in Rajanukuntte police limits. He had filed a complaint with the police after his son, who is pursuing II PU at a private college in Singanayakanahalli, had gone missing along with the driver. The driver would drop the boy to college and pick him up after college hours around 4.30 pm. When they did not come home on August 26, the businessman called to the driver and found that his mobile had been switched off. Suspecting foul play, he then filed a complaint. The accused subsequently called the businessman and demanded a ransom of Rs 3 crore to release the two.“All the three accused have been shot on their legs. Of the three, Tangabala has been shot on both his legs, Prashanth has been shot on his left leg and Naveen has been shot on his right hand. The police made the businessman continue negotiating over the ransom so that they would get time to get clues on the whereabouts of the accused based on the mobile phone tower locations. The complainant finally agreed to pay Rs 1.8 crore to which the gang agreed. The businessman on the instructions of the police made the accused to come near the Kadabagere Cross on the Magadi Road. Around 1.30 am, when Naveen, one of the accused came to take the cash, the police caught him after opening fire at him. Naveen tried to attack the policemen with aand in self-defence, the police opened fire,” said an officer.
