UP Police rules out Class 11 girl's death as suicide, parents cry rape and murder

An FIR has been lodged and a probe into the matter is underway (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The child was pronounced dead at Mainpuri district hospital on Tuesday She was found hanging from her hostel room and a note was recovered, said police The girl was upset over an incident from three years ago: SP Ajay Shanker Rai

Lucknow: Controversy has erupted over the death of a minor girl in Uttar Pradesh's Mainpuri district. Found dead in her hostel room on Tuesday, police claim that the Class 11 student hanged herself. However, parents of the deceased have challenged the cause of death and claim that she was killed by a fellow student who attempted to rape her first.

In response to the various counterclaims, police officers probing the matter said that the autopsy report rules out any signs of sexual assault. A note recovered from the girl's hostel room revealed that she was "upset" over an incident that took place about three years ago, added the officers. While the incident in question was one where the victim was accused of stealing food items from a hostel inmate's bag, it is unclear how it may have led her to take the drastic step.

"A preliminary investigation has led us to believe that the girl was stressed over the incident from three years ago," said Mainpuri Superintendent of Police Ajay Shanker Rai. According to a report, the SP went further to state that all of the girl's fellow students and inmates stopped trusting her since the incident took place and this drove her to take her own life. "She wrote the same in a note we recovered from her room," said Rai.

Despite the autopsy report establishing the cause of death as hanging while ruling out any signs of sexual assault, police have registered an FIR on the basis of a complaint by the girl's father. Those named in the FIR are the school principal and the hostel warden, both of whom are women. The complainant has also accused a male student and his unnamed friends of hatching a plan to rape and murder his daughter.

What is most chilling about this instance from Mainpuri in Uttar Pradesh is the manner in which the family members of the deceased learned of her death. The child's uncle reportedly went to the district hospital for some work when he noticed her body lying on a bed in the emergency ward, unaccompanied by anyone from her school. The uncle has even claimed that there were injury marks on her body and it seemed like someone attempted to rape her but ended up killing her after failing. Going even further, the uncle alleged that the deceased was being mentally harassed by the principal after she claimed to have knowledge of "confidential information" about the school's affairs.
