Cops rescue son, driver of Bengaluru businessman from abductors after dramatic shootout

Cops rescue son, driver of Bengaluru businessman from abductors after dramatic shootout

The duo had been held captive for nearly a month. The mastermind of the abduction is presently absconding.

news Crime

Almost a month after they were kidnapped, police in Bengaluru on Tuesday morning rescued a teenager and his driver under dramatic circumstances following a shootout. Three of the accused have been arrested and are currently in hospital nursing injuries.

According to police, the duo— Hemanth and the driver Keshav Reddy, were kept in a Bengaluru house by their abductors and were supposed to be released as the teenager’s father Siddaraj had agreed to pay the ransom. MM Siddaraju is a businessman who owns nine two-wheeler showrooms across Bengaluru.

“The abductors initially demanded Siddaraju pay a ransom of Rs 3 crore. After rounds of negotiations, they whittled it down to Rs 1.7 crore,” The Times of India quoted KV Sharath Chandra, inspector general of police (central range), as saying.

At the same time, police had laid a trap for the kidnappers to catch hold of them after the two were returned. The accused have been identified as construction workers— Prashant C, Naveen M and Tangabala. While Prashant and Naveen hail from Ullal in coastal Karnataka, Tangabala is from Tamil Nadu’s Villupuram district.

“Prashant and Tangabala held daggers at the necks of Hemanth and Keshav and threatened to kill them if cops took one step ahead,” Ravi D Channannanavar, superintendent of police (Bengaluru Rural), said in a statement.

“They instructed Siddaraju to bring the money in a bag and throw it on a stretch near NICE Road and Kanakapura Road junction around 3am on Tuesday. A police team followed Siddaraju and hid in bushes. A biker arrived and picked up the bag when cops swooped down on him. But the man stabbed Anekal sub-inspector Hemanth Kumar, prompting the latter to shoot him in the right hand with his service revolver in self-defence. The suspect was caught and identified as Naveen,” the IGP added.

Police said that the operation involved 35 policemen including three DySPs in nine teams. Another suspect Satish, who is the alleged mastermind and an employee in one of the showrooms owned by Siddaraju, is absconding.

Hemanth and Keshav Reddy were kidnapped on August 26 when the former had left the house for college in the car owned by the family and driven by Keshav. The family approached the police after the two did not return home as usual in the evening and both their phones were switched off. Soon after, they received a ransom call and the date of handing over the money was decided over the next few days after negotiations.
