Lesbian 'gang-rapes female victim along with two men' in first-of-its-kind sex attack case in India

A 19-year-old has been arrested in India for allegedly raping another woman in a first-of-its-kind case after the Supreme Court decriminalised same sex relations in September last year.

Shivani, of New Delhi, faces claims that she forced the victim to have intercourse with her by using a sex toy while two men, Rohit and Rahul, pinned the woman down, Karkardooma District Court heard.

According to News18, the victim said she was subjected to repeated sexual and physical assaults from March 2018.

‘The trio forced me to have sex with them. Then it became a gang affair. Soon, I was sent to serve clients and the accused woman was always there in the apartment,’ the victim added.

Shivani, of New Delhi, faces claims that she forced the victim to have intercourse with her by using a sex toy while two men, Rohit and Rahul, pinned the woman down, Karkardooma District Court (pictured) heard

‘My rapist was not forced to rape me. She was deriving pleasure out of it. I want her punished along with the other two.’

Charged under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code and provisions of the Prevention of Immoral Trafficking Act, Shivani was questioned by police before being sent to Tihar jail. The two men have also been imprisoned.

This latest incident is just one in a series of sex attacks to have recently plagued India.

In January, an eight-year-old girl was left with bloodied clothes after she was allegedly raped by her teacher in an empty classroom in Andhra Pradesh in the Krishna district.

According to News18, the victim said she was subjected to repeated sexual and physical assaults in New Delhi (pictured), from March 2018

Her parents did not initially report the attack to authorities as they feared their daughter would face repercussions.

But the eight-year-old's mother eventually filed a police report and the teacher, 42, has since been suspended.

Elsewhere, in July, a teenage girl was left fighting for her life after she was raped, doused with kerosene and set on fire in the Pakur district of eastern India's Jharkhand state.

The teenager, 17, was left with 70 per cent burns after the brutal attack and a 19-year-old living in the same neighbourhood was arrested.

This latest incident is just one in a series of sex attacks to have recently plagued India. In July, a teenager was left fighting for her life after she was raped, doused with kerosene and set on fire. Police were later seen parading a suspect with his head covered (pictured)

In the same state on the same day, a village chief was arrested over the gang-rape murder of a 16-year-old.

Dhanu Bhuiyan was the main suspect in the murder of the teenager, who was torched to death after being subjected to a sex attack in Chatra district.

Police said Bhuiyan became enraged after the local village council ordered him to do 100 sit-ups and pay a 50,000 rupee (£550) fine following the rape.

Bhuiyan and his accomplices then allegedly attacked the girl's parents before setting their house on fire with the girl inside.

The local village chief, who was found hiding at a relative's house, was also among 15 people detained in the case while the victim's family were given special police protection.
