Digvijaya Singh Says 'People in Saffron Clothes Commit Rapes in Temples'

Congress leader Digvijaya Singh on Tuesday landed in what is now the familiar territory of a sticky wicket for him with the proclamation that people in saffron clothes had been committing rapes inside temples.

In a video tweeted by the news agency ANI, Singh can be seen addressing a crowd, to whom he says, “These days, people are putting on saffron clothes and selling churan. These days, people are putting on saffron clothes and raping. The rapes are taking place inside temples. Is this our religion? Those who have done this to our sanatan dharma will not be forgiven by god either,” he says in Hindi.

#WATCH Digvijaya Singh, Congress in Bhopal: Today, people are wearing saffron clothes and raping, rapes are happening inside temples, is this our religion? Those who have defamed our ‘Sanatan Dharma’, not even god will forgive them. pic.twitter.com/psAQcd1R7p — ANI (@ANI) September 17, 2019



The event, a Sant Samagam (which translates to a ‘convention of saints’) had been organised by the Madhya Pradesh government’s spiritual department and was being headed by Computer Baba, reported Times of India. State chief minister Kamal Nath was also present on the dais when Singh was speaking.

Also read: Chinmayanand Raped, Physically Exploited Me: Shahjahanpur Student

Computer Baba, a Hindu seer who is considered close to Singh and heads the Ma Narmada, Ma Kshipra evam Ma Mandakini River Trust, also defended Singh, reported the paper.

Bharatiya Janata Party workers and supporters were not that kind. Several asked why Singh was perennially eager to play the Hindu sanatan dharma card. BJP spokesperson Rahul Kothari tweeted a photo, ostensibly of the same stage from which Singh was making his comments, showing a saffron clad man sitting next to Kamal Nath.



NDTV reported that Singh followed up the words audible in the video with a slew of additional charges. “Efforts are on in the country to capture mutts and temples, convert them into centres of politics. We’ll have to fight it. I appeal to the seers of the sanatan dharma not to be used politically,” he was quoted as having said.

Singh is no stranger to such gaffes. Hindustan Times reported that Singh had recently called Muharram, a day of mourning for Muslims, an ‘auspicious’ occasion.

He has also stirred controversy by referring to Kashmir as ‘India Occupied Kashmir’ in 2016. In 2013, he had claimed the Batla House encounter was fake.

Singh, one of the voices from the Congress who has been staunch in harnessing Hindu support, is often hailed as the kingmaker in Madhya Pradesh. He lost the 2019 Lok Sabha election from Bhopal to BJP’s candidate Pragya Singh Thakur.
