Man Killed Pregnant Wife For Refusing Sex, Hid Body In Employer's House

A man was arrested Saturday for killing his wife and hiding her corpse in his employer's house in the Indian state of Haryana.

Rajesh Kumar, a cab driver, fled after murdering his wife, Babita, on Jan. 21, 2018. He was arrested from a neighboring city Saturday. He told police that he killed his wife after she refused to have sex with him. She had apparently told him she was embarrassed to do so as her father started staying in an adjacent room in their house.

“Rajesh was upset and accused his wife of having an affair and confronted her. On Jan. 21 morning, he took her to the house of Dinesh Kumar, his employer, whose house was 10 meters away. The couple had an argument, following which he strangled her with her stole in a fit of rage. He hid the body in the bed box in Dinesh’s house and fled to Rajasthan (nearby state),” officer Shahid Ahmed said, local daily the Hindustan Times reported.

Dinesh, who left his keys with Rajesh on weekends, returned home on the day of the murder but did not find anything suspicious. He continued to sleep on the same bed. Five days later, he smelled something rotting. He opened the bed box only to find 30-year-old Babita’s decomposed body.

“The smell was increasing every day. I wasn’t being able to sleep at night. In the day, I felt too tired to move things and check this morning, when I checked inside the bed, I screamed with fear. There lay the body of a woman that had already started rotting,” Dinesh told the Times Of India.

Photo: MANJUNATH KIRAN/AFP/Getty Images

He immediately informed police. Investigation revealed that Rajesh had told in father-in-law he was taking his wife to Behror in the state of Rajasthan for a few days. Police suspected him to be hiding in Behror and sent a team to the village. However, they couldn’t nab him at the time.

The police then got a lead when Rajesh’s uncle told them he visited him in Amritsar. Police team reached Amritsar and caught Rajesh.

Babita’s father told the police his daughter was not using a mobile phone as he suspected her of having an affair.

“The woman’s father said that Rajesh often used to fight with his daughter and on one occasion, had broken the SIM card of her phone,” Officer Jai Bhagwan said.

An autopsy revealed Babita was one-and-a-half months pregnant.
