Two Punjab cops convicted for disappearance of two Sikhs after 26 years, one of them gets six years

PATIALA: The CBI special court in Mohali on Wednesday convicted two former cops in a 1993 case of abduction and wrongful confinement of a Patiala man and sentenced one of them to six years in jail.The court of CBI judge N S Gill held guilty Inspector Joginder Singh (retd) under Section 365 (abduction) and Section 344 (wrongful confinement) of the IPC , and constable Jagjit Singh was convicted under Section 218 (preparing incorrect record) of the IPC. Joginder Singh was sentenced to six years in jail for abduction and two years for wrongful confinement. Constable Jagjit Singh was awarded one year in jail but he was released on probation after furnishing surety of Rs 10,000, Sarabjit Singh, counsel of the complainant, said.The sentence has left the family members unsatisfied, they had demanded capital punishment for them.Two Sikh men, identified as Balwinder Singh and Gurinder Singh of Patiala city, were taken for questioning in March 1993. The police first rounded up Balwinder Singh on March 26, 1993, an elder son of Dharam Singh, a retired Subedar from the Indian Army. He was taken to the police station and a few days later, Dharam Singh's younger son Gurinder Singh was also rounded up for questioning by the police in April 1993. However, both of them went missing since then.For long 26 years, the family contested the case in the court demanding justice. During the drawn-out legal battle, septuagenarian parents of missing Balwinder and Gurinder had died. "At 4.30am on March 26, 1993, the police landed our doorsteps. We were about to recite the morning prayers. The police forcibly took my husband to the police station for questioning and then without registering any case, kept him in their custody for nearly a week. The police then took Balwinder's younger brother Gurinder for questioning and tortured him, too. Later, the police claimed that both had escaped. Since then they are missing," said Balwinder's wife Nirmal Kaur."After torturing my husband Balwinder and brother-in-law Gurinder, the police rounded up my father-in-law Dharam Singh and kept him for three months in illegal custody and tortured us all. We can never forget those dark days. I was just 16 when I got married to Balwinder, who used to own and run cabs. We had a one-year-old daughter when my husband was kidnapped by the police. My daughter still asks me if her dad will come back," Kaur added.According to her, Dharam Singh died in February 2018, and his wife, Charan Kaur, died three months ago. She said Gurinder was unmarried and had got a job in the police force a few months before he was abducted by the policemen. Five policemen were chargesheeted of which Joginder Singh and Jagjit Singh were imprisoned by the CBI court while three cops inspector Gurnam SIngh, sub-inspector Harbhajan SIngh and constable Harpal Singh died during the trial.
