Watch: Kerala priest sets dance floor on fire with Nivin Pauly's 'Kudukku' song

Watch: Kerala priest sets dance floor on fire with Nivin Pauly's 'Kudukku' song

The video that went viral a few days ago was shared by actor Nivin on his Instagram page.

Flix Mollywood

If it was “Jimikki Kammal” from Velipadinte Pusthakam that made the world dance during Onam 2017, then this year it is “Kudukku” from Nivin Pauly’s Love Action Drama. The song has found fans from across the country and the latest to shake a leg for this number is Malayali priest Mathew Kizhackechira who is in Delhi.

The video that went viral a few days ago reached actor Nivin Pauly who then shared it on his Instagram page. Father Mathew is seen dancing in his robes, surrounded by a cheering crowd, and accompanied by two other dancers.

According to TNIE, Father Mathew, who is originally from Alappuzha district in Kerala, had moved to Punjab to continue his higher studies. In the report, the priest has been quoted as saying that he did not intend to grab attention and that it was an impromptu jig.

The priest's version of “On the floor baby” has gained him a lot of fans on the internet. Nivin has also been sharing other versions of “Kudukku” performed by college students on his Instagram page, thanking everyone for the response.

Nayanthara and Nivin Pauly’s Love Action Drama opened this Onam along with the Mohanlal starrer Ittymaani: Made in China, Brother’s Day starring Prithviraj and Rajisha Vijayan’s Finals.

Love Action Drama is the directorial debut of actor Dhyan Sreenivasan, who comes from a family of actor-writer-directors. Dhyan has written and directed this romantic drama which also features his dad Sreenivasan and brother Vineeth, both of whom are writers and directors themselves. In the film, the characters of Nayanthara and Nivin are named after the female and the male leads of Sreenivasan’s old award-winning film Vadakkunokkiyanthram, Shobha and Dineshan respectively.

In the "Kudukku" music video available on YouTube, Nivin is seen dancing with different groups of people, including children. The film, however, received a lukewarm response from critics.
