Pune: Unidentified man sexually assaults 19-year-old girl who ran away from home

She stepped down from the train at Karad and boarded a train which was going to Pune (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 19-year-old ran away from her residence in Pune and took a train to Bengaluru Some time later, the girl boarded another train to Pune and met a man The man offered to take the girl to his residence and took her to an abandoned room and allegedly sexually assaulted her

Pune: A 19-year-old girl who had run away from home was allegedly sexually assaulted by an unidentified man, the police said on Thursday. The girl is a resident of Pune's Ravivar Peth and she had left her house on Tuesday morning at around 4 am. She met the accused on a train.

A senior police official familiar with the case said that the girl had failed her Class 10 examinations. She had been employed at a clothing store but had left the job. On Monday, the girl had brought her friend to her house for a sleepover. The 19-year-old's mother did not approve of the same and the two had an argument following which, they went to bed.

The girl, however, was upset with the argument and she decided to leave her home. She left her residence and boarded a train to Bengaluru. She stepped down from the train at Karad and boarded a train which was going back to Pune.

During the journey, the 19-year-old started talking to a male passenger. The man allegedly asked the teenager to get off at Ghorpadi with him, telling her that he would take her to his house. Reportedly, she agreed and the two got off at Ghorpadi. The man took her to an abandoned room near a Saibaba temple and allegedly sexually assaulted her.

The unidentified man fled from the establishment after sexually assaulting the 19-year-old. The girl then went to the police and narrated her ordeal to them. The police registered a case on Wednesday. Abhijeet Jogdanda, sub-inspector of Wanowrie police station said that after filing a complaint, the girl was taken to the Sasson General Hospital for a medical examination.

Two held for sexually assaulting minor domestic help in Delhi's Moti Nagar

A similar incident came to light from the national capital in September this year when a minor was allegedly sexually assaulted by two persons. The two men allegedly sexually assaulted the minor on the pretext of offering a job to her. The accused were identified as Ravi and Ankit Chaudhary.

The incident came to light when the security supervisor of a hospital in Moti Nagar called the police and told them that a girl was standing alone near the facility. The police reached the spot immediately and questioned the minor. Preliminary investigation revealed that the minor was new to Delhi and she was employed as a house help.

She did not know the address of her employers. She had come out of the house to shop, following which, she went to a park. The two accused allegedly told the 16-year-old girl that they had a job offer for her and sexually assaulted her. The two men were booked under sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
