BJP leader Chinmayanand, arrested in rape case, sent to 14-day judicial custody

BJP leader Chinmayanand, arrested in connection a rape case, has been sent to 14-day judicial custody.

The former Union minister, accused of rape by a law student, was arrested on Friday by the special investigation team (SIT) of the Uttar Pradesh Police from his residence 'Divya Dham'.

Shahjahanpur: BJP leader Chinmayanand who was arrested in connection with the alleged sexual harassment of a UP law student, sent to 14 day judicial custody by a local court pic.twitter.com/p3DHtTWKYQ ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) September 20, 2019

On Chinmayanand’s arrest, Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh said there was been no delay in the case. He added that three more persons have been arrested over extortion threats to Chinmayanand.

Following his arrest, Chinmayanand was taken for medical examination to a government hospital. He was then taken to the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate where he was presented.

Teams led by senior police officials were deployed at the court premises and the hospital. A team of police officials is patrolling the area to ensure there is no disturbance, a senior official said.

His counsel said the SIT took signatures of Chinmayanand's relatives on the arrest memo but no arrest-related documents were given to them.

THE CASE

The rape survivor, who is a postgraduate student at one of the colleges run by Chinmayanand's organisation, has alleged that she was raped and "physically exploited" for a year by the former Union minister.

Chinmayanand, who was admitted to the medical college here on Wednesday, was referred to King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow. But he chose to return to his residence on Thursday and get ayurvedic treatment there, according to his counsel Om Singh.

He underwent tests at the Shahjahanpur hospital where a team of four doctors monitored his condition, a spokesperson told PTI.

The student had earlier threatened self-immolation if the police do not arrest him.

Inspector General Naveen Arora, who heads the SIT, said a mobile phone and a pen drive given by the student have been sent for forensic examination.

The pen drive contains 43 video clips which the student says support her allegations.

Police has registered a case of criminal intimidation and abduction against Chinmayanand on a complaint lodged by the woman's father. Later, the student also accused him of rape and "physical exploitation".

Also read | BJP leader Chinmayanand, accused of rape by Shahjahanpur law student, arrested by SIT
