India critics missing the big picture [Opinion]

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi made history even before he set foot on the stage of NRG Stadium on Sunday. As leader of the world’s largest democracy, his choice to visit Houston reflects the growing influence of the Indo-American community in Texas and its valuable contributions to Texas. When President Trump adjusted his schedule to join the event, it was a sign of the positive and growing influence of Indo-Americans in our nation’s culture.

By all accounts, this weekend’s appropriately Texan-titled “Howdy Modi!” is something to be celebrated, but critics nonetheless seized on the event. “I don’t know what’s more embarrassing — that Modi will appear beside Trump or that Trump will appear beside Modi,” Rutgers University professor Audrey Truschke tweeted. “Both countries have my condolences.” Al Jazeera host Sana Saeed offered a similarly salty assessment: “Birds of a feather, fascist together.”

What a short-sighted, lazy and inflammatory observation that diminishes both nations.

The United States and India share a deep bond: as the leaders of the world’s oldest and largest respective democracies, President Trump and Prime Minister Modi have a unique opportunity to showcase the enduring power of representative government and the promise of freedom it provides. I’ve felt this bond personally, having given the prime minister a black Stetson cowboy hat as a gift when I met him in New York in 2014.

Our two nations are rapidly becoming the defining partnership for global peace and prosperity. The attacks by religious terrorists in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001, and India’s attacks by liked-minded terrorists on Nov. 26, 2008, have united our military and intelligence like never before. Every time I have met Modi he has stressed the need to have imports of American liquid natural gas . American LNG has been flowing to India for more than a year now, with 20 more years of American LNG energy exports guaranteed. And the iconic Houston MD Anderson Cancer Center has established a presence in India as well.

In 2016, during the Obama administration, India was designated a “major defense partner” of the United States, a critical relationship that must continue. Today, the Trump administration and Congress are working to get India a seat as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. Indeed, “Howdy Modi!” is as much a declaration of our shared desire for global security as it is a celebration of Indian culture.

Of course, Indian culture — and the welcome way in which it has woven itself into our great American tapestry — will be front-and-center before 50,000 or more people in NRG Stadium Sunday.

If you raised your eyebrows when you read that number, then you haven’t been paying attention to the growing Indo-American community in the Houston region. My congressional district — the 22nd — is the largest and most diverse in America, with Asians comprising 19 percent of the population, including a significant number of South Asians. Those numbers are trending upward in Houston, in Texas and in the U.S. According to the 2010 Census, between 2000 and 2010, the Indo-American population surged from 1.6 million to 2.8 million people, representing one of the fastest-growing ethnic groups in the country.

With this growth, it should come as no surprise that lawmakers of all backgrounds will be in attendance on Sunday.

This Sunday’s “Howdy Modi!” rally is truly bipartisan.

Critics take note: “Howdy Modi!” is about unity, not division; and it will bring the United States, India, and Texas closer than we’ve ever been before.

I just hope the prime minister brings the black Stetson cowboy hat I gave him in New York.

Olson. R-Sugar Land, represents Texas’ 22nd Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives.
