Welcome Bellevision.com

Rape-accused Chinmayanand arrested by SIT, sent to 14-day judicial custody

Chinmayanand has been sent to 14-day of Judicial custody. The SIT made the arrest four days after the woman, who studies in a college run by an organisation headed by Chinmayanand, recovered her statement before a magistrate in Shahjahanpur.

New Delhi, 20 Sep: Former BJP MP Chinmayanand, accused of raping a law student, was on Friday arrested by the Uttar Pradesh SIT from his residence in UP’s Shahjahanpur. He has been sent to 14-day of Judicial custody.

The SIT made the arrest four days after the woman, who studies in a college run by an organisation headed by Chinmayanand, recovered her statement before a magistrate in Shahjahanpur. On Wednesday, the girl had threatened to immolate herself if the SIT did not book Chinmayanand in the rape case. She had also submitted an application to Delhi police accusing Chinmayanand of allegedly sexually assaulting him.

No police official is ready to speak on the arrest of Chinmayanand.

“I have come to know SIT arrested Chinmayanand on the allegations levelled by the girl in an application submitted by her to Delhi police, said Chinmayanand’s lawyer Om Singh.

On Thursday evening, Chinmayanand reached his ashram from the Shahjahanpur hospital where he was admitted for the last two days for treatment. Chinmayanand was taken thereafter he made complained of uneasiness and pain in the chest.

“Doctors had advised Chinmayanand for angiography and referred him to a hospital in Lucknow,” said Om Singh.

The SIT was formed by the state government on the direction of the Supreme Court to probe two cases. The first case was lodged by the girl and father, who had accused Chinmayanand of abducting his daughter while the second case was lodged against an unidentified person for sending a threatening message to Chinmayanand and demanding Rs 5 crore extortion money. SIT chief Inspector General Naveen Arora said two days back that SIT had taken cognizance of the application submitted by the girl to Delhi police.
