Mumbai: 9-year-old rape survivor's testimony lands mother's boyfriend in jail

The special judge Bharti Kale lauded the girl for not falling to the inducements by her mother. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights 9-year-old rape survivor deposes against mother's live-in partner Accused sentenced to 10 years in jail for raping girl Special POCSO judge lauds victim for standing her ground

Mumbai: A special POCSO (Protection of Children from Sexual Offences) court has sentenced a man to 10-year imprisonment for raping a 9-year-old girl. The sentencing came on Thursday after the minor rape survivor deposed against the man despite pressure from her mother not to do so.

The minor girl was violated in 2017 by the accused, who was the live-in partner of her mother. After the sexual assault, the girl was shifted to a shelter home.

According to a report in Times of India, the mother of the survivor tried repeatedly to persuade her not to depose and withdraw the case against the accused, whom she used to call 'father'. But the minor girl stood her ground which led to the conviction and sentencing of the 25-year-old accused. The girl's mother tried to offer inducements to the victim saying they will all go back to the village and live there together.

The special judge Bharti Kale lauded the girl for not falling to the inducements by her mother and showed courage to depose against the accused. The victim's mother, a sex worker, had turned hostile in the court.

The woman told the court that she filed the complaint against the man under the influence of alcohol. In all, the prosecution examined six witnesses including police officers, doctor and the victim herself.

According to prosecution, the rape took place in June 2017 when the survivor's mother left the child at her neighbour's house and went to work. Later, the accused picked the girl and brought her home. When the woman returned, the girl told her mother that she was raped by the accused.

Delhi Police constable arrested for raping minor girl

In a similar incident on September 20, a Delhi Police constable was arrested under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act for allegedly raping a minor girl. Police said that the incident happened on Sept 19 following which the victim's family approached the New Usmanpur Police Station.

The girl's family members, along with the local residents had gathered outside the police station and surrounded it to press for the accused constable's arrest. Senior police officers said they have taken steps to dismiss the constable from service.
