Troops’ torture claims teenager’s life in IOK

F.P. Report

SRINAGAR: In occupied Kashmir, a teenage boy lost his life after he was thrashed, humiliated and subjected to ruthless torture by Indian troops at an Army camp in Pulwama district.

The 15-year-old boy, Yawar Ahmed Butt, a resident of Chandgam, Pulwama was shifted to Srinagar’s SMHS hospital in an injured condition where he succumbed.

His family members said that the boy was detained and beaten by the troops at the Army camp.

He was asked to report to the camp next day. However, on deterioration of his condition during the night, he was shifted to the hospital, where he took his last breath.

The locals said that the troops had barged into the Chandgam area of Pulwama at midnight and snatched identity cards of many youths. They were asked to report to the nearby army camp where they were subjected to brutal torture. Yawar Butt was one of these teenage youth.

The Hurriyat forum led by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq in a statement said the forum stands firm by its principled stand on the Kashmir dispute and stands with the people in the prevailing unprecedented situation.

The forum said that Mirwaiz Umar Farooq was under house detention at his Nigeen residence in Srinagar and described as baseless the media reports that he had been released after signing a bond.

Meanwhile, there is no respite for the people of Kashmir who continued to remain under siege for the 49th consecutive day, today, due to military clampdown and communications blackout imposed by India since 5th of August. No Friday prayers were held in the historic Jamia Masjid of Srinagar and other main mosques of the territory during past seven weeks.

The military siege has created a humanitarian crisis with healthcare biggest casualty in the Kashmir valley.

Ambulances cannot be contacted as no telephone service is available and a large number of patients who need chemotherapy and other medical interventions face a lot of difficulties to reach hospitals.

In the absence of mobile and internet services, hundreds of students have shifted out of Kashmir to prepare for examinations.

Also, Thousands of Kashmiris, their sympathizers as well as Indian Americans have gathered to protest Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Houston against his brutal actions in occupied Kashmir.

Hindu, Muslim, Dalit, Sikh and Christian groups under the umbrella of Alliance for Justice and Accountability, are arriving in Houston, Texas, to expose the undemocratic, anti-people and anti-minorities agenda of the Modi government.

Several US-based civil rights organizations have announced to join the protests. It is estimated that more than 20 thousand Kashmiris and Sikhs will join truck-rally in Houston against Modi’s visit for 74th UN General Assembly session.

The AJA protests will focus on the Indian Government’s brutal crackdown in Jammu and Kashmir.
