All eyes on Congress MLAs as Budget session starts today; party issues whip, will disqualify legislators who don’t turn up

Budget

Anand Singh

Everyone, including the four MLAs, will attend the session. There is no threat to the government Eshwar Khandre, Congress leader

Mallikarjun Kharge

Anand Singh & Umesh Jadav

DK Shivakumar

As rumours swirl, Yeddyurappa says he’s not destabilising govtAfter surviving two Operation Lotus attempts in fewer than two months, the Congress-JD(S) coalition government is set to face another test during thesession, beginning Wednesday. The session will begin with the customary Governor’s address the joint Houses of the Legislature on Wednesday. On Friday, Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy will present the coalition government’s second Budget for 2019-20.On the other hand, the Opposition BJP and Opposition leader BS Yeddyurappa, in particular, have made two attempts to topple the government by banking simmering discontent among Congress MLAs.Soon after the Belagavi Legislature Session ended on December 21, 2018, Operation Lotus resumed with January 16 as the deadline to oust the government. It is said that the BJP national leaders covertly backed the Operation Lotus. But Yeddyurappa failed to mobilise enough numbers to reduce the coalition government to a minority. Only four Congress and two independent MLAs stayed put at a hotel in Mumbai while others attended the Congress Legislature Party meeting on January 18. Bangalore Mirror on Sunday was the first to report that four Congress MLAs — Ramesh Jarkiholi, Mahesh Kumtalli, Umesh Jadhav and B Nagendra — continue to stay in a hotel in Mumbai along with two independent legislators.JN Ganesh, facing attempt to murder charges for assaulting fellow party MLA, is still at large and sources said that he is either in Goa or Mumbai.Reacting to reports that four more Congress MLAs have joined those in Mumbai, KPCC working president Eshwar Khandre told BM that it was all mere rumours. “Everyone, including the four MLAs, will attend the session,’’ he said, expressing confidence that there is no threat to the government.The Congress had asked the four MLAs to appear in person and explain the reasons for staying away from January 18 Congress Legislature Party meeting soon after they got the notice. None of them have appeared so far.The party on Tuesday issued third notice to all missing MLAs. Sources said Umesh Jadhav, who is also in Mumbai, spoke to Khandre and Congress Leader in the Lok Sabhaand agreed to return to the party fold. He, however, has two conditions — Social Welfare Minister Priyank Kharge should not interfere at his Chincholi constituency and he should be given ticket to contest in the next Assembly polls.It means that only three MLAs — Ramesh Jarkiholi, Mahesh Kumtalli and B Nagendra of the Congress — will remain in BJP fold along with two independents — R Shankar and H Nagesh.The party has issued whip to all its member to attend the Joint Session and the Budget session without fail.“We will act tough on those who violate the whip,” said a senior Congress leader, asserting that if anyone stays away from the session, action would be initiated against them.The BJP’s plan to make Congress MLAs resign in batches appears to be put on the back burner for now. Rumours were abuzz that nearly 15 Congress MLAs have reached Mumbai and are set to resign. There were also reports seeking to move a no-confidence motion against Assembly Speaker Ramesh Kumar. But technically, it is not possible as there are laid-down procedures to move a no-confidence motion against Assembly or Council Presiding officers and any such move will take at least 15 days.After being convinced that he has failed to get required numbers, Yeddyurappa on Tuesday said that the BJP neither makes any effort to topple the government nor has plans to move no confidence motion.A senior BJP leader, who spoke to BM, said that they are not able to get required number of MLAs to make the move. Now the party is hoping that some of these ‘committed’ Congress MLAs will stay away from the Assembly during the Budget allowing to defeat the passage of the budget.After a meeting with senior leaders at his residence, Yeddyurappa distanced himself from the Operation Lotus and the dissident Congress MLAs. “Both the Congress and the JD(S) are trying to hide in their failures by taking shelter under Operation Lotus. I have nothing to do with Congress MLAs who have remained aloof. Some MLAs might have been upset with their own government, it doesn’t mean that we are poaching,” he said.On former prime minister HD Deve Gowda’s statement that he understood Yeddyurappa was attempting Operation Lotus to destabilise the government, the latter said: “The former prime minister should speak with facts and stop making allegations like this.”Yeddyurappa also said that he had instructed all party MLAs not to create any trouble during the Governor’s speech or the Budget presentation.Sources said that the BJP leaders were also worried over the counter operation planned by the Congress and the JD(S). The issue was discussed in the meeting and steps have been taken to prevent any such poaching its MLAs by the coalition partners.Meanwhile, speaking to media, Kumaraswamy said that he did not see any threat to his government.“Why should I seek confidence vote. We sought it seven months ago. Now we are focused on the budget. Let the BJP move a no-confidence motion, I will prove the majority,’’ he said, dismissing suggestions that he might seek trust vote to defuse the attempts of the BJP to destabilise the coalition dispensation. Any number of attempts to topple the government will fail. Yeddyurappa who was successful in Operation Lotus in 2008 when in power thinks he can repeat it this time too. Everyday is not Sunday,’’ he said, dismissing suggestions of threat to his government.``I have already removed their (BJP’s) fuse,’’ the Chief Minister reiterated and said that the Legislature session commencing from Wednesday will put and end to all these rumours and fake news.Meanwhile, Congress MLA Anand Singh who was in hospital after being assaulted by JN Ganesh also party MLA in Eagleton Resort on city outskirts near Bidadi, has informed party leaders that he would attend the Joint Session on Wednesday.He was admitted to Apollo Hospital in Seshsdripuram after being assaulted by Ganesh with wooden log and flowerpots besides kicking and punching him in the ribs.Singh has filed an attempt to murder case against the fugitive MLA who is also a former rowdy sheeter. The Ballari police are likely to open rowdy sheet against him, Home Minister MB Patil had said.For the second year in a row, Water Resources Minister DK Shivakumar will not be present for the Budget presented by Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy.He is said to have sought permission from Legislative Speaker Ramesh Kumar that he would not be able to attend the Assembly session on February 8 (Friday) as he has to be in Delhi in connection with the notice issued by the Enforcement Directorate in a money-laundering case.Last year too, when Kumaraswamy presented his maiden budget, Kumar was busy attending a function in Kadusiddeshwara Mutt. He is a staunch devotee of the mutt and also the key functionary of its trust.
