Delhi Police head constable creates ruckus, suspended

A Delhi Police head constable was suspended after he was arrested by the Supaul Police, Bihar, for allegedly creating a ruckus in a village where he had gone to trace a minor girl, who was kidnapped from Delhi.

Head constable Mukesh Kumar was a part of the investigating team, who were trying to trace a boy who had allegedly kidnapped a girl. Sources in Supaul police stated that the officers of the Delhi Police had not taken any prior permission or informed the officers in the area. Kumar was arrested on Monday.

According to police officials of Supaul police the locals in the area informed them that a drunk man was creating ruckus at the house of the accused they were looking for. As locals started video recording Kumar engaging in a brawl the officials of the excise department reached the location. Kumar was asked to blow in the breath analyser to which he initially refused, but, later did blow following which he was arrested and sent to judicial custody.

As per senior officials of the Delhi Police the father of the minor girl had informed the police that his daughter was kidnapped on January 31. The family members had even conveyed their suspicion on a boy. Technical surveillance traced the mobile phone location of the alleged accused boy in Supaul, Bihar. On January 13, a team comprising of SI Puneet and two constables— a male and a female —were sent to Supaul. The team stayed in Supaul for a week but failed to find the boy or the girl. Later on January 31, another team comprising of ASI Yagdutt and head constable Mukesh Kumar, was sent to trace the suspect.

“As per their information they reached the location to trace the accused, however, villagers obstructed them and engaged in a ruckus. They even called the excise officials stating that he was drunk. The head constable was arrested and taken away by the police,” said a senior officer from the Delhi Police.

The Delhi Police on Monday sent another team to Supaul comprising of SI Chandan and a female police officer.

Sources in the village stated that the girl had eloped with the 19-year old boy who is staying at a rented accommodation in the area. “He had told the land lord that he worked in some construction company. This constable Mukesh Kumar, who was with the others, when he reached Chowdhary's house to find them, he created a ruckus. Later, Excise officials were called. The constable also indulged in a brawl and created a lot of scene for over an hour,” stated the source.

TRACING DOWN
