Investigate police torture charges, says High Court

Two held for property offences allegedly subjected to third degree during detention

Taking serious note of the injuries sustained by two detainees, who alleged in the open court that police beat them up during detention, the Telangana High Court on Monday directed Cyberabad Police Commissioner V.C. Sajjanar to investigate all the cases against them and present a report within two weeks.

A division bench comprising Chief Justice Raghvendra Singh Chauhan and Justice A. Abhishek Reddy instructed the Commissioner to suggest disciplinary action to be taken if any police officer was found responsible for the alleged torture of Syed Sohail and Syed Mohammed. The bench said the Commissioner should probe into all the charges, instead of other investigating officers, against the two detainees.

Family members of the detainees filed a habeas corpus petition in the HC a few days ago alleging that Hyderabad Task Force sleuths had picked up them from their houses in Chandrayanagutta of Old City without following any due procedure of law. When the matter came up for hearing in the HC recently, the Raidurg police of Cyberabad furnished a report stating they were already remanded in judicial custody and lodged in Chanchalguda central prison after being arrested in some property offences.

As the petitioners’ lawyer alleged that Sohail and Mohammed were illegally arrested, the bench directed the authorities to present them before it. On production before the bench on Monday morning, the detainees alleged in the open court that they were subjected to third degree by the police during their detention. Taking a serious note of the matter, the CJ summoned a team of doctors from Osmania General Hospital to assess the nature of injuries and decided to hear the matter in detail after the lunch break.

When the bench resumed hearing, the doctors told the court that the injuries were ‘fresh’. As this added strength to the detainees’ allegation about police torture, the bench grilled the government counsel bombarding him with questions on precise details of the arrest.

The bench declined to accept the government counsel’s version that the detainees sustained injuries because they attacked one another in the prison. The bench wondered if the authorities were allowing the detainees to carry sticks inside the prison.

Expressing dissatisfaction over the police getting the detainees checked up with a private hospital, the bench questioned why were they not taken to government hospital.
