Twitter user shares 'old pic' alleging human rights violation in Kashmir, J&K Police rejects it as propaganda

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Ever since India revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan has been alleging human rights violation in the Valley and spreading false propaganda against Indian defence force on social media platforms to portray them in a bad light.

A similar attempt was made by a social media user on Monday who tried to project that security personnel were harassing some children.

Shahid Tantray posted a picture on Twitter in which some security officials can be seen surrounding a group of children. “A brigadier says, The boys of #Kashmir break so quickly, we make their bodies sing, on the rack, till no song is left to sing.” ~ Aga Shahid Ali,” he wrote along with the photo using hashtag #KashmirSiege #StandWithKashmir #humanrights.

However, a Jammu and Kashmir police official strongly rejected his claim and said it was an old pic which is being used by the social media user to spread the propaganda. He further said that the police officers in the picture were counselling the minor boys who were involved in stone-pelting in the year 2010.

“An old pic and a fiction of a poet is being used here to spread the propaganda. The police officers are counselling the minor boys having been involved in stone pelting in year 2010,” the official, Imtiyaz Hussain said in a response to Tantray’s tweet.

An old pic and a fiction of a poet is being used here to spread the propaganda. The police officers are counselling the minor boys having been involved in stone pelting in year 2010.

This one is a typical example of agitprop,the soviet era propaganda. https://t.co/m7ShJh6xnP — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) September 23, 2019

He further said that it was a typical example of agitprop, the soviet era propaganda.

Following Indian government’s decision to revoke Article 370, several reports, picture and videos of alleged violence and protests in the Valley have surfaced on social media platforms.

However, the armed forces and the central government have time and again categorically rejected these reports and urged people not to pay heed to “false” claims.

Earlier, the Jammu and Kashmir Police had debunked the reports of protest and violence in the Valley, asserting that the situation was normal and peaceful in the state.

It also warned people against “fabricated and motivated news” and said that they should not believe any mischevious and motivated news regarding firing incidents in the Valley.

On August 5, the Centre had announced its decision to revoke Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that gave Jammu and Kashmir special status and the right to make decisions for all matters except for defence, foreign affairs, finance, and communications. It also bifurcated the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories.
