Another Hindu girl abducted, forcibly converted to Islam in Pakistan's Sindh; family stages protest

Representational Image | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Recently, several incidents of forced conversions have come to light from Pakistan More than 7,430 cases of abductions of Sindhi girls were recorded in Pakistan from 2004 to 2018 Last month, a 19-year-old girl, identified as Jagjit Kaur, was forcefully kidnapped and converted to Islam in Sindh province

Islamabad: In another case of forced conversion, a Hindu girl was kidnapped by Muslim men and forcefully converted to Islam in Pakistan’s Sindh. The family members of the girl have staged protest over the incident, demanding action against the perpetrators.

In the recent past, several incidents of forced conversions have come to light in Pakistan in which girls belonging to the minority community were abducted and forcibly converted to Islam.

According to Pakistan's own human rights commission, from January 2004 to May 2018, over 7,430 cases of such abductions of Sindhi girls were recorded in Pakistan. However, the actual number is said to be much higher.

The Imran Khan government has been facing the ire of not only human rights activists but also the minority community who have been raising their voices against the harassment.

Last month, a 19-year-old girl, identified as Jagjit Kaur, was forcefully kidnapped and converted to Islam in Sindh province. Kaur, daughter of Bhagwan Singh, a 'granthi' (priest) of Gurudwara Tambu Sahib, was reportedly converted to Islam at gunpoint.

The incident triggered a huge outrage across India and several political leaders called for stern action against the perpetrators.

The Ministry of External Affairs had taken note of the incident and raised the issue with the Pakistan government, demanding immediate remedial action in the matter.

Earlier, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar had said that Pakistan should fulfill all its obligations towards protecting minorities instead of commenting on others as "a fire was raging there". He further said that India has from time to time raised the issue of treatment of minorities in Pakistan.

"We have talked of harassment, violence, forced abduction, forced conversion, persecution of minorities. I feel that the minorities who are there, they have some obligations, which Pakistan should fulfil," Kumar said.

"The biggest thing is that before speaking of others, Pakistan should know what is happening in their house. And everybody knows what is happening in their house. A fire is raging there," the MEA spokesperson had added.
