Chinmayanand case: Shahjahanpur court stays rape survivor''s arrest; SIT quizzes her

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Shahira Naim

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, September 24

A Shahjahanpur court stayed the arrest of a woman who accused Bharatiya Janata Party leader Chinmayanand of rape on Tuesday evening, hours after a Special Investigation Team detained her for questioning over extortion charges she faces.

The court passed the order after rape survivor petitioned it for a stay on her arrest in the Rs 5 crore extortion case. Her arrest came just before her petition was heard by the court.

According to sources, the law student who has accused Chinmayanand, a former union minister and a three-time Member of Parliament, of rape and sexual exploitation was picked up by the SIT in a car. Her father and brother are also with her.

On Monday, the Allahabad High Court’s Special Division Bench of Justice Manoj Mishra and Justice Manju Rani Chauhan had dismissed her petition on the ground that the petitioner to approach the appropriate court in the matter.

Earlier the SIT had taken into custody three people—Sanjay, Vikram and Sachin—in the extortion case. They Vikram and Sachin, believed to be associated with the law student, were remanded in SIT’s custody after investigators said they wanted to take them to Rajasthan to look for a mobile phone they allegedly used to threaten the BJP leader.

Bail rejected

A Uttar Pradesh court rejected Chinmayanand's bail application on Monday, his lawyer said on Tuesday.

The Shahjahanpur chief judicial magistrate has rejected the bail application of Chinmayanand on Monday, saying it should be moved in the sessions court, the former Union minister’s counsel, Om Singh, said on Tuesday.

The court also rejected on the same grounds the bail application of the three men arrested on extortion charges filed by the BJP leader.

The SIT investigating the case took Sachin and Vikram on remand for 95 hours for taking them to the site for recovery of a mobile phone allegedly used in making the extortion demand, sources in the probe team said.

According to the sources, the accused had told the SIT that they had thrown the mobile phone, which was used to make the alleged extortion call, near Mehandipur Balaji in Rajasthan. The two will be taken there to recover the device.

The SIT has also sent Chinmayanand lawyer’s mobile phone, on which the alleged extortion message was sent, for forensic examination, sources said.

The postgraduate student, who studied at a college run by Chinmayanand’s ashram, has alleged that she was raped and physically exploited by the 72-year-old for over a year.

Chinmayanand, who was arrested on Friday and sent to judicial custody, was shifted on Monday to a Lucknow hospital, where he was tested for cardiac problems.

He has been booked under Sections 354 D (stalking), 342 (wrongful confinement) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code.

Instead of Section 376 (rape), he has been booked under Section 376-C, which is usually applied in cases where a person abuses his position to “induce or seduce” a woman under his charge to have “sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape”.

If proved, a rape charge can lead to punishment of up to life imprisonment, while someone convicted under Section 376-C can be jailed for between five and 10 years. With PTI
