Student who accused BJP's Chinmayanand of sexual assault arrested in extortion case

Student who accused BJP's Chinmayanand of sexual assault arrested in extortion case

Chinmayanand has alleged that the she has made extortion calls to him asking for Rs 5 crore.

news Crime

The Special Investigation Team (SIT) on Wednesday arrested for the woman law student who has charged BJP leader Swami Chinmayanand with sexual misconduct and harassment, on grounds of extortion.

The matter of the law student's anticipatory bail was to come up for hearing on Thursday at the Allahabad High Court, but the SIT did not wait for the court's ruling as certain phone calls traced revealed that the victim was planning to escape.

The woman was arrested from her home here and taken to the Kotwali police station. She was then taken for medical examination and would later be produced in court.

The woman was earlier on Tuesday taken into custody but later released by the SIT after the court of Additional District Judge (ADJ) first, granted a stay on her arrest.

The woman and three other boys, who were arrested earlier, had allegedly made extortion calls to Chinmayanand asking him to pay Rs 5 crore or else they would make public his intimate videos. Chinmayanand had earlier lodged a complaint in this regard.

The woman has accused Chinmayanand of sexually assaulting her for a year, and other girls too, in the Law College that she was studying in. She has also alleged that Chinmayanand threatened her family with death.

In a video she posted on August 23 on social media, the woman said that Chinmayanand had "destroyed” the lives of several girls, and asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi and UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath for help. “A big leader of the saint society, who has destroyed the lives of several girls, has been threatening me with (my) life. I have all the evidences against him. I request Modi ji and Yogi ji to please help me. He has even threatened to kill my family,” she said in the video.

On August 29, Supreme Court agreed to take suo motu cognisance of the case after a plea from a group of lawyers requesting initiation of proceedings over the matter of the missing law student in order to avoid a repeat like the Unnao incident. On September 2, the Supreme Court ordered a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to look into the case.

Chinmayanand has been booked under IPC Sections 364 (kidnapping or abducting in order to murder) and 506 (criminal intimidation). The BJP leader has denied the allegations against him and maintained that he is being “framed”.

(IANS inputs)
