Chinmayanand no longer party member, says BJP; Akhara Parishad to take decision on his expulsion next month

Swami Chinmayanand

Key Highlights Party spokesperson did not mention since when Chinmayanand ceased to be the member of the BJP Chinmayanand has not received any kind of support from any BJP leader ever since the controversy erupted Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad is set to meet in Haridwar on October 10 during which the decision on Chinmayanand’s expulsion will be taken

Lucknow: Former Union minister Swami Chinmayanand, accused of raping a law student of his college, is no longer a member of the BJP, declared party spokesperson Harishchancdra Srivastava.

The spokesperson, however, did not mention since when Chinmayanand ceased to be the member of the BJP.

When asked the saffron party spokesperson said that as all the records are now digitised we cannot tell from when he has not been a member of the party.

First elected to the 13th Lok Sabha from Jaunpur in Uttar Pradesh as a BJP candidate in 1999, Chinmayanand became a minister of state for home in the Atal Bihari Vajpayee-led BJP government. He had also won general elections from Badaun in 1991 and from Machhlishahr in 1998.

Chinmayanand, who has been in judicial custody since Friday, has not received any kind of support from any BJP leader ever since the controversy erupted.

The Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad, the religious orders of Hindu saints and seers, is yet to take a decision on expulsion of Swami Chinmayanand. The order is set to meet in Haridwar on October 10 during which the decision on Chinmayanand’s expulsion is set to be taken.

The Akhara Parishad also said that Akhara members should follow the example of Yogi Adityanath and not Chinmayanand.

Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad (ABAP) president Narendra Giri had earlier told PTI that in cases like these, the seer is expelled from the Akhara Parishad until proven innocent.

The 72-year-old Swami Chinmayanand belonged to the Prayagraj-based Mahanirvani Akhara.

Last year, Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath had ordered the withdrawal of a rape and kidnapping case lodged against Chinmayanand by a disciple and manager of Mumukshu Ashram operated by him.

However, the chief judicial magistrate of Shahjahanpur district court stalled the withdrawal proceedings after the victim objected. The manager of the Mumukshu Ashram had filed an FIR against the seer on November 30, 2011, and alleged that she was held captive, raped and assaulted for several years.

Meanwhile, the 23-year-old law student, who had accused Chinmayanand of rape, was arrested after the SIT recovered digital and forensic evidence and statements of people.

The SIT also said that they had enough evidence to prove that Rs 5 crore extortion money was demanded from Chinmayanand. People arrested told the police that they had sent messages to Chinmayanand after receiving orders from the girl.

Chinmayanand has been booked under sections 354 D (stalking), 342 (wrongful confinement) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code. He is currently under observation and his blood pressure and other parameters are normal.
