Andhra Pradesh: NRI Honey-trapped on WhatsApp Found Dead Killed Over Loan

The Police of Andhra Pradesh claims that they have cracked the murder case of businessman Chigurupati Jayaram by arresting his driver and a realtor. NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram was honey-trapped on WhatsApp and was killed after failing to repay a loan of Rs. 4 crores that he took from the realtor.

Rakesh Reddy the Realtor and Srinivas the driver were both presented to the media today, Rakesh Reddy is the main accused.

NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram was the director of Coastal Bank, he was found dead on January 31 in a national highway near Vijayawada.

After investigating the murder, SUperintendant Krishna of the Sarvashresht Tripathi police said that Rakesh Reddy was behind the gruesome crime, the reason behind was that NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram could not pay the Rs. 4 crore loan he took from him.

NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram was also the managing director of express TV that is now a defunct Telugu channel came to from the USA to Hyderabad. It is said that Rakesh Reddy was asking him to repay the loan he took, but instead of talking to him he blocked his cellphone number.

Rakesh Reddy honey-trapped NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram via WhatsApp, he used a different cellphone number and used a profile picture of a woman, he then asks NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram to come to her home in Jubilee Hills as she was alone.

When NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram reached the place, Rakesh and Srinivas tortured him and asked the businessman to repay the loan along with the interest, Rakesh asked for Rs. 6 crores in total. The businessman only had Rs. 6 lakhs with him, Rakesh got mad and banged the head of NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram against a sofa, the businessman died on the spot.

Rakesh placed the dead body of NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram in a car and drove it to Krishna District where he left it in a national highway in the hopes that it would look like an accident.

The police gathered CCTV footages from different places that were present on the highway. They saw Rakesh Reddy driving the car and even stopped in a liquor shop in Nandigama. The police also found empty liquor bottles in the car along with the dead body of NRI-Businessman Chigurupati Jayaram.

The police are still doing an investigation to see if there are other people who are involved in the crime.
