1 Lakh Gurkhas Excluded From NRC, Rape Survivor In Chinmayanand Case Sent To Jail + Top News

They, like the 1.9 million applicants whose names were also found to be missing, were told to file their appeals at the Foreign Tribunals (FTs). The Gurkhas, however, are the angry lot and are reportedly refusing to file their appeals at Foreign Tribunals. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Rape Survivor Who Accused BJP Leader Chinmayanand Of Rape Sent To Jail In Extortion Case

The law student who had accused Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader and former Union minister Chinmayanand of rape was arrested on Wednesday morning. On September 24, she was detained by the Uttar Pradesh police in a case of extortion that has been filed against her. Read more

2) Swachh Siachen: Indian Army Removes 130 Tonnes Of Solid Waste From The Glacier

The environment is increasingly degrading and much of it is because of the actions of humans. From solid waste to pollution of water bodies, the environment is losing its sheen at an alarming rate. Read more

3) Target Millennials: Asaduddin Owaisi's AIMIM Becomes First Political Party To Have TikTok Account

The rise and rise of TikTok in India holds immense possibilities in the political arena as the country’s overall interest in issues related to politics and politicians is seeing an unprecedented rise. Read more

4) Unnao Rape Survivor Discharged From AIIMS A Month Following Deadly Attack

The Unnao rape survivor was discharged from AIIMS, a month after she was met with an accident while travelling with her relatives and her lawyer. The woman was admitted in AIIMS following an accident on July 28 and the family is under the CRPF security as per the Supreme Court's order. Read more

5) Western Railways Plans To Serve Vegetarian Food On Gandhi Jayanti & People Aren’t Happy

Western Railways has decided to observe Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary as ‘Vegetarian Day’. As part of the plan, it announced that it will not serve non-vegetarian food anywhere on its premises. Read more
