Mumbai: Doctor facing rape charges counters with defamation

A month after being accused of rape by a television actress, celebrity cosmetic and plastic surgeon Viral Desai has submitted a written complaint to the cyber police stating that he was subjected to defamation and criminal intimidation by the actress after she created a fake page on social media where she published intimidatory material against the doctor.

The Santacruz police who had registered a rape case against Desai claimed that the actress alleged that Desai first botched up a procedure on her face and then forced himself on her inside the changing room of his clinic on August 9.

Soon after the incident, Desai received a number of calls and emails from people of his fraternity, informing him about a woman's Facebook profile, in which she was uploading defamatory content about him.

Police said, Desai immediately checked the social media profile. He claimed in his complaint letter that, this profile was made by the actress but under a fake name. Surprisingly, two more Facebook profiles were created in fake names, with the sole intent of posting defamatory content against him, said police.

On September 9, Desai wrote a complaint letter to Vishal Thakur, the deputy commissioner of police (cyber) and attached screenshots of the fake social media profiles created by the actress, where she had sent friend requests to several friends of the doctor. Moreover, Desai also attached screenshots of emails sent by other doctors in his professional circuit.

Desai's advocate, Manish Agarwal, submitted a complaint letter to Santacruz police, requesting them to investigate the case and collect CCTV footage from the office of actress' lawyer, in which he is seen making extortion demand in exchange for not filing an FIR against Desai.

"It will also be clear from the said recording that their purpose in doing so was to extort money by showing the consensual relationship between the complainant and Dr Viral Desai as rape," reads the letter submitted to the police.

Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) states that any person whose reputation has been damaged (or was intended to be damaged) by the material in question has the rights to sue for defamation.
