7 snatchers arrested; 13 mobiles, 5 two-wheelers, 7 weapons seized

Ludhiana: Seven snatchers from two separate groups were arrested in Rahon Road and Kartar Nagar on Wedneesday following tip-offs. Cops seized 13 mobile phones, 3 motorcycles, 2 scooters, and 7 sharp-edged weapons from their possession.

Salem Tabri police busted a gang of robbers with the arrest of five accused on Wednesday, recovering 10 snatched mobile phones, two motorcycles, one scooter, and five sharp-edged weapons from their possession. The arrested accused are identified as Jagdev Singh, Sarabjit Singh, Kulwinder Singh, Hardeep Singh (all of Sasrali Colony), Meharban, and Baljinder Singh of Rahon Road.

According to cops, this gang used to have drinks before executing the snatchings. Additional deputy commissioner of police (Zone-1) Gurpeet Singh Sikand said Jagdev was the kingpin of the gang, which was formed six months ago. Jagdev was quite notorious, and had FIRs lodged against him under the Excise Act. In these six months, the gang executed more than 10 snatchings and loots.

Sikand added that before the snatchings, the accused used to get a liquor bottle to have drinks. Thereafter, they would roam in Meharban and Salem Tabri on two-wheelers with sharp-edged weapons. They threatened people with weapons, and at times also attacked commuters to rob them. They also used to target factory workers in the late evening hours.

They were presented before the court on Wednesday, which remanded them to three days in police custody.

Meanwhile, Model Town police also arrested two snatchers — Sukhwinder Singh and Jatinder Singh of Shilmapuri — and recovered three mobiles, one scooter, one motorcycle, and two sharp-edged weapons from their possession on Wednesday.

Assistant Commissioner of Police (Civil Lines) Jatinder Singh said the accused were arrested near Block D of Kartar Nagar. They used to roam around in Model Town and Shimlapuri late in the evenings, and snatch mobiles by threatening commuters with sharp-edged weapons. Jatinder is already facing trial in a snatching case in Division 5.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
