A moral voice

Understanding Gandhi and his methods through the works of literary masters

The 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi is approaching at a time when he is reviled by a section of society in the country that officially reveres him as the Father of the Nation. Only some time ago, in the well known Uttar Pradesh town of Aligarh, his assassination was enacted in public and was celebrated with obvious glee by those who participated in the shameful spectacle. This was a man about whom Albert Einstein, probably the most influential scientist after Issac Newton, had said: “Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this ever in flesh and blood walked upon this earth.”

Gandhi was essentially a political leader who led his countrymen to independence from the British colonial rule. But, he was much more than that. He was a moral voice the like of which one does not come across frequently in the annals of human history. He inspired many creative people – some of them truly geniuses – who made him the subject of their work and interpreted his life and message as they understood them. One readily recalls the epic film “Gandhi” made by British director-actor Richard Attenborough that was nominated for eleven Oscars and won eight. Sitar maestro Pt Ravi Shankar along with George Fenton composed music for it and was nominated for an Oscar.

Memorable tribute

In 1948, just a few days after Mahatma Gandhi was assassinated, Pt Ravi Shankar was asked by a radio producer before a live telecast at a Bombay (now Mumbai) studio if he could play something to pay tribute to the memory of the Mahatma. He composed a raga on the spot and played it, accompanied by Alla Rakha on tabla. The Mahatma’s name Mohandas was used to christen the raga as Mohan Kauns.

Gandhi continues to inspire creative people to this day. Eminent theatre director Prasanna, who began as a Marxist in his youth, has turned a Gandhian devoting himself to the cause of reviving and promoting handloom and other handicrafts in Karnataka. Not many people might remember that renowned Urdu poet Akbar Allahabadi, who died in 1921, had penned a book titled “Gandhinama” that was published by his grandson Muhammad Muslim Rizvi in 1948. In this, Akbar, known for his stinging satire and extraordinary wit, showered fulsome praise on Gandhi who had made his appearance on the Indian political scene only a few years ago.

He went to the extent of saying: “Madkhoola-e-government Akbar agar na hota, isko bhi aap paate Gandhi ki gopiyon mein” (Had Akbar not been a government servant, you would have found him among the lovers of Gandhi). And, this is what he wrote about Gandhi’s political method: “Lashkar-e-Gandhi ko kuchh hathiyaron ki haajat nahin, haan magar beinteha sabro-qanaat chaahiye” (The army of Gandhi does not need weapon. But it does need limitless patience and contentment.)

Overseas admirers

Gandhi was a source of creative inspiration to foreign writers and artists too. In 1963, well known Hungarian playwright László Németh published a play titled “Gandhi halála” that dealt with the Mahatma’s death. He was drawn to the apostle of non-violence when he read in 1924 a collection of Gandhi’s articles, culled from journal Young India, published by famous French writer Romain Rolland.

In 1957, Németh began to plan a play on Gandhi’s death. Well known Hindi poet-translator Girdhar Rathi and Hungarian scholar Margit Köves have jointly translated it from original Hungarian as “Gandhi Ki Mrityu” and Raza Foundation has published it in collaboration with Rajkamal Prakashan. As Margit Köves has explained in the introduction, Németh had classified ‘historical drama’ into two types – Greek and French. He styled his play on Gandhi’s death on the French type that was structurally a combination of Shakespeare and Schiller. The play is in two parts and has 13 scenes altogether featuring all the historical characters such as Jawaharlal Nehru, J. B. Kripalani, Maulana Azad, M. A. Jinnah, Shaheed Suharawardi, G. D. Birla, members of the Muslim League and Hindu Mahasabha, and Lord and Lady Mountbatten. It shows the depth of Németh’s understanding of the Indian situation and the dynamics of the historical-political process.

László Némethviewed satyagrah as a “great historical experiment” that negated the political doctrine of Machiavelli and showed a new way of resistance. He admired the innate “innocence” of Gandhi who never lost the hope that “people can be changed” and tried to depict it through his play.

Raza Foundation has also published a two-volume set of Mahatma Gandhi’s discourses that he delivered at the end of his prayer meetings from April 1, 1947 until January 30, 1948, the day of his assassination. As well known historian Sudhir Chandra points out in his introduction, Gandhi was killed before he could deliver his discourse on January 30, 1948.

However, the editors of the original compilation, of which these two volumes are a reprint, decided to include his last words “Hey Ram” as his last discourse. This, according to Chandra, could be viewed either as an emotional response of the editors or as their deep understanding of the great leader’s message. These discourses deal with the Gandhian concept of Ahimsa (non-violence) in great detail and are all the more relevant today.

The writer is a senior literary critic
