The Chinmayanand case: Why is she in jail but he is not?

Having journeyed to journalism via academics and a PhD from the University of Florida, Renuka Bisht now has the great pleasure of working with the editorial page of TOI. As impressed as the next person by big bang reforms, she’s also a champion of incremental change – because even a little star can light the way for a traveler in the dark. LESS ... MORE

Anyone with the misapprehension that India’s anti-rape laws are now so severe and lopsided that a woman’s mere accusation will land a man in jail, would be disabused by the Chinmayanand case.

One day after a law student of Shahjahanpur’s SS Law College (one of the several colleges and ashrams run by him in Uttar Pradesh) publicly accused Chinmayanand of harassment and sexual abuse on August 24, his lawyer lodged extortion charges. When the SIT set up by the Uttar Pradesh government on the orders of the Supreme Court quizzed her ”for 11 hours” on September 8, she told them Chinmayanand had raped and physically exploited her for one year.

After much public pressure Chinmayanand was arrested on September 20, although the charges against him didn’t include rape. He was then moved to the Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences in Lucknow, complaining of chest pain. On September 25, the law student was arrested on extortion charges. Her bail plea has been rejected and she is remanded to 14-day judicial custody.

No one should prejudge the case, the law will take its course, everyone has a right to justice – this is what BJP spokespersons have been saying. This is anodyne and unobjectionable, except every political party cries to high heavens when it is opponents who face accusations, then there is no delay in presumption of guilt. They are also now saying the three time BJP MP and MoS for internal security in the Vajpayee government, who is also known to have long associated with Adityanath, is no longer with BJP. In one of the many eerie echoes of the Unnao rape case, exactly when either of the rape accused departed BJP remains a very muddied matter.

Add to all this the history of a woman in Chinmayanand’s ashram having accused him of rape in the past, only to in turn be accused of having stolen cash and jewellery from the ashram. Ask why a powerful and influential man like Chinmayanand accused the law student and her friends of extortion only after she accused him of sexual abuse. Or why the SIT has hurried to arrest the law student when it could have very well investigated the extortion charges without doing so. See that nobody in the ruling party, not one of its 41 women Lok Sabha MPs, has stood for the law student, said beti bachao.

The law student has said, “There are many girls whose lives have been destroyed by Chinmayanand, but I gathered courage to stand against him.” She is in jail soon after saying this, reminding us that not only is rape an exercise of power, the powerful man can continue to exercise power even after the accusation against him has been brought out in full public gaze. It would take extraordinary courage for the rape survivor to make a public charge, but afterwards also hers would remain much the greater vulnerability. Because law and order institutions are indoctrinated in genuflecting to power. Those stringent anti-rape laws, there is always a way around them.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
