Mumbai: Shop owner stabbed by man after he reveals secret

Frustrated with Rakesh Yadav, Bhoir decided to take revenge with the help of his associates (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man from Mumbai allegedly stabbed a shop owner after he let out the secret of his relationship The accused Ganesh Bhoir was in a relationship with the daughter of the victim's regular customer The victim allegedly told his customer about the relationship, following which, he was attacked

Mumbai: A 28-year-old shop owner was allegedly stabbed to death on Tuesday night by a man in Mumbai. The incident took place in Dombivli. The prime accused has been identified as Ganesh Bhoir. Along with Bhoir, the police have also arrested a man named Ravi Khillare and a minor.

The minor has been sent to a juvenile home. Ganesh Bhoir had been in a relationship with the daughter of Rakesh Yadav's regular customer. Allegedly, Rakesh Yadav told the customer about the relationship. After Yadav told his customer about the relationship, he started taking steps to prevent his daughter from meeting Bhoir.

In an attempt to stop the girl from meeting Bhoir, her father sent her to their village in Uttar Pradesh. A police official familiar with the case said, "after this, Bhoir could not meet his girlfriend".

The police officer added, "Bhoir was enraged when he learnt that Yadav had tipped-off the girl's father and he decided to teach him a lesson." Frustrated with Rakesh Yadav, Bhoir decided to take revenge with the help of his associates. On Saturday night, the accused took his associate Ravi Khillare and the minor accused to Yadav's apartment in Mothagaon, Dombivli.

When they reached the complex, the accused allegedly stabbed Yadav in the stairwell. Some residents of the locality witnessed the incident but chose to stay mum and did not come to Yadav's rescue. A police official said that Bhoir and his associates had threatened the residents. The accused fled from the spot after the incident.

Man kills sister's friend over suspicion of affair in Delhi's Paschim Vihar

A similar incident came to light from the national capital in September when a man allegedly murdered his sister's male friend over suspicion that his sister was in a relationship with her male friend. The accused was identified as Anil.

On the night of the incident, the accused called Prashant on the pretext of some work stabbed him multiple times. Pankaj, Prashant's brother said that the accused was nursing a grudge against Prashant as the latter had a relationship with his sister. Pankaj was the eyewitness in the case.
