Victim Writes to Amit Shah After Rape-Accused BJP Leader Given Haryana Poll Duty

New Delhi: Former Uttarakhand general secretary of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Sanjay Kumar, has been inducted back into the party, according to a report in the Times of India. The newspaper has claimed that Kumar’s name figures on a list of party leaders who have been deputed to campaign in the upcoming assembly elections in Haryana.

The Wire has seen a copy of the purported list, but has been unable to, at this time, verify its authenticity. When we contacted the Haryana state convenor of the BJP, Lalit Banna, he said that the ‘Sanjay’ mentioned in the list is not the Sanjay who has been accused of rape.

“This is a misunderstanding. This is not the Sanjay Kumar who has been accused of rape. He is another party worker,” he said.

Last year, a former worker of the Rashtra Sevika Samiti – which is the women’s wing of the men-only Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh – accused Kumar of rape. Subsequently, he was removed from the position of BJP general secretary Uttarakhand, a position he had held for seven years.

Also read: Law Student Who Accused BJP Leader Chinmayanand of Rape Arrested

Now, that Kumar has been assigned a party post once again according to the Times of India, the victim has written to BJP president Amit Shah with her grievance. “There should be an inquiry, and all those who have helped Sanjay Kumar get back to a position in the party should be investigated. All of them should be punished by the party. Further, there should be an unbiased inquiry into the actions of Sanjay Kumar and he should be punished as per law,” she wrote.

The victim has also alleged that the police have watered down her case. “They have removed the section of rape from the FIR and he is now only accused of sexual harassment. I have also been constantly harassed and threatened by BJP and RSS workers in Dehradun. No help has been forthcoming for me,” she told The Wire.

She has also written to the Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, seeking a speedy investigation into the matter. However, it remains unclear how the CJI, if at all, has responded.
