‘Free Kashmir’ lights up Times Square ahead of Modi, Imran UN address in New York

New Delhi: The screens of Times Square in New York, perhaps the world’s most prized real estate for advertisements, lit up with slogans against the Kashmir lockdown Thursday.

The messages — from “Restore Human Rights” to “Stand with Kashmir” and “Free Kashmir” — were the brainchild of the Pakistani community based in the US, according to reports in Pakistani media.

The government of Pakistan tweeted the picture from its official Twitter handle.

With the extraordinary efforts of PM Imran Khan, Kashmir issue has now become a Global concern. The voice of people of IOJ&K is once again being heard in the highest diplomatic forums.

“Stand With Kashmir” has been highlighted on Times Square New York, today.#StandWithKashmir pic.twitter.com/2k8u4PYNp1 — Govt of Pakistan (@pid_gov) September 26, 2019

Tensions between India and Pakistan have deepened ever since New Delhi scrapped Article 370, which gave Jammu & Kashmir a degree of autonomy. Pakistan has downgraded diplomatic ties with India, and lashed out at India for its “assault on Kashmir”.

Also reads: Erdogan support for Pakistan on Kashmir at UN an outcome of downswing in India-Turkey ties

Why Times Square

Times Square, a commercial hub in New York, US, is one of the best-recognised locations in the world, drawing thousands of tourists every day.

It is located less than 2 kms from the United Nations headquarters, where the 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) is being held. Prime Ministers Narendra Modi and Imran Khan are both scheduled to address the UNGA Friday.

Putting up a screen advertisement at Times Square reportedly costs at least $3.8 million annually for a 30-second spot.

Also reads: Our army, ISI trained al Qaeda, military backs all my decisions — gems from PM Imran in US

Focus on Kashmir

This past week, PM Khan had expressed his disappointment with the international community over its response to the Kashmir issue. On the margins of the UNGA, he had said the issue would have got more attention had it been 8 million Jews or Europeans who were affected.

Last week, addressing the Howdy, Modi! event in Houston, PM Modi, without naming Pakistan, had lashed out at crossborder terrorism.
