Kerala nun rape case: National Commission for Women requests CM Vijayan's prompt action

The NCW had received complaints from two nuns who were issued transfer orders by their congregation last year. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The National Commission for Women (NCW) wrote a letter to Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan requesting him to intervene and "take prompt action to ensure prevention of sabotage of material evidence and witnesses in pending case against rape-accused Bishop Franco Mulakkal, so that justice may prevail."

The NCW had received complaints from Sister Neena Rose and Sister Ranit Pallasseril of St Francis Mission Home, Kuruvilangad, Kerala, who were issued transfer orders by their congregation last year. The nuns alleged that the transfer orders were aimed to split them and to "sabotage the case" against the accused Bishop. They also alleged that the congregation wanted to pressurise and threaten them as they were key witnesses in the case.

National Commission for Women (NCW) has written a letter to Kerala CM Pinaryi Vijayan requesting, "to take prompt action to ensure prevention of sabotage of material evidence and witnesses in pending case against rape-accused Bishop Franco Mulakkal, so that justice may prevail." pic.twitter.com/9ZmPiw9k34 — ANI (@ANI) February 6, 2019

Four of the nuns supporting the survivor were sent transfer orders to join different convents in Punjab, Jharkhand, Bihar and Kannur. Another nun was asked by the church to appear before the authorities in Jalandhar to explain her decision to protest against the Bishop. The nuns were also asked to not deviate from their religious duties.

In January, the nuns had also written a letter to the CM Vijayan with a similar request. They had emphasised that the accused Bishop could easily influence the case. Save Our Sisters (SOS) forum had also sought the CM's intervention in the case and requested the government to ensure that the lives and safety of the nuns were protected. The Bishop has been accused of raping a nun multiple times at the convent in Kuruvilangad between 2014 and 2016.

Also Read: ‘Zero tolerance for predators, compassion for victims’ - Bishops' council comes down hard on erring priests
