Pope SHOCK revelation: Nuns used as 'sex slaves' by priests and bishops, says Pope Francis

Pope Francis arrives in Abu Dhabi as he begins tour

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pope Francis has publicly acknowledged for the first time priests and bishops have sexually abused nuns, including one case where they were reduced to “sexual slavery”. In a shock revelation, the pontiff also added he believed the sexual abuse is still going on. The news broke as the Pope boarded his plane, which was returning to Rome from the UAE.

Boarding the aircraft, he told reporters: "It's not that everyone does this, but there have been priests and bishops who have. "And I think that it's continuing because it's not like once you realise it that it stops. “It continues. And for some time we've been working on it. "Should we do something more? Yes. Is there the will? Yes.

Pope SHOCK revelation: The Pope has admitted priests and bishops have sexually abused nuns

“But it's a path that we have already begun." On a question on whether there was a universal approach being formulated to deal with abuse of women in the church, the Pope implied the incidents are currently being dealt with on a case-by-case basis. He said: "There are cases, usually in new congregations and in some regions more than others. ”We're working on it."

Pope SHOCK revelation: The Pope admitted nuns have been used as sex slaves

In November, the Catholic Church's global organisation for nuns denounced the "culture of silence and secrecy" which prevents them from speaking out. During the pontiff’s historic tour in the Middle East, he also admitted the Church had an issue with "seeing women as second class". Pope Francis said: ”Pope Benedict had the courage to dissolve a female congregation which was at a certain level, because this slavery of women had entered it - slavery, even to the point of sexual slavery - on the part of clerics or the founder." "It's a path that we've been on.”

Pope SHOCK revelation: The Pope during his visit to Abu Dhabi
