SIT probe is sending wrong message to every woman seeking justice: Brinda Karat on Chinmayanand case

SHAHJAHANPUR: Left leaders Brinda Karat and Subhashini Ali along with members of All India Democratic Women's Association (AIDWA) arrived in Shahjahanpur on Thursday to meet the law student who accused Chinmayanand of rape and was arrested for extortion by the special investigation team (SIT) on Wednesday. During a press conference later, Karat told reporters that the SIT is attempting to demoralize the victim and her family members and “sending wrong message to every woman seeking justice across the country”.Karat said, “BJP should only do politics and stop supporting rape accused in the state now. This is the second case after Unnao in UP where power has been abused by influential accused to threaten the survivor and harass her family. SIT is attempting to demoralize the victim and her family members and sending wrong message to every woman seeking justice across the country,” Karat said.Casting doubt on the role of SIT in the probe, Karat said, “SIT has tried everything possible to save Chinmayanand by not registering a rape FIR ignoring the woman’s complaint and her repeated statements. It is really shameful to say that UP’s government, administration, police and all the security agencies are trying to save the accused. A rape victim was dragged and sent to jail for an offence which is bailable, which is completely inhuman.”On the Allahabad high court expressing “satisfaction” over the SIT probe, Karat said, “I would like to raise a question for the high court whether they were made aware that SIT has not registered a rape FIR on the complaint of the woman. As per the Supreme Court, a woman’s complaint of rape should be immediately registered and probed.”Subhashini Ali said, “The accused in this case is far more powerful than the complainant. He is politically, economically very strong and runs several institutions, because of which the entire district administration and police department support him. The SIT has not registered the FIR as per original complaint despite several SC directives in such cases. One should also remember that the accused is a repeat offender.”The group met the law student inside the district jail. They also met the members of SIT at the reserve police lines and handed them a memorandum in which they had asked SIT to file an FIR against Chinmayanand and his staff under sections 201 (causing disappearance of evidence) because the spy camera of the complainant went missing from the college hostel. Also they asked to add section 376 (1) (2) against Chinmayanand instead of 376 (C).Meanwhile, a bail application was also filed by woman’s lawyer Anoop Trivedi in the court of district judge, which will be heard on Monday. On the same day, Chinmayanand’s bail plea will also be decided in the same court.
