Chinmayanand-UP law student saga explained: Why both accused and accuser are in jail

Accused Chinmayanand and the accuser, a law student from Shahjahanpur, are in custody. (Photos:PTI)

On August 28, former BJP MP Swami Chinmayanand was booked for kidnapping and criminal intimidation after a 23-year-old law student, who had accused the leader of sexual harassment in a viral video, went missing.

A month later, after multiple twists that have made national headlines, both Chinmayanand, 72, and the woman law student have been arrested.

Here's everything that has happened in the Chinmayanand-UP law student case.

HOW DID IT ALL START?

In a video posted on Facebook on August 23, a 23-year-old law student of a Shahjahanpur college, alleged that she was being exploited by powerful people. In the video, which was widely circulated on social media, the woman urged PM Narendra Modi and Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath to help her.

"A big leader of the Sant Samaj who has destroyed the lives of many other girls and also has threatened to kill me... I want to request Yogi ji and Modi ji to help me. He has threatened to kill my family. Please help me," the woman said in the video posted on her Facebook page on August 24 at 4 pm.

The woman said she had evidence against the "powerful" Chinmayanand and alleged that he kept the district magistrate and superintendant of police "in his pockets". She did not explicitly name Chinmayanad in the video.

She went missing the following day.

WHO IS SWAMI CHINMAYANAND?

Chinmayanand is the president of the managing committee of Shahjahanpur's Swami Shukdevanand Postgraduate College, where the woman who accused him of sexual harassment studied.

Chinmayanand was a Union minister in the third Atal Bihari Vajpayee government (1999-2004). He was a member of the Lok Sabha from Jaunpur constituency in Uttar Pradesh during the period.

Chinmayanand has an ashram in Shahjahanpur and runs five colleges in the town. He also has ashrams in Haridwar and Rishikesh. In 2011, Chinmayanand had been accused of rape by an inmate of his ashram.

READ | Ram Mandir movement: How BJP leader Chinmayanand built huge empire

WOMAN UNTRACEABLE, HER FATHER FILES A COMPLAINT

What did he say: In his complaint, the law student's father said he feared his daughter may have been kidnapped. The father also alleged that his daughter had been sexually exploited by Chinmayanand.

A case is registered. CHARGES:

Section 364 (kidnapping or abducting in order to murder)

Section 506 (criminal intimidation)

How did Chinmayanand respond to allegations?

Chinmayanand said he was being framed and alleged that the woman was part of a conspiracy against him. He claimed that it was an attempt to extort the former MP.

Chinmayanand said the case was an attempt to malign the Yogi Adityanath government. "Earlier Kuldeep Singh Sengar was implicated and now I am being targeted," he had said.

CROSS-COMPLAINT FILED

Chinmayanand's lawyer alleged that a WhatsApp message sent to the former BJP MP threatened to damage his and his ashram's image if he did not pay Rs 5 crore.

Police turned the complaint into an FIR on August 25.

Note: The father of the woman, who was still missing, alleged that he was under pressure to water down the case against Chinmayanand.

SC LAWYERS FILE PLEA, SAY DON'T WANT ANOTHER UNNAO

As the case started getting national attention, a group of Supreme Court lawyers filed a plea in the top court.

The Supreme Court lawyers asked the Chief Justice of India to take suo motu cognizance of media reports of the missing law student.

The lawyers said they did not want a repeat of the Unnao rape case.

The lawyers' plea noted the case's striking similarity to the Unnao rape case in which Kuldeep Singh Sengar is the main accused. The Unnao rape case has witnessed a series of mysterious deaths.

FIRST BIG TWIST: Police said the Shahjahanpur girl was traced to New Delhi, along with a boy who had demanded Rs 5 crore from Chinamayanand. The police, meanwhile, sealed the woman's hostel room in Shahjahanpur to avoid trespassing and evidence tampering.

WOMAN FOUND IN RAJASTHAN

Four days after she went missing, the woman was found in Rajasthan with a friend on August 30. After police said the woman wasn't kidnapped, the Supreme Court asked them to produce her before the court.

This was followed by a closed-door meeting of the SC judges with the law student. In the meeting,

Judges asked for safe and comfortable accommodation for the woman in Delhi

Asked the Uttar Pradesh Police to bring her parents to the Capital

The judges said no one will be allowed to meet her till she sees her parents

Later, the Supreme Court allowed the transfer of the Shahjahanpur woman to other colleges saying her "future was important"

Meanwhile, where was Chinmayanand? Answer: Chinmayanand's lawyer said the BJP leader was busy in spiritual practice. "Swami is not running away from the case. He will definitely appear before the Delhi Police whenever required," Chinmayanand's lawyer Om Singh said.

On September 2, the Supreme Court ordered a probe into the case and formed a special investigation team (SIT). The SIT visited the college and spoke to teachers and students. The team also visited the ashram, but Chinmayanand remained elusive.

READ | Chinmayanand not running away, but meditating, says his lawyer

RAPE COMPLAINT FILED

On September 8, the law student came forward and filed a rape complaint against Chinmayanand in Delhi. "Swami Chinmayanand raped me and even exploited me physically for one year," the woman alleged.

Why Delhi? The law student said she wanted to file the rape complaint earlier, but the UP Police turned her down.

In her first public appearance after the case was filed, she addressed a press conference. Key takeaways:

Chinmayanand exploited her physically for one year

Her family was receiving threats from the accused

Says all evidence at her hostel, asked it be opened in front of the media

A day later, SIT opened the woman's hostel room and collected evidence. The student submitted a statement to the Delhi Police and the magistrate. Crucial details emerged:

The student alleged that she was filmed and raped repeatedly by Chinmayanand

She said she met Chinmayanand for admission at his college following which he arranged her admission

He admitted her, gave her a job in the library and then asked her to move into the hostel

She alleged she was filmed while taking a shower, the video of which was used to blackmail her

In an interview to The Print, the woman said 6 am was reserved for naked massages and 2.30 pm for "forced sex"

She was escorted to Chinmayanand's room by his gunmen who would then drop her back

READ | Law student’s father says evidence missing

LAW STUDENT SUBMITS EVIDENCE

Explosive video evidence was handed to the police in a pen drive, the law student said on September 11. The woman said she started filming Chinmayanand using a spy camera in her spectacles to expose him.

As the case continued to get murkier, her father claimed that evidence had gone missing from the girl's hostel room.

On September 12, the SIT finally questioned Chinmayanand, following which two rooms of Chinmayanand's ashram, where the alleged assault took place, were sealed.

What happened next?

The postgraduate student on September 14 gave a pen drive containing 43 videos to the SIT to support her allegations. The woman told the probe team about a BA-LLB student who was also being tortured and had confided in her about the harassment.

Meanwhile, more videos tumbled out. In one, Chinmayanand was seen getting a massage from the woman, but another showed 'extortion'-related talks. The veracity of the videos was not forensically established.

READ | Loving criminals, protecting them part of BJP's DNA: Congress attacks govt on Chinmayanand rape case

Did the SIT file a rape case? Answer: No

The law student questioned why no action had been taken against Chinmayanand even after she gave a detailed statement before a magistrate. "Will you act against Chinmayanand once I kill myself," she had asked.

Soon after her threat, Chinmayanand was admitted to a hospital after his "health deteriorated". Doctors said Chinmayanand had chronic diarrhoea and had complained of uneasiness.

The SIT also summoned records relating to the appointment of the complainant woman's mother at a college run by the Mumukshu Ashram of the BJP leader. The student's mother was appointed a teacher at the college in May this year.

Chinmayanand being attended by a doctor at his residence in Shahjahanpur. (Photo:PTI)

SIT ARRESTS CHINMAYANAND, BUT NO RAPE CHARGE

Around a month after the case came to light, Chinmayanand was arrested on September 20 and sent to jail. However, he was not charged with rape, but with "misusing authority for sexual intercourse" or "sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape".

That means punishment of five to 10 years in jail while a rape charge means seven years to life in jail.

What did Chinmayanand tell the SIT?

Soon after his arrest, Chinmayanand confessed to having called the Shahjahanpur law student for a massage and said he was ashamed of his actions.

An SIT official, quoted by news agency PTI, said Chinmayanand admitted to almost every allegation levelled against him, including those related sexual conversations and body massages.

He was sent to 14-day judicial custody. On September 23, Chinmayanand was admitted to a hospital in Lucknow.

READ | Shahjahanpur rape case blot on BJP’s Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao campaign, says Congress

HOW DID THE LAW STUDENT BECOME A SUSPECT?

The law student, who accused Chinmayanand of rape, and her three friends were booked for extortion by the SIT.

SIT chief Naveen Arora said the three friends, when questioned about a video clip in which they were purportedly discussing extortion, accepted their involvement in trying to blackmail and extort Chinmayanand.

While the SIT arrested the three friends, it said the woman was involved but was still looking for proof to act against her.

Of CCTV footage and 4,300 calls

Police said they monitored the movement of the woman student's friends through their mobile locations, call records and CCTV footage from hotels where the law student allegedly went with them.

The law student and her friends exchanged over 4,300 calls since January. Of these, most calls were made in August.

The woman's version: The law student's father denied his daughter's connection with the extortion case. Her lawyer said the 23-year-old was scared for herself and her family. The lawyer said the extortion case was an attempt to shift attention from the case against Chinmayanand.

Chinmayanand's version: The BJP leader claimed to have received a WhatsApp message on August 22. The message threatened to leak videos showing him naked online unless he paid Rs 5 crore.

Next, the woman moved the Allahabad High Court, but she was not granted relief when she sought interim protection from arrest in the extortion case filed by Chinmayanand.

SIT questions law student in extortion case

A court on September 24 admitted the interim bail plea filed by the law student who faced an extortion charge. Meanwhile, the 23-year-old woman was questioned by the SIT at her home for nearly three hours.

The bail application of the three men already arrested on charges of extortion charges was rejected.

The SIT also obtained the remand of Sachin Sengar and Vikram -- two of three men arrested in the extortion case -- to help trace the mobile phone used in the alleged extortion bid.

The police also sent the mobile phone of Chinmayanand's counsel Om Singh, on which the message demanding money was allegedly received, for forensic examination.

COMPLAINANT ARRESTED

The 23-year-old law student was arrested on the morning of September 25 after "enough digital and forensic" evidence was found against her in connection with the extortion case.

An SIT official said the student was confronted with video clips that showed her discussing the alleged extortion plan. She "verified" the contents of the clip and confirmed it had her voice and that of the other three after which she was arrested, the official added.

Let's see what the SIT said:

They had enough evidence that Rs 5 crore was demanded from Chinmayanand as part of an extortion attempt

Those arrested said they panicked and sent messages to Chinmayanand on directions of the girl as they were not getting the money and were upset

Pen drive, mobile phone sent for forensic examination. No addition, alteration, morphing, modification or editing in the video (of Chinmayanand taking a massage) found

Mobile location, calls verified. The four -- the law student and her three friends -- were in touch

Spectacles used for filming Chinmayanand bought online in March, but yet to be found

Mobile messages deleted by Chinmayanand could not be retrieved

The 23-year-old student, arrested on charges of extortion, was on September 25 sent to 14-day judicial custody.

What next for the law student: After the woman's arrest, her counsel filed a bail plea but the plea was rejected. The student's lawyer on Thursday filed the bail plea before a sessions court, a day after a lower court rejected a similar application. September 30 has been fixed as the next date of hearing.

What next for Chinmayanand: BJP has claimed Chinmayanand is no longer a member of the party. After the controversy erupted in August, no BJP leader had come forward to extend support to Chinmayanand. "He is not a member of the BJP," party spokesperson Harishchancdra Srivastava told PTI, and added, "All our records are now digitised and so we cannot tell from when he has not been a member of the party."

The Akhara Parishad, the prominent body of seers, is likely to take a decision on expulsion of Swami Chinmayanand from the body at its meeting on October 10.

Chinmayanand, meanwhile, continues to be in a Lucknow hospital where doctors are monitoring him for diabetes and urinary problems after having cleared him of any cardiac illness. His bail application in the sexual assault case will come up for hearing on September 30.

Also read | Not a party member: BJP distances itself from rape accused Swami Chinmayanand

Also watch | From rape to extortion: All about the Chinmayanand case

Also watch | Chinmayanand case: Arrested law student sent to 14-day judicial custody in extortion case


