Two US citizens among three injured in separate accidents

Tyre burst led to first mishap, school van hit in second

Three persons were injured in two separate incidents in the city on Wednesday evening and Thursday morning. While two US citizens were injured in the first incident, the driver of a school van received minor injuries in the second mishap.

According to the police, two US citizens, including a 15-year-old girl, were severely injured on Wednesday evening after the vehicle they were travelling overturned on the Yamuna Expressway following a tyre burst.

The two injured were identified as Micheal (48), and his daughter Linaya (15). The four-member family from the United States had hired a tempo traveller from Delhi on Wednesday to visit the Taj Mahal. The incident occurred around 3:30 p.m while they were returning to Delhi from Agra.

The front left tyre of the vehicle busted and in the impact, the vehicle overturned at the Yamuna Expressway near Rabupura in Greater Noida.

“We received information about the mishap around 3:45 p.m after which a PCR van was immediately sent to the spot. However, a team of paramedics from Expressway Management managed to shift the injured to the hospital by the time we reached,” said Sunil Kumar Singh, Station House Officer at Rabupura.

A spokesperson from the Kailash Hospital said that the two foreign nationals were brought to the hospital around 4 p.m and were discharged on request by the family.

“The two were brought to the hospital with chest and head injuries and shifted to the Intensive Care Unit. The duo was later discharged following a request by their family,” said the spokesperson.

Kids unhurt

In another incident, a school van carrying around six children was hit by an unidentified car in Dankaur.

While the driver sustained minor injuries, the children escaped unhurt.

“The vehicle belonged to Captain Academy School in Usmanpur Village of Dankaur. Fortunately, nothing major happened. The driver sustained minor injuries. He was discharged from the hospital after giving first aid,” said Rajpal Singh Tomar, Station House Officer at Dankaur.
