Owning Gandhi: Why BJP, RSS seek the company of the Mahatma

One strange thing about evil is that it wants to be remembered as good. Murderers want to be loved by their victims and be seen as their deliverers. Hitler unleashed death and destruction on Jews and other dissenters but loved being photographed with children and smiling young women.

His admirers would like you to believe he had rare human qualities, that he loved music. Is it hypocrisy that his music collection had Jewish musicians even if he had declared there was no Jewish art?

A follower of Stalin, reproaching me for my criticism of his hero, said that he was a man of such fine sensibility that he could hear the sound of the grass growing! Criminals want to be remembered as educationists, and mass murderers want to go down in history as art collectors!

Evil in this sense cannot be absolute, as even if it's devoid of all human content, it seeks that humanity. As Carl Jung says, "It is quite within the bounds of possibility for a man to recognise the relative nature of his evil but it is a rare and shattering experience for him to gaze into the face of absolute evil."

It is in this light that we need to see the decision of the Bharatiya Janata Party to launch a 'Gandhi Sankalp Yatra' from October 2, his birthday, to propagate Gandhi's ideas of "cleanliness, non-violence, swadeshi, swaraj and sadagi (simplicity)".

Note that the list does not contain communal amity or Hindu-Muslim unity, nor does it talk about the fight against caste discrimination, two main elements of Gandhi's social and political programme. It is futile to expect it to include protection of minority rights, which was an article of faith for Gandhi in the first months of the formation of independent India.

Steering the nation Non-Cooperation Movement poster published by Rashtriya Chitra Prakashak Karyalaya, Cawnpore. (From the collection of Ms Priya Paul)

After all, it was Gandhi's insistence on ensuring equal political status to the numerically smaller Muslim and Christian communities and even non-Indians, which ultimately led to his murder.

People have wondered about the aggressive move by the BJP under the new leadership to adopt or appropriate Gandhi. Is the party changing? The proclamation by the prime minister from the Red Fort to make the Swachhta Abhiyan his flagship programme confused his critics.

Was a leader who they had charged of making a career by dividing people aspiring to statesmanship after coming to power? The next six years have shown that the company of Gandhi's memory, in my opinion, has not been able to change him or his party's politics.

This is not the first time the BJP and its parent body, the RSS, have played with Gandhi. The RSS incorporated Gandhi in its list of Pratah Smaraneeya sometime after his murder. This was necessary because the organisation was widely perceived as being complicit in the violence that took Gandhi's life.

Later, the BJP under Atal Bihari Vajpayee adopted the platform of 'Gandhian socialism'. It has since shed this millstone silently but kept returning to Gandhi from time to time. The aggression with which the BJP under Prime Minister Narendra Modi seeks to appropriate Gandhi is new but in keeping with the nature of this regime.

One cannot imagine a more incompatible pair. The only thing common to both seems to be the Hinduness that the RSS claims to represent. But it is not difficult to see that its relationship to Hinduism is utilitarian, not a matter of faith. Neither does it have any spiritual pretence.

It is very much secular, a worldly instrument to achieve power and keep it within its grip. For the RSS and the BJP, Hinduism is a demographic idea which helps mobilise a majority of those who recognise themselves as Hindus. For Gandhi, it was a deeply personal thing , never to be used for political power.

For the RSS and the BJP, the Ramayana, Mahabharata and Gita are historical documents; for Gandhi, they were poetry! The RSS and its allies would destroy a mosque to 'reclaim' the exact birthplace of Ram; for Gandhi, Ram was not a historical figure at all.

His clarity in these matters is astonishing. Responding to the demand conveyed by Rajendra Prasad to outlaw cow slaughter, he said a clear 'no', as in India there were people for whom eating beef was not taboo.

For the RSS, India is a land primarily of Hindus. Muslims and others are seen as latecomers to the land or outsiders who will have to accept Hinduism as a way of living. Gandhi found this unacc­eptable. "You shall not force others to sing Vande Mataram or even to carry the national flag," he told students in his 'Constructive Programme'.

So, Gandhi is everything the RSS is opposed to. Why does the RSS then seek to claim the company of Gandhi? The first reason, in my view, is to create an equality between the two. To bring Gandhi down from the exalted seat he occupies in the pantheon of nation-builders to its own level.

The claim that there was mutual affection and admiration between them is a fiction but it is important for the RSS to peddle this. It helps its cadre get rid of the inferiority complex they have always suffered from when confronted with Gandhi. Gandhi looms large in the Indian imagination and it is necessary to cut him down to size.

The BJP, for its part, is keen to make Gandhi its own because it wants to be seen as the party that defines the idea of India. But as Ali Khan Mahmudabad writes, the source of the idea is still in the freedom struggle and the making of the Constitution.

Since the BJP does not have an ancestry which would make its ownership of the idea credible, it has become necessary for it to appropriate Gandhi the universal and Ambedkar the lawgiver. And Bhagat Singh for his militancy.

Meanwhile, on a subterranean level, the old smear campaign against Gandhi continues unabated. It is very much in keeping with the traditional doublespeak of the RSS and BJP.

One must not ignore the recent emergence of 'Main bhi Godse' stickers on vehicles and the popular mandate to Sadhvi Pragya despite her exaltation of Nathuram Godse. Or, did they vote for her precisely for her stand?

However, it is true that the idea of Gandhi, his political practice, has not been pursued even by our secular parties and he has long been reduced to a ritualistic presence in our collective life. Our schools and popular culture have also taken the sting out of Gandhi. He has been made a lifestyle guru, a feelgood presence-something he never was.

All his life, he kept challenging popular beliefs and forcing people to rethink their positions. Yet, he has been turned into a saint who did not have worldly concerns. The political Gandhi has long been abandoned by our political class. The non-violent Gandhi was a threatening presence not only for the British but also for many of his compatriots. The non-violent Gandhi that is now presented to us is a non-dissenting Gandhi, who accepts all the violence of the State without protest.

Gandhi can be recovered from the clutches of this cynical majoritarianism only if his politics is revived. This is a politics of dissent, with the courage of humanity which sometimes requires going against one's own people. If we are not ready to take this path, there is no use lamenting the appropriation of Gandhi by the BJP and the RSS.

Apoorvanand is a literary critic and teaches Hindi at Delhi University.
