Mumbai: Woman goes missing seconds after telling mother about 'stalker'

The woman's father said that at 9.36 pm, the girl had called her mother (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 21-year-old woman from Mahim has been missing for Wednesday In her last phone call, the woman told her mother that she was being stalked by a drug addict The Mahim Police have lodged a case and a search operation is underway

Mahim: A search operation has been launched to locate the woman who went missing on Wednesday from Mahim Causeway. The 21-year-old woman went missing some time after she told her mother that a drug addict wass stalking her. A case of kidnapping has been registered by the Mahim Police.

The 21-year-old woman had left her residence in Mahim (West) at around 9.30 pm on Wednesday. She was going out to meet her mother at her office. They had planned to go shopping to Mahim market after meeting each other.

The woman's father said that at 9.36 pm, the woman was at Mahim Causeway when she called her mother. During the phone call, the woman told her mother that she was scared as a drug addict was stalking her. She then asked her mother to stay on the call as she was trying to escape.

However, in just a few seconds, the woman allegedly screamed on the phone and the call was disconnected. The family then tried to call her back multiple times but the 21-year-old's phone was allegedly unavailable. The woman's father said, "The incident took place on Mahim Causeway, where we suspect she was kidnapped. "

The parents of the missing woman went to the Mahim Police on Wednesday and lodged a complaint. Milind Gadankush, senior inspector of Mahil police station said, "We have registered a case on Wednesday night under Section 363 (punishment for kidnapping). " While a case has been lodged in relation to the incident, no arrest has been made yet. Further investigation is underway.

Three men abduct, gang-rape woman in Rajasthan's Dholpur

A similar incident came to light from Rajasthan's Dholpur in September this year where three bike-borne men allegedly abducted a woman and gang-raped her. The woman had gone out of her house to relieve herself when the incident took place. The accused accosted the woman when she was returning home.

Allegedly, three men stopped her when she was returning and assaulted her. After hitting the woman, the accused tied the woman's mouth with a cloth and took her to an area near Bishangiri village. Following this, the accused gang-raped the woman. In an attempt to save herself from the accused, the woman raised an alarm. Some of the passersby heard the woman's screams and rushed to help her. The locals caught two of the accused but one of them managed to flee from the spot.
