2 buried alive in house collapse as rain leaves trail of destruction

Tree

Allahabad: Two persons — including a four-year-old boy — died and 12 others were injured as heavy rain battered Sangam City and its adjoining areas and neighbouring districts on Friday, making walls collapse, uprooting trees and snapping power lines.

As the local Met office recorded 80.4mm rainfall, traffic came to a virtual standstill on many thoroughfares and offices witnessed thin attendance. The district administration has ordered schools to remain closed on Saturday in the wake of inclement weather. The Met office has forecast more rain in the next 24 hours.

Ram Sagar (34) and Priyanshu (4) were buried alive in debris after a kutcha house in Raja Ka Purwa Majra village in Mauaima area of Allahabad crumbled amid incessant rain. SP (Trans-Ganga) NK Singh said three members of the family were sleeping under a makeshift hut near the house when it collapsed and trapped them. Local residents managed to rescue one in time.

Two kutcha houses also collapsed in Pratapgarh district, leaving three persons critically injured. Three more houses were pounded by heavy rain in Fatehpur district, in which nine persons were injured.

The downpour resulted in waterlogging in several parts of the city. In some places, the water level was knee-deep. Khuldabad, Station Road, Leader Road, Georgetown, Tagore Town, Kydganj, Dariyabad and LIC Colony were among those worst-hit. Low-lying areas like Mumfordganj, Rajapur and Ashok Nagar, which recently battled floods, were also inundated.

Link road submerged: Commuting was a nightmare for those using the Niranjan railway underbridge. This important road, which links Old City areas with Civil lines and is used by thousands of office-goers as well as schoolchildren, went 4ft underwater.

Trees uprooted: The rain felled several trees, which in turn either blocked roads or damaged power transmission lines. A big tree, near AN Jha Hostel of Allahabad University, was uprooted and it buried a car and an e-rickshaw. Another tree in Old Cantonment disrupted traffic on the busy MLN Road.

Pothole peril: Ugly warts on several roads yawned open into craters, compounding woes of commuters. “Once the wet spell subsides, we will start repairs on a massive scale since festivals are round the corner. Ram Dal will be taken out on some of these roads,” said additional municipal commissioner Amrendra Verma.

Power pangs: The incessant rain also caused power failure in several parts of the city. While in most cases, uprooted trees were to blame; in some cases, rainwater rendered transformers defunct. “There were power cuts in some areas because of heavy rain, but supply was restored in phases. All complaints are being looked into,” said UPPCL executive engineer (Georgetown area) M. Agarwal.

Level of rivers: Despite Ganga and Yamuna flowing below the danger mark, flood water is yet to drain out from several localities. The water level of Ganga at Phaphamau was 82.95 metre at 4pm and the same at Chatnag was 82.22 metre. The Yamuna at Naini flowed at 82.79 metre.

“The water is receding in Yamuna while it is stable in Ganga. We are keeping close watch. It will take another week or so for water to recede from affected areas,” said MK Singh, executive engineer (flood control).


