RSS, communal parties pose danger to country: Zaheeruddin Ali Khan, Haragopal

Hyderabad: The ideology of RSS was in vogue even before the Indian Independence. When Mohammed Ali Jinnah sensed it, he put forward the claim of separate Pakistan. Muslim living in India had an opportunity to migrate to Pakistan but many of them chose to live and die in India. They are not required to produce the certificate of their patriotism. Spreading hatred and promoting two-nation theory is the agenda of RSS.

Maulana Azad, Nehru and other secular leaders of India opposed two-nation theory and played a major role in saving the country from disintegration.

These thoughts were expressed by Mr. Zaheeruddin Ali Khan, Managing Editor of Siasat Urdu Daily while addressing a seminar held at Sundarayya Vignana Kendram yesterday. The seminar was organized by the Human Rights Committee.

Prof. Haragopal, Social activist, Vimala Akka, Mujahid Hashmi and others also addressed the seminar.

Continuing his speech, Mr. Zaheeruddin Ali Khan told that when Nathuram Godse assassinated Mahatma Gandhi, he was carrying fake cap and a beard in his bag. He wanted to create an impression that a Muslim assassinated Mahatma Gandhi.

When these things were seized, Maulana Azad insisted Pandit Nehru to make an announcement on All India Radio that Mahatma was assassinated by Nathuram Godse and not by a Muslim.

Mr. Zaheeruddin Ali Khan further told that the mentality of manovadi organizations like RSS has always been to spread hatred against the Muslims. Communal elements never like students like Rahoit Vemula and Kanhaiya. He also said that during the past four years, everything has changed. At the time of Nuclear Deal, Muslim MPs were purchased so that they should not raise any voice against the pact. Now, the situation is that BJP is exploiting the Muslims parties and leaders for its benefit. Citing the political situations right from Assam to U P, he said that Muslim leaders were used as pawns for dividing secular votes.

He cautioned that the country is passing through a dangerous situation. Many political parties under the garb of secularism express their sympathies towards Muslims, Christians and other depressed classes. There are news that during the past four years, in Telangana, many churches were damaged. If the government is serious about protecting minorities, how such incidents can take place, he asked. He advised the minorities and depressed classes to get united and fight against fascist forces.

Prof. Haragopal declared that RSS and other communal parties are a great danger for the country.

He said that BJP Govt. is misusing the statutory organizations to cover up its failures. Citing the arrangements made for Kumbh Mela, Prof. Haragopal said that public money is being wasted on its publicity. He told the peace-loving citizen that it is obligatory for them to work for the protection of democracy.

[source_without_link]Siasat News[/source_without_link]
