Two YO raped at station while father, siblings sleep, dies

Aurangabad: In yet another shameful incident a two-year-old girl was allegedly raped at the Rahuri railway station near Ahmednagar while her family was asleep.

The victim’s family were returning from Rahauri after visiting their relatives. Unfortunately, the family boarded a wrong train from Manmad railway junction and had to spent the Wednesday night at the station.

The girl died on Thursday night after the incident in Aurangabad.

Autopsy report obtained from the Government Medical College and Hospital (GMCH) concluded the cause of death as “septicaemia resulting from rape”.

According to reports, the victim’s family hailing from Aurangabad had come to Manmad looking for a job. The family initially planned to go from Manmad to Igatpuri but boarded a wrong train for Daund on Solapur- Pune route.

They decided to get down at Rahuri station when they realized they boarded the wrong train.

Though the father, the minor and her two siblings managed to get off at the busy station, her mother and another child couldn’t. The father decided to spend the night at the station.

The very next morning the father and the children travelled to Aurangabad to meet his wife and other child who made it to their relatives house.

Suspecting evil spirits, the minor who was incessantly crying since her return was taken to a Tantrik to ward of evil spirits but the victim died on Thursday after returning.

She was rushed to a private hospital and was declared brought dead.

The father refused to let go of his dead minor daughter at the busy Kranti chowk in Aurangabad creating a scene.

Furious commuters thrashed the father and informed the police of the incident.

The Kranti chowk police immediately rushed to the spot and took the girl’s body to the GMCH, where an autopsy showed that she had been raped.

Senior police inspector Uttam Mudak reporting on the case said: “We have registered a case of accidental death. Based on the preliminary autopsy report, a case of rape has been registered. Sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act are also being included in the FIR.”
