To take revenge for molestation complaint, two men set 12 vehicles on fire

Police have recovered a pistol and a knife from the possession of the two accused. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Two men set 12 vehicles on fire in Rohini colonies One of the accused was angry with residents for filing molestation complaint Police arrested both the accused

New Delhi: Angry with the residents of three colonies for filing a molestation complaint against him, a man along with his friend allegedly set 12 vehicles ablaze in Kanjhawala area of Rohini district in New Delhi.

Police have now arrested the two accused identified as 19-year-old Akash and 30-year-old Kuldeep. According to police, no casualty was reported in the incident.

According to a report, police said Akash plotted the whole arson incident in order to take revenge for a police complaint against him by the residents for allegedly molesting a woman.

Akash was on bail after three weeks in jail when he perpetrated the arson incident. The colony residents had handed Akash over to police when he allegedly molested a woman.

"We received a complaint about the first incident in Sawda on September 23. The next day, two other complaints were registered by residents of Shiv Vihar and Bhagat Singh Colony. We recovered CCTV footage and checked records of criminals in the area. A policeman identified Akash, who had secured bail recently. Akash confessed to the crime when caught," the report quoted S D Mishra, DCP (Rohini).

Akash works as a labourer in the area.

According to the police, Akash confessed during interrogation that he and his friend Kuldeep set fire to three cars and a bike in Sawda area on the night of September 23. Again on the next day, the two then set four bikes and four cars ablaze.

Police have booked the two accused under Section 435 (mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage).

Kuldeep was arrested later after Akash revealed to Kanjhawala police about the identity of the second person involved in the incident. Police said Kuldeep also works as a labourer and was allegedly involved in several theft cases in the area. Police have recovered a pistol and a knife from the possession of the two accused.

In another incident in Mumbai, a woman staffer of the Mumbai airport chased and caught her molester, who called her an 'item' in Vile Parle area of Mumbai on Friday (September 22). The 26-year-old accused was later arrested by police. He was later sent to judicial custody.

The incident took place in the evening when the victim was on her way to the bus station after finishing her duty. The accused identified as Dinesh Yadav was caught by the woman.
