Alcohol, drug addict stabs brother to death in Delhi's Moti Nagar

The accused has been identified as Amit Tiwari (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights An alcoholic in Delhi stabbed his brother to death in front of their mother The accused is absconding and a police team has been formed to arrest him

New Delhi: A man in Delhi was allegedly stabbed to death by his brother in front of their mother, the police said on Thursday. The incident took place in the Basai Darapur area near Delhi's Moti Nagar. The accused allegedly stabbed his brother after he was scolded for his addiction to alcohol and drugs.

The deceased has been identified as Anand. After the incident, the deceased's mother lodged a complaint with the Moti Nagar police. Sameer Sharma, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (west) said that Anand died moments after he was attacked.

The accused has been identified as Amit Tiwari. At around 9.45 pm on Thursday, the police control room (PCR) got a call stating that a youth had been stabbed and was in a critical condition.

Sameer Sharma said that after receiving a call, a police team reached the area. According to a report, Amit Tiwari was bleeding profusely. Allegedly, Amit Tiwari used to have repeated arguments with his mother and brother due to his addiction to alcohol and drugs.

On the night of the incident, Amit came home under the influence of alcohol. Amit and his mother started having an argument over the same. Sameer Sharma said, "When Anand intervened and joined his mother, Amit picked up a knife and slit Anand's throat before 'fleeing the home'. After slitting his brother's throat, Amit left the house while their mother tried to raise an alarm. The police have said that a team has been formed to nab Amit Tiwari.

In a fit of rage, man stabs wife to death over argument on his alcoholism

A similar incident surfaced from Thiruvananthapuram in March this year when a man allegedly stabbed his wife to death after the two had an argument. The couple allegedly had an argument over the accused's alcohol addiction, following which, the accused flew into a rage and stabbed his wife to death.

The deceased was identified as Rajani. The accused Sreekumar also attacked his wife's parents when they tried to intervene in their argument. The police said that Sreekumar had been sent to de-addiction centres in the past and he was not in favour of the idea. He used to stay upset over the same. On the day of the incident, Rajani got into an argument with her husband over his alcohol addiction and threatened to give him a divorce. Sreekumar got irritated with the same and stabbed Rajani.
