CBI vs Kolkata police: Big wins for BJP & TMC; CPM & Cong stare at irrelevance

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. | File image

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has claimed (short-lived) victory as the Supreme Court has given immunity from arrest to Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar till the end of this month. BJP claims the same as the apex court asked Rajeev Kumar to appear before the CBI on the 20th of this month and issued a contempt notice to the Chief Secretary and DG, West Bengal Police.

Without even participating in this tug of war between TMC and BJP to ‘save democracy against authoritarianism’, it is the CPM, and to a small extent, the Congress, that emerge as the biggest losers in this controversy.

Mamata’s principle opposition in the state has been the CPM, till at least the 2016 Assembly elections, when they miscalculated the impact of an alliance with the Congress. CPM, a cadre-based party, transferred all its votes to Congress candidates whereas Congress votes didn’t transfer to the CPM candidates. Congress ended up winning more seats than the CPM in 2016 contesting fewer seats. In the next two years, at least 4-5 MLAs of the Congress have defected to the TMC.

Since then, the BJP has replaced CPM as the TMC’s principle electoral challenger in the state, whether it be the Panchayat elections or Municipality bypolls. CPM’s voters have developed a perception that is the BJP which can take on the TMC. As a result, CPM voters are switching to BJP, forcing CPM in the third position in every election since 2016.

TMC’s criticisms on Sarada issue or any other issue, by the CPM and the BJP supporters in social media, or WhatsApp groups have become similar. At the local level, there are instances of BJP and CPM, two ideologically opposite parties, joining hands against the TMC. CPM leadership realises the problem and tries to counter the charges in public statements but saying “Police-CBI fight is staged to deflect attention from our Brigade Rally”, “Modi Bhai-Didi Bhai Setting”, and blaming the media for everything under the sun is self-mockery of their former political might. These allegations of tacit understanding make no sense to voters as BJP has realized Mamata has no chance of supporting the NDA in post-poll formations being the general marshalling the troops against Modi-. She has taken it too far to come back to Modi-Shah and lose her credibility.

Thousands of CPM supporters across rural Bengal are homeless because of TMC atrocities. They want an answer from the CPM leadership if they can fight TMC’s state power. What they get is half-baked, confusing answers. These voters may be ideologically committed but when they are homeless, tortured, discriminated for six to seven years, they have little hope of their ideology saving them. The elite CPM (and anti-Mamata for cultural reasons) supporters ensconced in the towns and cities of Bengal realise that if anyone can teach a lesson to the TMC, it is Modi who has institutional power at his disposal and has the image of a strongman politician.

Congress is bifurcated. Leaders in favour of an alliance with the TMC are not wasting their time in joining TMC. Leaders who want an alliance with CPM are left in the lurch due to lack of any positive response from the high command. It was Congress leader, Abdul Mannan, the leader of the Opposition in the Assembly and a supporter of Cong-CPM alliance whose resolute legal and political fight made the Supreme Court transfer the Sarada investigation to the CBI from the special investigation team under Rajeev Kumar. Present day political needs have made Mannan’s leader Rahul Gandhi support Mamata. Congress voters are not ideologically committed. Can they shift to the BJP to teach Mamata a lesson?

Now, add that Rajeev Kumar has a high chance of getting arrested before the election, possibly early next month (unless there is an understanding or botched up investigation) to the perception it is the BJP which can fight Mamata, BJP’s recent electoral successes and Modi-Shah-Yogi’s frequent campaigns in the state. What you get is Mamata raising her pitch to ‘save democracy’ and get a bigger national focus in the run-up to the polls and a spike in BJP’s vote share because of a further dent to the CPM and Congress’s vote share. CPM’s loss would be more, given their organisation and voter presence is far higher compared to the Congress pockets of Murshidabad and Malda.

BJP will increase its vote share. But will that translate into more seats, given the lack of BJP’s pan Bengal organisation? The basis of their politics has helped them in some districts which have a strong Muslim presence and Hindi speaking population. The latest opinion polls give BJP 7-9 seats. If this turns out to be true, then it means TMC gains no more seats than it did in 2014 somewhat quashing Mamata’s hope of becoming the PM. CPM and Congress, meanwhile will reach electoral irrelevance if they fail to act.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
