Man set ablaze in Pakistan's Okara for slapping cousin's wife

After Afzal was attacked, he was taken to the DHQ hospital but he died (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man was set on fire by his cousins in Fazawala village of Okara, Pakistan The deceased had allegedly slapped his cousin's wife The police have launched an inquiry into the case

Islamabad: A man was allegedly set ablaze by his cousins in Fazawala village of Pakistan's Okara on Saturday. The deceased has been identified as Afzal. Afzal was allegedly set on fire after he slapped his cousin's wife. An inquiry into the case is underway.

The police are yet to confirm if this is was a case of suicide or murder. After Afzal was attacked, he was taken to the DHQ Hospital but he passed away. The alleged incident took place at Afzal's residence.

Afzal's father said, "My nephews came and poured petrol on my son and set him ablaze." Afzal's father also recalled that his son had a fight with his cousins when they were visiting on the 10th of Muharram (first month of the Islamic calendar).

He said that the initial fight between Afzal and his cousins had been stopped after their neighbours intervened. Afzal's father further added that his son had slapped his sister-in-law, following which, differences arose between him and his cousins.

Contrary to the claims made by Afzal's father, the police have said that it could also be a case of self-immolation. A police officer familiar with the case said, "An investigation will reveal whether Afzal died of self-immolation or was murdered."

This is not the first time where people have taken law in their hands to avenge a loved one or to take revenge for a dispute.

Man set ablaze over dispute, 10-year jail term awarded to accused

In the past as well, instances of people being murdered over personal disputes and enmity have surfaced from different parts of the country. One such incident came to light from Aurangabad, Maharashtra in March this year when 10 years of rigorous imprisonment were awarded to three men accused of setting a man ablaze. The three accused were identified as Kanchan alias Hirabai Sanjay Sarode, Sanjay Damodar Sathe and Ashok Damodar Sathe. The 33-year-old victim used to live in N-9, Pawan Nagar, CIDCO. After the incident, the accused had fled the spot.

The three accused had set a man ablaze in October 2015 over an old dispute. The victim was identified as Sanjay Ramesh Sarode. The man had suffered 50 per cent burn injuries. After he was set ablaze, Sanjay Ramesh Sarode was taken to Dr Avinash Yelikar who administered treatment to him and saved his life.
