Chinmayanand case: No permission for Cong march in support of UP law student

UP: Elections not won on exit polls basis, results will be surprising: Kamal Nath

Chinmayanand case: No permission for Cong march in support of UP law student

India

oi-Deepika S

Lucknow, Sep 30: Congress leader Jitin Prasada was refused to take out a march in Uttar Pradesh in support of the Shahjahanpur law student, who had accused BJP leader Chinmayanand of rape.

"UP is no Kashmir yet today I am in preventive custody for simply wanting to highlight the plight of the Shahjahnpur rape victim. This BJP govt has no qualms in quashing an individual's fundamental rights!", Jitin Prasada tweeted after he was taken to preventive custody ahead of the 'padyatra'.

"Congress today wanted to hold a march to highlight the plight of the Shahjahanpur rape victim but the local administration is not allowing it. Tell me how is this not a violation of law? It's unfortunate," Prasada said in an audio message.

The 'nyay yatra' by the Congress was in support of the girl student who had levelled rape allegations against BJP leader and former union minister Swami Chinmayanand.

SC orders Gujarat govt to pay riots victim Bilkis Bano Rs 50 lakh in two weeks

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra alleged that the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh is stopping her party's march in support of the law student who has accused Swami Chinmayanand of rape and arresting its leaders.

The opposition party added on its official Twitter handle that district borders in Shahjahanpur have been blocked from all sides and Congress leaders such as Jitin Prasada detained.

The party said the protest march has been blocked by UP Police.

"The criminals in UP have the protection of the government so they can intimidate the rape victim," Priyanka Gandhi said in a tweet in Hindi.

"The UP BJP government wants to suppress the voice seeking justice for daughter of Shahjahanpur. The padyatra is being stopped. Our workers and leaders are being arrested. What is there to be afraid of?" the Congress general secretary in-charge UP East said.

The 23-year-old student has been in judicial custody for allegedly extorting Chinmayanand. The student has accused the BJP leader of raping and physically exploiting her for over a year.

Chinmayanad is also under 14-day judicial custody after being arrested by the SIT. However, he is presently undergoing treatment at the Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences in Lucknow after he complained of chest pain in jail.
