Found my true calling: Christian girl believed to be victim of ‘love jihad’ says flew to Abu Dhabi 'for love'

Ciyani Benny | Image courtesy: Twitter @Abhi95Choudhary

Abu Dhabi: The vice-chairman of the National Commission for Minorities (NCM) had recently written to Union Home Minister Amit Shah, raising the issue of 'love jihad' cases that were coming to light in Kerala.

In his letter, George Kurian had talked about two cases. The first one of a Christian girl from Kozhikode who was raped and then blackmailed using her nude pictures by the accused, who was forcing her to convert to Islam. An attempt was also made to kidnap the girl from outside the hostel of a Christian college where she was studying.

The second case was of a girl from Delhi who, as per her parents, was allegedly kidnapped from the national capital and taken to a West Asian country.

The girl’s parents had said that their daughter could have been "misled/ cheated/ brainwashed/ abducted and led astray with very nefarious designs like joining an outfit such as the Islamic State or being used as a slave."

However, the 19-year-old Christian girl has now come out in the open to claim that she had come to the United Arab Emirates for love.

The girl, who flew to Abu Dhabi earlier this month, denied that she had been kidnapped or joined any terrorist group.

"This is not true. I have found my true calling and have come to Abu Dhabi of my own free will. No one forced me. I am an adult citizen of India and can make my own decision," the girl identified as Ciyani Benny, now known as Aisha, was quoted as telling the Gulf News.

Ciyani is a final year under-graduate student at the Jesus and Mary College. She is reported to have attended classes till September 18.

A report in IANS today said she flew to Abu Dhabi the same day to marry an Indian man based there. She had become friends with the man on social media around nine months back.

Releasing a statement on Saturday, Ciyani said she had converted to Islam on her own will. She embraced the religion on September 24 in an Abu Dhabi court.

"I have accepted this religion and would ensure that I would live with the same faith," she added.

Ciyani said it was "fake news" that she had been "abducted or is part of a terrorist group".

Ciyani said her parents, including his brother, have come to Abu Dhabi and she had "told them I am not going back. I want to get married to live in the UAE".
