Rajasthan: Alwar fails to keep its daughters safe; 3 gang rapes reported in 24 hours

Medical examination of the survivors has been conducted by the authorities. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The first case was reported from Alwar district where a 15-year-old girl was gang-raped In second case, a 16-year-old girl was allegedly abducted and raped by four men The police complaint was filed under sections 376-D of the Indian Penal Code

Alwar: In just 24 hours (Saturday-Sunday), the Rajasthan police have registered three cases of gangrape from Alwar and Jaipur districts. In two of these reported cases, the victims were minors who were gang-raped.

The first case was reported from Alwar district where a 15-year-old girl was gang-raped by three youths after being abducted. The incident reportedly happened in Thangazi town in a forested area, where the accused abducted the minor and took her to an isolated spot. The minor told the police that while she was trying to escape the alleged rapists she fell in a shallow well. After crying for help and rescue, the villagers heard her and rushed to her help. They safely pulled the minor out of the well.

According to a report, the police complaint was filed in the case under sections 376-D of the Indian Penal Code and under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences(POCS0) Act. Vishnaram Bishnoi, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Alwar (Rural) told media that villagers caught the accused and handed them over to the police. Reportedly, two of the accused in the case are in their 20s while one of them is a minor.

In another case reported from Alwar's Dhabla area, a 16-year-old girl was allegedly abducted and raped by four men. The woman while registering her complaint told the police that the accused men also threatened her to make the assault video viral if she reports the crime to the police. On Saturday morning, the girl gathered courage, reached out to the police and registered the case. However, all four accused in this case were arrested.

On Sunday, a 35-year-old woman in Raini area alleged that two men had barged into her house and sexually assaulted her. When the survivor cried for help, the accused fled the spot fearing that if he is caught they he would be handed over to the police. However, the police have registered complaints in the case and further probe is underway. Medical examination of the survivors has been conducted by the authorities.
