Not just the trauma of rape!

Shivani Pandey's journey has been unique. Starting out as a management professional, her creative soul sought something creative so she learnt photography, a childhood passion, leaving behind a lucrative corporate career. Writing and films followed soon where her focus has been on social issues. In a career spanning more than a decade, she has worked with the most renowned international NGO and her work mostly includes art, culture and public health. Currently, she works independently and has exhibited her artwork and screened her films both in India and the US. Shivani regularly participates in debates and discussions on different platforms, is called in to lecture by various media and journalism universities and colleges and has also been a jury member for prestigious film festivals. LESS ... MORE

The Bollywood film ‘Pink’ was quite a blockbuster where a young woman shows a brat his true place. The girl and her friends even dared to fight the legal battle with all their might. It actually reminded me of the 90’s movies where most rapists were shown as sons of politicians. The scenario in real life around 25 or 30 years later has somehow changed. Now, it’s not the “sons” but a man (about a girl’s father or grandfather’s age) who usually turns out to be a rapist. Moreover, it has somewhere gotten even more complicated with men of religion, and not just any a particular religion, so often getting accused of rapes by young women.

Rapes and crimes against women continue to happen in our country, in fact, they seem to be increasing at an alarming rate. It seems all the talk of “what is not forbidden and hidden loses its charm”, has totally lost its meaning in this country. Psychologists believe, with increased exposure to nudity, one feels less curious or violent towards the opposite sex and is in better control over his carnal desires, since it is so readily available. There is no dearth of explicit content easily available all over the internet but has it changed anyone’s mindset? I doubt.

So, it is basically one’s upbringing and much more that is involved and no blanket statement can hold true for a majority of people. I think a lot of this abuse of power is related with men’s belief that women are not equal to them. In the rural patriarchal upbringing at least, this seems the case.

Perhaps they have grown up watching films from the 70’s where you see in a lame shot, a villain is lying on his stomach by the poolside getting a massage from skimpily clad women. Apparently, it is this ‘bada aadmi=big man’ complex that forces men to behave like this, as soon as they get some money. Ridiculous to say the least.

I mean honestly, having been initiated on the righteous path don’t these so-called saints feel disturbed by an unwilling person’s vibe of fear and insecurity around them? Especially since they claim to be connected with a higher power. I think a regular common man with the slightest of intuition would back off whether it is an unwilling friend, spouse/ partner or simply an employee no more interested in working with you.

Alas! This is India and men here are different. Even if they are following the path of spirituality and religion, they are somehow born obsessed with a woman’s body. Most women would agree to being ogled at by men at the most unexpected of places. I recently had a situation where a senior 70 something could not keep his eyes off me. This was when I was sitting much on the side and as such nowhere in the line of sight in a conversation between two male professionals, that too in a highly formal setting.

Of course this is nowhere close to voyeurism or harassment that so many women have to face on a daily basis, however, it is still plain simple embarrassing. I can’t imagine if I ever have to work under a boss like that and where it could lead. I’m fortunate to have always been in an independent work situation though I can totally get it how trapped a woman must feel if she has to be in a setting where a senior, a boss or a teacher is abusing his power.

Indian men are special because unlike the West, here they have been brought up with a sense of entitlement over women. In fact, many only feel satiated after exercising a certain violence towards women, it could be something as trivial as being rude and nasty. This for them shows a woman her true place which is far below a man’s.

If they are not violent they will ridicule a woman and feel a sense of pride. It could be her driving skills or the way she arranges her paperwork, as per men, women have to be watched out. A simple task like taking a print out or ordering something over the phone or internet is a big deal for men, who would insist that a woman follows their 15 steps to-do-instructions to accomplish such a no brainer.

It seems Indian men can never fully trust a woman to be responsible and would lecture a woman on minutest of things. It is as if women have not moved out of kindergarten and without constant lecturing by men they would not survive a day. This is very unlike in other parts of the world where men look up to women for their organisation skills.

And so when on trips to the states, American friends ask me what’s with rapes and gang-rapes in India? … I really don’t know where to look. With more and more religious leaders getting accused of rapes it’s an unspoken fact that I come from a country of rapists totally unsafe for women. People ask “how do you manage being a woman in India? It’s unsafe you know.” I can understand where they are coming from and it is not without a reason.

All the sense of pride that I gain when our dynamic and impressive Prime Minister visits the United States and awes most Americans goes deep down a drain when I have to face such questions. Americans who recently termed Modi an ‘authentic leader’ are not so pleasant when they discuss crimes against women in our country.

It is beyond crazy when a rape survivor is punished for raising her voice against a powerful debauch. It takes a lot of courage by a less exposed woman from a small town to boldly put across her agony. The case takes such a silly turn even when the supreme court is involved. Last I heard the SIT constituted to investigate former Union minister Chinmayanand is not sure if it was rape. This is when he has himself admitted to being ashamed of his actions. Surprisingly, they have enough evidence of extortion attempts by the woman.

The most sensational Nirbhaya case that shook the world has been shoved under the carpet when the accused should have been hanged long ago for such a heinous crime. It is also astounding since none of the accused involved belongs to the privileged class. So it is as if no one wants to send across any stern message to deter prospective rapists. As a fact, the juvenile involved was let free with some kind of support and money to rehabilitate him. As if he can get reformed in a few years that he spent in a correctional facility. In America, he would have been tried as an adult in the first place and easily got at least 150 years imprisonment. This is to ensure he is born reformed in his next life as he is beyond repair in this one.

It cannot be stressed enough that rape or any kind of violence – physical, mental or emotional, causes immense trauma to the victim. Especially, in a situation where the accused is very powerful, it is not only the physical and mental pain but also the feeling of helplessness. It won’t be wrong to say it becomes an important public health crisis, capable of turning so many women psychologically disturbed, if rapes continue to increase. My heart goes out to all women going through such an ordeal. Lately, the victims of Swami Chinmayanand and Kuldeep Singh Senger, BJP MLA, in the Unnao rape case.

In India, things are slowly changing with men in a metropolitan environment getting better exposure. Of course, it has to be an inner journey that we need to take and address the underlying issues. Men have to be brought up thinking everyone you see around is an equal. Whether a man, woman or transgender, we are all really souls on our respective paths. This is because rape or any crime against a woman is essentially an act of violence exerted towards a weaker individual, either weaker by strength or position.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
