INX media case: Delhi High Court dismisses Chidambaram's bail plea

INX media case: Delhi High Court dismisses Chidambaram's bail plea

The former Finance Minister and senior congress leader was arrested by the CBI in a money laundering case related to INX media.

news INX media

The Delhi High Court on Monday dismissed the bail petition filed by former Finance Minister and senior Congress leader P. Chidambaram in the INX Media case.

Justice Suresh Kumar Kait dismissed the bail on the grounds that after being a member of the Bar and of Parliament, "there is a chance that he may influence the witnesses".

However, the court observed that Chidambaram is not at flight risk and is not likely to tamper with the evidence.

Kait dismissed the order after hearing the arguments from both the sides.

During the course of hearing, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta stated, "We are at a stage where we have exposed our evidence to him as we have confronted the accused and hence, the risk of tampering and influencing is much higher."

He submitted, "Some people are in so powerful position that their mere presence can influence the witnesses."

"To say that I am a responsible and respected citizen is not an argument altogether. Those who have fleeced the country are the ones who are respected and responsible and having business empire and what not," the Solicitor General observed.

Sibal opposed the claims of the prosecution and said that Chidambaram is not at flight risk, there is no evidence of him tampering with evidence.

"After spending 40 days in prison, he will flee? They have to justify each day of incarceration. What is it that you cannot do outside jail but can do inside it," said Singhvi on behalf of Chidambaram.

Chidambaram and his son Karti Chidambaram were named in the case by Peter and Indrani Mukerjea, who are currently in jail in Mumbai in connection with the murder of Indrani's daughter Sheena Bora.

The ED too had filed a money laundering case against Chidambaram in this regard in 2017.

Chidambaram has been lodged in Jail No 7 of the Tihar jail, which is meant for economic offenders.

He was sent to judicial custody by a Delhi court after his arrest on August 21 by the Central Bureau of Investigation for alleged irregularities in granting FIPB clearance of Rs 305 crore to INX Media, now known as 9x news, during his tenure as Finance Minister. Chidambaram is also being probed by the Enforcement Directorate in a money laundering case relating to INX Media.

Several senior leaders of the Congress including former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Congress interim President Sonia Gandhi, leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad and senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel visited Chidamabaram in jail.

Earlier, senior Congress leader Jairam Ramesh on Friday also accused the government of planning a conspiracy to "defame and character assassinate" Chidambaram in the case.

The Congress has termed the charges against Chidambaram a "paramount example of political vendetta".
