Snatching-accused commits suicide at Ludhiana Central Jail

Jaswinder Singh excused himself to go to the washroom and committed suicide (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A snatching accused who had been taken into custody attempted suicide at the Ludhiana Central Jail Jaswinder Singh Jassa was taken to the hospital but he died after some time The jail superintendent has claimed that Jaswinder Singh was a drug addict

Ludhiana: A man who had been arrested for his alleged involvement in a snatching case attempted suicide inside the Ludhiana Central Jail. The man died on Saturday while treatment was being administered to him. He has been identified as Jaswinder Singh Jassa.

The deceased, Jaswinder Singh Jassa was a resident of Doraha in Ludhiana. He had allegedly snatched the earrings of a woman. On September 22, an FIR had been registered in relation to the incident and he was sent to jail by the court on Friday.

Rajiv Arora, jail superintendent said that on Friday evening, Jaswinder Singh had been sent to jail, as per court orders. According to Arora, Jaswinder Singh was addicted to heroin. Within hours of his arrest, Jaswinder Singh started feeling unwell. The staff present inside the jail then took Jaswinder Singh to the jail hospital. On Saturday, Jaswinder Singh excused himself to go to the washroom and allegedly attempted suicide.

Narrating the incident, Rajiv Arora said, "On Friday evening he was brought to jail and got unwell. We admitted him to the jail hospital. He tried to hang himself with grills in the washroom but some other inmates saw him and rescued him. He was taken to the Civil Hospital but due to serious condition, he was referred to the Christian Medical College and Hospital (CMCH). But more than hanging, his condition deteriorated because of an addiction problem. He died undergoing treatment at CMCH."

According to Arora, Jaswinder Singh had a history of criminal cases. He had initially been convicted in another case and had come out of jail recently, after completing his punishment. He added, "We have got to know that his family had boycotted him due to which he was depressed too." His body has been handed over to his family. An inquiry has been ordered into the case.

Tuition teacher booked under POCSO hangs himself in Punjab's Muktsar jail

A similar incident came to light from Punjab when a man booked under POCSO Act allegedly hanged himself to death within the premises of the Muktsar jail in July this year. Identified as Tarlochan, the deceased had been taken to custody after his minor student accused him of rape.

The minor girl used to take tuitions from him. After he was sent to jail, Tarlochan also started teaching inmates. On the day of the incident, when the inmates went for their classes, they found Tarlochan hanging from a window.
