Priyanka Chopra's New Production About A Woman With PTSD To Premiere On Netflix

Priyanka is one seriously busy woman. Between planning the most extra wedding ever to mini-mooning in Oman, she's always on the move.

And now she can add 'Reasons Why We're Still Binging On Netflix' to the list. The actress has produced a film called Firebrand, which will premiere on everyone's favourite streaming platform this month.

Excitingly, this marks Netflix's first licensed original film in Marathi (an Indo-Aryan language spoken in India).

This content is imported from Instagram. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.

The film follows the life of a successful and ambitious lawyer - played by Indian actress Usha Jadhav - who is a sexual assault survivor dealing with PTSD.

She tackles difficult family cases while also coping with intimacy issues in her own marriage. According to a press release, the film 'revolves around trials and tribulations of contemporary modern-day relationships'.

The female-led drama is also Priyanka and her mother Madhu Chopra's first digital venture with their production house Purple Pebble Pictures.

This content is imported from Instagram. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.

While promoting the film, Priyanka and Madhu praised Netflix for promoting diversity and accepting all genres.

'The age of digital has changed the way we consume content,' the actress said. 'Today, the story is king and audiences are open to and accepting of all kinds of genres.

'We scroll for content that appeals to our mood and mind, equally. This definitely was one of the major reasons behind our move of taking our latest Marathi project Firebrand straight to Netflix. A story like Firebrand deserves to reach audiences far and wide and I'm thrilled to be bringing this to Netflix.'

This content is imported from Instagram. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.

While Madhu added: 'Firebrand is packaged with a gripping, powerful narrative along with an ensemble of talented actors and we are truly excited that this story will reach millions of diverse Netflix members.

'We are delighted to have Netflix as a partner that will help us take this meaningful cinema to new audiences across the globe.'

Happy binging, people.

This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
