Thane: Cab driver rapes 50-year-old ashram volunteer, arrested

The cab driver raped the woman when she was returning to her house from ashram on foot around 7 pm in the evening. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Cab driver arrested for raping ashram worker Incident occurred on June 23 in Ulhasnagar area of Thane district

Thane: A cab driver has been arrested for allegedly raping a 50-year-old ashram volunteer working in the Kalyan area of Thane district in Maharashtra.

The crime took place on June 23 when the woman was returning home in Ulhasnagar.

According to a report, the matter came to light after a friend of the 28-year-old cab driver told the police during interrogation that he had accompanied the accused to the crime spot the next day to search for his lost wallet.

Police said that the cab driver raped the woman when she was returning to her house from an ashram on foot around 7 pm in the evening.

The accused dragged the victim to an isolated place and violated her. The traumatised and injured woman later reached Central Hospital in Ulhasnagar for treatment.

According to Titwala police, a case of rape was registered against the unidentified accused on the same day.

Since there were no CCTV cameras in the area, the police during the investigation interacted with several local people in the area to identify the accused.

The police also scanned the Call Record Details (CRD) of the several suspects to nab the accused.

"During the course of the investigation, we interrogated several people including labourers, construction workers, slum dwellers. A man from Varap told us that he and his friend Lakhan Devkar had gone to the place mentioned by the police to pick up his wallet. We then arrested Devkar from his house in Pune district," said Balaji Pandhare, a senior inspector of Titwala police station.

50-year-old teacher arrested for allegedly molesting four-year-old student

In a similar incident in July this year, Amritsar Police arrested a 50-year old school teacher for allegedly molesting a four-year-old girl inside the school in Neshtha village.

The victim's mother Rajinder Kaur told the police that her younger daughter aged four came home and complained of pain in the stomach. The survivor told her mother that a teacher there improperly touched her private parts. Based on the woman's complaint, an FIR was registered under Section 376, 201 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
