Cong’s UP march scuttled, 80 held

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, September 30

About 80 Congress workers, including leaders Sushmita Dev, Aradhana Misra, Ajay Kumar Lallu, Jitin Prasada, were arrested today after being denied permission for a “Nyay Yatra” demanding justice for the Shahjahanpur rape survivor.

The Congress has planned a 180-km march from Shahjahanpur to Lucknow in support of the law student who has accused the BJP’s Chinmayanand of rape.

The workers en route to the Shahjahanpur were arrested from Bareilly, Lakhimpur Kheri and Lucknow. The district borders of Shahjahanpur were blocked from all sides. Irked at being denied permission for the march, Congress workers protested on roads and some of them climbed a water tank to show their resentment against the district administration.

Shahjahanpur City Magistrate Vineeta Singh said they had denied permission for the march as the venue, from where the “Nyay Yatra” was scheduled to begin, was “too small to accommodate 2,000 people”.

Later, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra criticised the arrests. “The BJP government of UP is standing with the one committing atrocities on daughters and is taking protesting Congressmen into custody,” Rahul tweeted.

“The UP Government is nervous,” said Priyanka Gandhi. In a series of tweets, she accused the government of tearing democracy apart in its arrogance. “The UP BJP government wants to suppress the voices seeking justice for the daughter of Shahjahanpur. The padyatra is being stopped. Our workers and leaders are being arrested. What is there to be afraid of?

“As soon as they learn about the protest against them, they promulgate 144. Please give justice to the daughter of Shahjahanpur. Stop protecting your minister,” she tweeted.

Prasada, too, tweeted: “UP is no Kashmir, yet today I am in preventive custody for simply wanting to highlight the plight of the Shahjahanpur rape victim. This BJP government has no qualms in quashing an individual’s fundamental rights"

All India Mahila Congress president Sushmita Dev said women security and law and order were in a bad shape under the Yogi government and when the Congress wanted to highlight these, it was prevented.

Congress leaders PL Punia and Akhilesh Pratap Singh claimed that 5,000 Congress workers had been arrested in the state. They said Priyanka Gandhi Vadra had called upon party workers to hold district-level protests on Tuesday.

(with agency inputs)
