Punjab: 15-year-old rape survivor gives birth to stillborn baby, accused arrested

The victim was admitted to the hospital after her condition deteriorated. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Minor rape survivor gives birth to stillborn baby at Ludhiana hospital Matter came to light after the girl told her family about the rape The girl was sexually assaulted on Holi this year

Ludhiana: Police have arrested a man for allegedly raping and impregnating a 15-year-old girl in Ludhiana district of Punjab. On Monday, the minor rape survivor gave birth to a stillborn baby at the Ludhiana hospital.

The matter came to light after the girl told her family about the rape. The victim's family later found out that she was six months pregnant. The accused is married and has three children.

According to a report, the girl was sexually assaulted on Holi this year. The girl was alone at home when the accused barged into her home and raped her.

According to police, the accused threatened to kill the victim if she informed anyone about the sexual assault.

A First Information Report (FIR) was registered after the parents of the victim approached the police. The accused was booked under Sections 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Sections 3, 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The victim was admitted to the hospital after her condition deteriorated and she gave birth to a stillborn child.

In a similar incident in May this year, a minor girl gave birth to a premature baby after being raped in Sikar district of Rajasthan. After the birth of the child, the police found out that the woman had been raped. The girl had been pregnant for seven months.

The pregnancy of the girl came to light after she had a stomachache. Treatment revealed that the girl had been pregnant since the past seven months.

The accused was booked after a complaint was lodged by the girl and her parents. The accused was identified as Amir Qazi, a neighbour of the victim.

After investigations, the police booked the accused under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for rape and under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The girl did not disclose the incident to her parents because she was scared of the stigma she might face.
