Neet impersonation: Student on the run surrenders before court

Salem: The first-year MBBS student, who has been allegedly on the run fearing arrest over impersonation in the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET), surrendered before a judicial magistrate in Salem on Tuesday morning. A student of Dharmapuri government medical college, he has been remanded in judicial custody till October 9.

The accused, Mohammed Irfan, of Vaniyambadi in Vellore district, had been on the run since September 7 after a Theni government medical college student was arrested in a similar case. Like the Theni student, Irfan too was accused of using an impersonator to write NEET.

The CB-CID police had arrested Irfan’s father Mohammed Rafi alias Raja, 46, on September 29. Based on the information he revealed during inquiry, police officials had hatched a plan to nab the student in Salem on Monday. “Meanwhile, he surrendered before the judicial magistrate number-2 K S S Siva,” said a CB-CID official from Salem district.

Earlier, the Salem district CB-CID officials attempted to initiate an inquiry with Irfan. However, the move was opposed by Irfan’s advocate Srinivasan and a few others. They also asked police to interrogate the student after taking him under police custody.

Talking to media persons, Srinivasan said the student was studying MBBS in Mauritius and not in Dharmapuri government medical college. “However, the CB-CID police arrested Irfan’s father in connection with the impersonation case,” he said and alleged police were torturing Irfan’s father to give a confessional statement that his son was involved in the impersonation issue.

The advocate also said the student was in Mauritius and he came down to Bengaluru on Tuesday morning and reached Salem around 12pm. “After reaching Salem, he immediately surrendered before the judicial magistrate.” The advocate also said Irfan surrendered only because of continuous torture.

However, when CB-CID asked whether he had come down from Mauritius, Irfan just nodded his head in negative.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
