Row in TISS Hyderabad: Group of students allege they are being targeted, institute denies

On September 28, 23-year-old Shruthy Harilal, a Dalit student pursuing her Masters in Development Science in Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) wrote an extremely disturbing Facebook post, stating that she or her friends might end up killing themselves, like Dr Payal Tadvi and Rohit Vemula, alleging harassment by the administration and by some students. Shruthy said that false allegations were being levelled six students, including her.

“What do you want? What exactly do you want? You, yes all of YOU here are knowingly making a Rohit Vemula and Dr Payal Tadvi amongst us. I am not saying for the sake of it. But this is the mental state where all of YOU have pushed us to. And if at all it happens, YOU are responsible for it. This is the mental state that each one of us is going through for the past two months,” Shruthy said in her post.

Shruthy is one of the six students along with Joel Thomas Mathews, Prabakaran, Arvind Karthick, Anand Pillay, and Shaik Nafaaz, who were summoned by the TISS administration on September 25 for allegedly discriminating against two students – Vedant Kaul and Bitoo Kumar – on the basis of caste, religion and language. Bitoo Kumar is a Dalit, while Vedant Kaul is a Kashmiri Pandit. Of the six students accused of discrimination, two are Dalits, one belongs to OBC community, and two belong to religious minorities. The students have also been accused of physical assault, bullying, and defamation. “I myself am a Dalit woman, how will I discriminate others on the basis of caste?” Shruthy asked.

These six students were in the forefront of the agitation in July demanding the withdrawal of the fee hike for SC and ST students. They now allege that the administration is using these two complainants to make false allegations against them, and harass them mentally.

Speaking to TNM, Shruthy said that Dr Murali Krishna Mallepaku, convener of SC, ST and Equal Opportunity Cell, held a grudge against them during the protests. “No student could approach him, because of how intimidating he was. But during the protests we called him out, for which he has held a grudge against us.” Shruthy claimed.

Among the six students who were summoned, Shruthy and Prabakaran are Dalits. Shruthy alleged that the administration carefully picked them since they were not scholarship availing students.

“Knowing that if they would target other scholarship availing Dalit students, they would be under trouble, they have picked us,” she alleged.

Shruthy also said that CCTV footage and statements from other students who were present during the alleged incidents of discrimination would prove that the complaints were false.

The conflict between these students

The conflict between the complainants and the six students arose during the protests in July.

“I was part of the protest, but our differences cropped up when these students wanted to prolong the strike despite the principle demands being met,” said Vedant, one of the complainants. Vedant alleges that ever since he took a stand differing with the views of the protesting students, he was harassed constantly. “They twist my words, indulge in name-calling, call us puppets of institutions, defame us on social media,” he claimed.

Bitoo, who was the former students’ council chairperson, alleged, “On July 11, at least 70 students barged into my hostel, and threatened me. They said, ‘You have to decide’. They wanted me to pressure into continuing with the protest, which I refused to.”
