Junior partner at law firm DLA Piper says her boss sexually assaulted her four times

A junior partner at a major global law firm has accused her boss of recruiting her with promises that she would soon rise up the ranks above him, only to sexually assault her four times and have nothing done when she reported the abuse.

Vanina Guerrero took her grievances to the US Equal Opportunity Commission. She alleged gender discrimination, including 'quid pro quo' and hostile-environment sexual harassment, and that she was retaliated against.

The complaint names Louis Lehot, a DLA Piper co-managing partner of the $2.8 billion multinational firm's Silicon Valley office, as her abuser, according to Law.com.

Attorney Vanina Guerrero, pictured above, has accused her boss at the law firm DLA Piper of recruiting her with promises that she would soon rise up the ranks above him, only to sexually assault her four times and have nothing done in her defense when she reported the abuse

Guerrero took her grievances to the US Equal Opportunity Commission, where she filed a complaint that names Louis Lehot, a DLA Piper co-managing partner of the $2.8 billion multinational firm's Silicon Valley office (pictured above), as her abuser

Guerrero wrote an open letter to the firm Wednesday, asking to be released from a mandatory arbitration, indicating that she'd rather file a civil claim against Lehot for assault, battery, and sexual harassment.

The young attorney's complaint alleges that Lehot had recruited her in September 2018 from her plum position as general counsel for an Asian telecommunications firm, calling her a 'star' and promising that she would rise up the ranks quickly. He told her 'you'll be my boss soon,' she recalled.

By November, the complaint alleges she had already suffered the four sexual assaults.

'I went from working in Hong Kong as general counsel and the top female executive at a global tech company to being abused by [the partner],' she wrote in her open letter.

'During my entire career I was known for my intellect, tenacity and confidence,' Guerrero added. 'In less than nine months at DLA Piper... I became a shell of my former self,' she wrote, according to the Daily Beast.

Guerrero was hired to work out of the firm's Silicon Valley practice after previously working for Reliance Communications, a telecommunications firm that is part of the Indian conglomerate Reliance Group, and its internet and technology subsidiary.

The complaint alleges that after Lehot brought her on-board at DLA Piper, she noticed how he was prone to 'temper tantrums in and out of the office,' involving yelling, cursing, and clenched fists, according to the complaint.

Lehot, on a business trip in Shanghai, asked Guerrero to join him in his hotel room to discuss business matters, she claims. At the time, he had had several glasses of wine, and offered her a foot massage, according to the complaint.

Guerrero wrote an open letter to DLA Piper Wednesday, asking to be released from a mandatory arbitration, indicating that she'd rather file a civil claim against Lehot for assault, battery, and sexual harassment

Guerrero says in her complaint that Lehot had recruited her from her plum position as general counsel for an Asian telecommunications firm, calling her a 'star' and promising that she would rise up the ranks quickly. He told her 'you'll be my boss soon,' she recalled.

'Before she knew what was happening, he had her lying down on the couch with his body next to her, physically hugging and groping her,' the complaint reads. 'Upset and in shock, Ms. Guerrero told him "no" and ran out of the room.'

Panicked and in a state of disbelief, Guerrero stayed silent because she didn't expect any future advances. However, they continued the following week, she alleges.

While on a plane to Brazil, Lehot revealed he had feelings for her, the complaint claims, causing her race to a bathroom where she burst into tears.

Later at their hotel, Lehot had his room upgraded so they could work together, she alleges. She said she also learned two male colleagues on the trip would not be joining them for dinner.

During the meal at a 'romantic restaurant,' where Lehot 'attempted to tell her things about his personal life' Guerrero became so upset she began sobbing uncontrollably and both had to leave the establishment.

'Back at the hotel, undeterred and seeing her in a vulnerable state,' Lehot insisted they have a drink in his room, where he repeated what he was alleged to have done in Shanghai, the complaint says, reports the Daily Beast.

Guerrero wrote in her open letter that she has a track record of working as a successful corporate lawyer for top global companies on Wall Street, and in Paris, Hong Kong, Beijing, Tanzania and India. She is pictured above with former US President Jimmy Carter

'Trapped, in distress, and aware of his temper, Ms. Guerrero believed the best way to protect herself was to allow his physical assault rather than fight back.'

On another trip in Chicago, Lehot again invited Guerrero to work in his room, and this time 'jumped on' her, placed his hands on her neck, kissed her and played with the zipper of his pants, according to the complaint.

'I don't want to wait anymore. Look, the bed is right there, Let's have an affair,' he allegedly told her.

By November of 2018, Lehot is accused of pushing 'a never-ending supply of alcohol' on Guerrero during a party at his Palo Alto home. He is later accused of grabbing her in his kitchen and trying to kiss and rub against her.

The complaint details how Guerrero screamed and pushed her boss off her, yelling at him to stop, but that he continued and tried to restrain her. Lehot would later claim he was crushed by her rejection and sobbed all night, the complaint says.

Guerrero, in her open letter, says she was 'petrified' to disclose what had happened and feared Lehot's retaliation.

He came to her saying rumors were circulating about them and that her 'sexual appeal,' and dressing habits were making male clients and other lawyers 'uncomfortable,' according to her complaint.

After one rejection, Lehot allegedly threatened her job, position and compensation.

The abuse left Guerrero hospitalized with severe intestinal problems in June, and later this summer suffering post-traumatic stress disorder from Lehot's alleged bullying.

The complaint alleges that Lehot's behavior was 'common knowledge' among employees and other partners in the Palo Alto office. Those partners, including three other senior male partners, failed to address the problem, she claims.

The three partners, the complaint says, 'opted to marginalize what happened and horrifically—did nothing.' One of them said, according to the complaint, that Guerrero 'was lying and that this was clearly a case of 'he said, she said.'

Guerrero, who speaks five languages, wrote in her open letter that she has a track record of working as a successful corporate lawyer for top global companies on Wall Street, and in Paris, Hong Kong, Beijing, Tanzania and India.

'I excelled and thrived, even in these male dominated spaces,' she adds.

It wasn't until after joining DLA Piper's Silicon Valley office, and suffering the alleged abuse, that she suffered 'such humiliation and harm simply because of my gender.'

'No female working at DLA Piper... should be forced to litigate claims involving sexual assault and battery or sexual harassment by male lawyers in secret,' she wrote. 'Female employees at DLA Piper deserve to know about what happened.'
