Andhra grants special remission to 10 prisoners on Gandhi Jayanti

Andhra grants special remission to 10 prisoners on Gandhi Jayanti

Officials said the prisoners were released after due counselling on the values espoused by Mahatma Gandhi.

news News

Andhra Pradesh granted special remission to 10 convicted prisoners as a humanitarian gesture on the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.

Four convicted prisoners from Rajahmundry Central Prison, two from Visakhapatnam Central Prison and one each from Kadapa Central Prison, Nellore Central Prison, District Jail Vijayawada, and District Jail, Ananthapur were granted remission and released on Tuesday.

An order to this effect was issued by the Home Department, Prisons. Officials said the prisoners were released after due counselling on the values espoused by Mahatma Gandhi.

The remission was ordered in line with the government of India's decision to grant special remission to specific categories of convicted prisoners who have consistently maintained good conduct during their term in prisons.

Nearly 600 prisoners, convicted of offences other than murder, rape and corruption, were released from 150 jails across the country on Wednesday.

A standing committee was constituted to review the list of eligible convicted prisoners and recommend to the government for consideration. The Director General of Prisons and Correctional Services, Andhra Pradesh, had sent to the Home Department the prison wise list of convicted prisoners eligible for release.

However, around 80 convicts selected from jails in Maharashtra and Haryana, will have to wait for their release. With the announcement of Assembly elections in the state and the model code of conduct coming into force, their release date has been shifted till the elections get over.

India remembered the father of the nation on his sesquicentennial on Wednesday with various events and 'padyatras', even as the day saw the BJP and the Congress trying to claim the legacy of Mahatma Gandhi in their tributes to him.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi led the nation in paying tribute to Gandhi, with an early morning visit to Raj Ghat. Later, Congress interim President Sonia Gandhi and President Ram Nath Kovind, and Vice President Venkaiah Naidu followed in offering their respects at the samadhi.

IANS inputs
