Jadavpur University Student Alleges Assault by ABVP Supporters: Report

New Delhi: A second-year student at Jadavpur University Debanjan Ballav has alleged that he and his girlfriend had been attacked by ABVP supporters at a bus stand near Burdwan, West Bengal according to a report in Times of India.

Ballav came into public attention after BJP MP and Union minister Babul Supriyo claimed that he had been heckled by students of Jadavpur University (JU) and tweeted a picture of Debanjan Ballav pulling his hair during the incident.

Ballav’s mother, a cancer patient, had then appealed to the minister to not destroy her son’s career. Supriyo then responded by saying,“I will not harm your son in any way.”

Ballav, who is a resident of Raina, a village 35 km from the town of Burdwan, claimed that some ABVP supporters had pulled him and his girlfriend out from a bus and assaulted them at the bus stand.

Ballav said that the incident took place when he and his girlfriend were returning home from Kolkata. “At Alisha bus stand, some people arrived and prevented us from boarding a bus. We pushed them aside and entered. Then they pulled us down and assaulted us,” Ballav said in the complaint.

Speaking to Indian Express Bangla, Debanjan Ballav said, “BJP goons have attacked like cowards after being alone in the darkness of night. I got to know one. Shyam was a BJP leader. He also threatened again, saying he had done enough”.

Also read: Babul Supriyo at Jadavpur University: Imagining Universities as Temples

Speaking to TOI, Babul Supriyo said that he “would ask these guys to grow up as human beings”.

“That day, I was assaulted and the extent was such that I had to undergo an MRI. Despite that I didn’t lodge any complaint, nor did I allow anyone from my party to lodge an FIR. I responded to his mother’s plea and assured her that no harm would be done to her son,” Supriyo said.

“In return, what did this student do? He was not even repentant. If we had any intention to beat him, we would have done it the next day. He is doing drama to stay in the limelight. If this is a return for my gesture, it is unfortunate,” Supriyo told TOI.

The spokesperson for ABVP, Saptarshi Sarkar denied involvement in the incident. “We don’t have any such information,” he said and added, “It is nothing but an effort to get unnecessary mileage”.

Ballav, however, insisted that he was attacked by the ABVP.

“After the youths who assaulted us moved away from the spot, one person, who claimed to be the leader of the group, said they would not spare me ‘if I did this again’,” Ballav said and added that this clarified whom the youths supported. “They wanted to take revenge,” he said.

The superintendent of police for East Burdwan said,” We have lodged a complaint and raids are on nab the culprits”. As a safety measure, Ballav and his girlfriend have been sent back to Kolkata.
