As city worships the goddess, woman assaulted by Durga Puja committee member in heart of Kolkata

The thirty feet lane is completely blocked with the pandal

Key Highlights When the lady started recording the incident, the general secretary of the committee allegedly assaulted her Durga puja committees in West Bengal not only receive political patronage but also monetary aid from the state exchequer WB Police has filed charges under Sections 354 and 509 of IPC (outraging modesty of a woman) against the accused

Kolkata: A 35-year-old woman was physically assaulted allegedly by a Durga Puja committee member in broad daylight near Sealdah in Kolkata on Tuesday. Two days after she registered a police complaint, where charges under Sections 354 and 509 of IPC (outraging modesty of a woman) were pressed, the police is yet to take any action against the alleged perpetrators.

The woman had to suffer assault only because she raised an objection that the Puja pandal structure was blocking entrance to her restaurant and many other shops in the neighbourhood, thereby affecting their businesses during this festive period.

"I am shocked by the way Vinod Sonkar (general secretary of the puja committee) pounced on me. I was filming their act of defiance, how they expedited their pandal work after police came and intervened and asked them to stop. They wanted to prove that they are the bosses of the locality and they don't care about the law. He hit me notwithstanding that I am a woman. He wanted to snatch my mobile. He kept on shouting that he is the boss and is the administration. Not once but he kept on repeating that no one can ever do anything to him," said the woman recounting her horror.

The woman, a patient of chronic autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis, said that she had collected signatures of eight more shop owners to make their objection more effective.

Hours before the alleged assault, the woman went to Munchipara police station to draw the attention of the administration. An officer from Muchipara police station had visited the spot and had, in turn, asked the members of Nayapalli Sealdah Sarbojanin, the puja committee, to push off by few meters so that the footpath can be freed up for people to walk and for shops too, to do business.

Soon after the officer left, the woman alleged that the finishing work of the pandal was rushed up without shifting even by an inch. When the lady was recording the incident with her mobile phone, Vinod Sonkar, the general secretary of the committee, allegedly assaulted the woman.

The woman till a few years ago was an active political worker of the Indian National Congress but she resigned from the party a year ago.

“Before anyone alleges let me tell you this is not political at all. I am an individual and just not me but there are others who are suffering too. This puja is being organised here only for the past seven years. After I had complained to the committee in 2017 they had obliged to my request. But this time even after repeated requests they didn't pay any heed. Durga Puja is for me as well, why should I object against Pujo? But someone's celebration should not lead to someone else's inconvenience,” said the woman who claims she was hit on her chest repeatedly, her hands were twisted abused.

The thirty feet or so long lane is completely blocked with the pandal. The bamboo structure has even taken the support of the thatch of the adjoining shops on the footpath. The safety guidelines say adequate space has to be left by the organisers to ensure free movement in case there happens anything untoward. With no help from the police, the woman even dialled the hotline 'Didi k Bolo', one that Mamata Banerjee has launched to hear public grievances.

"I have even reached out to our chief minister. She is a woman herself and maybe she will understand my plight. The puja committee can not be above law and no one should be given impunity for his political allegiance," she said. "Maybe it is too late for them to rectify or make amends with the panda. Pujo has started. But my assault is real, the scars of which will not go away even after Pujo is over. I want justice," the lady added.

Local shopkeepers in the area remain tight-lipped about it. " Vinod often claims his allegiance with Trinamool Congress as an intimidating tactic. We are scared of raising our voices. Look at the pandal, it has occupied the entire stretch of the road. There is hardly any space even to walk. What if there is any fire in this lane?" a shop-keeper said on condition of anonymity.

In the past few years, Durga puja committees in West Bengal have not only received political patronage but also monetary aid from the state exchequer. This year the chief minister announced that doles to puja committees will be increased to Rs 25,000 each, costing total Rs 70 crore to the state exchequer.
