Fight breaks out among Matuas over NRC

Two groups of followers of a Dalit sect had a fight on Tuesday on the possible effects of National Register of Citizens (NRC) in West Bengal, resulting in many injuries. This is for first time that the two sects of Matua Mahasangha, a socio-religious body of a predominantly Dalit refugee sect, the Matuas, fought publicly, “tarnishing” the image of the apolitical body, followers said.

About 40-45 lakh Matua voters are spread over nearly 50 of the 294 Assembly segments in West Bengal.

On Tuesday, one section of the Matuas, headed by the Matua Mahasangha’s chairperson Mamatabala Thakur, convened a meeting in its headquarters at Thakurnagar in North 24 Paraganas, about 70 km north of Kolkata. Ms. Thakur is a former MP of TMC, defeated by her brother-in-law’s son Shantanu Thakur of the BJP in the recent Lok Sabha election.

“Our objective was to make people aware of the possible impact of NRC on people who came from Bangladesh. We also invited Muslims,” a disciple close to Ms. Thakur’s faction said. Mr. Thakur’s faction opposed it and campaigned in the area over the last few days against this meeting that was held to “build up resistance against the NRC”.

Mr. Thakur’s faction allegedly attacked Ms. Thakur’s meeting, which took “a communal turn” as many Muslims were present. “They started shouting Jai Sri Ram and asked why Muslims are allowed to come inside Thakurbari [the headquarters],” the disciple said. They alleged that their leader Sukriti Ranjan Biswas was also beaten up. The other faction, led by Mr. Thakur, denied the allegation.

“They [Ms. Thakur’s faction] held the meeting in the venue even though we were scheduled to hold a meeting there. Moreover, they got Muslims to enter Thakurbari.” said another disciple who is close to Mr. Thakur. He also added that Ms. Thakur’s faction was “spreading false news” about NRC despite BJP president Amit Shah’s statement.

“Mr. Shah said that there won’t be any NRC in Bengal and they [Ms. Thakur’s faction] were insisting that the BJP will push people out of the country, so we had to protest,” the disciple said.

The scuffle deeply disturbed the followers of the sect and one of the religious chiefs of a group, among the multiple bodies of Matuas, regretted the incident. “Matua Mahasangha was founded on basis of equality to all. We believe that people should not discriminate and fight on basis of religious or political ideology... There should not be a BJP versus TMC division among the Matuas, or else that philosophy is breached,” the chief said.
