NIA chief asks Odisha police to choke terror funding

BHUBANESWAR: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) advised the Odisha police to trace the money trail of Maoists and choke the terror funding to weaken their leadership."Such militants, including terrorists and Maoists cannot survive without money. Maoist activities in Odisha can be checked to a great extent if the police choke their funding. They (Maoists) will be practically finished,” NIA’s director general Yogesh Chander Modi said on the sidelines of a workshop on “capacity building of Odisha police in probing terror-related cases" here on Thursday.Police sources said Maoists in Odisha largely mop up money from ganja cultivation and extortion. Though thousands of acres of ganja plants are being destroyed every year and hundreds of cannabis smugglers arrested annually, the police have so far failed to trace the main sources of funding to Maoists.Saying that the Left-Wing Extremism (LWE) related violence are well under control in Odisha, Modi asked the state police to refer sensitive Maoist-related and suspected terror cases to NIA for investigation. Official sources said the NIA had taken up investigation into two cases from Odisha in the last seven years. The NIA in June 2012 took up probe into killings of four BSF personnel, including a commandant in a Maoist ambush in Malkangiri district. In December 2015, the NIA was probing the burning of three empty trains by a suspected terror group at Puri. Subsequently, the NIA ruled out any terror link with the train arson offence.Modi denied any terror funding was so far sourced from Odisha. Significantly, in November 2017, the NIA raided house of a resident at Samantrapur village in Cuttack district, suspecting his link with a terror outfit. In November, 2018, the NIA arrested Habibur Rahaman, a native of Kendrapada district, from Delhi for his alleged link with a terror outfit. The Odisha police were jittery after the Delhi police arrested suspected al-Qaida operative Abdul Rehman from Paschima Kachha area in Cuttack district on December 16, 2015.Odisha DGP B K Sharma said the NIA training workshop will help the state police to improve the quality of investigation into terror and LWE-related cases. “We will also consider the NIA DG’s proposal to send our personnel on deputation to the premier anti-terror agency,” Sharma said. ADG (Crime Branch) Santosh Upadhyay said around 100 police personnel, who were trained by the NIA, would share their experience with colleagues in police stations to probe such sensitive cases.
