Unnao victim was gang-raped by 3, week after she was raped by Kuldeep Singh Sengar: CBI

Protests demand justice for Unnao gang-rape victim (File photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Main accused in Unnao gang-rape case Kuldeep Singh Sengar is behind bars Police said the victim was gang-raped by three people a week after June 4 incident when she was raped by Sengar The case will come up for hearing on October 10 at Delhi's Tiz Hazari Court

New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Thursday named three persons in the charge-sheet filed in the Unnao gang-rape case. The three suspects have been accused of gang-raping the Unnao victim after June 4 ordeal she faced in Uttar Pradesh in 2017, the investigative agency alleged.

The three people accused in the charge-sheet were Naresh Tiwari, Brijesh Yadav Singh and Shubham Singh – all three are out on bail. As per the charge-sheet, the three persons named allegedly kidnapped and gang-raped the victim a week after June 4 incident.

The investigative agency said the woman was allegedly raped on June 4 by expelled BJP MLA from Bangarmau, Kuldeep Singh Sengar at his house.

Sengar is currently lodged in a jail awaiting trial. The rape victim, who was critically injured in a recent car crash in which she also lost her relatives, has been released from the hospital and alleged a threat to her life.

CBI filed the charge-sheet in Delhi’s Tiz Hazari Court before District Judge Dharmesh Sharma. The case will come up for hearing on October 10 as the investigative agency sought time to file additional documents and a list of witnesses to be examined.

Meanwhile, the victim’s mother also recorded her statement in the Court. The victim’s mother and sister also deposed before District Dharmesh Sharma during in-camera proceedings.

The Supreme Court (SC) on September 25 had directed the investigative agency to complete the probe within 15 days in the case involving the Unnao rape victim, her family members and lawyer. The bench comprising Justices Deepak Gupta and Aniruddha Bose extended the time period after Solicitor General Tushar Mehta sought more time.
