Bhopal: Woman stabbed to death by estranged husband for refusing to remarry

On Thursday, the accused went to the commercial complex where Uzma had been working as a saleswoman (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A woman was allegedly stabbed by her ex-husband in full public view in Madhya Pradesh The accused allegedly stabbed the woman after she refused to remarry him He was arrested using the footage of the CCTV cameras installed nearby

Bhopal: A man allegedly stabbed his ex-wife to death in broad daylight on Thursday in Old City's Mangalwara area of Madhya Pradesh. The incident took place at the entrance of a busy commercial complex. The deceased woman has been identified as Uzma Khan.

Uzma Khan worked as a saleswoman at the commercial complex where she was stabbed. She collapsed after being attacked and was taken to a hospital by her coworkers.

The accused, Shariq Khan has been arrested by the police. Shariq allegedly stabbed his ex-wife to death after she refused to reconcile with him. According to a report, the couple got married in 2006 and are parents to two children.

In February this year, Uzma divorced Shariq Khan and started living away from Shariq. Uzma shifted to her parents' house in Arif Nagar with her daughter while the couple's son kept living with Shariq in Sehore.

In August, Uzma started working at a glassware shop in Itwara. Following this, the accused started asking Uzma to reconcile. Uzma rejected all of Shariq's advances and this led to frequent arguments between the estranged couple.

On Thursday, the accused went to the commercial complex where Uzma had been working as a saleswoman. He kept waiting for her at the complex. When the woman came out, Shariq stabbed her in the chest, abdomen and face.

Following the attack, the accused fled from the spot. Meanwhile, Uzma was admitted to a nearby hospital. During the investigation, the police scanned the CCTV footage of the area and identified the accused. Shariq was arrested from Sehore the same day.

Crazy 'lover' hacks girl to death on busy road

A similar incident came to light from Hyderabad in February this year when a teenage boy allegedly attacked a girl with a sickle. The 19-year-old accused attacked the minor girl after she rejected his proposals. The 17-year-old girl sustained multiple critical injuries in the incident. The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and the Arms Act.

The accused had allegedly been pursuing the girl for around one year. The girl's family had also informed the police about the accused. The girl was returning from her uncle's house when the accused started following her. The girl started running but she fell on a narrow street. The accused eventually caught up with her and attacked her.
