Muslim school teacher roughed up for refusing to say 'Vande Mataram' on Republic Day

Muslim school teacher roughed up for refusing to sing 'Vande Mataram' on Republic Day I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

Patna, Bihar: An altercation broke out between a school teacher and locals at a primary school in Bihar’s Abdullahpur on Wednesday after the former allegedly refused to sing the ‘Vande Mataram’ during the flag hoisting ceremony on the Republic Day. The school teacher, identified as one Afzal Hussain said it is against his religion to sing Vande Mataram, as per ANI.

A video of the scuffle went viral after which Hussain said that he did not sing ‘Vande Mataram’ as it was against his religious belief.

"We believe in Allah and Vande Mataram is against our belief. The term means Vandana of Bharat Mata which is not what we believe in. Nowhere in the Constitution is it written that saying Vande Mataram is necessary. I could have lost my life,” Hussain was quoted by the news agency ANI as saying.

Katihar:Scuffle broke out when a primary school teacher Afzal Hussain refused to sing 'Vande Mataram' on Jan 26;Hussain says,"We worship Allah & Vande Mataram means 'vandana'(worship) of Bharat which is against our belief.Constitution doesn't say it's necessary to sing it".#Bihar pic.twitter.com/JjyEWpGRGt — ANI (@ANI) February 7, 2019

However, district authorities told ANI that there was no complaint regarding the incident. District Education Officer Chandra Dev reportedly said the authorities will investigate the matter if a complaint is made.

The incident comes after Islamic seminary Darul Uloom Deoband issued a diktat on January 25, asking students to venture out on Republic Day at their own risk. A cleric from the organisation also asked its followers not to sing the 'Vande Mataram' or Bharat ki Jai. The reason for the same, according to Deoband, is that in Islam only Allah can be worshipped.

The recent statement comes just two days the religious studies' body asked its followers not the venture out on Republic Day (January 26) and if they do, not to get into an argument with the Police –and try to resolve the argument in a peaceful manner.
