Two minor victims of sexual assault accused public prosecutor of siding with accused

Both of the girls have approached police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The first case against her was registered on Monday followed by the second on Tuesday ''Marry him or take money', the prosecutor allegedly told one of the victims in 2015 In one of the cases, the accused was acquitted after the prosecution failed to prove its case

Chennai: Even in this day and age, men and women who are victims of sexual assault hesitate to approach the police or the judiciary. Those who cannot afford a legal defence are given a public prosecutor by a court of law. However, a case from Tamil Nadu has raised serious questions at how public prosecutors can subvert justice by using their influence over the complainant and his/her family.

Parents of at least two minor victims of sexual assault have come forward with allegations against a Special Public Prosecutor, accusing her of threatening them to drop the cases against the accused. Both of the families hail from Tamil Nadu's Tiruvallur district. In their complaint to the police, the family has identified Special Public Prosecutor Dhanalakshmi ML of the District Mahila Court.

The matter came to light on Monday when a girl with disabilities approached the police and lodged a complaint against Dhanalakshmi. A minor at the time, the girl was sexually assaulted in 2015 by a school headmaster. After the parents approached the police, a case was registered in this regard. The Special Public Prosecutor in question was assigned to their case.

However, the parents claim that Dhanalakshmi tried to coerce them into taking money from the accused. While they decided to move the Madras High Court, they were told that there is no threat to them and the accused was eventually acquitted after the court found that the prosecutor had failed to prove their case.

A day after the first complaint was registered, another girl approached police with a similar accusation against the Special Public Prosecutor. Now 20-years-old, the girl claimed that she was raped by a neighbour in 2015. About two years later, she was called for chief examination before a magistrate at the Tiruvallur Mahila Court. After the session, Dhanalakshmi made the girl sit next to her rapist and even threatened her that she would prove in court that the girl was in love with the rapist. The girl further alleged that the Special Public Prosecutor asked her either to get married to the accused or take money from him.

It goes without saying that cases such as these not only give the Indian judicial system a bad name but discourage victims of sexual assault from coming forward and seeking justice. A police investigation has been initiated against Dhanalakshmi and more details are awaited as it proceeds further. The accused is yet to comment on the allegations made against her.
