Man held for making fake bomb threats to 4 HCs, brought to Bengaluru for questioning

Man held for making fake bomb threats to 4 HCs, brought to Bengaluru for questioning

The man, who hails from Kanpur, had sent bomb threat letters to the Karnataka, Madras, Kolkata and Bombay High Courts.

news Crime

The Bengaluru police on Friday took into custody a man from Uttar Pradesh who was arrested for allegedly sending fake bomb threats to four high courts in the country as he wanted to extract revenge against his in-laws. The man, identified as M Rajendra Singh (36), was arrested by Chennai police a few days ago and was brought to Bengaluru on Friday for questioning. Bengaluru Police say that he had on September 17 written to the High Courts saying that serial bomb blasts would be carried out on September 30.

The threat letter was sent to the Karnataka, Madras, Kolkata and Bombay High Courts.

Police say that the letter was written under the name of Haardarshan Singh Nagpal, who claimed to be a resident of Moti Nagar in New Delhi. On September 17, the registrar of the Karnataka High Court had filed a complaint with the Vidhana Soudha Police, who began investigating the case.

“I’m a member of International Khalistan Support Group. Accompanied by my son and other members, we will plant explosives in the high courts of Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Kolkata. The blasts will occur simultaneously on September 30,” the letter had stated.

DCP Central Chetan Rathod said that Rajendra Singh, a resident of Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh is an arts graduate and a legal representative at a firm in UP. Upon questioning, Rajendra Singh allegedly confessed to sending the letters in a bid to extract revenge against his in-laws.

Rajendra claimed that his father-in-law Hardarshan Singh Nagpal had allegedly been harassing him. The Bengaluru police brought Rajendra from Chennai, where he was lodged in jail for the same crime.

In June this year, Rajendra had married Hardarshan’s daughter. Over a month after the wedding, she filed a dowry harassment complaint with the Kanpur Police. In order to extract revenge, Rajendra allegedly went to New Delhi and wrote four letters threatening serial bomb blasts. The address he had mentioned was that of Hardarshan on the envelopes.

“My family members and I were summoned by Delhi police. At the station, we were treated badly and they abused me for harassing my new wife. The dowry harassment complaint is baseless and we were insulted and humiliated for no mistake of ours. Then, I decided to take revenge and hatched the conspiracy,” Rajendra’s statement to police read, as per TOI.

Police say that the CCTV footage of Rajendra shoving the letters into a letter box in New Delhi was found, which led them to the suspect. DCP Chetan said that Rajendra travelled to New Delhi from Kanpur and the police have his mobile call records to prove the location. Police also said that they found copies of the letter on Rajendra’s laptop.
