People trying to sabotage Congress are calling the shots now, says Tanwar

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, October 5



Moments after resigning from the primary membership of the Congress, former Haryana unit president of the party Ashok Tanwar declared a virtual war on former state Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda and said “forces in the Congress were out to destroy genuine workers”.

“I am not joining the BJP. I will continue to work with the people who spent five years slogging for the party. It’s another matter that those who were busy sabotaging Congress have all the say now but I will not acknowledge those who didn’t acknowledge the high command or me when I was state congress chief,” Tanwar said on Saturday after his resignation.

Asked what his next step would be and what his role would be in the state elections due on October 21: “To start with we will tomorrow mark the third anniversary of the Bhairav Mandir attack on me and my supporters by people who spent the last five years undermining the Congress. The anniversary will be marked in Rohtak”.

A visibly agitated Tanwar said: “Those who ask what Ashok Tanwar is I will now tell them what I am”.

Tanwar’s unstated jibes were meant for BS Hooda and his son Deepender Hooda.

In his letter to Congress President Sonia Gandhi on Saturday Tanwar said the father son duo got tickets in Lok Sabha elections despite the reluctance of Rahul Gandhi, then party chief.

Importantly, Tanwar didn’t attack Gandhis even one and said his fight was with entrenched lobbies that were preventing people from non dynastic backgrounds from working.

“The message in Lok Sabha was that one family charged with serious offences is so influential in the Congress that it bagged two out of 10 Lok Sabha tickets,” said Tanwar, adding that he was repeatedly attacked while being state chief in the state and never allowed to function.

To a query on Congress admonishing him to introspect as to who he’s strengthening with his revolt, Tanwar said: “Those who never supported me when I was Haryana Congress chief, who were those people strengthening?”

Tanwar also lamented that despite being hooted at publicly at Congress rallies and later being assaulted physically outside Bhairav Mandir in Delhi three years ago, no justice was done.

“Shinde committee was formed but no one was punished. Why?” Asked Tanwar who said in his resignation letter that the personal security officer of BS Hooda assaulted him at Bhairav Mandir.’

‘Organisation bigger that individuals’

Congress meanwhile was unfazed by Tanwar’s resignation and said it was up to him to take a call as the party had given him everything.

“I’ve always said organisation is bigger than individuals and while individuals come and go, organisation stays. We must never forget that we owe our current political identities to the organisation. In that light of Ashok Tanwar has decided to quit the party that’s his call. Best to him,” Haryana Congress Chief Kumari Selja said sarcastically after she learnt of Tanwar’s resignation through Twitter.

Other Congress sources said the Tanwar’s exit won’t make any difference on the ground on election eve in the state.

“Nothing at all,” said a senior party leader when asked what impact Tanwar’s resignation will have on the party prospects in Haryana.

Tanwar had in his press conference two days ago said contrary things.

In one vein, he said: “I will continue to work as a primary member of the party and its loyal soldier”.

In the other, he said: “What I am saying today is the reality of today. Let’s see what turn politics and time takes tomorrow. There’s still some time until elections”.

Tanwar resigned from party’s primary membership just a day after he was named star campaigner for Haryana.

It remains to be seen if Tanwar will jump ship to another party.
