Will deal with Aarey murderers, says Uddhav Thackeray; Cong reminds it's your own govt

While Uddhav Thackeray (left) extended his support to the protesters, the Congress slammed him for "double standards". (Photo: PTI)

As the protests against the felling of trees at Mumbai's Aarey Colony intensified with the Mumbai Police arresting 29 protesters, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray on Saturday said the Shiv Sena will deal with the "murderers of Aarey" if they are voted to power in the 2019 Maharashtra assembly election.

At least 29 people have been arrested and over 100 detained by the Mumbai Police in connection with the protest against the cutting of trees in Aarey Colony on Saturday. The arrested protesters have been sent to judicial custody.

Addressing a press conference in Mumbai, Uddhav Thackeray said the felling of trees at Aarey Colony is the "most important issue" for him and he will take detailed information about the situation.

"Aarey is the most important issue for me right now. Whatever is happening today, whatever was happening yesterday and whatever will happen in future, I'll take detailed information of what the situation is and will speak firmly and directly on the issue," Uddhav Thackeray said.

Meanwhile, speaking about of the upcoming Maharashtra assembly elections, Uddhav Thackeray said the alliance of the BJP-Shiv Sena will win the polls and deal with the murderers of the Aarey forest once they are elected to power.

"The upcoming government will be ours and once our government comes into power, we will deal with the murderers of Aarey forest in the best possible way we can," the Shiv Sena chief said.

Shiv Sena Chief, Uddhav Thackeray: The upcoming government will be our government and once our government comes into power once again, we will deal with the murderers of #AareyForest in the best possible way we can. https://t.co/weNHtCbhUy pic.twitter.com/o0ePTCBi8V ANI (@ANI) October 5, 2019



Uddhav Thackeray's son Aaditya Thackeray, who is contesting the Maharashtra assembly polls from Worli assembly seat, slammed the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRC) for cutting trees in Aarey Colony at the night, despite the Bombay High Court's decision to not quash the BMC tree authority's decision allowing felling of over 2,600 trees to pave way for a metro car shed.

Taking to Twitter, Aaditya Thackeray condemned the detention of the protesters outside Aarey Colony and cutting down of trees during the enforcement of the model code of conduct before the elections.

"The use of a large number of police personnel. Hacking trees in the dead of the night, even after winning in court (then why not broad daylight) and detention of peaceful protesters and citizens. Who is authorising this? During Code of Conduct? All these powers handed to MMRC?" Aditya Thackeray tweeted.

Aaditya Thackeray also said that it is a matter of "shame" if the protesters are being arrested and filed cases against. He also requested Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis to look into the matter.

"These protestors can't be arrested and filed cases with. It's a shame if we do that. I call out and request @CMOMaharashtra to look into this and ask the police to not put any cases for people with love for the environment. We'd be hypocritical then at the @UN if we do this," he said.

Detaining citizens and arresting youth for standing with environment. So much for speaking about environment at global level while we destroy ecosystems here in the middle of the night. https://t.co/BI10eHsUIz Aaditya Thackeray (@AUThackeray) October 5, 2019





While the father-son duo extended their support to the protesters, the Congress slammed the two, reminding them that it is their own government in Maharashtra.

Congress leader and former MP Sanjay Nirupam, who has been vocal against the cutting down of trees at Aarey, said that the Shiv Sena was adopting "double standard", as it condemned tree felling but continues to support the BJP-led government.

"Such double standard would not do," he said. Saying that the state government should respect the wishes of the people, he asked why the tree cutting was started at night.

Actually its #BMC which has permitted #MMRCL to cut trees in #AareyForest and I would like to remind everyone that #BMC is controlled by ShivSena.

So #ShivSena must stop its lip service against tree cutting in #Aarey & tell Mumbaikars that they are helpless before #BJP pic.twitter.com/hl2Ofvt92B Sanjay Nirupam (@sanjaynirupam) October 5, 2019





"We are not against the car shed but constructing it inside the Aarey forest will be catastrophic," he said.

Gujarat MP and activist Jignesh Mevani also slammed Aaditya Thackeray, saying it was "your government" which was cutting down the trees.

"Dear @AUThackeray, you said you're with #SaveAarey, then you must be with the protesters. But your government is not only cutting the trees but also assaulting women & students and also booked them under non-bailable offences. Shame," Jignesh Mevani said.
