Pakistan calls for action on Kashmir, warning it could end in a ‘bloodbath’

Insisting he wasn’t making a threat, Pakistan’s leader denounced his Indian counterpart and warned that any war between the nuclear rivals could “have consequences for the world.” India’s prime minister took the opposite approach, skipping any mention at the United Nations of his government’s crackdown in the disputed region of Kashmir.

“When a nuclear-armed country fights to the end, it will have consequences far beyond the borders. It will have consequences for the world,” Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan said in a wide-ranging, at times apparently extemporaneous UN General Assembly speech in which he called Mr Modi’s actions in Kashmir “stupid” and “cruel.”

“That’s not a threat,” he said of his war comments. “It’s a fair worry. Where are we headed?”

Camera Icon Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan addresses the United Nations General Assembly at UN headquarters. Credit: AFP, Getty

An hour earlier, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed the UN meeting with a speech that focused primarily on his country’s development, though he warned of the spreading spectre of terrorism.

He never mentioned Kashmir directly.

Camera Icon Delegates from India lisent as Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan speaks at the 74th session of the United Nations General Assembly. Credit: AFP

India and Pakistan have fought two of their three wars over the Himalayan region.

They’ve been locked in a worsening standoff since August 5, when Mr Modi stripped limited autonomy from the portion of Kashmir that India controls.

Mr Modi’s Hindu nationalist government imposed a sweeping military curfew and cut off residents in the Muslim-majority region from virtually all communications.

Mr Khan said there were 900,000 Indian forces in the region policing 8 million Kashmiris.

“What’s he going to do when he lifts the curfew? Does he think the people of Kashmir are quietly going to accept the status quo?” Mr Khan said. “What is going to happen when the curfew is lifted will be a bloodbath.”

“They will be out in the streets. And what will the soldiers do? They will shoot them. … Kashmiris will be further radicalised.” he said.

Camera Icon Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi speaks during the 74th Session of the General Assembly at UN Headquarters in New York. Credit: AFP

While not mentioning Kashmir by name, Mr Modi touched on terrorism: “We belong to a country that has given the world not war, but Buddha’s message of peace. And that is the reason why our voice against terrorism, to alert the world about this evil, rings with seriousness and outrage.”

Mr Modi has defended the Kashmir changes as freeing the territory from separatism. His supporters have welcomed the move.

Ahead of Modi’s and Khan’s appearances at the UN, residents of Indian-controlled Kashmir expressed hope that their speeches would turn world attention to an unprecedented lockdown in the region.

“We really hope these leaders will do something to rid us of conflict and suppression,” said Nazir Ahmed, a schoolteacher on the outskirts of Srinagar, the main city in Indian-held Kashmir. “Conflict is like a cancer hitting every aspect of life. And Kashmiris have been living inside this cancer for decades now.”

Camera Icon People gather during a protest in solidarity with the people of Kashmir outside the United Nations headquarters in New York. Credit: AFP

As the two leaders spoke Friday, large duelling protests supporting and opposing India’s action in Kashmir were taking place across the street from UN headquarters.

US President Donald Trump, who met with both Modi and Khan this week, has urged the sides to resolve their differences.

‘Scar of war’: Harry carries out Diana’s legacy

Concern over Trump’s whistleblower ‘threats’

Plan for Corbyn to be ‘temporary PM’

India and Pakistan’s conflict over Kashmir dates to the late 1940s, when they won independence from Britain.

The region is one of the most heavily militarised in the world, patrolled by soldiers and paramilitary police.

Most Kashmiris resent the Indian troop presence.

Camera Icon Kashmiris run from flames rising from an Indian flag set on fire during a protest rally in Srinagar, Indian controlled Kashmir. Credit: AP

Mr Modi, a pro-business Hindu nationalist, and his party won a decisive re-election in May. The election was seen as a referendum on Mr Modi, the son of a poor tea seller whose economic reforms have had mixed results. But he has enjoyed enduring popularity as a social underdog in India’s highly stratified society.

Critics, however, say his Hindu-first platform risks exacerbating social tensions in the country of 1.3 billion people.
