[VIDEO] Bengaluru court acquits rape accused; defence lawyer says 7-year-old concocted 'fanciful rape story'

The poor police investigation in the case has drawn strong investigation from women activists in Bengaluru.

Key Highlights Bengaluru court acquits man accused of raping 7-year-old Alleged rape had occurred in 2012 in a school Principal had reportedly told victim to forgive and forget

Bengaluru: A man accused of raping a minor girl in 2012 has been acquitted by a Bengaluru court. The girl was raped when she was just 7 years old. The family of the survivor alleged that the accused was set free by the court due to the shoddy police probe.

The court in its judgment observed that the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the case against the accused.

According to the First Information Report (FIR) filed in 2012, the girl was allegedly raped inside the toilet of a school by a plumber.

The prosecution also alleged that the school took the matter lightly and asked the child to forgive and forget the incident.

However, the defence lawyer argued that the accused was not present in the school when the crime took place. Not only this, the defence counsel also went on to say that the girl weaved fanciful stories and even the school principal had claimed that the girl had a vivid imagination.

The defence also claimed that the victim also failed to identify the accused when there was an identification parade in the school principal's office.

Police lapses

In its order, the court listed how the police failed in its job when they did not talk to the first doctor who had examined the girl and even failed to produce the forensic test report before the court.

One of Bengaluru's top-notch lawyer CH Hanumantharaya represented the accused in the court. The lawyer also backed the Principal's claim that the girl had a fanciful imagination.

Speaking to Mirror Now, the defence lawyer CH Hanumantharaya defended his arguments in the court saying, "It's in the nature of the child to weave stories and coming up with exaggerated versions. That is akin to the nature of the child. Tutoring of the mother could not suppress it, could not get the child to get out of that fanciful imagination. The inherent qualities of the child could overcome the tutoring of the mother. When I cross-examined the girl she did not remember what her mother had told her."

Meanwhile, Assistant prosecutor BT Vanktesh admitted that there were serious lapses in the police probe and that's why they fell short of that in the court.



"It's not the question of falling flat. The question is the quality of investigation being poor, the biggest challenge we had in that case. The quality of evidence collected by the police was not up to the mark. The opportunity for the defence to raise doubts into the story of the prosecution was huge.

The poor police investigation in the case has drawn strong investigation from women activists in Bengaluru.

"Here is a case where the girl had been a case of circumstances even in the court. Prosecutor was duty-bound to place the medical record. I don't know why he hasn't placed the records. Why the FSL records were not placed before the courts. What was the justification for not placing the records, the prosecutor should explain, said woman lawyer and activist Pramila Nesargi.
