Cops in Madhya Pradesh watch as 22-year-old woman burns to death

On Saturday, Ranu set herself ablaze at a room in her residence in Karju village (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The alleged suicide attempt of a girl in Madhya Pradesh was not stopped by the police Allegedly, the cops did not make a single attempt to save the girl who had immolated herself The police have claimed that the girl had died by the time they reached the spot

Indore: A 22-year-old woman was charred to death after seven police officials allegedly watched her burn on Thursday. The cops are deployed at the Bhavgarh police station. Allegedly, the girl had set herself ablaze in an attempt to commit suicide. Her family turned to the police for help but the cops remained silent spectators.

The woman has been identified as Ranu Tailor. While on one hand, the girl's father said, "My daughter kept burning", the cops have maintained that the woman had died before they reached the spot. A video of the incident was also circulated on social media.

When the forensic team arrived, the cops allegedly asked Ranu's father Komal Tailor to put out the fire. Komal said, "I was asked to bring two buckets of water and pour on the burning body of my daughter. " The seven policemen standing at the spot did not help Komal Tailor.

Contrary to the statements made by the deceased's family, Hitesh Chaudhary, Mandsaur Superintendent of Police (SP) said that the case is being "portrayed in a wrong manner". He said that Ranu had died before the police reached and that the fire had been put out by her family and the cops.

How it happened

On Saturday, Ranu set herself ablaze at a room in her residence in Karju village. At around 2 pm, the neighbours heard loud noises coming from inside the house and noticed smoke. They made several failed attempts to break open the door. Meanwhile, the police were informed and R C Gaud, Bhavnagar police station in-charge and six other police officials reached the house at around 2.20 pm.

Ranu's father Komal Tailor had gone to Bhukki village to attend a family function. When he learned about the incident, he came back. Komal Tailor also reached his residence around 2.20 pm. The police tried to break open the door but failed. At around 3.10 pm, the cops managed to break the window.

Inspector R C Gaud looked through the window and told the family that Ranu had passed away. He directed everyone to leave the spot. He asked a constable to guard the area and wait for the forensic team to arrive. Shailendra Soni, the deceased's neighbour said that he asked Gaud the villagers could put out the fire, but the inspector refused.

The inspector asked Shailendra Soni to wait for the forensic team. Soni said, "The girl's body kept burning for over 2 hours 45 minutes in front of everyone but he did not do anything. "
