Relief for Rajoana: When the Quality of Mercy Is Tainted

When the Government of India announced the decision to offer clemency to eight convicted Sikh extremists and commuted the death sentence of one to life sentence, suddenly the Centre started looking kind and merciful.

In the times we live in, when our ears have been pierced by cries of “no tolerance for the anti-nationals”, this warmth in the eyes of the sovereign for the most condemned and the most helpless among us gives hope. Hope that humanity lives, even in this age of nationalism, when we thought that a narrow idea of the nation had replaced the concept of humanity.

The unforgiving, hard state with an “uncompromising stance” towards terrorism has decided to remove people with foreign passports from the list which ensured that they could not travel to India because they were suspected to be associated with activities antithetical to the national interests.

“The government of India has reviewed the ‘Adverse List’ containing 314 foreign nationals belonging to Sikh community and brought it down to just two,” an official said. “These Sikh foreign nationals are now eligible to avail visa services to visit their families in India and reconnect with their roots,” the authorities explained, according to the Economic Times.

That such amnesty was granted on the occasion of Prakash Parv, the commemoration of 550 years of the arrival of Guru Nanak Devji, only confirms the old belief that if you are in a noble company, even for a moment, the divine hidden inside you is kindled. It is also clear that the occasion of Prakash Parv, associated with a figure revered by the Sikhs, can evoke its mercy only for the Sikhs.

Also Read: Modi Govt Commutes Death Sentence of Prime Accused in Beant Singh Assassination

What makes it even more extraordinary is that the death sentence of Balwant Singh Rajoana is being commuted to life. He was part of the group which assassinated Beant Singh, chief minister of Punjab. Along with Singh, 17 others – including three commandos – were also killed. It was deemed an act of terror. Rajoana was the backup suicide bomber.

Sikh groups of different nature have naturally hailed the Centre’s decision. According to a report by the Asian Age, Sukhi Chalal, chairman of the Punjab Foundation, wrote in a Facebook post:

“I am personally grateful to PM Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah and the central government on the whole for the decision on the Sikh prisoners’ release and commuting the death sentence of Balwant Singh Rajoana as a goodwill gesture.”

“The act of kindness will go a long way in healing the wounds of the Sikh community. My gratitude as a Sikh and President of Sri Guru Singh Sabha, Southall UK,” said Sardar H.S. Sohi.

Rajoana’s sister told ANI, “Not just the Sikh community but people of all religions are happy about the decision. On Guru Nanak ji’s 550th birth anniversary, I would only say that it is his blessings and kindness on us. It is a big relief.”

We can recall that the SGPC demanded the commutation of Rajoana’s death sentence. On March 28, 2012, the home ministry decided to stay his hanging, which was scheduled for March 31, 2012, citing the SGPC’s appeal.

However, barely a month before, on February 9, Afzal Guru was hanged, ignoring scores of appeals for clemency. Similarly, mercy appeals for Yakub Memon were not heeded.

A stark contrast

In these two cases, the appeals were not just ignored, but condemned and violently opposed in the public sphere. It is still deemed an act of sacrilege even to discuss the issue, years after their hanging. It was a meeting to mark the day of Afzal Guru’s hanging at the JNU that created the narrative of “anti-nationals” hiding in the university. But not even a leaf is stirred, when the Akal Takht bestows the title of Zinda Shaheed on Rajoana.

Also Read: Why Do Memories of Afzal Guru Still Haunt India’s Conscience?

When Punjab chief minister Amarinder Singh used his opposition to capital punishment as a reason to remain silent on this issue, he knew that he was not being truthful.

The Sikh groups advocating clemency for their co-religionists did not think of sympathising with the desperate cries for Guru or Memon, let alone lend their voice to this cause. The Hindu majoritarians, who conducted pogroms against the Sikhs in 1984 when two Sikh bodyguards of the then-prime minister Indira Gandhi assassinated her, seem to have now grown softer towards the community. We are being told that we should ‘understand the circumstances’ which ‘forced’ people like Rajoana to commit terrorist acts.

Elections around the corner

The media didn’t fail to notice that the timing of granting mercy. The Delhi assembly elections are around the corner and Sikh votes are decisive in many constituencies. So, this benevolence is opportunistic and the mercy is calculated.

The media also makes it a point to report that along with these acts of kindness towards the Sikhs who were deemed anti-nationals, the probe into the 1984 massacre is being fast-tracked.

This is not the sole act of kindness of this government. It is only part of the eco-system of mercy that this state is creating. Ministers, including Amit Shah, have assured those who don’t find a place in the National Register of Citizens need not worry. The only condition is that they should not be Muslim.

Just when we read about all this, a cry arises in the western part of India, of a mother whose 19-year-old daughter was killed in cold blood by the Gujarat police. The accused are being let off one by one and the agency which is responsible for the probe does not seem interested in pursuing the case. The mother demands justice for her daughter, who was wrongly and wilfully killed at the hands of the state. But apart from her, no one else is interested. You need not guess that the victim, in this case, is also a Muslim. Her name is Ishrat Jahan.

Some may tell us that to talk about these other issues at this moment is in bad taste. One should not take a comparative view when faced with a single noble act. We should not say that since the state had remained unmoved in certain cases, it should not be merciful in others.

Mercy applied is this manner can act as a cementing force. There is indeed a chasm between the Sikhs and the Indian state. Families of thousands of those who disappeared in the 1990s are still waiting to be recognised by the state. One must not hold any grudge when the unpardonable is pardoned, for only such an act can illuminate the true meaning and significance of the term ‘pardon’.

The selectivity of mercy, however, is also glaring and painful. A cold calculative mind is using it for sectarian purposes, making the quality of mercy questionable. The idea is clearly to create a joint front against Muslims. So, mercy for Sikh terrorists and a call for justice to the 1984 pogrom are being used to bring them into the anti-Muslim fold. Wouldn’t the followers of Guru Nanak see through this game?

Apoorvanand teaches in Delhi University.
