Mumbai: Youth attempts suicide after killing girlfriend

The Vakola police have arrested a 24 year-old man who allegedly killed his girlfriend inside a Santacruz-based lodge and then tried to commit suicide by jumping before a truck. The accused identified as Vijay Kumar Harijan escaped the accident but fractured his leg and at present, is admitted in a private hospital after which he shall be arrested, said the police.

According to the police, the deceased Sandhya Harijan (22) was strangled with a rope and after the murder, Vijay Kumar left her corpse inside the room as it is and went to Sewri to commit suicide. Both Sandhya and Vijay Kumar are said to be residents of Darukhana area of Reay Road and the duo were supposed to get married soon. On Saturday noon at around 1.30 pm, the couple checked inside Kailash Lodge which is located at Golibaar Road in Santacruz East.

"Since a long time, Vijay Kumar was under the impression that Sandhya was cheating on him with someone else and was double crossing him. He was almost convinced that there was a third person in Sandhya's life so in order to take revenge, he opted for the option of killing her so he took a rope and strangled her. Later, he left the room leaving the body as it is and by evening, all attempt to reach out to him by the lodge staff failed. When they suspected something fishy, they used their spare key to open the room where they discovered the dead body after which they immediately alerted the police," said a police officer.

Sandhya was immediately rushed to VN Desai hospital where she was declared dead on arrival and Vijay Kumar who was at Sewri missed his suicide attempt and fracutured his leg instead. Police also suspected that Sandhya was raped before she was killed but that could be ascertained only after the post mortem report claims it.

MERE SUSPICION

Vijay Kumar was under the impression that Sandhya was cheating on him with someone else and was double crossing him. He was almost convinced that there was a third person in her life so in order to take revenge, he opted for killing her
