Importance of Gandhi in present times

Importance of Gandhi in present times

During the first week of October there was a race to occupy the space as a true follower of Mahatma Gandhi, Father of the Nation, when India started observing his 150th birth anniversary. All political parties, including BJP and Congress, joined this race, giving their own interpretation of what the father of the nation stood for. Unlike in the previous years when Congress claimed that it was the sole inheritor of the legacy of Mahatma Gandhi, BJP was keen to claim that they too followed the teachings of the father of nation.

The BJP leaders claimed that by building millions of toilets and launching the "Swatchh Bharat", they were realizing the dream of the Mahatma. In addition, BJP also claimed that they were changing the life of poor villagers by providing them houses and cheap gas as fuel for cooking. On the other hand the Congress claimed that any political party, which believed in discrimination on the basis of religion or violence as means for achieving their ends, could not claim to be follower of Gandhi.

In case one goes deeper it will come as no surprise that not many followed Gandhi and a majority of politicians who claimed to be Gandhi-ites only paid lip service to it. For instance how a can a nation where violence is so common can claim to be following the teachings of Bapu. Every day pages of newspapers are full of stories of murders, lynching cases and rapes of women. Violence has become a part of politics. For Mahatma non-violence was an essential part of politics and means were as important as ends.

Discrimination on the basis of religion was unimaginable for followers of Gandhi. But now it it is being openly advocated while dealing with the issue of citizenship. A man who sang every evening in his prayer meetings "Ishwar, Allah. Tero Naam", anything but secularism was unacceptable. He also believed that there was no greater force than non-violence which was adopted as means for winning freedom of the country, but also was adopted in different parts of the world like Africa and the USA by African Americans.

By all criteria India no more follows non-violence and has become a very violent nation. The strength of police, para military forces and armed forces has been multiplied many times when compared to the post independence times. In processions people like to display weapons. Most of the protest marches or agitations end up in violence. Billions of dollars are being spent on import of expensive weapons while the poor starve to death in the country.

As such leaders of today can be anything but followers of Gandhi. Many important persons, including elected members of the Lok Sabha today have started praising Nathu Ram Godse, a man who shot Gandhi dead. One wonders why such persons are tolerated by responsible national parties. What would the father of nation, who throughout his life worked for bringing about unity of all irrespective of religion, have to say about the use of religion to divide people.

Following teachings of Gandhi was never easy and many in his life time followed his lead and many differed with him in his life time for different reasons. They included leaders like Subash Chander Bose who took the help of foreign countries to fight the British by building up "Azad Hind Fauj". But all were united on one issue that is secularism .One needs to remember that in the 1947 riots it was Sardar Patel who as home Minister provided protection to the Muslim minority which chose to make India their home and not to migrate to Pakistan.

This is the responsibility of all who swear by Gandhi as mere service to "Swachh India" or building toilets is not enough. They have to treat all Indians as equal and give them the same rights. In this context what is happening in Kashmir needs to be looked into. Denying freedom of press, markets closed, schools not working, communication denied is not the picture of a Gandhian India, of which we all could be proud.

No one can monopolise the legacy of Gandhi, but no one has a place among his followers who does not believe in secularism or non-violence.

(Brij Bhardwaj is a veteran journalist and commentator)

—[IFS]
