BNP mini boss Tarique Rahman approved attack on Sheikh Hasina

Blitz Exclusive

According to Global Intelligence File (GIF), Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP)’s mighty mini-boss Tarique Rahman had approved a secret plot of assassinating Awami League chief Sheikh Hasina through series of grenade attacks on a rally in Dhaka on August 21, 2004.

The attack plot was originally designed by Maj Gen Rezzaqul Haider Chowdhury and Brig Gen Abdur Rahim, both, long-time agents of Pakistani spy agency Inter Service Intelligence (ISI). These military officials were heading Bangladesh’s intelligence agencies.

According to GIF, a number of key leaders of Harjatul Jihad al Islami (HuJI) in Bangladesh held close-door meeting with BNP leader Tarique Rahman in presence of Maj Gen Rezzaqul Haider Chowdhury and Brig Gen Abdur Rahim at Tarique’s infamous Hawa Bhaban office in Banani area in Dhaka. Tarique’s “friend” and homosexual partner Giasuddin Mamun was also present in the meeting.

Maj Gen Rezzaqul Haider Chowdhury first tabled the plan of grenade attacks on the meeting of Sheikh Hasina with the notorious agenda of murdering her along with few key members of Awami League. Immediately on hearing the plot, Tarique and Mamun burst into laughter saying this was a “fantastic plan”. They also said, implementation of the plot would totally “wipe-off” Awami League from the “politics” of Bangladesh.

Looking onto HuJI men, Tarique Rahman said, “Make sure you do not miss Hasina [Sheikh Hasina] from this attack”.

Saiful Islam Duke, Khaleda’s nephew and also private secretary was coordinating communications amongst the conspirators.

On Monday February 27th, 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing The Global Intelligence Files, over five million e-mails from the Texas headquartered “global intelligence” company Stratfor. The e-mails date between July 2004 and late December 2011. They reveal the inner workings of a company that fronts as an intelligence publisher, but provides confidential intelligence services to large corporations, such as Bhopal’s Dow Chemical Co., Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Raytheon and government agencies, including the US Department of Homeland Security, the US Marines and the US Defence Intelligence Agency. The emails show Stratfor’s web of informers, pay-off structure, payment laundering techniques and psychological methods.
