Bengaluru: Uber driver punches passenger, leaves him with bloodied face over fare brawl

The argument escalated further as the cab driver punched Aneek on the face. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Bengaluru driver punches into face of passenger Driver demanded higher fare when victim booked an UberPool Cab driver who is identified as Harish KS is now absconding

Bengaluru: In yet another case of misbehaviour by cab drivers, a passenger was left with bloodied face after an Uber driver beat him up over an argument over fare in Bengaluru. The cab driver, who is identified as Harish KS, is now absconding.

The shocking incident occurred on Thursday when a passenger named Aneek Roy booked a cab for the airport from his Whitefield residence.

According to a report, the victim had booked an UberPool ride, but the driver asked him to pay UberGo category fare, much higher than Uberpool.

Aneek refused to pay the higher fare and that led to a heated argument. The driver then asked Aneek to cancel the trip to which the victim protested. Aneek refused to cancel the ride claiming he will be fined by the app aggregator. This enraged the driver who started throwing Aneek's luggage on the ground.

The argument escalated further as the cab driver punched Aneek on the face which left him with a bloodied nose.

Police have now booked the Uber driver under Sections 341 (wrongful restraint), 323 (assault), and 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace) of the Indian Penal Code.

Despite the victim reaching the airport on time by taking another cab, Aneek was not allowed to board the plane as he was still bleeding from the nose. He was admitted to a hospital where doctors confirmed nasal bone dislocation.

Later, an Uber spokesperson said in a statement that the company has revoked the services of the driver and was ready to assist the police in its probe into the matter.

In August this year, the Bengaluru police managed to crack the murder case of a 30-year-old Kolkata woman, who was stabbed to death 22 times and her head smashed beyond recognition by a cab driver. Bengaluru police reached the killer, a cab driver, with the help of an email trail of the victim.

The victim's body was found at an isolated place at Kadayarapanahalli near Kempegowda International Airport on July 31. During their preliminary investigation, the police sent two teams to different states including West Bengal.

The police team which went to Kolkata found a diary entry at New Town police station with description matching that of the victim found murdered in Bengaluru.

The woman was later identified as 30-year-old Pooja Singh Dey, who had gone to Delhi via Bengaluru. Pooja's husband Soudeep Dey identified the body by 'S' symbol tattooed on her neck.

A police officer said that Soudeep had filed a missing person's complaint with New Town police, but officials there failed to register an FIR.

According to police, as they began to verify emails of Pooja, they found out the hotel where she was staying. Police also scanned the CCTV footage of the hotel after which they came to know about the cab she hired for her commute.

The cab driver was identified as HM Nagesh, who stays at Sanjeevini Nagar near Hegganahali. The victim arrived in Bengaluru on July 30 and took a cab to reach an office at Crescent Road. Later, she reached the hotel on Hosur Road after booking an Ola cab.
