Veer Narmad South Gujarat University sacks in-charge registrar on govt orders

SURAT: Veer Narmad South Gujarat University (VSNGU) authorities sacked in-charge registrar Hirnesh Bhavsar on Monday, 28 days after his appointment on the directives of the state education department. The decision of VNSGU vice-chancellor Shivendra Gupta to bring Bhavsar, personnel officer of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC), on deputation as in-charge registrar had kicked off a controversy at the outset itself.Gupta and his supporter senators in the university appointed Bhavsar without required approval from the state government and SMC’s general body. Incidentally, Bhavsar is a candidate for the registrar’s post in VNSGU that has been vacant for the past five years.The state education department asked VNSGU authorities to immediately cancel appointment of Bhavsar as in-charge registrar over grade pay issues. Bhavsar’s existing grade pay in SMC is three stages lower than a university registrar, VNSGU sources informed. His appointment was also under scanner since the education department’s approval had not been taken by Gupta, who argued that in the past too one officer had been brought to VNSGU on deputation.The university has paid Rs70,000 as salary to Bhavsar for one month. This is going to be a major issue now since Bhavsar was not appointed as per procedures. VNSGU syndicate members had challenged Bhavsar’s appointment claiming that the top decision-making body of the university – syndicate – was not taken into confidence regarding it.“I had challenged the move by Gupta in the general board meeting of SMC after which it was put on hold. It is shocking that both VNSGU and SMC chose to openly violate all the rules,” said Bhavesh Rabari, syndicate member. He is also municipal councillor and represents Congress.“I did not have efficient officers to execute important university functions. This is why I brought this officer on deputation from SMC. I have removed Bhavsar on the orders of the state government,” Gupta said.The charge of the registrar’s post for the time being has been given to Rajendra Patel, head of department of education in the university.
