Kaushambi Gangrape: Already Marginalised Minority Dalits Of Ghosiya Village Shamed By Attack On Dignity

A Pasi couple from Ghosiya, who live just outside the mohalla in which the perpetrators live, say a similar rape took place in the village in 2005. The girl was from Ravidas community — also a scheduled caste — and the rapist was a Muslim who had dragged her into a field. Villagers agitated outside the police station, some of them even threatened suicide, but the police covered up the case, they say.

“The entire mohalla went there. But those were the times of Samajwadi Party. Muslims would get away with anything,” the man says.

The couple takes me to the house of the 2005 survivor. The girl’s father is at home. He says the girl has been married for several years and rejects the gang-rape allegation. “The man wanted to rob her jewellery. That’s all it was,” the father says.

Back at the couple’s house, I am told the father was given a sum of money to forget all about the case. The rapist was sent to Mumbai. “Eventually all we could demand from the police was that there would not be a repeat,” the man says.

“It has happened again. Rapes have increased under this government,” he says, and adds, “But now at least the culprits have been arrested".

The couple says they are among the few educated Pasi families in the village who have been exposed to the outside world more than their neighbours.

The man is a graduate. He had a hard time at school and college. “As a student, I and other Pasis would take own mats to sit on the floor. The ‘upper caste’ would sit on chairs,” he says.

Though such practices have changed in schools, discrimination continues. “During panchayats and meetings with the pradhan, they always make separate arrangements for us. We sit separately and drink from separate glasses,” he says.

Asked why they do not protest this discrimination, which is illegal under law, the man says, “Do you really expect us to slap police cases on them? As a solution, we have simply stopped going for such meetings. Even when the DM [district magistrate] is here, we don’t go. We go only if the person calling us gives us some value,” he says.

It is, perhaps, thanks to such treatment at every step at the hands of either ‘upper caste’ Hindus or Muslims, that the community remains marginalised despite strength in numbers — it’s the second-largest Dalit sect in UP after Jatavs, forming close to 16 per cent of the state’s entire SC population.
