John Nath Kapoor

Amritsar Born NRI Kapoor Founder of Drug Company, found guilty of bribing doctors

John Kapoor and other top executives committed fraud, placing profit before patient safety

Now face up to 20 years in prison

400,000 people died from overdoses involving prescription or illicit opioids over the past two decades.

Opiate overdose claimed the lives of about 48,000 people in 2017 alone.

Los Angeles, May 3, 2019,

NRIpress.club/Ramesh/ A.Gary Singh

NRI John Nath Kapoor, 76, Opioid company executives, onetime billionaire and founder of Arizona-based Insys Therapeutics, was found guilty of criminal conspiracy by a jury in Boston.

Kapoor was convicted along with four other former executives of the company on charges that they acted more like mobsters than pharmaceutical executives when they sold a brand of fentanyl, a powerful and addictive opioid.

John N. Kapoor, 74, of Phoenix, Arizona, the founder and majority owner of Insys Therapeutics Inc., was arrested today and charged with leading a nationwide conspiracy to profit by using bribes and fraud to cause the illegal distribution of a Fentanyl spray intended for cancer patients experiencing breakthrough pain.

The medication, called “Subsys,” is a powerful narcotic intended to treat cancer patients suffering intense breakthrough pain. In exchange for bribes and kickbacks, the practitioners wrote large numbers of prescriptions for the patients, most of whom were not diagnosed with cancer.

The painkiller Subsys was approved for sale in 2012

Insys is a specialty pharmaceutical company that manufactures and markets two main drugs – subsys and syndros. Subsys delivers fentanyl, an opioid analgesic offered in mcg doses ranging from 100 to 1,600. Fentanyl is offered for the treatment of breakthrough pain caused by cancer (“BTCP”) in opioid-tolerant patients.

Syndros oral solution is approved for the second-line treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (“CINV”) and anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with AIDS.

READ MORE WITH PHOTOS ……….. CLICK HERE

–

–

–
