Diwali 2019: Make a note of this year's Deepavali celebration dates

Pixabay Image.

India is a land of myriad festivals with each denoting a specific meaning and exhibiting a different emotion. Our country is indeed a conglomeration of a variety of languages, castes and ethnicities. However, what binds us together irrespective of the diversity is our rich cultural heritage. From Holi, the colour of festivals to Deepavali (Diwali), the festival of lights, Indian festivals are all about community get-togethers. And as people gather to celebrate festivals, they recall the purpose of celebrating it, to educate the younger generations about its beauty and sanctity.

Deepavali or Diwali is just around the corner. The eastern regions of the country celebrate the festival by paying ode to Goddess Kali, one of the fiercest avatars of Goddess Durga.

According to a popular legend, this festival is associated with Shri Rama, one of the most revered deities among the Hindus. The people of Ayodhya, lit earthen lamps to welcome Shri Rama when he returned to his kingdom after a hiatus of fourteen years. Ayodhya had lost its glory after Rama left his birthplace to honour the promise his father Dasharatha made to his youngest wife, Kaikeyi. Rama, along with with his consort Sita, and younger brother Lakshamana spent fourteen years in exile. During the fourteen years, Ravana, the demon-king of Lanka abducted Sita and held her captive in his kingdom. Lord Rama, along with Sugreeva's Vanar Sena (army of monkeys), a host of well-wishers and Hanuman, fought a fierce battle against Ravana to free Sita. The war ended with Ravana's death at the hands of Shri Rama. Thus, with the return of Shri Rama, Ayodhya glittered with lights of thousands of lamps.

Traditionally, Diwali celebrations begin with Dhantrayodashi or Dhanteras on the thirteenth day in the month of Ashwin (Shukla Paksha) in the Hindu calendar. Devotees also worship Dhanavantrim the God of medicines on this day. This year, Dhanteras falls on October 25.

The second day is dedicated to the worship of the Yama Deepam, Kali Chaudas and Hanuman Puja. This year, these pujas will be performed on October 26.

The third day is reserved for Lakshmi Pujan and a host of other festivals like - Narak Chaturdashi and Kali Puja. This year, it falls on October 27.

The fourth day which coincides with the New Moon day (Amavasya - October 28) calls for Diwali celebrations.

And last celebrations culminate with Bhai Dooj (a festival dedicated to brothers) on the following day (October 29).

Here's wishing everyone a very joyous Diwali in advance.
