Girls living in labour quarters most vulnerable to rape

Ludhiana: Despite ten cases reported in the city in nine months, where minor girls were raped and assaulted by neighbours, no action is being taken up by the city police to prevent such cases. In a majority of the cases, the accused and rape survivors are found to be living in the same labour quarters. These cases have also highlighted how girls are more vulnerable in labour quarters, as when their parents go out on work, the kids remain alone at home. Importantly in 2017, 19 such assault cases were reported in the city, in which neighbours were involved, and in 2018, the cases increased to 24.

Sukhdhir Singh Sekhon, president of Navchetna Child Welfare Committee, said, “The reason why children are more vulnerable in labour quarters is that both mother and father are so busy earning money for survival that they have no time to take care of their children. Moreover, labour quarters are crowded, as each family lives in a one-room accommodation. Therefore, their children live together in a congested area, which is why children are easily approachable to the accused.”

“In several cases, minor girls could not even tell their parents they were being assaulted, including the recent one, where parents found their 14-year-old girl pregnant, and then came to know she was being raped. There is a strong need of awareness and sensitization in these areas. Children need to be aware of good and bad touch. Besides, people residing in labour quarters should be taught to be alert and careful towards children,” added Sekhon.

Police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal said, “We are quite serious about crimes against children. Recently, on September 14, when a six-year-old girl was raped after abduction, the police had submitted a challan in the court of sessions judge to put the case in the fast track court. Besides, the police are planning to pitch in some NGOs to start awareness drives in factories for working parents. They will be told how to take precautions, and children would be told about good and bad touch.”

BOX

RAPES INVOLVING NEIGHBOURS

September 29: 15-year-old girl raped by neighbour, father of three children

September 17: 18-year-old booked for raping 16-year-old girl

July 29: 15-year-old boy arrested for raping 16-year-old girl

July 21: 15-year-old boy arrested for raping 7-year-old neighbour girl

April 5: 40-year-old married man arrested for allegedly raping minor girl

March 24: 17-year-old girl raped for after being blackmailed with her nude picture

March 13: 21-year-old labourer raped 5-year-old girl and murdered her in Focal Point

February 18: 16-year-old girl allegedly been raped by a youth of the same locality

February 17: 18-year-old schoolgirl accused her neighbour friend for allegedly raping her for nine months

January 28: 22-year-old factory worker arrested for raping 5-year-old girl



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
