Bhopal: 75-year-old father strangles daughter to death over property dispute

The two accused have been arrested and the matter is still under investigation even though they have confessed of committing the crime. (Image for representation)

A 75-year-old man allegedly strangulated his daughter to death, hours after his complaint against her was turned down by the police in Cholla area of Bhopal on Monday evening.

The accused, identified as Nannu Lal Sahu, had approached the police along with his 45-year-old son alleging that his daughter was harassing him over a property dispute.

According to police, the 35-year-old deceased, identified as Radha Sahu was found dead at her house on Monday. She was a divorcee and was staying in the same house for over 12 years.

The house belonged to Nannu Lal Sahu who lived there along with his wife, two sons, their families and his daughter, until about six-years-ago when his wife died.

After his wife's death, Radha allegedly pushed her two brothers and their families out of the house. Nannu Lal Sahu continued to live in the house but has alleged that his daughter wanted to throw him out of the house as well.

A few days ago Nannu Lal Sahu was admitted to Bhopal Memorial Hospital where he was looked after by his elder son Revaram.

On his return from the hospital, Radha tried to pressurise her father to transfer the ownership of the house to her name but Sahu refused, following which he was also thrown out of the house.

After this incident, Nanne Lal Sahu shifted to his son's rented house.

On Monday, Nannu Lal Sahu and his son Revaram approached the District Superintendent of Police's (DSP) office to file a complaint against Radha.

The DSP office, however, asked them to file a complaint with the Cholla Police Station, which the father-son duo tried to do on Monday evening but their agony was not heard.

At the police station, Nannu Lal Sahu and his son were asked to sort out the property dispute themselves.

Realising that the police were not very keen to intervene in the matter, Nannu Lal Sahu and his son went back to their disputed house and strangulated Radha with a dupatta when she tried to stop them from entering the premises.

According to Bhopal SP Dinesh Kaushal, the two accused have been arrested and the matter is still under investigation even though they have confessed of committing the crime.
