Bihar Shelter Home Case-SC Summons Nageswara Rao For Laxity In The Investigation

The Supreme Court on Thursday accused Nageswara Rao of contempt for the laxity in the investigation into rapes of children in Bihar's government-run shelter homes.

The top court came down heavily on CBI for transferring its former joint director A K Sharma, who was probing Bihar's shelter home cases and asked former interim CBI director M Nageswara Rao to appear before the court on February 12.

A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi took serious note of violation of two earlier orders of the apex court and issued contempt notice to Rao for transferring Sharma to the CRPF on January 17 without taking prior permission from the court.

The court said it will initiate contempt proceedings against all CBI officials who were involved in transferring Sharma.

“We are going to take it very very seriously. You have played with order of Supreme Court of India. God help you. Never play with SCs order,”Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi says after CBI counsel informed that 2 officials including M Nageswara Rao were involved in transferring Sharma. https://t.co/LSTnGwoJiY — ANI (@ANI) February 7, 2019

The top court referred to its earlier orders in which it had asked CBI not to remove Sharma from the team probing Bihar shelter home cases.

"We are going to take it very very seriously. You played with our order. God help you," SC said when CBI counsel informed the court that two officials, including Nageswara Rao, were involved in transferring the officer.

Earlier today, the court came down heavily on the Bihar government and ordered the case to be shunted out of Bihar to Delhi for "a free and fair trial". "Enough is enough. Children cannot be treated like this. You cannot let your officers treat children this way. Spare the children," an SC bench headed by CJI Ranjan Gogoi told the Bihar government.

ALSO READ: SC Transfers Muzaffarpur Shelter Home Sexual Assault Case From Bihar To Delhi

"The transfer of trial in Muzaffarpur shelter home out of Bihar is needed to ensure a free and fair trial in the case," the court said.

The SC warned the state government that it will summon the chief secretary if the state fails to give all information related to the case.
