Chennai shocker: Woman allegedly strangles and throws 6-yr-old stepchild from terrace

Chennai shocker: Woman allegedly strangles and throws 6-yr-old stepchild from terrace

On Tuesday, when her husband left for work, Suryakala allegedly strangled Raghavi to death and then threw her down from the terrace of their three-storey building.

news Crime

The Chennai police has arrested a 28-year-old woman from Selaiyur after she allegedly strangled and threw her 6-year-old stepdaughter from the terrace of their residence. After this, Suryakala allegedly pretended to look for the young girl with her husband, feigning ignorance over her death, until she was forced to confess by the police.

According to police sources, the deceased child Raghavi, was born to 34-year-old Parthiban and his first wife Sharanya. In 2015, however, Sharanya passed away due to health reasons and he married Suryakala the next year. The couple then had a son. While Suryakala, who has a Bachelors in Philosophy, remained a homemaker, Parthiban worked in TCS.

On Tuesday, when Parthiban left for work, Suryakala allegedly strangled Raghavi to death and then threw her down from the terrace of their three-storey building. Reports suggest that she was angry with her husband who was refusing to have another child, since they already have two. Suryakala reportedly believed that getting rid of Raghavi would allow her to have another child of her own.

The police, however, state otherwise.

"The real problem was that Sharanya's mother Valarmathi lived with the couple and the children. Valarmathi wanted to stay and look after her grandchild and Suryakala was unhappy with this," says a senior officer investigating the case. "So, when Valarmathi left town, she murdered the child to stop her from coming back," he adds.

After allegedly murdering the child, Suryakala called her husband and claimed Raghavi was missing. She then pretended to search around their residence for the child, until she was finally found dead amidst rocks and shrubs. Initially, the police filed a case of unnatural death.

"But we had our doubt," says the senior police official. "The terrace walls were too high for a child to fall over. So, we began to question Suryakala and she finally cracked. She initially said she was only trying to hurt the child and keep her out of the house. But the post-mortem report reveals that she strangled her," he adds.

A case of murder has now been filed against Suryakala by the Chennai police.
