Newborn sold off by grandparents at government hospital in Patiala

Sakai Ram and Saroj Bala agreed to the same and handed over the baby to Saroj (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A one-and-a-half-month-old baby was sold off by his grandparents for Rs 4 lakh in Patiala A staff employed at Rajindra Hospital in Patiala helped the grandparents of the baby in selling him The other accused involved in the case have also been arrested

Patiala: A child trafficking racket was busted in Patiala and five women were arrested, the police said on Thursday. According to the police, a newborn who had gone missing from the Rajindra Hospital on October 2 had been abducted by the gang.

Allegedly, the grandparents of the missing one-and-a-half-month-old baby were also involved in the case. The police rescued the baby and reunited him with his mother.

How it happened

On October 4, a man named Rakesh approached the police and told them that his baby was missing. A resident of Sidhpur in Lucknow, Rakesh said that his one-and-a-half-month-old baby was born weak. Rakesh's father Sakai Ram and his mother Krishna Devi had taken the baby to Rajindra Hospital in Patiala for his treatment. When Sakai and Krishna came back, they told Rakesh that the newborn had been abducted by an unknown woman.

According to a report, Sakai Ram met Saroj Bala in the Rajindra Hospital on October 2. Saroj had pitched the idea of 'selling' the newborn for money. Sakai Ram agreed handed over the baby to Saroj. Saroj gave the baby to Mamta. Mamta gave it to Kamlesh Kaur while Kamlesh asked her relative Usha to look for 'customers'.

Usha then contacted Seema while the latter approached her friend Beeba, asking her to find a customer for the baby. Meanwhile, Beeba found a customer through her friend. The customer was identified as Pankaj Goyal. Pankaj Goyal paid Rs 4 lakh for the baby.

After Rakesh lodged a complaint about his missing baby, the police sprung into action and launched an investigation into the case. The police arrested Sakai Ram, Krishna Devi, Saroj Bala, Mamta, Kamlesh, Seema and Pankaj Goyal. A case was also registered at the Civil Lines police station. Cash worth Rs 94,000 was also seized by the police.

Retired nurse suspected to have sold newborns in Chennai

A similar incident came to light in April from Chennai where a nurse with around 30 years of experience was accused of selling babies. The allegations surfaced after an audio of the woman discussing the prices of the babies went viral. The audio was recorded by one of the clients of the woman.

In the audio, the woman could be heard saying that newborn girls are sold for Rs 2.75 lakh. The fair newborns are sold for 3 lakh and the price rises to Rs 3.75 to Rs 4 lakh if the babies are "beautiful".
