10 militants killed, over 300 stone pelting cases since Aug 5: Security forces claim situation normal in J&K

The document states that close to a 100 security personnel were injured in the stone pelting incidents. (Photo: PTI)

Over 300 cases of stone-pelting have been reported since August 5 when the Central government revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by abrogating provisions under Article 370.

The picture emerging from the internal document of the security forces accessed by India Today TV is contrary to the claims made by the Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) administration.

The J&K administration has claimed that the state has been largely "peaceful" and "normal".

The document states that close to 100 security personnel were injured in the stone-pelting incidents, including 89 from the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF).

A top official in the CRPF told India Today TV, "The numbers may be there, but there are far fewer protests than what was seen in the 2016 agitation post-Burhan Wani's death."

Speaking further, the officer, on the condition of anonymity, said, "In the first six months of 2019, there had only been around 40 incidents of stone-pelting, the number is fewer than any normal day before the revocation of Article 370."

However, sources said the number of encounters had dipped to only five. They said the communication blackout which has not only adversely affected locals impacted counter-terror operations.

The technical intelligence, which was generated mostly on the account of mobile phone intercepts and tracking methods, has yielded in fewer encounters.

The security forces have also suffered in the five encounters so far, sources said.

Since August 5, two security force personnel were martyred and nine were injured, including a Special Police Officer (SPO) Bilal Ahmed who died in Baramullah on August 21 during an operation in the Gannie-Hamam area. The encounter had also grievously injured sub-inspector Amardeep Parihar.

The encounters have led to the deaths of 10 militants, records stated. There have also been two incidents of grenade lobbying and on two occasions, attempts were made to snatch weapons of security forces.

The CRPF camp in Kashmir also came under attack once from the Valley-based terror groups but no one was injured.

In apprehension of a huge backlash, the security forces have had to suffer on the account of communication blackout.

Though 300 SIM cards were immediately provided in the first ten days, the security forces have managed to keep their communication on.

Nearly 3,000 people were detained, including the entire mainstream political class. Sources said that the decision to release leaders in a phased manner is underway but declined to comment on the mobile phone connectivity.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah has maintained that "not a single bullet has been fired and not a single person has died". However, contrary claims have been made by several sections of media.
