Cow Menace On The Rise In UP, Swine Flu Cases Spike In Rajasthan + More Top News

Unprecedented scenes are playing out in Uttar Pradesh, especially in the rural areas among the agrarian communities.Cows, revered as Gods and a lifeline of many is now turning out to be a financial burden and a threat to their crops.

The stray cattle menace across the state has gone so much out of control to a point where farmers are now locking up the abandoned cows in anywhere from government offices, schools and hospitals to save their crops. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Swine Flu Cases Spike In Rajasthan, Delhi, Haryana And Punjab, 226 Deaths Reported So Far This Year

Rajasthan, where 85 have died and 2,263 others have been tested positive has been the worst hit in the swine flu outbreak across north India.According to the figures released by the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), a total of 226 people have been killed in the country due to the infection. Read More.

2) As Maharashtra Makes Virginity Test A Sexual Assault, The Dehumanising Practice Is A Shameful Reality

Many women from the Kanjarbhat community - made up of around 200,000 people – are forced to undergo a virginity test on their wedding night in order to ascertain whether or not they are ‘virtuous’.

The test is seen as a fundamental part of any wedding that takes place within the community and is obligated by the highly influential caste panchayat. Even though the Maharashtra state government passed a law criminalising caste panchayats in July 2017, the kangaroo courts have sustained, exercising mammoth power and influence in the community. Read More.

3) Back In Business, Bajrang Dal Threaten To Thrash Couples For Celebrating Valentine's Day

Bajrang Dal hates lovers. They hate Valentine’s Day even more. They hate it to the extend where they eagerly wait for February 14 every year, so that they can go around the town scare couples and forcefully marry them, if they manage to get hold of any lovers.

With just a week to go for another Valentine’s Day, the Bajrang Dal guys are back. To begin with, the right wing group's sate unit in Telangana has warned pubs and restaurants in the state against giving special offers to couples on February 14. Read More.

4) After Getting Pelted By Stones On Trial Run, Vande Bharat Express To Officially Launch On Feb 15

Less than a week it was pelted with stones by miscreants, India's first engineless train Vande Bharat Express is set to be flagged off on February 15. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will flag off India's first engineless train Vande Bharat Express from the New Delhi Railway station. Read More.

5) From Gold, E-Bikes To Unemployment Allowances, What Political Parties Are Offering As Pre-Poll Gifts

Lok Sabha elections are just a month or two away. As political parties try to grab every golden opportunity in which they can appease community members, gold, e-bikes, farm loan waivers whatnot are being granted to people in return of votes.

Assam Finance Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma promised e-bikes for all girls who secure first division in the higher secondary examination as well as a one-time subsidy of Rs 50,000 on all education loans sanctioned in the current financial year. Read More.
