Gujarat: Pocso convict kills his baby girl by dousing her with acid

PALANPUR/AHMEDABAD: Death of an eight-month-old girl in a village of Mehsana district, which was suspected to be due to malnourishment , has turned out to be a macabre murder allegedly executed by her own father, a Pocso convict. Autopsy of the baby girl who died on Wednesday in Chalasan village revealed that she painfully succumbed to severe acid burns. On Thursday, police arrested her father Vinuji Thakor (35) who confessed to dousing her with acid.The reason for killing the girl and Thakor’s brutality left even the police interrogators shaken. A senior police officer said Thakor wanted to frame some of his relatives in the baby’s murder as they were bitterly opposed to his affair with his widowed sister-in-law. “Thakor’s wife Suraj is physically challenged and the girl was their third child. However, she was born premature and severely malnourished. Assuming that the infant would not survive , Thakor hatched a conspiracy to kill her and then frame four people who were opposing his affair,” the police officer said.Few days ago, he had also purchased a bottle of acid to execute his macabre plan.On Wednesday noon, after the girl was fed cow milk by her mother, Thakor took out the bottle and savagely started dousing it on the infant and in front of his wife. He even sprinkled acid in the cradle. After she died, Thakor thrashed his wife and told her to call up police control room and name four persons for murdering the girl.A police team rushed to their house and sent the body for post-mortem. They also rounded up the parents and others for questioning.Meanwhile, doctors confirmed that the girl had died, not because of malnourishment, but severe acid burns, especially on the neck.“Initially, Suraj and Vinuji both said that the girl had died due to malnourishment. But Suraj couldn’t hold the guilt and spilled the beans on his grisly crime and the conspiracy. We have arrested him,” said Manjita Vanzara, superintendent of police, Mehsana. The couple’s son studies in Class II while daughter is 18 months old.
