Woman gang-raped, forced to drink acid by ex-husband and his relatives in Madhya Pradesh

The accused have been identified as her ex-husband, his sister, sister's husband and their two sons (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 28-year-old woman was tortured by her husband and his relatives in Madhya Pradesh The five accused abducted the woman and took her to a farm The woman was allegedly gang-raped, forced to drink acid and burnt with a cigarette

Indore: A woman was allegedly gang-raped by her ex-husband and his relatives in Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh, the police said on Friday. The woman was subjected to mental and physical torture in front of her two-year-old daughter. The 28-year-old woman was also forced to drink acid by the five accused.

After torturing the woman and gang-raping her, the accused abandoned her in Taal area. The police nabbed four of the five accused on Friday. The incident is said to have taken place on Monday.

According to the woman, she was going to a tailor in the area with her two-year-old daughter on Monday morning when the accused abducted her. The accused have been identified as her ex-husband, his sister, sister's husband and their two sons.

Reportedly, the accused arrived in a four-wheeler and abducted the woman and her two-year-old daughter. The accused drove the vehicle to a farm in Kharchod. The accused allegedly beat up the woman while her nephews gang-raped her.

On the next day, the accused allegedly beat up the woman again and burnt her with a cigarette. The accused forced the woman to drink acid. She spat it out and lost consciousness. The 28-year-old woman and her daughter were then thrown out of the car on a road. Following this, the accused fled the spot.

The woman was taken to the hospital by the police. The police have said that a zero FIR has been registered in relation to the case. An investigation revealed that the woman got married to her ex-husband (one of the accused) around eight years ago. The woman and her husband had two children, but around a year ago, the woman left her first husband and got married again. The accused was allegedly vexed over the same.

Woman beaten up, forced to drink toilet cleaner by husband in Uttar Pradesh

A similar incident came to light from Hathras, Uttar Pradesh in August this year where a woman was allegedly beaten up by her husband. The accused also forced the woman to drink toilet cleaner. Identified as Sadhna, the woman and her sister were married to two brothers.

Sadhna was married to Charanjeet while her sister Manisha was married to Daljeet. Sadhna and her husband had been experiencing problems in their marriages. On the day of the incident, Sadhna and her husband had an argument and when it escalated, Charanjeet forced her to drink toilet cleaner.


