India, Pak trade fire in Poonch

India, Pak trade fire in Poonch

Jawan killed, 2 women hurt in Indian firing: Pak

JAMMU, Oct 10: Pakistan on Thursday for the third consecutive day shelled forward Indian border posts and villages on the Line of Control (LoC) in Degwar, Kerni and Balakote sectors in Poonch district.

Defence spokesperson, while confirming ceasefire violation by Pakistan, said, “Pakistan army resorted to firing with small arms in Degwar, Kerni sectors in Poonch district. No injuries have been reported on Indian side. Indian army retaliated in equal measure.”

In the meanwhile reports from Islamabad said that at least one Pakistani army soldier was killed on Thursday in a fresh clash with Indian border troops along the Kashmir border amid heightened tensions following New Delhi's Kashmir move in August.

“Two civilian women were also injured in the clash -- the latest in a series of border skirmishes since India revoked the decades-long special status of the Jammu and Kashmir,” said a statement by the Pakistani army's media wing.

“Indian army troops,” the statement said, “resorted to unprovoked firing along the Line of Control -- killing a soldier and injuring two women in the village of Serian.” “Pakistan army troops targetted Indian army posts in response with reports of casualties to Indian troops,” the statement added.

Earlier on Wednesday also, Pak violated ceasefire in Degwar sector by initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by firing of small arms and shelling with mortars targetting Indian forward border posts and villages. Heavy trade of fire between India and Pak continued till late evening on Wednesday though no casualties were reported. On Tuesday, Pak army resorted to heavy shelling in Balakote, Mendhar sectors.



On Sunday also, Pak army violated the ceasefire at the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district by resorting to unprovoked firing and shelling in these sector.

Past few days have witnessed surge in ceasefire violations in Uri, Rajouri, Poonch on the Line of Control and Jammu and Kathua on the International Border. On October 8, the Director General of Police Dilbag Singh had stated, “During ceasefire violations, Pakistan attempts to push in a greater number of infiltrators. But the anti-infiltration grid of the Indian Army at the border areas is strong and it has foiled many such attempts from Pakistan.”
