Four men gangrape 20-year-old in front of her minor niece at Bhopal railway station

The incident took place when the woman and her niece were crossing the railway station's washing yard (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights All four accused have been arrested and booked on charges of gang-rape The incident took place on Wednesday when the two had gone to relieve themselves, said police Police said that the accused were employed as sanitation workers at the Bhopal railway station

Bhopal: In a chilling incident that has come to light from the state capital of Madhya Pradesh, a 20-year-old woman was gang-raped by four men. Police officers probing the case said that the accused held the survivor's minor niece hostage as they took turns raping the aunt. Going by most recent inputs, all four accused have been arrested.

Both residents of Sehore, less than 40 kilometres from Bhopal, the woman and her niece were in Bhopal to witness a religious procession on Wednesday night. In her complaint, the survivor stated that she and her niece went to the washing yard of the Bhopal railway station to answer nature's call when they were apprehended by the four men. She has also identified the prime accused as Rajesh Khare (40), her husband's brother and the others as Rakesh Karosia (40), Dharmendra Rai (45) and Vikram Karosia (32).

They held the minor girl hostage and took turns raping her aunt in front of her, said Station House Officer (SHO) of Government Railway Police (GRP) police station DK Joshi. The survivor initially approached the Hanumanganj police station but SHO Mahendra Singh Thakur guided her to the GRP police station where she lodged a complaint of gang-rape against the five accused.

A probe was launched on the basis of her complaint and led to the prompt arrest of all four accused. An officer familiar with the case told media outlets that all of the accused were hired through a private agency to work as sanitation workers at the railway station. The others were workers while Rai was their supervisor, he added.

The survivor also told investigators that her husband was involved in the murder of one Rakesh Bohad. He, among others, was booked in February of this year on the basis of a complaint by his brother who is the prime accused in the gang-rape case. However, her husband is still at large. It is still unclear why the prime accused targeted the woman and her niece.

Earlier this month, a gang-rape survivor was stopped by police after she declared that she would self-immolate in front of Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath's residence. Police officers in Bhopal reportedly counselled the woman and took her back home. A resident of Sagar district, the 17-year-old woman was raped by three men about a month ago. While two of the culprits were arrested, the third is on the run at the time of this report.
