Murder of Teacher, Pregnant Wife & Son shocks West Bengal

"a brutal murder took place, putting humanity to shame."

West Bengal in India is in a state of shock after a teacher, his pregnant wife and their eight-year-old son were found brutally murdered in Murshidabad district.

Primary school teacher and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) worker Bandhu Prakash Pal, his wife Beauty and their son were found lying in a pool of blood at their home on October 8, 2019.

Police have said that they were hacked to death by “unidentified miscreants on Monday night”.

The discovery of the barbaric triple murder came to light after neighbours did not see the family during some festivities.

Some of them became concerned and went to their home, however, they found that the front door had been locked from the inside.

This prompted them to inform the police who quickly arrived at the scene. They broke down the door and discovered the bodies of the family.

Graphic photos and videos of their bodies covered in blood circulated on social media.

Their murders have caused outrage across West Bengal, with politicians condemning the actions of those responsible.

Politicians also slammed rival parties after they chose to stay silent about the matter.

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) member Sambit Patra shared footage of the house covered in blood and called it “gruesome” on Twitter.

He wrote: “This has shaken my conscience… a RSS worker Bandhu Prakash Pal, his eight months pregnant wife & his kid were brutally slaughtered in West Bengal’s Murshidabad.

“Not a word by the liberals. Not a letter by 59 liberals to Mamata [Banerjee]. Nauseating Selectivism!”

It is believed that Patra was referring to people writing to Prime Minister Narendra Modi in July 2019 requesting him to take action against mob lynching.

West Bengal Governor Jagdeep Dhankar reacted to the incident and said:

“I am in deep pain. My heart is bleeding. What was in Murshidabad, a brutal murder took place, putting humanity to shame.

“A teacher, his pregnant wife and eight-year-old child were killed in a barbaric manner and there has been no response from the state machinery so far.

“This is a very, very serious reflection of the situation we are living in. I would urge the authority for a quick and real investigation.”

Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad condemned the murder while also hitting out at “liberals” for not speaking out about the killings.

Prasad tweeted:

“Deeply condemn this barbaric act of murder of RSS worker, his wife and child in West Bengal.”

“Hope liberals will find it ghastly enough to emphasise with the bereaved family if not condemn and criticise it outrightly.”

India Today reported that police officers have registered a case and are investigating to find those responsible for the triple murder which has shocked the Indian state.
