Modi-Xi summit: China’s territorial fetishism and why the road from Wuhan may peter out at Mamallapuram

In a second informal summit between India and China, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping are currently meeting at Mamallapuram. This meet, like the 2018 Wuhan Summit, is intended to conclude with no outcome documents and joint statement. At a time when India-China bilateral ties have hit a rough patch, informality certainly allows much flexibility to the dialogue between the two leaders.

If, for Modi, consolidation of Jammu and Kashmir is vital for achieving ‘One Nation, One Constitution’ thereby fulfilling the dream of ‘New India’; for Xi domestic stability is critical for accomplishing the Belt and Road Initiative and thereby fulfilling the ‘China Dream’. Intriguingly, for both, Pakistan is a pivotal factor in domestic consolidation.

For India, peace and stability in J&K is contingent on tackling and taming the epicentre of terrorism, Pakistan. For China, domestic prosperity is hinged upon the success of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, a flagship project of Xi’s ambitious BRI that passes through PoK. However, inherent in BRI is China’s territorial fetishism that would ultimately derail the Mamallapuram informal summit.

It may be noted that when Xi came to power in 2012, rising economic inequality and corruption challenged the Communist party’s legitimacy. Xi’s unveiling of BRI sought to integrate the underdeveloped periphery regions of China with the economies of the surrounding countries with massive infrastructure connectivity projects. CPEC was thus constituted which essentially connected the Kashgar Special Economic Zone (SEZ) that was created in 2010, with the Gwadar deep-sea port of Pakistan that China has helped build since 2002.

In the context of the US-China trade war now threatening to escalate into a finance war, China has critical need of Pakistan for the success of BRI. This explains Xi’s latest exhortation on Pak ties where he said, “no matter how the international and regional situation changes, the friendship between China and Pakistan has always been unbreakable and rock-solid.”

That rock-solid approach is most vivid on the issue of Kashmir. Marking a U-turn, Beijing said on Wednesday that the Kashmir issue must be resolved as per the UN charter. Earlier, following India’s abrogation of Article 370, Beijing pushed the UN Security Council to hold informal discussion on Kashmir. These indicate not merely a show of solidarity with Pakistan on Kashmir. Nor is it simply a Chinese geopolitical strategy to keep India boxed in. Rather, it is indicative of China’s territorial fetishism through which it is creating a security ring along its periphery that it thinks will sustain its economic development and legitimise its party leadership.

China’s territorial fetishism is not new. It is rooted in history, stemming not only from colonial incursions but also nomadic invaders who plundered the rich Yellow River Valley civilisation and ruled over China for almost half of the period of Chinese imperial history. To overcome peripheral vulnerability, the imperial Chinese state devised a well-defined periphery policy, the core of which was defence through development and forced migration.

The post-1949 Hanisation of Tibet and Xinjiang is therefore, a mere validation of imperial policy. Similarly, in the 1990s, to address the menace of ethnic separatism in the backward peripheral regions of Tibet and Xinjiang, China undertook the Western Development Strategy that was again laced with security measures, not economic amelioration, underscored in the five-pronged security policy of Hanisation, infrastructure development, resource extraction, military deployment and repression.

Today, under Xi, territorial vulnerability has reached new heights. It is not just about taming China’s minority dominated periphery alone, but also about imposing extraterritorial claims beyond its legal boundaries, be it gaining a 99 year lease on Sri Lanka’s Hambantota port or gaining 91% of revenue generated by Gwadar port from 2016 to 2059. Moreover, right after the conclusion of Mamallapuram meet, Xi Jinping would visit Nepal – the first by a Chinese president in 23 years. By integrating Nepal into BRI China, in effect, has turned Nepal into a new periphery.

Clearly, domestic compulsions of economic stability and party legitimacy are principal drivers of China’s territorial fetishism. In this context, while Kashmir looms large on India-China bilateral discussion, Pakistan remains the principal anchor for China’s India policy. The centrality of Pakistan in Chinese foreign policy is a direct assault on India’s sovereignty and domestic security. In all likelihood, the Wuhan spirit is unlikely to consolidate into a Mamallapuram spirit, and could well collapse due to China’s territorial fetishism.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
