Fabric designer abducted by fake cops

Ludhiana: Five miscreants posing as cops have allegedly abducted a fabric designer, Prince Dhami (32), from his house in Janta Nagar on Thursday night. While leaving from there, one accused claimed they were from CIA-1 staff. However, when the family approached the CIA staff, they came to know they had not detained the man. Following this, the family on Friday lodged a complaint with Shimlapuri police. According to cops, they had verified from both CIA-1 and CIA-2, along with other police stations, but could not confirm Dhami’s detention.

In his complaint, Prince’s younger brother Rajan stated, “On the night of October 8, nine cops (including a woman) came to our locality in two cars. The woman and one man were in police uniform, while the others were in civil dress. They first went to my uncle’s place, adjoining ours, and searched that house. Thereafter, they came to our house. While one was standing outside keeping a watch, the others came inside and started searching our house.”

Dhami added that after frisking the house for a while, the man in uniform said they were investigating an accident case, for which they were frisking their house. However, after frisking, they apologized for the inconvenience and left from there.

He added, “On Thursday night, my brother Prince returned from his factory around 8.30pm. His wife was also at home when three men in a silver-coloured Maruti Suzuki Swift, and two men in one bike came to their house. They barged into the house, and took Prince along without saying anything. When Prince’s wife asked the bike-borne accused, he said they were from CIA-1. On being informed, I rushed home and approached CIA-1 and CIA-2, but did not get information on Prince’s custody.”

The family also approached Shimlapuri police, who confirmed they had not arrested Prince. On Friday morning, Rajan lodged a complaint with the police. Shimlapuri SHO inspector Pramod Kumar said, “We have confirmed from both CIA-1, CIA-2, and all police stations of Ludhiana Commisisonerate, but got no confirmation of Prince’s arrest. The police have also circulated his name and picture with the police of other districts, but got no confirmation.”

The inspector added that if police from another district or state had to arrest an accused, they would approach the police station concerned. Therefore, it was suspected that Prince Dhami had been abducted by some miscreants posing as cops. According to family, Prince has no rivalry. Workers in the factory where Prince works were also questioned about any rivalry, but they were not aware of any.

BOX

NO NUMBER PLATES

According to complainant Rajan Dhami, on October 8, when nine miscreants came to their house in two cars, one Toyota Innova and one Maruti 800, both vehicles were without a number plate. Importantly, police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal has already issued orders to register a case against persons driving any vehicle without a number plate. Dhami also alleged that on Thursday night, their neighbour noted down the registration number of the Swift car, which was later identified as that of a scooter.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
