In another case, Unnao rape victim kidnapped, raped for 9 days by 3 people, alleged CBI

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) alleged that the Unnao rape victim was kidnapped and raped for nine days at different places by three people in 2017 when she was a minor.

The CBI, which is probing the case, on Friday told a Delhi court that the case was different from the alleged sexual assault of the woman by expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar in 2017.

District Judge Dharmesh Sharma, during in-camera proceedings, took note of a charge sheet filed by the CBI in the gangrape case and listed the matter for further hearing on October 15.

In the charge sheet, three people -- Naresh Tiwari, Brijesh Yadav and Shubham Singh -- have been named as accused for the offences under sections 120B (criminal conspiracy), 363 (kidnapping), 366 (abducting or inducing woman to compel her for marriage), 376 D (sexual assault by more than one person) of the Indian Penal Code and sections 3 and 4 (penetrative sexual assault and punishment) of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, news agency PTI reported.

The CBI said that the woman had come out of her house to fetch water at night when Singh and Tiwari, along with three others, allegedly pulled her inside a car forcibly and raped her.

The charge sheet also alleged that she was later taken to a house on the way to Kanpur where two unknown persons allegedly raped her.

After two-three days, the woman was taken to the Yadav's house, where he allegedly raped her. Then two days later, she was taken to Auraiya district in Uttar Pradesh from where she was recovered by police, the charge sheet said.

During the course of the investigation, the CBI found that the rape survivor was kidnapped on June 12 instead of June 11 as Singh and Tiwari were not at that location on June 11.

The CBI said further investigation is going on in the case regarding the role of other accused persons.

Meanwhile, the probe agency dropped murder charges against Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his associates in its first charge sheet in the Unnao rape victim accident case in which two aunts of the woman were killed.

In the first charge sheet filed before a special CBI court in Lucknow on Friday evening, the agency charged Sengar and all other accused named in the FIR under IPC sections related to criminal conspiracy and criminal intimidation.

In July, the woman, who was allegedly raped by Sengar in 2017 when she was a minor, was critically injured after a truck hit the car she was travelling in with some family members and her lawyer Uttar Pradesh's in Rae Bareli district.
