Another BJP worker rapes, impregnates teen, arrested

Chennai: A 61-year-old owner of a private nursing college and also the president of BJP party’s art and culture president was arrested on charges of raping and impregnating a 19-year-old student studying in the college.

The accused identified as Sivaguru Durairaj was arrested by the Tamil Nadu’s Sivaganga District Police.

The crime came to light after the victim got married.

“The girl got married on September 11. After 20 days of the wedding, her husband left to resume his job abroad as he is working there. On Monday, the girl fainted in her husband’s house. When doctors examined her, it came to light that the girl was already three months pregnant,” said Sivaganga district police in a statement.

When asked the victim revealed to her parents that her college owner had raped her multiple times.

“Durairaj is running Goodmans Nursing College in Sivaganga, where the victim was studying. The accused apparently raped the girl by promising her high marks in exams. He is said to have threatened her if she revealed anything to anybody,” Sivaganga police sources added.

The Police further said: “We have formally arrested him today and an FIR has been filed under IPC sections 417 (Punishment for cheating), 376 (Punishment for rape), 294(B) and section 506 (i) Punishment for criminal intimidation has been filed against him.”

“We have also asked if any other students to come forward, if they have been exploited by Durairaj similarly and have assured any aggrieved student that they would be provided security” R Rohit Nathan, Superintendent of Police, Sivaganga told the media.

However, Sivanga District BJP president N Chockalingam said that he has recommended to the party high-command to take disciplinary action against Durairaj.

“Sivaguru Durairaj is not an active worker of BJP. Though he was appointed as BJP arts and culture wing district president post a few years ago, he was not working for the party.”

He further added, “So, we do not consider him as a party worker. I have already recommended to the party leadership to remove him from the party. The delay in taking action was because the TN state president post is vacant since September 1. However, our party will initiate disciplinary action against him.”
