Assistant priest found dead in his chambers in Karnataka's Udupi, no suicide note found

The deceased Mahesh D'Souza (Picture Courtesy: donboscoschoolshirva.com) | Photo Credit: People

Key Highlights Another priest who worked with the deceased found his body on Friday night Police are yet to recover a suicide note from the deceased's chambers or official residence D'Souza was appointed the principal of Don Bosco School in Shivar in 2016

Bengaluru: A 36-year-old principal of a prominent school in Karnataka's Udupi district was found dead in his official chambers on Friday night. Identified as Mahesh D'Souza, the deceased was also an assistant parish priest and hailed from Moodubelle. A police investigation into his death has been initiated and more details are likely to emerge in the coming days.

Mahesh's body was discovered by Father Ashwin Aranha, a priest who worked closely with the victim. Father Aranha went to visit Mahesh at his official chambers on Friday night and found the latter's body lying on the floor. He immediately alerted staffers and local police who arrived at the scene and rushed D'sSouza's body to a government hospital in the city.

Doctors at the hospital declared him dead on arrival. However, the cause of death is yet to be ascertained awaiting a post-mortem report. Prima facie the death seems like a case of suicide, according to a report. But no suicide note was recovered from the principal's chambers where the priest found his body. As part of the initial investigation, police also searched Mahesh's official residence but could not find any solid evidence leading them to believe that he might have taken his own life.

Ordained as a priest in 2013, D'sSouza served as an assistant parish priest at the Milagres Mount Rosary Church in the tiny hamlet of Kallianpur in Karnataka. He was posted at Shirva as an assistant parish priest and the Principal of the Don Bosco School in Shirva in 2016. Officers probing the matter said that Mahesh carried out his regular duties on Friday and those who were with him did not notice any anomaly in his behaviour. That, coupled with the absence of a suicide note, has lent mystery to the sudden and suspicious death of the 36-year-old priest.

Meanwhile, a case of unnatural death has been registered at the Shirva police station. Investigators also cited a note by the Udupi Diocese that established how Mahesh and Ashwin were handling the daily affairs of the parish in the absence of the senior parish priest, who is abroad at the moment. While some reports in sections of the media claim that D'sSouza hung himself to the ceiling fan in his chambers, the same is yet to be confirmed by police officers probing his death. The reports further add that the deceased's mobile phone is being verified along with CCTV footage from outside his chambers.
