Telangana: TSRTC employee sets himself ablaze, another attempts self-immolation

The strike entered its eighth day on Saturday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Reddy attempted self-immolation at his home in Khammam and has suffered 90% burns The TSRTC employee is currently critical and being shifted to Hyderabad for treatment Another employee attempted to set himself ablaze but was rescued by colleagues

Hyderabad: Less than 48 hours after Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao announced that the government is not willing to take back the 48,000 employees of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC), his decision has led to a devastating turn of events.

A TSRTC employee, now identified as Srinivas Reddy set himself ablaze at his residence in Khammam district on Saturday. Reddy had been working with TSRTC for over 20 years and his decision to take the drastic step has shocked his co-workers and family members. Following the incident, he was rushed to the nearest government hospital where he is currently undergoing treatment.

However, most recent inputs suggest that his condition is critical since he sustained close to 90 per cent burns on his body. Srinivas is among the 48,000-plus TSRTC employees who launched a strike on October 5. The purpose of this strike is to merge the corporation with the state government. This would allow the employees to seek employment benefits available to those in the public sector.

A senior official in Khammam told media outlets that Reddy is being shifted to a hospital in Hyderabad where he will be treated for burns. Meanwhile, unions of transport employees have called for a statewide strike on October 19 to draw the attention of the state government and persuade it to give in to their demands. These 48,000 or more employees are yet to receive their salaries for the month of October since the state government claims that they have been terminated from service. In fact, another employee of TSRTC attempted self-immolation outside the collectorate but was rescued by his colleagues.

Even as the tussle between TSRTC employees and the Chandrashekhar Rao government widens, neither of the parties is willing to back down. Telangana Transport Minister P Ajay Kumar has said that RTCs have not been merged with state governments in any Indian state. He also claimed that Chief Minister Rao never promised to initiate the merger. Resounding the words of his transport minister earlier, the CM had termed the strike as "illegal and unauthorised". He had even declared that the state government will not acknowledge the strike in any official capacity.

In an official statement from his office, KCR instructed concerned officials to appoint enough employees to run 50 per cent of TSRTC's buses and take another 30 per cent on hire while giving stage carriage route permits to 20 per cent private buses. The protestors are also demanding salary hikes which are due since 2017 as per the Telangana Joint Action Committee (JAC).
