Just married minor girl dies in Andhra village, honour killing suspected

honour killing

Santhipuram block

Chittoor district

Palamaneru block

In a suspected case of, a 17-year old girl died under suspicious conditions hours after marrying her lover against her parents’ wish. The family cremated her hurriedly and claimed that she had committed suicide.The incident took place inofon Saturday but came to light on Sunday (Oct 13). The victim belonged to a backward community and hailed from Reddipalli village in Santhipuram block.According to police, the girl, who was studying degree first year in the government college at Kuppam, was in love with a student, called Nanda Kumar, from the same college. Nanda belongs to a Scheduled Caste (SC) and is from another village in the same Santhipuram block.Following objections raised by her parents to the affair, she left home on Friday and married Nanda at a temple in Kuppam on Saturday morning. Her parents brought her home, reportedly promising to have a formal talk with Nanda’s family.That evening, she died. The family cremated her body in a hurry and also immersed the ashes in a local water body, leaving no clue for investigation. Villagers alleged that the family members had tortured her to death. The parents claimed that their daughter committed suicide by hanging herself from the ceiling, when they were away from home.Kuppam rural police inspector Krishna Mohan said a case of death under suspicious conditions was registered. “We are investigating if the girl was murdered," he said. Nanda’s family alleged that the girl was murdered for marrying a man from a different caste. They questioned the parents’ hurry to cremate the girl and immersing the ashes in the water body.This is the second instance of honour killing in Chittoor district in four months. In June, a father brutally murdered his 23-year old daughter for marrying a lower caste man in. The father waylaid her when she was returning home with her infant son and axed her to death. The police arrested all the family members of the woman.
