NPA “captured by Trump” – EFF’s Ndlozi shares wild conspiracy theory

It’s quite the conspiracy theory, even by the EFF’s lofty standards. But Spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi has issued a response to the news that the Guptas have been slapped with heavy sanctions in the US, and it’s probably not as glowing as many – including the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) – would have expected.

Guptas under pressure

The Indian billionaires have essentially been banned from any financial activity in America, and cannot conduct business with any company that operates within the USA. The UK are also being asked to implement similar punitive measures, as South Africa goes international in its bid to prosecute the infamous state captors.

We learned on Friday that eight other countries – including China, Canada and Switzerland – have been asked to cooperate with South African law enforcement in order to bring the brothers to justice. That includes the NPA, who would be responsible for filing a case against the Guptas if they could be hauled back to Mzansi.

EFF introduce our latest state captor… It’s Donald Trump?

Given the wide-ranging nature of their corruption network, any intervention that goes towards snaring the billionaires must be seen as positive… right? Well, not if you’re Mbuyiseni Ndlozi of the EFF. He shared a very frank opinion on the matter during Sunday, likening the US Treasury’s action to an “imperialist capture of the NPA”.

Ronald Lamola, previous Deputy President of the anti-imperialist ANC YL, is now presiding over the imperialist capture of South Africa’s National Prosecuting Authority by Donald Trumps’ United States of America. — Mbuyiseni Ndlozi (@MbuyiseniNdlozi) October 13, 2019

He references Donald Trump by name. Although The Donald hasn’t personally intervened in this case, people extremely close to him have monitored the situation. US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo – a rare mainstay in Trump’s Administration – recognised the Gupta-targeted sanctions on Thursday, stating that “no corruption of any kind” could be tolerated in America.

International investigation into the Guptas gains traction

Justice and Correctional Services Minister Ronald Lamola has explained South Africa’s position on the Guptas. He has confirmed that a global collaborative effort is underway to find out if the brothers can be brought back to the shores of Mzansi to face a criminal investigation.

The probe could prove to be a little too close to home for the former allies of Jacob Zuma. Both India and the UAE – known Gupta residences – have been asked to put the squeeze on the trio. They’ve done a pretty good job of hiding so far, but it seems there are fewer places left for the brothers to run.
