Physically-challenged man held for raping, murdering 40-year-old in Uttar Pradesh

The woman's post-mortem also confirmed sexual assault. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: A physically-challenged man was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh police on Sunday for outraging the modesty of a 40-year old woman and strangulating her to death. The incident was reported from Lakhimpur Kheri district of the state. The woman's body was found in a semi-naked condition with strangulation marks around the neck from a sugarcane field on October 11.

The superintendent of Police, Poonam, told media that while probing the case, it came to light that the woman was strangled to death and later sexually abused. The accused was identified as Ganga Ram. On October 11, while the woman was passing by the field after withdrawing money from a nearby bank, Ram reportedly attacked and later strangulated her to death.

The accused was interrogated by experts dealing with audio and speech impaired persons. Ram reportedly, confessed that he assaulted the woman after finding her alone and strangulated her with her saree. After murdering the woman, he confessed to having abused the woman. However, the post-mortem of the victim also confirmed sexual assault.

Initially, the police had registered a case under section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code. After further investigation in the case, the police added sections 376 (rape) and 201 (causing the disappearance of evidence of offence) of the Indian Penal Code.

In another case reported, the Chhatisgarh police arrested two men on Sunday in connection with the abduction and rape of a 19-year-old tribal woman in Koriya district. The accused tried to kill the victim by hanging her from a tree after the sexual assault by one of them. According to a news agency report, the incident took place on Saturday evening in Jhagrakhand police station area.

The accused duo was identified as 25-year-old Vinod Urao and 24-year-old Suraj Panika. The complaint in the case was lodged by the victim. The police official told a media person that as per preliminary investigation in the matter, Urao had been arrested in 2017 and he had spent a few months in jail after the same girl had lodged a molestation complaint against him.

As soon as he was released from jail on bail, he was allegedly planning to take revenge and teach her and her family a lesson.
