Being Raped Is Just The Beginning, Society Ensures Survivors Suffer For Life

Being sexually violated is a traumatic experience. Everyone knows it. But, what people don’t think about as much as the act of violence itself is the continued trauma of those who survive it.

Let’s take a simple hypothetical situation. A woman is raped. She goes to the police to file an FIR. The police ask her questions along the lines of, “Did you know the man? What was he doing in your house? Why didn’t you shout for help? There are no bruises on you, so you clearly didn’t struggle, did you?”

Each time a woman is asked to recount the assault, she has to relive it again. And again. And again. Each time is a fresh case of trauma. People seem to be sensitive enough to the Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) that war veterans go through. Movies and shows have been made to revolve around the trauma of men who have gone to war and come back.

A car backfires and a war vet can be sent straight back into the battlefield where he witnessed the slaughter of his friends in front of his eyes. We all sympathise with this kind of PTSD, so why are we so insensitive to the trauma a rape survivor goes through?

Somehow, it’s the woman’s fault

This is because, at some level, people think it is the woman’s fault that she was raped. That somehow, she invited it--with the clothes she was wearing, by being out alone at night, by not fighting hard enough.

When I watched the Netflix series Unbelievable, it shook me to the core. It would shake anyone who watched it. The show follows the life of a young girl who was brutally raped by a masked intruder in her own home. When filing a police report, two male officers kept asking her insensitive questions, kept doubting her answers, and kept pushing her to “remember” more.

Finally, she tells the police officers that she made up the whole rape for “attention”. When, in reality, she just wanted them to stop making her relive her trauma. The police’s insensitivity nearly led to a serial rapist getting away with raping multiple women across different districts.

It’s not a shocker that the police team that managed to catch the serial rapist was led by two women. You can immediately see how different the approach of the women police officers was--the moment a rape survivor looked uncomfortable, they immediately stopped pushing them to talk. Sensitivity. Clearly, it is possible to be sensitive and still solve a crime.

India has a bad track record with rape survivors

Unnao, Shahjahanpur, Kathua rape cases--what do they have in common? In each one, the police refused to file a case of rape. It is against the law to do so but the police, who should be upholding the law are the ones breaking it.

The Unnao rape survivor has had her father and two female relatives die after she accused a BJP leader of rape. She and her lawyer barely managed to escape with their own lives after they met with an “accident”.

Each step of the way, rape survivors are treated like absolute dirt. Their battle for justice is looked down upon as a transgression of a man’s right to take what he wants, including a woman’s body. The women are shamed, are considered “soiled” goods, and are ostracised by society.

Each step of the way, evidence is destroyed and witnesses are intimidated or outright killed. The men accused in the Nirbhaya rape case have confessed to their crimes on camera, in a BBC documentary that was aired despite a ban by the government, but they are still in jail “awaiting trial”.

By the time the rapists are hanged for their brutality, there will be no justice because, as they say, justice delayed is justice denied. A woman in Jaipur found it easier to just burn herself to death than fight for justice in an apathetic system.

Being raped is only the beginning of the trauma women go through after being sexually assaulted. Society’s treatment of survivors is a lifelong traumatic experience.




