Minor dies due to unsafe abortion; 'pregnancy was terminated outside hospital', suspect Delhi Police

The post-mortem report in the case are awaited and further investigation in the case is still underway. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The minor victim was brought to Deen Dayal Upadhyay hospital on Friday late evening The police is suspecting, there was an attempt to terminate her pregnancy outside the hospital The police have arrested one person and registered a case under Sections 376, 201 and 304 of the Indian Penal Code

New Delhi: After a 15-year-old girl died on Friday night allegedly due to unsafe pregnancy termination, the Delhi Police have apprehended one person in connection with the case on Sunday. The incident happened in West Delhi's Nanak Pura area.

The police officials told the media, that the minor victim was brought to Deen Dayal Upadhyay hospital on Friday late evening. The girl was reportedly in a serious condition and she breathed her last at the hospital. The Deputy Superintendent of Police (West), Deepak Purohit said that the girl was alive when she was brought to the hospital and they didn't find the traces of fetus.

He added that the police is suspecting, there was an attempt to terminate her pregnancy outside the hospital, maybe at home or some other place and they are now are trying to find out the location. Reportedly, the police have arrested one person and registered a case under Sections 376, 201 and 304 of the Indian Penal Code and The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012.

The deceased's family and other relatives are currently being questioned by the police. The police official added that since the victim is minor they have registered a case of rape and under other appropriate sections. The post-mortem report in the case are awaited and further investigation in the case is still underway.

Unsafe abortions are procedures conducted by untrained providers like quacks or using other illegal methods in unhygienic conditions. According to a report, as many as 56% of abortions in India are unsafe and 8.5% of all maternal deaths in India are due to unsafe abortion. due to these reasons, 10 women die every day in lour country.

Reportedly, when a woman is legally not allowed to abort or lacks access to trained providers, she is forced to go to illegal providers. Due to these reasons, the maternal mortality rate is high in our country.
