Activist who spoke out against illegal constructions in fringes ‘abducted’

The disappearance of an outspoken voice against illegal constructions around the fringes of Pune has caused the missing man’s family to claim that police are deliberately lax to investigate the case at the behest of builders indulging in shady dealings.Vinayak Sirsat (32), an officebearer of the Republican Party of India (Athawale) or RPI-A, was allegedly kidnapped from the Jambhulwadi area last week, as per a first information report (FIR) filed with Bharati Vidyapeeth police by his kin.Missing for the last nine days, Vinayak had filed multiple complaints against developers active in illegal constructions across areas like Jambhulwadi, Narhe, Uttamnagar and Shivne over the last three years. In fact, taking cognisance of his plaints, both Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority (PMRDA) and Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) had also initiated action against unauthorised constructions a few times. This has convinced the Sirsats that the builder lobby is behind the alleged abduction.A resident of Shivne, Vinayak’s father Sudhakar Sirsat (52) lodged the complaint in this regard; while doing so, he also submitted a list of 72 local developers that had found themselves in his son’s crosshairs over the years. He further alleged that these entities used to threaten his son on a regular basis.While Vinayak is the city president of the Republican Bandhkam Kamgar Sena, his father is the state president of the same organisation.Vinayak also used to take plastering contracts at construction sites.On January 30 this year, he left for work at a building site in Jambhulwadi, even as his father visited a hospital for a routine heart check-up. The last Sudhakar heard from Vinayak is when he called around 2 pm to ask about his health status. When the father came home at 7 pm, he received a call from their driver, asking for Rs 15 lakh. Confused, Sudhakar asked the driver to come home and explain this demand — when the driver reached, he said he had received a call from Vinayak, asking him to bring Rs 15 lakh from his father. Taken aback, the family tried to call Vinayak, but found his cellphone switched off. They also called his best friend, Prakash Varma, but his mobile was switched off as well.On January 31, the family lodged a missing person complaint. But a few days down the line, when they realised something serious is afoot, they also lodged a complaint of kidnapping on February 5.Speaking to Mirror, Vinayak’s brother Kishor Sirsat asserted, “The day after he disappeared mysteriously, we found his car unlocked roadside in Ambegaon. When asked, local shopkeepers said they had been at their stores from 9 am to 10 pm the previous day, but saw no one parking that car. This means it was placed there at night. When we went to the cops, they did not even bother to check closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage of the construction site my brother had visited. Moreover, they did not cooperate with us, claiming they would investigate the case in ‘their own way’.”He added, “My brother has a list of 72 developers active in the illegal construction business across Narhe, Ambegaon, Uttamnagar, Kondhwe-Dhawde and Shivne. Many of them routinely threatened him to withdraw his complaints, even holding meetings to discuss him. He worked for the right of the poor people of all these villages.”Vinayak’s plaints till date have targeted over 40 developers, whose names include Ramesh Konde, Bhushan Ranwade, Kishor Pokale, Vikram Pokale, Chetan Dhawde, Prakash Varma, Sachin Dodke, Atul Dangat, Vijay Sanas and more. Taking cognisance, both PMC and PMRDA have initiated action and razed illegal constructions in Narhe, Jambhulwadi, Uttamnagar and Shivne at Vinayak’s behest; PMRDA has also filed cases against many of the developers.Recently, in December 2018, an illegal construction by Abhishek Dhawde and one Darwadkar was razed by PMRDA at Shivne, near the Kawde Hospital; earlier that year, PMRDA took action against an unauthorised structure by the same duo at Uttamnagar. The previous year, in 2017, PMRDA had initiated action at Shivne against an illegal construction by Vikram Mokashe, Bharat Changediya and one Kondankar, as well as razed an unauthorised building by Bhushan Ranwade at Narhe.Emphasising these achievements, Sudhakar told Mirror, “I submitted the list of people against whom my son has filed complaints as we strongly believe they are behind this crime — and may have done something to my son. But the police refuse to take this case seriously. They are delaying investigations. The offenders are local goons, connected to political parties. So, nobody dares take them on. The police should have already called them for interrogation and taken action if they found anything suspicious.”But denying any accusations of nonchalance, senior police inspector Vishnu Pawar of Bharati Vidyapeeth PS asserted, “We have been probing this case since the missing person complaint was filed. We have formed three teams and given different tasks to each to look into different angles. The family gave us a list of 72 people, all of whom are being called for interrogation. Naturally, this will take some time.”
