Noida solved 91% cases, but also saw most number of rapes, loots

NOIDA: Gautam Budh Nagar has witnessed the most number of loot dacoity and rape cases so far this year among the top 10 districts that have been adjudged for maintaining law and order. The district has bagged the fifth spot in the state for prevention of crime , according to the report of a survey released on Saturday.All 75 districts of Uttar Pradesh have been examined on the basis of cases lodged with police, prevention of crime, rate of solving cases, response time to attend distress calls, overall image, perception, etc. The rankings were released on Saturday.While Moradabad bagged the top spot on all these parameters, it was followed by Gorakhpur, Etawa, Auraiya, GB Nagar, Lalitpur, Kanpur Dehat, Gonda, Chandauli and Muzaffarnagar, respectively.The survey showed GB Nagar had solved 91% of the cases registered up to September this year, but the data also revealed that it’s vulnerable to different types of street crime. The number of dacoities, robberies, murders and rapes in the district so far in 2019 stands at 3, 121, 69 and 72, respectively.These numbers indicate that GB Nagar witnessed the highest number of dacoities, robberies and rapes among the top 10 districts. In heinous cases such as murder , the district is second only to Gorakhpur, which has seen 73 killings.A comparative study of crime data of 2019 and 2018 itself shows that GB Nagar has seen a rise in cases of robbery, murder and rape, while dacoities have shown a decrease.While there have been 121 robberies in 2019, the number stood at 81 last year. This year, 69 murders have taken place in the district, compared to 50 in 2018. Rape cases, too, have registered an increase —up from 40 in 2018 to 72 this year.Further, at 512 so far, GB Nagar has the highest number of cases lodged under the Goonda Act among the top 10 districts. The number of cases lodged under the Gangster Act is the third-highest on the list, and the number of times the National Security Act was invoked stands at 4, the second-highest among the top 10 districts.The economic offences wing of GB Nagar has also recovered a total of Rs 2.5 crore from several offences committed in the district, which makes it bag the top spot.Police officers admitted there was a rise in street crime in the district and attributed it to more number of organised gangs at work, more people coming forward to report crime and the district sharing its borders with Delhi and important towns of western UP.SP (rural) Ranvijay Singh said economic activity had seen a rise in GB Nagar of late because of increasing number of industries and factories coming up in the area. “The maximum number of snatchings is of mobile phones. The most number of attacks has taken place near factories and companies, which makes it clear that the gangs of snatchers are targeting people moving around their workplace. It is difficult to deploy policemen at every place. The gangs take advantage of this,” he said.The SP pointed out that in a number of rape complaints, it had been seen that women have approached the cops when relationships have turned sour. “In many complaints under the Dowry Act, the rape charge is being invoked,” he added.Singh, however, said the police had intensified vigil to arrest gangs engaged in street crime.The report of the survey released on Saturday also showed that Noida police had arrested as many as 40 criminals after shootouts, but there were no casualties. Asked about the shootouts, Noida police chief Vaibhav Krishna had said cops were often forced to fire in retaliation.
