Mumbai: 4-year-old minor girl sexually assaulted, murdered in Mahim

A 4-year-old minor girl was found dead at Mahim West. Further investigation have hinted on the vitim being sexually assaulted.

The body was found on Thursday, 9.30 am near Mahim church area after the watchman of an adjoining building alerted the secretary of the body lying inside the bushes.

According to the police, the deceased minor was survived by her parents who are beggars and usually sleep on the footpath. During the wee hours of Wednesday and Thursday, father of the girl who was asleep with his family outside the premises of another building situated close to the crime scene, woke up after his daughter was nowhere to be found.

"On Thursday around 5 am, the father woke up after realising that his daughter was not sleeping next to him. He searched the area but failed to trace his missing daughter. Couple of hours later, he approached the Mahim police station where a complaint was lodged under section 363 (punishment for kidnapping) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). A message was sent to all the patrolling officers and other stations. The team received a call about a dead body being found close to the Mahim church," said a senior police officer.

The police discovered the body in a semi-nude condition and preliminary examination highlighted that the girl was sexually assaulted and then strangulated by hands of an unknown accused. The forensic team along with the dog squad later carried out necessary investigation from the spot and samples from the spot are collected for further analysis. The body of the girl was sent to Sion hospital for post-mortem.

Along with the local police team, the crime branch sleuths are also conducting a parallel investigation in the matter and are questioning all the concerning people. "CCTV footages of all the adjoining areas are being scrutinised. One of the footage shows unidentified man carrying a child on his shoulders. We have registered a case under section 302 of the IPC and we are hopeful of arresting the accused very soon," added the officer.

GORY PICTURE
