Man kills wife using iron rod over suspicion of infidelity in UP's Ghaziabad

However, an FIR was lodged by the victim's brother on October 10 at the Khoda Police Station. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused was identified as Raju, a resident of Prashant Vihar colony Raju used to work in Dubai and had returned to India in February this year After a preliminary investigation in the case, the accused was apprehended in the case

Ghaziabad: The police have arrested a man for bludgeoning his wife to death with an iron rod on suspicion of her "character" on Sunday. The incident happened in Uttar Pradesh's Ghaziabad district.

The accused was identified as Raju, a resident of Prashant Vihar colony. He used to work in Dubai and had returned to India in February this year. The Superintendent of Police Maneesh Mishra told a media person that after murdering his wife he was planning to leave the country but was arrested from labour chowk.

He further added that a look-out circular had been issued against Raju to prevent him from fleeing the country. The victim used to live with her husband in a house owned by Raju's mother. As per a news agency report, the police said that the victim's mother-in-law had asked her to vacate the house on several occasions but she refused.

Meanwhile, the victim's husband doubted her character and feared that she may sell his mother's house. On October 9, Raju decided to kill his wife and later bludgeoned her using an iron rod. However, an FIR was lodged by the victim's brother on October 10 at the Khoda Police Station. He accused his brother-in-law of the crime. After a preliminary investigation in the case, the accused was apprehended in the case.

In another incident reported from Kolkata, a man allegedly stabbed his wife to death in Maheshtala in South 24 Parganas on Saturday night. The incident took place when the accused was at his in-laws' house for the celebration of his son's birthday.

The deceased was identified as Madhumita and the accused was named Shibu. Madhumita and Shibu had been married for the last 17 years but they did not stay together. On the day of the incident, Shibu went to his in-laws' place with chocolates and gifts but he was denied entry into the house.

He later went to a police station to lodge a complaint in relation to the incident, where the police asked Shibu to go back to the house to meet his son. When the accused went back to meet his son, he asked his wife to come to another room. Shibu locked the door and stabbed her multiple times. However, locals caught hold of Shibu and handed him over to the police.
