Mumbai: Angry over sister's suicide, man stabs brother-in-law inside police station

Police officials said Kaled believed his brother-in-law drove his sister to take the extreme step of ending her life within one year of their marriage.

In a shocking incident, a 25-year-old man was stabbed to death inside a police station in front of police officers and personnel in Mumbai on Monday evening.

The incident occurred inside the Nallasopara police station on Monday evening when Akash Kolekar was recording his statement before police when his brother-in-law Ravindra Kaled, 25, stabbed him in front of the police officer.

On Saturday night, Kolekar's wife and Kaled's sister Komal, aged 20, committed suicide by hanging herself with her saree tied to the ceiling fan at her residence in Matruchaya Building at Nallasopara.

According to police, there had been differences between the couple and they would fight often -- mostly on trivial issues. Both had married for over a year. Komal was reportedly tired of the mental agony and took the extreme step of ending her life.

As no suicide note was found, the police registered a case of accidental death. Meanwhile, Komal's family, who stay in the Satara district of Maharashtra, were informed so that they could be questioned regarding the incident.

Komal's parents and her brother Ravindra arrived at the police station in the evening when Kolekar's statement was being recorded. Seeing Kolekar in the detection room, Kaled pulled out a knife he was carrying with him and attacked Kolekar -- stabbing him several times.

Kolekar was grievously injured before police officials could spring into action. The police managed to overpower and restrain Kaled, while Kolekar was rushed to the Riddhi Vinayak Hospital. Kolekar succumbed to his injuries and was declared dead at the hospital.

"We have charged Kaled with murder under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (Punishment for assault on provocation) and he will be produced in court on Tuesday," a senior police officer from Nallasopara police station told India Today TV.

Police officials said Kaled held Kolekar responsible for his sister's death. He believed his brother-in-law drove his sister to take the extreme step of ending her life within one year of their marriage.

Police believe the murder was premeditated which is why he had carried a knife to the police station.
