'How did Gandhiji commit suicide?' Inquiry initiated

Gandhinagar, Gujarat: The Gujarat state education authorities has initiated an inquiry after a self-financed school in Gandhinagar asked a shocking question ''How did Gandhiji commit suicide?" in its exams.

The question was asked in the internal assessment exam to class XI students in the Gujarati language.

"Every school has their own question paper. An inquiry has been initiated in the matter and we have sought a response from the school. Once they submit a report, further actions will be taken," District Education Officer Bharat Vader told ANI on Monday.

The school runs under the banner of Sufalam Shala Vikas Sankul, a Gandhinagar-based organisation of self-financing schools which get government grants.

Indian freedom fighter and Father of the Nation Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, known more populary as Gandhiji, or Mahatama Gandhi, was assassinated by Nathuram Godse, a Hindu nationalist on 30 January 1948.

Taking cognisance of the matter, the Congress leader Nisith Vyas said, "This is a conspiracy to dissolve the Gandhian ideology so they (BJP) can impose their own. This was started in the state 22 years ago. Are they ready to denounce Godse? No. Instead, they are planning to set up a Godse's statue."

Drawing a comparison with the situation in the state with the Third Reich, he said, "If we refer to history, a similar incident had happened in Germany. When Hitler tried to establish his superiority, he faced backlash. So, he changed history and tried to mould a whole generation. The same is being repeated in the state."

Gandhi followers believe that either this was due to the lack of information on part of the teacher who made the question paper or a deliberate attempt to spread misinformation among the students.

"I think either the teacher did not know enough about Mahatma Gandhi or he was intentionally trying to spread misinformation about Gandhi's death among the students," a Gandhian named Dhimant Badhia said.
