Rajkot: Class III girl abducted, raped by history-sheeter

Eight teams crack the case

RAJKOT: An eight-year-old daughter was abducted , raped and dumped at lonely spot by a 30-year-old history-sheeter in the city late on Sunday night.Police arrested the perpetrator identified as Babu Bambhava on Monday by tracing his mobile location.Bambhava had allegedly snatched and took away the little girl on his bike when she was returning home after the garba programme with her grandmother and younger brother. At airport railway crossing, the girl’s grandmother stopped Bambhava, who on bike, and requested him to drop them home. However, much to the shock of the old woman, Bambhava snatched the girl, forced her on his bike and sped away. He took her behind Raiya Gaam crematorium and allegedly raped her."When the girl cried for help, Bambhava said told her he was taking her eat ice cream. Then Bambhava took her behind the crematorium and committed the crime," police commissioner Manoj Agarwal, told reporters. The girl’s grandmother also called up the police realizing that he had abducted her.After sexually assaulting the girl, Bambhava started his bike, but it got stuck in a pit filled with slush. Not knowing what to do, Bambhava slapped the girl and asked her to walk away. Bambhava abandoned his bike and walked towards Saurashtra University.Meanwhile, the girl spotted a car and stopped it. A couple — Tasvir Chawda and his wife Jigna — who were in the car, dropped her home. She narrated her trauma to her parents and cops who had reached her house."The girl took us to the crime spot where we saw the abandoned bike. We started checking for its owner with the help of a computer software and traced four persons. The bike was found to have been sold multiple times and its last owner was identified as Bambhava. We procured his number but Bambhava had kept his cellphone switched off," said Agarwal.In the morning, when Bambhava turned his cellphone on, the police traced him through his mobile location and nabbed him from Nirmala Road.Bambhava is a history-sheeter having been jailed twice under Prevention of Anti-Social Activities (PASA) Act, booked for bootlegging and vehicle thefts.The survivor studies in class III of a government school and her father works as a watchman of an apartment at Airport railway crossing.Eight eight teams of policemen were formed on Sunday night once the grandmother of the survivor informed the cops. The police circulated the girl’s photograph on the social media. Once the girl was found and rape declared, they launched a manhunt for the accused. After Bambhava was arrested, Agarwal declared a cash prize for the officials of Gandhigram police station, crime branch and special operation group. Bambhava has been booked under 376 (AB) of Indian Penal Code (IPC) dealing with rape of woman under 12 years of age, 363 of IPC dealing with abduction and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)
