Normal life remains paralyzed on 72nd day (Tuesday) in occupied Kashmir

Normal life remains paralyzed on 72nd day (Tuesday) in occupied Kashmir

In Occupied Kashmir, normal life continues to remain paralyzed on the 72nd straight day today across the territory.

According to Kashmir Media Service, restrictions continue to remain imposed, shops closed and schools and offices are empty and public transport is off the roads.

Heavy deployment of Indian forces and ban on pre-paid phones and internet services are causing great inconveniences to the people not only throughout the territory but also from the world.

A recent report released in New Delhi by Anirudh Kala, Brinelle D’Souza, Revati Laul and Shabnam Hashmi after a visit to occupied Kashmir has testified that Prime Minister Modi and his government's actions in reading down Article 370 and demoting Kashmir to a union territory has eventually proved veteran Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Gilani right that India cannot be trusted.

On the other hand, Indian troops arrested several women after subjecting them to brute force during an anti-India demonstration in Lal Chowk area of Srinagar, today.

The police arrested several women including the daughter and the sister of former puppet Chief Minister of occupied Kashmir, Farooq Abdullah, during the protest against the revocation of Kashmir’s special status. Ms Hawa Bashir, the wife of former Chief Justice of IOK High Court, Bashir Ahmed Khan, is also among the detainees.

The police also tried to stop the protesting women from distributing a statement to the media, which said that they expressed their outrage against the Indian media for its false/misleading coverage of ground realities in the territory.

Meanwhile, a truck driver was shot dead and his vehicle was set ablaze by unidentified gunmen at Sindoo in Shirmal area of Shopian district. Over two dozen youth were arrested by Indian troops in the subsequent cordon and search operation in the area.

In another incident, an Indian soldier was killed and two others were injured when an Improvised Explosive Device went off in Nowgam area of Kupwara district. Indian police arrested two youth in Ganderbal district.

NNR/Mustafa
