Newborn baby found buried alive fighting to survive

A newborn baby, found buried alive in India's north last week, may not survive as originally thought.

Doctors suspect she was buried for days and believe her tiny size, weighing just over one kilogram, meant she didn't need as much oxygen while she was underground.

She is being treated at Maharina Pratap District Hospital in Uttar Pradesh and doctors say she is still heavily emaciated, has a blood infection and is suffering sepsis.

Doctors are fearful a newborn found buried alive in India's north may not survive her injuries. (Rajesh Kumar Mishra / Facebook)

They told BBC that initial tests have revealed she was born premature, possibly around the 30-week mark and weighed just over one kilogram.

While they are unsure of her exact age, they believe she was between a few days and one-week-old when she was found.

Local politician Rajesh Kumar Mishra intends to adopt the baby and has named her Sita - after a mythological Hindu goddess who was found by a king in a field.

Mr Mishra and his wife are covering Sita's medical expenses and intend to adopt her as soon as she is well enough.

"It's a miracle that she survived," Mr Mishra told BBC.

"She is oscillating between life and death. Once she recovers, I will take her home and raise her as my daughter."

Police are investigating after a newborn baby was found buried alive in a shallow grave in India's north. (Anoop Kumar Mishra)

A local politician wants to adopt the baby girl who he has named Sita after a mythological goddess. (Rajesh Kumar Mishra / Facebook)

Sita was found on Thursday by Hitesh Kumar, a father who was burying his own stillborn child at the same burial site in Bareilly, a town in Uttar Pradesh.

As Mr Kumar began to dig his daughter's grave, his spade cracked open the ceramic pot Sita was buried in and she started to cry.

"At one point I thought that my daughter had come alive. But the voice was actually coming from inside the pot," Mr Kumar told the Times of India.

Doctors will continue to carefully monitor Sita's progress over the coming days and an investigation is underway to try and locate the child's parents.

"We are trying to find the parents of the baby and we suspect that this must have happened with their consent," police told local media.
