MD of Bengaluru security firm caught on camera brutally assaulting 2 employees, arrested

MD of Bengaluru security firm caught on camera brutally assaulting 2 employees, arrested

A suo motu case has been registered against the managing director Salim Khan, who has been booked for attempt to murder.

news Crime

Bengaluru police arrested the managing director of a private security firm in the city on Tuesday after videos of him brutally assaulting two of his employees were shared widely on social media.

In the video clips, Salim Khan, the suspect, is seen standing on the neck of one of the men even as he begs him to let him go. The video goes on to show Salim stomp the head of one of the men repeatedly and jump on the other man's chest. The incident took place on Monday in HSR Layout in the city. Salim is also heard asking, "Who told you?" repeatedly to his employees even as they plead their innocence.

Disclaimer: The visuals may be disturbing, viewer discretion advised.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southeast) Isha Pant told reporters that the HSR Layout police officials registered a suo motu case against Salim after the videos surfaced on social media.

"There was a viral video on social media in which the MD of Bangalore Security Force (BSF) Salim Khan was seen assaulting two of his employees. We have booked a suo motu case under section 307 (attempt to murder) at the HSR Layout police station. There are six suspects in the case," Isha Pant, DCP (Southeast) said.

Salim was arrested on Tuesday evening while two other suspects were arrested on Tuesday morning. Salim was reportedly trying to evade arrest by hiding at a friend's residence.

The video was shared widely after one of the staffers uploaded the video on social media. It was also aired on television channels before Salim's eventual arrest. The two staffers, who are seen in the video being assaulted by Salim, are Farizuddin and Raizuddin, hailing from Assam.

The employees allegedly hatched a plan to abduct Salim since he didn't pay them and used to harass them when they asked for their salary. But Salim heard about the plan and assaulted the duo, a report by Deccan Herald stated.

Police officials are contemplating about writing to authorities to cancel Salim's security agency licence due to his criminal background. According to the police, he has more criminal cases filed against him filed in the past.
