Delhi doctor held for raping, blackmailing 27-year-old married woman, probe on

The woman passed out and alleged that the doctor then raped her | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The accused allegedly raped her after offering her a drink laced with sedatives In her official complaint, the woman alleged that the doctor raped her in May this year Since then he blackmailed her with her obscene photographs that he had clicked

New Delhi: In a case reported from the national capital, the Delhi police arrested a doctor working with a city-based hospital on charges of rape. The doctor was accused of raping a 27-year-old married woman after offering her a drink laced with sedatives at his apartment in Gautam Nagar area. The police are probing the case through all angles.

A news agency reported that the accused was arrested on Saturday after the survivor approached the police and registered a case. In her official complaint, the woman alleged that the doctor raped her in May this year and since then he blackmailed her with her obscene photographs that he had clicked. Reportedly, the woman is working with a pharma company and came in contact with the doctor following official meetings.

Reportedly, the woman added that after a few officials meeting, the doctor advised her to appear for a government examination and offered to teach her along with a few other students. Meanwhile, he asked her to come to his rented accommodation in south Delhi's Gautam Nagar. The alleged incident dates back to May 10, when the accused offered her a drink and on the quiet - laced it with sedatives.

After consuming the drink, the woman passed out. She informs that when she came around, she realised that the doctor had raped her. However, the police have booked him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway.

In a similar case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a doctor was booked for attempting rape on a woman while taking her blood samples. The incident happened in the Jhinjhana area of the Shamli district. An FIR was registered against the accused.

Reportedly, the accused was identified Jasvir, who visited the 24-year-old survivor to collect her blood sample. The accused tried to force himself on the woman while taking her samples. Immediately, the survivor raised an alarm and the accused ran away from the spot.

The police officials said that efforts were on to trace Jasvir and further investigation in the case is underway.
