Trichy-based gang executed Rs 1.63-cr cash van heist in Civil Lines: Police

Allahabad: A Tiruchirappalli-based gang had executed the Rs 1.63 crore cash van heist in Civil Lines area of Allahabad on October 3, police investigation has revealed.

Officials believe that the same gang has committed similar crimes in Delhi, Noida and Varanasi.

A cash box containing Rs 1.63 crore had gone missing from a delivery van on October 3 evening when it had gone to load cash in an ATM on Civil Lines side of Allahabad railway station.

Following the detention of three suspects, police compiled details of the gang’s modus operandi and movement across the country.

SSP, Prayagraj, Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj said the gang used to carry out thefts at places where they could get hefty amount and kept on changing their location to dodge police.

“The gang members move in groups of maximum 15 and often take shelter near temples to avoid police vigil. They also keep changing their hideouts,” the SSP said, adding that the gang also has women who sometimes work as labourers.

Once the Tamil Nadu-based gang came under the radar of Allahabad police, they collected data and inputs from their counterparts in Delhi and other states.

Recent intelligence inputs revealed that gang is currently operating from Tarapeth and Wardhman in West Bengal.

“The gang members are expert in executing thefts swiftly. In Allahabad case, the driver, who was walking within the 100-metre radius of the van, could not get a whiff of the theft. Police teams quizzed the van driver but could not extract any information from him,” a police officer said.

Investigation revealed that the gang did not carry out any recee of the van’s movement and executed the crime within minutes. The compilation of CCTV and video footages has helped the crime branch to connect missing links and identify criminals,” he added.

Every member of the gang was assigned different task right from stealing cash box to its transportation to safer areas.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
