The Shillong Times

Andhra journalist stabbed to death, three detained

Rajahmundry (Andhra Pradesh): A journalist working for a Telugu daily was stabbed to death by unknown persons in Andhra Pradesh, police said. K Satyanarayana (49), a reporter working for ‘Andhra Jyothi’, was found dead near his house in Godavari district on Tuesday. The police took up the investigation and detained three suspects. The deceased was shifted to the hospital for autopsy. District Superintendent of Police Adnan Nayeem Asim visited the scene on Wednesday. He spoke to the scribe’s family members. Minister for Information and Public Relations Perni Nani said those involved in the murder would be handed out stringent punishment. He said Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy directed the DGP to take immediate steps to track down the culprits. Jana Sena Party President Pawan Kalyan strongly condemned the ghastly murder and termed this as an attack on journalism. “It appears the physical attack was carried out with a motive to scare the media,” he said. Kalyan said that Satyanarayana had survived an attack a month ago and it was reported to the police. But they failed to provide him protection. (IANS)



Dengue cases in Patna escalates

Patna (Bihar): The number of people affected by dengue has gone up by 100 in the past two days, Sanjay Kumar, Principal Secretary Health in Bihar said on Tuesday. Speaking to media, Kumar said, “In the last 2 days, dengue cases have gone up by 100. As per experts, 30 to 40 per cent Aedes mosquito larvae breeding inside houses. We are appealing to people in Patna to not allow water to stand. So far, there has been no mortality due to dengue.” “In the past two days, another 100 cases have been registered. The National Institute of Malaria Research conducted a survey here and found out that approximately 30 to 40 per cent of Aedes mosquitoes are there inside the houses,” he said. Kumar added, “We are continuously appealing to people not allow water to stay or collect even inside the house. Aedes mosquito breeds and evolves in freshwater and bites during the day time only.” “The health department has constituted 75 teams to use anti-larvicidal in different parts of Patna. As the temperature, in general, will fall, the outbreak of dengue will also decline or decrease,” he said. (ANI)



Man held for smuggling gold

New Delhi: A man was arrested at Delhi airport upon his arrival from the UAE for allegedly smuggling a gold bar worth more than Rs 48 lakh by concealing it in an electric iron, customs officials said on Wednesday. The passenger, who arrived at the Terminal-3 of the IGI Airport from Dubai on Monday, was intercepted after he had crossed the green channel. On detailed personal and baggage search, one piece of silver colour-coated, filament-shaped gold bar weighing 1,280 grams and having a market value of Rs 48,46,208 was recovered, the officials said. The recovered gold has been seized and the passenger arrested under relevant provisions of the Customs Act. For the purpose of customs clearance of arriving passengers, a two-channel system has been adopted under which the green channel is for passengers not having any dutiable goods, while the red channel for those having dutiable goods. (PTI)



Bhutanese held with tiger skin

Jalpaiguri (West Bengal): Two Bhutanese, including an ex-serviceman of the Royal Bhutan Army, were nabbed and a Royal Bengal tiger skin and its bones seized from their possession at West Bengal’s Alipurduar district, a senior forest official said on Wednesday. A 14-foot skin of a fully grown tiger and 110 bones of the feline were seized during the apprehension at Hashimara in the district, Forest Range Officer Sanjay Dutta said. “The accused had brought the skin from Assam and were en route to Kathmandu to sell it at Rs 32 lakh,” he said. Bullet marks in the skin suggest it was shot dead, he said. “During interrogation, the accused revealed names of more people involved in the racket,” Dutta added. (PTI)
