Delhi's 'best beat constable' accused of robbing bank, raping woman

The police have said that the accused is a native of Panipat (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights A Delhi Police constable who had been awarded for being the 'best beat constable' has been accused of robbing a bank The accused had allegedly robbed a bank of jewellery worth Rs 5 crore A police officer said that he was also accused of raping a woman

New Delhi: The Haryana Police have arrested a constable for his involvement in a case of robbery. Shockingly, this constable is one who was conferred with an award for being the 'best beat constable'. The constable has been accused of robbing jewellery worth Rs 5 crore from a bank in Panipat, Haryana.

A police officer familiar with the case said that in the CCTV footage of the bank, the constable can be seeing looting the bank with his associates. The police have said that the accused is a native of Panipat. After the police checked the CCTV footage, they raided his parents' house. The cops nabbed the accused's father and his relative, Rs 12 lakh was also confiscated during the raid.

A police official said, "The constable had been stationed at the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal Cell (MACT) for the last few months, but was absent since August without notice. " The award for 'best beat constable' was given to the accused when he was posted at Adarsh Nagar police station. "

Apart from being involved in a robbery, the constable was also accused of raping a woman in January this year. According to the police, the constable was transferred to Police Lines during the investigation of his rape case. He was later sent to the MACT Cell.

Delhi Police constable arrested for allegedly raping a minor girl

A similar allegation was made against a constable deployed with the Delhi Police in September this year. The accused constable was booked under sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

A complaint was lodged against the accused at the New Usmanpur police station in the national capital. After the complaint was filed, the family members of the survivor and locals gathered outside the police station, demanding the arrest of the accused.

Lottery centre owner kidnapped for want of money in Mumbai

In another such incident, a driver working with the Mumbai Police and a junior officer allegedly abducted a lottery centre owner while posing as crime branch officers. The sub-inspector was identified as Ram Jadhav and the driver was identified as Arvind Andhare.

Both Ram Jadhav and Arvind Andhare posed as crime branch officers and raided the lottery centre located in Cotton Green, Mumbai. The two accused told the owner that a senior official wanted to talk to him. When the owner went to the car, they took him to a secluded spot and robbed him of Rs 10,000.
