Journalist stabbed to death in India

Journalist stabbed to death in India

JournalismPakistan.com October 17, 2019





Unidentified assailants stabbed and killed Andrah Pradesh journalist K Satyanarayana on October 14 — just a month after a separate attack.

The International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) and its affiliate, the National Union of Journalists (India) (NUJ) have condemned his brutal murder and demanded immediate investigation on the issue.

The 45-year-old was working as a reporter for Andhra Jyothi, a Telugu Dailyin East Godavari district, and had previously filed a report to police concerning an attack a month ago. The journalist’s body was found near his house in Godavari district. According to The News Minute, the incident occurred around 7:00 pm on Monday, when assailants attacked the journalist with a heavy weapon and fled.

An official release from Director General of Police, Gautam Sawang, said he had directed Adnan Nayeem Asmi, East Godavari, the district superintendent, to personally visit the place of the offense, and gather the facts. It is not yet clear if the incident was work-related.

The NUJ(I) said: “We appeal to the state government to set up a high-level judicial committee to probe the incident, and culprits should be nabbed immediately."

NUJ(I) President, Prajnananda Chauduri, and Secretary-General, Sheo Kumar Agarwal, condemned the incident and expressed their concern for safety of the journalists in India.

The IFJ joined NUJ(I) in calling on the police and government to investigate the case and punish the guilty while reiterating the call for the enactment of the Journalists Protection Act.

K Satyanarayana was the first journalist to be killed in India in 2019, according to IFJ’s list of journalists and media staff killed.

IFJ General Secretary, Anthony Bellanger, said: "We condemn the horrific murder of K Satyanarayana. Indian authorities must take immediate action to investigate the murder and bring those responsible to justice. We urge the government of India to make the strongest efforts to promote and protect the rights of journalists in order for them to be safe to continue their work." — An IFJ media release
