Cops thrash students, SSP says will act on plaint

Allahabad: Cops deployed on Allahabad University campus allegedly abused and attacked students on Thursday even though they were not a part of any agitation.Students claimed that policemen, led by a CO-rank officer, abused them and used force on them without any provocation. No protest was organised by any student leader on the campus on Thursday.Pleading ignorance on the issue, senior superintendent of police, Allahabad, Satyarth Aniruddh Pankaj said, “I have not received complaint from any student. I will order an inquiry if anyone brings to my notice any evidence or fact regarding police brutality.”Though no student approached police authorities in this connection, mediapersons captured videos and photographs of the act.The campus turned into a virtual fortress on Thursday after student leaders threatened to launch an agitation to demand restoration of students’ union. Only those students were allowed entry to the campus who could produce their identity card.Since morning, students were allowed to enter the campus only through KPUC and Library gate.Police and security guards at AU checked the identity cards of students before letting them in.Besides police, PAC and RPF personnel were also present on the campus to check identity cards of students.Senior officers of district police were also seen talking to students in a decent manner.Suddenly, a CO-rank officer, along with a group of policeman, started moving towards the union hall from library gate of AU.He allegedly started abusing and thrashing students passing by, accusing them of abusing the police and pelting them with stones.“I wanted to enter from library gate because I had to take a test. A man in red ‘kurta’, who I thought was a faculty member, asked for my identity card. When I showed it to him, he kept it with him. When I asked him to let me enter the campus, a police official dragged me inside the gate and started beating me. What was my fault,” asked Shubham Singh of MA-I.Anand Gaur, another student, said: “We are afraid of entering the campus because cops are beating up students randomly. They are not even asking us why we are on the campus. Did our parents send us to college to hear filthy abuses from police officers?”Mithlesh Yadav, a BA student, said: “I came to the university to deposit my scholarship form but here policemen are beating everyone. We are neither student leaders nor creating any disturbance, then why are we being beaten mercilessly?”
