Five including 2 Bangladeshi nationals arrested in Kolkata for alleged links with trafficking gang

The officer further added that the five accused in the case were apprehended from the front of the Ladies Park on the CIT Road | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused Bangladeshi nationals had entered the country 'illegally' through Satkhira border Five accused in the case were apprehended from outside the Ladies Park on the CIT Road in Beniapukur The two Bangladeshis failed to produce any valid document of their identities

Kolkata: The Kolkata Police apprehended five people including two Bangladeshis from the Beniapukur area on Thursday. The accused have been booked for their alleged links to a trafficking gang operating in the city.

A senior officer of Special Task Force (STF) of Kolkata police told a media person that an initial probe in the case revealed that the two Bangladeshis nationals, had entered the country 'illegally' through Satkhira border with the help of the three other arrested handlers. The accused Bangladeshis are residents of Nariael and Khulna in the neighbouring country.

The officer further added that the five accused in the case were apprehended from outside the Ladies Park on the CIT Road in Beniapukur police station limits. According to a news agency report, the two Bangladeshis failed to produce any valid document of their identities and later it was found that they had illegally entered India through Satkhira in Khulna division with the help of Indian handlers in exchange for money.

However, the police have registered a case in the matter under the provisions of the Foreigners Act. The police are trying to ascertain their true identities and the purpose of their visit to the country. An investigation in the case is underway to know whether they belong to any terrorist group or not.

In another case reported from Kolkata, a man allegedly stabbed his wife to death in Maheshtala in South 24 Parganas area. The accused was identified as Shibu Karmakar and the incident took place when Shibu was at his in-laws' house for the celebration of his son's birthday.

The accused suspected his wife of having an illicit relationship which often led to heated arguments between the couple. Shibu used to work as an electrician and they had been married for the last 17 years but they did not stay together. For the last two years, the deceased had been living with her parents in South 24 Pargana. Shibu had gone to his in-laws' house for his son's birthday. He went there with chocolates and gifts but he was denied entry into the house.

Irked over this, the man stabbed his wife several times which resulted in her death at the spot. However, the police arrested the accused and booked him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code.
