Datamatics Wins Automated Fare Collection Contract for Mumbai Metro Line 2A, 2B and 7

/ -- The Consortium led by Datamatics Global Services Limited (DGSL) and AEP Ticketing solutions S.R.L, Italy (AEP), have been issued the Letter of Acceptance (LOA) for implementing Automatic Fare Collection (AFC) system for 52 stations of Mumbai Metro Line 2A (Dahisar to DN Nagar Metro), 2B (DN Nagar to Mankhurd Metro) and 7 (Andheri (E) to Dahisar) of the Mumbai Metro Rail project. The LOA was issued by Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA) to the Consortium for approximately Rs. 160 crores.

The LOA between the Consortium and MMRDA was signed in the presence of Shri. R. A. Rajeev, IAS, Metropolitan Commissioner, MMRDA; Shri. Sanjay Waghmare Director(Systems), Metro PIU, MMRDA, Mr. O. P. Nebhnani, Officer on Special Duty(S&T), Metro PIU MMRDA, Dr. Lalit Kanodia, Chairman, DGSL, Shri Rahul Kanodia, Vice Chairman & CEO - DGSL; Shri Sanjeev Subhedar, EVP and Global Head Engineering Services and other top officials from MMRDA and DGSL.

On the occasion, Shri. R. A. Rajeev, IAS, Metropolitan Commissioner, MMRDA, said, "The ticketing system for the Mumbai Metro should be implemented taking into consideration ease of use for the commuters of the city of Mumbai. At the same time it should be state of art supporting future of the growing metro network and supporting upcoming fare media technologies."



Commenting on the occasion, Dr. Lalit S. Kanodia, Chairman, Datamatics, said, "Over the years, Datamatics has invested and built expertise in Automated Fare Collection technology and has been a part of large global AFC mandates. We are headquartered in Mumbai and therefore winning Mumbai Metro project is special and a very proud moment for us."



Automated Fare Collection (AFC) has been a focus area for Datamatics and over the last 25 years, the company has been instrumental in successfully executing over 25 marquee projects in the tier 1 metropolitan cities across the globe including Sydney, Hong Kong, London, Chicago, Melbourne, etc.

Rahul L. Kanodia, Vice Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, Datamatics, said, "Datamatics is the only Indian company to have AFC solution. We have put in our best efforts for making the Lucknow Metro a successful project and we are delighted to be a part of prestigious Mumbai Metro Line 2 and 7 projects."



In India, Datamatics is also implementing AFC system for Lucknow Metro Project which includes design, supply, installation and end-to-end testing of the ticketing, gates, servers, hardware networks and software components. The first phase of this project has already gone live with 8 stations. This is the fastest rolled-out AFC system in India till date.

Sanjeev Subhedar, EVP & Head - Engineering Solutions, Datamatics, said, "Datamatics is committed to Indian customers to provide most advanced AFC solution suitable for Indian conditions within project timelines. Datamatics assures its customer of continued upgrades and long term support to protect the investment made by our customers."



To know more about Datamatics' and offerings for the Transport vertical, please visit: https://www.datamatics.com/industries/transportation



About Datamatics Global Services



Datamatics ( BSE: 532528) (NSE: DATAMATICS) provides Intelligent Solutions for data driven businesses to increase productivity and enhance customer experience. The company's portfolio of service offerings spans across Information Technology Services, Business Process Management, Engineering Services and Big Data & Analytics all powered by Artificial Intelligence. It has established products in Robotics Process Automation, Advanced Analytics, Business Intelligence and Automated Fare Collection. Datamatics services over 500 customers globally across Banking & Financial Services, Insurance, Healthcare, Manufacturing, International Organizations and Media & Publishing. Headquartered in Mumbai, the Company has presence across 4 continents with major delivery centers in the USA, India and Philippines with an employee base of 10,000. To know more about Datamatics, visit https://www.datamatics.com.

Safe Harbour



Some of the statements in this update that are not historical facts are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements include our financial and growth projections as well as statements concerning our plans, strategies, intentions and beliefs concerning our business and the markets in which we operate. These statements are based on information currently available to us, and we assume no obligation to update these statements as circumstances change. There are risks and uncertainties that could cause actual events to differ materially from these forward-looking statements. These risks include, but are not limited to, the level of market demand for our services, the highly-competitive market for the types of services that we offer, market conditions that could cause our customers to reduce their spending for our services, our ability to create, acquire and build new businesses and to grow our existing businesses, our ability to attract and retain qualified personnel, currency fluctuations and market conditions in India and elsewhere around the world, and other risks not specifically mentioned herein but those that are common to industry.

Source: Datamatics Global Services Ltd.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
