Schoolboy attacks girl with knife, jumps to death from her eight-floor apartment in Noida

Police are yet to reveal the motive (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The incident happened at around 5 PM on Thursday, claimed the girl Neither of the aggrieved families have registered a police complaint in this regard Post-mortem report of the boy is awaited and a case will be registered: SSP

Noida: Gautam Buddha Nagar police in Uttar Pradesh are investigating a curious case that has come to light from the city's Sector 61 area. On Thursday evening, residents of a residential society heard a girl screaming on the eighth floor of one of the buildings in the society. Upon breaking into her apartment, they saw the 21-year-old girl lying in a pool of blood.

This is when the matter was brought to the attention of Noida police. As a team of police personnel rushed to the spot, neighbours transported the women to the nearest hospital in Sector 62 where she is currently being treated in the intensive care unit for serious injuries to her abdomen. When they arrived at the scene of the crime, police were guided to the back of the building where the other residents found a 15-year-old boy in a seriously wounded condition.

Police officers rushed the boy to the nearest hospital where doctors declared him dead on arrival. While the girl is a BTech student at a private college in Ghaziabad and lives with her parents, the boy was the student of a private school in Noida and lived with his parents in a different wing of the residential society. Based on a preliminary investigation, police believe that the boy attacked the girl with her knife and jumped off from the balcony of her eighth-floor apartment.

According to a report, the station house in-charge (SHO) of Sector 58 police station said that the girl told officers before she was wheeled into intensive care that the boy came to her apartment at around 5 PM on Thursday and attacked her with a kitchen knife. He then locked himself in one of the rooms as I screamed for help, the girl told police officers. It is believed that the boy jumped from the balcony of the room he had locked himself in as neighbours rushed to the girl's rescue.

While families of both the boy and the girl are in utter shock, it is still unclear why the boy targeted the girl or whether they knew each other from before. The boy's body has been sent for post-mortem and the results are awaited. However, investigators have established that the boy used a kitchen knife to attack the girl. The latest inputs suggest that neither of the families has registered an official police complaint in this regard. A case will be lodged following a preliminary investigation, said Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Vaibhav Krishna.
