TN Governor Unlikely to Agree With Cabinet Recommendation to Free Rajiv Case Convicts

New Delhi: Tamil Nadu governor Banwarilal Purohit has informally indicated to the state cabinet that he does not agree with its recommendation that seven convicts in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case be released, according to The Hindu.

The newspaper reported that the governor has not conveyed “anything in writing to the government”, but is disinclined to go along with the cabinet’s recommendation. In September 2018, the cabinet recommended the convicts – Nalini Sriharan, her husband Sriharan alias Murugan, Suthendraraja alias Santhan, Robert Payas, S. Jayakumar alias Jayakumaran, A.G. Perarivalan alias Arivu, and Ravichandran alias Ravi – to be released prematurely. Sriharan, Santhan, Robert Payas and Jayakumar are Sri Lankan nationals. The bomb killed former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi and 15 others in May 1991.

The governor’s position would be in line with a Presidential Order issued through the Union home ministry in April 2018. The order was issued after the state government proposed in 2014 and 2016 to release the convicts, saying it would “set a very dangerous precedent and lead to international ramifications”.

According to The Hindu, the cabinet sought the opinion of advocate general Vijay Narayan before making its September 2018 recommendation. He informed the government that the governor had “unfettered power” under Article 161, which allows him to grant pardons and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.

Also Read: Rajiv Gandhi Assassination: To Uphold Justice is to Release the Seven Convicts

On his part, Purohit met Arputhammal, mother of Perarivalan, and relatives of people who died in the bomb blast.

The argument in favour of the convicts’ release is that they have already spent more than 25 years in prison.

Background

In January 1998, a Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act court awarded death sentence to all 26 accused in the case. In May 1999, the Supreme Court released 19 people and confirmed the death sentence of Nalini Sriharan, Murugan, Suthendraraja and Perarivalan. The death sentence of three other convicts was commuted to life.

In April 2000, Nalini’s death sentence was commuted to life after the intervention of Sonia Gandhi. Nalini had given birth to a girl in prison. In August 2011, the president rejected the clemency pleas of Nalini’s husband Murugan and two others on death row. Their execution was scheduled for September 9, 2011, but the Madras high court stayed it for eight weeks based on their petitions. In February 2014, the Supreme Court reduced their death sentence to life.

In May 2019, the Supreme Court disposed of a petition against the Tamil Nadu government’s 2014 proposal to grant the convicts remission. In July, the Madras HC held a petition filed by Nalini seeking a direction to the governor to “countersign” the government’s decision as “not maintainable”.
