Extinction Rebellion Tube bloke unmasked as monk who's now 'full-time protester'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

Extinction Rebellion protesters who were roughed up after attempting to stop the Tube have been unmasked a Buddhist monk and a bookkeeper.



Mark Ovland and James Mee were both yanked off a Jubilee Line train at Canning Town .



Fuming commuters wrestled them down from the top of the train in an act of street justice.

Extinction Rebellion’s (XR) leading organisers have attempted to distance themselves from the stunt which they fear will further alienate the environmental protest group.



XR spokesman Howard Rees, 39, said the intention was not to "inconvenience hard-working people”.

The group acknowledged the action at Canning Town Tube station was "divisive" and said Ovland, Men and their supporters had acted "autonomously".

(Image: Facebook)

Mee, 35, who was pulled of the Tube after he appeared to kick out at a commuter, has been revealed as a bookkeeper from Bristol.



And Ovland, 36, was found to be a “professional protester” who gave up his full-time Buddhist teacher training to join XR.

He has previously lived in India as a monk, and claimed he had a “profound mystical awakening there”.

Upon returning the UK, he become a trainee Buddhist teacher and would visit prisons to assist a Buddhist Chaplin.

(Image: @mahatir_pasha / Twitter)

Video shared on social media showed Mee and Ovland holding a sign which read "Business as usual = death”.



Tempers frayed when Mee appeared to kick out at the commuter who pulled him down from the Tube.

Further video then shows another commuter climbing on top of the train and pursuing Ovland.

The ponytail sporting protester is then grabbed by his leg and pulled down onto the platform.

(Image: @1968Sid69 / Twitter)

In a statement, Extinction Rebellion said: "It is regretful that there was violence at today's action at Canning Town tube station. We would like to express our sadness that events escalated this way.

"We are aware that one of our activists responded in self-defence in a moment of panic when confronted by a threatening situation.

"He acknowledges his accountability for this action and we offer gratitude for members of the public who helped to protect him."

The group apologised for the disruption caused to commuters, but said the incident should not create "unnecessary division".

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

British Transport Police said eight people had been arrested on suspicion of obstructing the railway on Thursday morning, and also urged commuters not to "take matters into their own hands".

A member of Transport for London (TfL) staff appeared to intervene to stop people from attacking the male XR activist further by holding them back.

One man yelled: "I need to get to work, I have to feed my kids," while others shouted insults at activists.

British Transport Police also said they were investigating the response from commuters, and acting chief constable Sean O'Callaghan added: "It is important that commuters and other rail users allow the police, who are specially trained, to manage these incidents."

(Image: PA)

Yesterday, Extinction Rebellion activist Elliot Laughlin – who has a Patreon page asking for donations to support his protesting – blamed the “London mob mentality” for the scene.

He claims he received a kicking from commuters after he was kicked off the chair he was standing on – and was left curled up in the foetal position.

Elliot said he was left with “cuts and bruises” and was only saved with three bystanders stepped in.

“My camera and tripod fell, then all you can see from when the camera cuts out, until I resume the footage once the attack was over, is just feet raining down upon me,” he said.

(Image: Elliot Laughlin/Facebook)

The action is the latest in a series from the anti-climate change group, who have been banned from protesting in London.

A legal bid to overturn the order was expected to reach the High Court on Thursday.

Activists also arrived at Gatwick airport at about 11am on Thursday, but made no attempt to disrupt passengers.

The group of about 20 rebels, including a caped flautist, played music and offered flyers to passengers passing through the international arrivals hall at Gatwick's South terminal.

Steve McDonald, 63, who has been a climate activist for more than 20 years, said he was saddened by the incident at Canning Town but said those involved had been well intentioned.

He said: "It wasn't good what happened this morning, but the people who did that are passionate people and they decided that that was what they wanted to do. The policy of XR is, you have to disrupt.

"Obviously it went wrong, that was never our intention, but I don't condemn those people."

Eight people have been charged with obstructing the railway after the incidents at Shadwell, Stratford and Canning Town.
