License of Bengaluru security firm cancelled after arrest of MD for assaulting workers

License of Bengaluru security firm cancelled after arrest of MD for assaulting workers

A video of the managing director of a private security firm in Bengaluru brutally assaulting two of his employees were shared widely on social media, prompting the police to make three arrests.

news

Just days after a video of the managing director of a private security firm in Bengaluru brutally assaulting two of his employees was shared widely on social media, the firm's registration certificate has been cancelled by the Labour Department.

Salim Khan, the managing director of Bangalore Security Force was arrested on Tuesday evening for allegedly assaulting two of his employees.

In the video clips, Salim Khan is seen standing on the neck of one of the employees and kicking another employee even as they both beg him to let them go. Salim is also heard asking, "Who told you?" repeatedly to his employees. The incident took place on Monday in HSR Layout in the city.

HSR Layout police officials registered a suo motu case against Salim and arrested him on Tuesday evening. A team of officers from the Labour Department headed by divisional officer Yashodhar CN recorded the statement of the employees - Faizuddin and Raizuddin - who hail from Assam and were working with the security firm for the last few months.

After the statements were recorded, department officials decided to revoke the registration certificate of Bangalore Security Force.

Manjunath G, Joint Labour Commissioner, Labour Welfare Board confirmed the decision to TNM. "The registration certificate of Bangalore Security Force has been revoked with immediate effect," he said.

In a letter confirming the cancellation of registration certificate, officials cited human rights violations against the employees and previous cases of assault and theft against Salim Khan as the reasons for its decision. "This (cancellation) letter has been issued for the protection of the workers working in your organisation and to protect their security under the principles of natural justice," the letter issued by a senior official of the Labour Department stated.

Salim was arrested along with two others from the same organisation. Bangalore Security Force provided security and housekeeping services in the city.
