Criminalisation of even consensual sex between adolescents obstructs access to safe abortion for girls

Unsafe abortion is the third leading cause of maternal mortality in India, leading to about 10 deaths every day. ‘The incidence of abortion and unintended pregnancy in India, 2015’ study records that of the 15.6 million abortions in 2015, only 22% were conducted in health facilities, whereas an overwhelming 78% abortions were done outside health facilities. Adolescent girls, in the age group of 16-18 years, are left at the mercy of life-threatening pregnancy termination methods. A 2010 facility-based study discloses that 20-30% of abortion seekers were unmarried young women and adolescent girls; and 16.7% of them were victims of sexual abuse.

Significantly, this life endangering vulnerability is abetted by the law. Section 19(1) of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act stipulates mandatory reporting of all sexual offences against a child to the law enforcement authorities, and failure to report the same entails punitive consequences. This blanket legislative compulsion to inform authorities, makes no exception for adolescent girls nor for health professionals, thereby jeopardising the life and reproductive health of adolescent girls.

NFHS-4 (2015-16) data confirms that adolescents are sexually active in India. The legislative diktat of POCSO treats any sexual activity with a person under 18 years as a crime. Even consensual sex between adolescents is criminalised. This strictly penal approach rejects the evolving sexual capacities and consensual sexual interactions between adolescents. Ironically, the Juvenile Justice law recognises 16-18 year-olds as “deliberative intentional adults” to prosecute them as adults for heinous crimes.

The 1971 Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act governs the circumstances under which comprehensive abortion can be provided. To provide abortion services to a girl under 18 years, the law requires the written consent of a guardian but casts no obligation on the doctor to inform the police. POCSO, however, superimposes mandatory reporting on health professionals, placing physicians and psychiatrists in a particularly conflicted position, about how and when the doctor must inform the police.

Rule 5 of POCSO prescribes that the doctor rendering emergency medical care shall not demand any prior legal requisition; shall protect the privacy of the child and shall attend to the needs of the child including advice on pregnancy and emergency contraception. The Monitoring Guidelines state that it would suffice to give information to the police official attached to the hospital, and a medico legal certificate made to the police. The guidelines also state that providing medical care is the first duty of health professionals, while reporting is a secondary duty.

Doctors providing abortion services are confronted with a professional and ethical dilemma. The primary duty of the doctor is to provide medical treatment and the efficacy of this treatment rests on maintaining confidentiality and trust of the patient, underpinned by securing informed consent. Thus, doctors have to meet the competing demands of the law and their professional obligation to provide healthcare.

Doctors have reported that the POCSO statutory directive has a chilling effect in providing healthcare. Many doctors continue to prioritise their duty by first providing safe abortion services and also comply with the law by informing through either an MLC, or a subsequent report to the police. However, doctors also report many instances where adolescent girls seeking pregnancy termination have abruptly left upon learning that the police would be compulsorily informed. The situation is more egregious when the pregnancy is caused by sexual assault within the family and the survivor is unable and unwilling to approach the police. Irrespective of the marital status of the adolescent girl seeking abortion, the doctor is required to inform the police, as law deems them all to be a consequence of rape.

There can be no dispute with the objective of ending child sexual abuse and there is merit in imposition of mandatory reporting in institutional settings. However, in the context of access to safe abortion, universal mandatory reporting, is a blunt instrument, not in the best interest of the health or autonomy of adolescent girls.

Let’s pause and consider the state of the criminal justice system that this mandatory reporting will trigger. The Supreme Court on July 12, 2019, registered a suo motu writ petition titled, ‘In Re: Alarming rise in the number of reported child rape incidents’. Responding to the inordinate delay in the investigation and conclusion of POCSO trials, the court issued directions. Is it surprising then that the criminal justice system does not inspire confidence in the victims of POCSO offences?

The criminalisation of all sexual activity between adolescents under POCSO, coupled with mandatory reporting directive, operates as a barrier for adolescent girls accessing safe abortion services. Respecting “the best interests of the child” mandate, POCSO should prioritise enabling adolescent girls to access safe abortions and not fetter health professionals with mandatory reporting.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
