Beat him up, but don’t file a complaint, say railway cops

West Bengal fights

Yeshwanthapura Railway police station

harassment

OMBR

,

Advertising professional fromwith police for five hours to register complaint of sexual assault at YesvantpurA 25-year-old advertising and marketing professional from West Bengal went to theto file a complaint against a pervert who had sexually harassed her on the railway platform. But she faced a different kind ofat the police station, when all she wanted was justice.For five hours, the victim alleges that the railway police station staff tried to convince her not to file a complaint, because she would regret it in future. The woman police constable also did not come to her help and told her not to file a complaint.What took the victim by surprise was when the police told her that they would allow her to beat the accused as much as she wanted, in return for not filing the complaint.The incident happened on Wednesday October 16, between 10.50 am and 11 am at Platform No 6 of the Yesvantpur railway station. The victim had gone to drop her sister, who was taking the Howrah Express to Kolkata. The victim’s sister had come to Bengaluru to celebrate Durga puja with her.The victim, a resident of Bengaluru for the last one-and-ahalf years is a resident oflayout in Banaswadi.Talking to BM, the victim said, “I was sitting on one of the benches on Platform No 6, waiting for the train to start. The accused came and sat beside me. He seemed to be under the influence of some substance. Since he was behaving strangely, I shifted to the next bench. He followed me there also started sexually harassing me. He suddenly put his hand on my thigh and started rubbing me. I stood up and warned him to go away before I slapped him. I walked a bit further to get away from him but he followed me, making obscene gestures and kissing sounds.”Seeing her distress, a bystander came to her help and asked her to click his photograph. Then he pointed her in the direction of the Yesvantpur railway police station. When the accused saw her talking to the railway protection force, he stopped stalking her.“When I walked inside the police station and told them about my experience, the police were not willing to listen to my complaint. I forced them to accompany me to the platform and arrest the accused as there were chances that he would escape. They came along with me and when I pointed out to the accused, they took him back to the station. They told me that the person could be mentally unstable, but I didn’t think so. He looked definitely normal. They then asked me not to file a complaint as they would make the accused apologise to me. They even said that they would allow me to beat him up to vent my anger. When I kept insisting on filing a complaint, they directed me to the sub-inspector’s chamber,” said the victim.At this point, the victim alleges that the police started creating excuses for not registering the complaint. She says she was told that they wanted to go through the CCTV footage and the person who was responsible for watching the footage had gone out. The woman police constable who was there also tried to convince her not to file a complaint. The victim said that she called a friend to be with her till the complaint was registered.“Finally the police registered my complaint around 5 pm. But I was shocked to see the FIR copy stated the time of registering the complaint as 12 noon. The police further asked me to go for medical tests for which I refused saying that it was just molestation and nothing more than that. I left the police station around 6 pm. The police apathy in registering my complaint is unacceptable,” she added.Following her complaint, the police regularised the arrest. The accused has been identified as Ajesh Gangadharan, 34, of Kannur in Kerala. He is said to be a driver by profession.Reacting to the delay in filing the complaint, Railway Superintendent of Police, MB Boralingaiah told Mirror that he will look into the issue and take the railway policemen to task. “FIRs should be done immediately and cases of sexual harassment should be given utmost priority. During every meeting, we advise the policemen to register complaints,” the superintendent added.A case of sexual harassment under section 354A of the Indian Penal Code has been registered against the accused.The Yesvantpur railway police have registered a case and investigations are on.
