Siddaramaiah slams BJP for its bid to confer Bharat Ratna on Savarkar

Mangaluru: Leader of the opposition in the assembly, Siddaramaiah criticised the BJP ’s bid to confer the Bharat Ratna on Hindu Mahasabha leader Vinayak Damodar Savarkar ahead of assembly elections in Maharashtra.At a party workers meet here on Friday, Siddaramaiah alleged that Savarkar was one of the conspirators in Mahatma Gandhi’s assassination.“Savarkar was the president of Hindu Mahasabha. He was one of the conspirators in Mahatma Gandhi’s assassination. He was one of the accused in the assassination. Due to lack of evidence he was acquitted. There are plans to confer Bharat Ratna on him. What will happen to this nation? Someone said let the government give a Bharat Ratna to Godse too,” Siddaramaiah said sarcastically.“Godse was the one who killed Mahatma Gandhi. The RSS and Hindu Mahasabha were never part of the struggle for Indian independence. Truth is that they were all with the British. A Bharat Ratna for the killers of Gandhiji? A Bharat Ratna for those who prepared plans for Gandhiji’s assassination? Should the BJP win in Mangaluru, which is a land of educated people,’’ Siddaramaiah questioned, urging people not to vote for the BJP.He said the BJP was always playing with the sentiments of the people for political gain. “With the help of Sri Rama, Hindutva, Pakistan, Jammu & Kashmir and Article 370, they are trying to portray themselves as patriots,’ he said.He was addressing party workers as part of a campaign ahead of elections to the Mangaluru City Corporation council. Later, Siddaramaiah left for the Manjeshwar assembly constituency in Kasaragod district of Kerala, where bypolls will be held on October 21.‘Water-sharing deal not possible without talks’Former chief minister and leader of opposition Siddaramaiah said chief minister B S Yediyurappa’s announcement of entering into a water sharing agreement with Maharashtra is a poll gimmick to garner votes.Siddaramaiah said Yediyurappa must have made that announcement for votes (for the BJP in Maharashtra). “He (Yediyurappa) must have said this with the Maharashtra election in mind. However, it’s not possible, as such a decision requires bilateral talks before it is finalised,” Siddaramaiah told reporters at Mangaluru International Airport. The former chief minister said he has requested the government to allot Kaveri guest house in Bengaluru for him.
