Divisive figure or national icon? -- The contested and controversial legacy of Vinayak Damodar Savarkar

The BJP has promised to confer the Bharat Ratna Award on Veer Savarkar. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights His proponents also point to Savarkar’s charge against caste-discrimination, and advocacy for increased inclusion in schools as a true barometer of his character His characterisation of the 1857 Indian uprising as India’s ‘First War for Independence’ is viewed as an immense act of bravery by his supporters He is often criticised for bartering an ideology that he fervently preached for years, for his own personal freedom

Earlier this week, the Bharatiya Janata Party published its election manifesto for the upcoming Maharashtra Assembly polls, promising to confer the Bharat Ratna, the highest civilian award in India, to Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, often referred to as Veer Savarkar. The move has drawn both criticism and praise, spotlighting a debate around a character that has its roots in the late 19th century. As one of India’s influential political figures, Veer Savarkar is often condemned by his detractors for propagating what they believe to be a deeply flawed and divisive Hindutva ideology. His proponents, on the other hand, believe Savarkar to have been a shining beacon in India’s fight against British imperialism. Savarkar’s life appears to be littered with contradictions, and perhaps this is why the nation has never been able to harmonise the conflicting narratives around the man.

Supporters of Savarkar often cite his text, ‘The History of the War of Indian Independence’, as a critical piece of literature in mobilising the Indian populace against the oppressive British regime. His characterisation of the 1857 Indian uprising as India’s ‘First War for Independence’ is viewed as an act of intellectual courage by his supporters as it sought to provide a counter-narrative to the British monopoly over historiography. The book was banned across the British Empire, yet copies were smuggled into France, the Netherlands and Germany, causing Savarkar’s popularity as a revolutionary to soar.





His proponents also point to Savarkar’s charge against caste-discrimination and advocacy for increased inclusion in schools as a true barometer of his character. Savarkar worked at the grassroots level to introduce a number of social reforms, most notably to elevate the status of India’s untouchable community. He organised several religious events to integrate the downtrodden castes, encouraging them to pray and engage in festivities at temples. As a rationalist, he contended that one’s lineage or caste should have no bearing on the measure of privilege accorded to an individual, and called for a “social revolution” to “bridge the differences between various castes.”

However, his detractors have found the BJP’s bid to confer the Bharat Ratna award on Savarkar baffling, citing the fact that Savarkar was an accused in the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi. Although Savarkar was acquitted by the courts for lack of evidence, this has not stopped some from arguing that Savarkar’s links with Nathuram Godse and other conspirators went far beyond what has been claimed.

Others also argue that for all his political activism and talk of revolution, Savarkar, ultimately, ended up assisting the British government upon his release from the Yerwada Central Jail in 1924. During his time as a prisoner in Cellular Jail in the Andamans, Savarkar was subjected to torture and harsh conditions that, many believe, were enough to extinguish his spirit. He filed a number of mercy petitions to the Governor General’s council, denouncing his previous actions, and pleading to be transferred to mainland India. In one letter, Savarkar offers to serve the government “in any capacity”, proposing to use his image as a political luminary to restore the faith of “misled young men in India” in the British Empire. As such, he is often criticised for bartering an ideology that he fervently preached for years, for his own personal freedom.

Some contend that the Hindu Mahasabha’s (Savarkar’s political party) loss in the 1937 elections to the Indian National Congress relegated Savarkar to the margins of history. He is often referred to as the father of the Hindutva movement, but the complexity of his ideology has unfortunately left room for great misinterpretation.



In his text, "Hindutva. Who is a Hindu?", Savarkar discussed the need to develop a national identity, and in doing so characterised the Hindutva ideology as transcending that of Hinduism. He claimed that the Hindutva identity also had roots in geography, history and country, as he sought to coalesce the Muslim and Christian identities into an overarching collective identity. His proponents interpret Savarkar's ideology as an inclusive one premised on the acceptance of India as more than one's birthplace but also a Holy Land, regardless of what religion one belonged to.



While many accept Savarkar's mission to create a national identity as noble and even essential, his critics question why such an identity needs to have a religious foundation at all. In doing so they allege that Savarkar's ideology becomes inherently divisive, especially in the manner in which it ultimately materialises on the ground. Savarkar himself has been described as a "strategic agnostic" who came to realise that religion was useful in unifying the populace.



It is clear that the intriguing life and philosophy of Veer Savarkar will continue to divide commentators along ideological and political lines. Yet, perhaps some consolation can be found in the idea that discussions around Savarkar and his place in India's modern history were long overdue and they are finally being held, thus adding another layer of complexity to Indian historiography.
