Child-bride sale: Gujarat man says he was jobless, sold daughter to feed family

Accused husband to be charged under POCSO. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Officials said girl's father confessed to sold the daughter to feed his family 10-year-old was illegally married to a 37-year-old man named Govind Thakor Accused husband to be charged under POCSO

Ahmedabad: The Gujarat social justice department which is probing the child bride sale case, has revealed that the man was jobless and sold his 10-year-old daughter to feed his family.

The man, a residence of Banaskantha district, sold his daughter in 'marriage' for Rs 50,000 to a 37-year-old man in Ahmedabad August this year. Officials said the father of the girl was exploited by a local agent to sell his daughter.

According to a report, the girl was rescued from a house in Asarwa on Tuesday by the women's crime branch in Ahmedabad. The minor girl has bow been shifted to Women's protection home in Odhav.

"The girl's father is very poor and had run out of money to feed his family. He fell into a trap of a village agent who offered him Rs 50,000 to give his 10-year-old daughter in marriage," said Child marriage prevention officer Manish Joshi.

Meanwhile, a probe is underway under the Prevention of Child Marriage Act by Hadad police as the illegal marriage took place under the limits of Khermal village of Danta taluka in Banaskantha district.

A video of the incident was handed over to the police, where the 37-year-old man was seen putting vermillion in girl's hair as a custom of an Indian wedding ceremony. The accused husband was identified as Govind Thakor.

When showed the video by police, the girl's father identified the minor as his daughter. He confessed that she was married to Govind and added that the marriage happened in August this year.

The girl was shown to Thakor in a local fair where he agreed to pay Rs 50,000 for the 'bride'. The agent who showed the minor to Thakor was named as Jagmal Gamar.

Despite knowing that the wedding was illegal, the accused Govind Thakor allegedly raped the minor for over two months at his residence in Asarwa in Ahemadabad.

Police said they will add charges of rape and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act against Thakor. The report also said that the girl's father and the agent will be booked for abetment of crime and three other persons involved in the incident will be charged under human trafficking.

The girl has been sent for medical examination and the might also undergo counseling so that she could narrate her ordeal to the investigators.

A police officer said that the girl's father is an alcoholic and had been out of work for around for months.
