Telangana bandh: Clash between RTC workers, police in Parakala as strike continues

File picture: Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) employees stage a demonstration in Hyderabad | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The day-long shutdown in Telangana was called by the Joint Action Committee of TSRTC employees The Telangana Police have detained several agitating leaders TSRTC employees have been striking since October 5 to press for 26 demands

Hyderabad: A minor clash erupted between a group of striking employees of Telangana State Road Transport Corporation (TSRTC) and police in Warangal district's Parakala town as the state-wide shutdown is underway on Saturday.

The day-long shutdown in Telangana was called by the Joint Action Committee (JAC) of TSRTC employees, whose indefinite strike entered the 15th day today, and being supported by the opposition parties.

As police prevented RTC workers from stopping buses from leaving the Parakala bus depot this morning, a minor clash between the two sides was reported.

The Telangana Police have detained several agitating leaders.

Four buses were damaged as protesters pelted stones at a few places at Wanaparthy and Nizamabad district.

Tight security arrangements have been made in Hyderabad as well as other towns to prevent violence. The TSRTC is operating a few buses with the help of temporary drivers and conductors, and under police protection.

Meanwhile, commuters in Hyderabad faced tough time today as the Ola and Uber cab drivers also began their indefinite strike from Saturday to press for their demands to regularise the cab aggregator market. As per the drivers' association, 50,000 cabs have gone off the roads.

People were heavily dependent on cab services because of the strike by the TSRTC employees.

All major opposition parties - Telugu Desam Party (TDP), Congress, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), Telangana Jana Samithi (TJS), Communist Party of India (CPI), Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M), Jana Sena – and trade unions, state government employees, sections of advocates and student unions have given their support to the bandh called by the striking TSRTC employees.

TSRTC employees have been striking since October 5 to press for 26 demands. Their main demand is TSRTC's merger with the government.

On Friday, the Telangana High Court had set a deadline of October 28 for TSRTC and employees' unions to settle the matter.

The JAC has held the government responsible for the situation, saying it was not extending an invitation to them for talks despite the Telangana HC’s direction.

In the wake of the strike, the educational institutions, which were scheduled to re-open on October 14 following 15-day-long holidays, were directed to remain closed till October 19.

Ruling out talks with the striking employees, Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao had previously announced that 48,000 employees 'dismissed themselves' by not coming back to work before the expiry of the October 7 deadline.

The KCR government had further issued orders to hire new employees. The Opposition has slammed the government for adopting a tough stand on the strike.
