Madhya Pradesh: Ex-BJP MLA's daughter alleges torture by family over marriage

The counsel of the woman that she has approached Madhya Pradesh High Court in Jabalpur seeking police protection. (Image for Repesentatiom: Reuters)

The daughter of a former Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA from Bhopal has approached Madhya Pradesh High Court claiming that she was being given injections by her family to force her to marry a legislator's son, police said on Saturday.

The ex-MLA had filed a case with Kamla Nagar police station in Bhopal on October 16 about his daughter going missing and had claimed that she was "mentally unwell", Inspector Vijay Sisodia said.

A local news channel played a video clip showing the woman talking about the alleged torment.

"My family wants me to get married to an MLA's son against my wish. I am being drugged with injections," she claimed.

She went on to add that she was "not with a Christian, Muslim" and that she was "safe and happy" after "leaving home on my own wish".

"I am mentally sound. My family has gathered fudged documents regarding my health as they are influential. I am being bothered intentionally. I don't want to return home," she said in the clip, adding that a cousin was beating her up amid "10 years of torment".

The woman said that she had left home "10-20 times" earlier. Her counsel Ankit Saxena told PTI that she has approached Madhya Pradesh High Court in Jabalpur seeking police protection.

Ankit Saxena said that he had recorded the video of Bharti on her request.

Ankit Saxena said that the plea in HC seeks inquiry and cancellation of the October 16 police complaint filed by her father.

His client is not mentally unwell and was a meritorious student who scored distinction in three subjects in her Class XII exams, the lawyer said.

Ankit Saxena said that the woman was in a relationship with a man in Pune in neighbouring Maharashtra and was being forced to call it off to get married to a BJP leader's son.

The accused MLA could not be contacted for his comments.
