Militants on the run in J&K: Dr Jitendra - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

‘A new era to dawn after Oct 31’

Avtar Bhat

DODA, Oct 19: Reiterating that Narendra Modi Government is committed to uproot terrorism from Jammu and Kashmir which has been eating into vitals of the society for last three decades, Union Minister in PMO with independent charge of North Eastern States, Dr Jitendra Singh today said that terrorism is on last legs and it will be wiped out within a year.

Talking to reporters on the sidelines of party programme at Doda and during visit to the residence of BJP activist Vijay Kumar at Batote in Ramban district at whose residence three militants were eliminated early this month by police and security forces, Dr Jitendra Singh said that strong and calculated steps have been taken by Narendra Modi led Government and Union Home Minister, Amit Shah to wipe out terror from Jammu and Kashmir and frustrate the designs of forces inimical to national interests.

Dr Jitendra Singh, while referring to recent terrorist incidents in Jammu and Kashmir said these incidents are not result of any strategy on the part of extremists and their harborers but a result of desperation among the terrorist groups who have felt heat of the security forces and police after the result oriented counter insurgency operations launched against them under the Modi Government. “They are now on the run to save their lives from security forces and police who are chasing them up to finish, he added.

The Union Minister said unlike past, this Government has given a free hand to security forces and police in countering the terrorism in J and K and this step of Narendra Modi Government has yielded good results and the Government is fully confident to wipe out terrorism within a year so that the people heave a sigh of relief and Jammu and Kashmir will tread on the path of development and progress.

He said the people of the State should not get upset with the stray terrorist incidents and reports in certain sections of media that terrorists are regrouping again. But this is the indication that terrorists are losing the ground and they are on run as they know that security forces will chase them to finish. They are in great desperation and the stray attacks by them are the result of this frustration, he added.

The Minister said that Modi Government has not shown any leniency towards the terror from the Day one it assumed office at Delhi first time in May 2014 and took hard steps in curbing their activities on border and within. He said it was the result of weak policies of previous Governments both at State and in the Centre that Jammu and Kashmir suffered a lot due to last three decades of terrorism. “But we are determined to eliminate it completely form the soil now”, he added

Dr Jitendra Singh highly exclaimed the courage shown by the security forces and police led by SSP Ramban, Anita Sharma while countering the terrorists who had made BJP leader Vijay Kumar hostage after forcibly entering his house early this month and said it was the result of utmost wit shown by the security forces and police personnel that three dreaded terrorists were eliminated without harming the hostage in which one jawan of security forces attained supreme sacrifice in the operation.

The Union Minister said as soon he was informed that the BJP activist was held hostage in Batote area by terrorists, he immediately took up the issue with Union Home Minister, Amit Shah. The Home Minister at that very time issued directives to the State administration to ensure the safety and security of the hostage and “I personnel pay kudos to security forces and police personnel for the courage and valour shown by them in eliminating the dreaded terrorists and safe release of Vijay Kumar”, Dr Jitendra Singh added.

He said for Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh a new dawn will usher after October 31 when the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir will be converted into two UTs. Under the new arrangement it will be now easier to implement priorities of Narendra Modi Government including establishing law and order.

There will be a lot of transformation in all the three regions of erstwhile J&K State with the beginning of new era of development and progress as there will be total watch on the developmental funds and all schemes will be directly monitored by Central Government to ensure that funds earmarked for the public welfare are not misused and officers at the helm of affairs will be made accountable for the same under new arrangement.

Dr Jitendra Singh said that BJP has fulfilled its commitments towards people of the J and K and it created a history of sorts by abrogating the controversial Articles of 370 and 35 (A) which were the barriers in the total integration of the State with Union of India.

With the abrogation of controversial Articles, the dream of founder president of Bhartiya Jana Sangh, Dr Shyama Prasad Mookherjee who had launched a movement along with Sher-e -Duggar and founder leader of J&K Praja Parishad, Pt Prem Nath Dogra in this regard in 1952 and the sacrifices made by three generations of the party later to fulfill the same have come true, he added.
