Ex-BJP MLA refutes daughter's allegations of torture over marriage

Former Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA from Bhopal Surendra Nath Singh, who was accused by his daughter for being tortured by her family to force her to marry a legislator's son, has refuted her claims saying she was suffering from depression.

Earlier, Surendra Singh's daughter approached Madhya Pradesh High Court claiming that she was allegedly being given injections by her family to force her to marry a legislator's son.

Refuting his daughter's allegations, Surendra Singh told India Today TV that she was suffering from depression.

Surendra Singh also said that the only thing he wanted for his daughter was to have a "good career" and get her married to a well-off family. "Is it a crime to think so?," Singh asked.

Earlier, the ex-MLA had filed a case with Kamla Nagar police station in Bhopal on October 16 about his daughter going missing and had claimed that she was "mentally unwell", Inspector Vijay Sisodia said.

A local news channel played a video clip showing Surendra Singh's daughter talking about the alleged torment by her family.

"My family wants me to get married to an MLA's son against my wish. I am being drugged with injections," she claimed.

She went on to add that she was "not with a Christian, Muslim" and that she was "safe and happy" after "leaving home on my own wish".

"I am mentally sound. My family has gathered fudged documents regarding my health as they are influential. I am being bothered intentionally. I don't want to return home," she said in the clip, adding that a cousin was beating her up amid "10 years of torment".

The woman said that she had left home "10-20 times" earlier. Her counsel Ankit Saxena told PTI that she has approached Madhya Pradesh High Court in Jabalpur seeking police protection.

Ankit Saxena said that the woman was in a relationship with a man in Pune in neighbouring Maharashtra and was being forced to call it off to get married to a BJP leader's son.

(With PTI inputs)
