Army destroys terror launch pads in PoK, Pakistan summons Indian envoy

The Indian Army on Sunday hit terror launch pads and Pakistan Army posts giving incidental protection to them in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) in a retaliatory attack against ceasefire violation that killed two soldiers and a civilian in Jammu and Kashmir’s Kupwara district.

Three civilians of Ghundhishat village in Tangdhar sector were also injured in the firing. However, in the retaliatory firing by India, five Pakistani Army personnel were killed along the Line of Control (LoC), PTI reported.

#WATCH Army Chief General Bipin Rawat on Indian Army used artillery guns to target terrorist camps in PoK: On the basis of reports that we have been getting, 6-10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed, 3 camps have been destroyed. Similar no. of terrorists have also been killed… pic.twitter.com/a19gOD90Ab — ANI (@ANI) October 20, 2019

Amid all this, Indian Acting High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia was summoned by the Pakistan Foreign Ministry on Sunday evening.

Army sources told The Indian Express that Pakistan Army resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violation to assist infiltration by terrorists across the Line of Control (LoC).

“Indian Army retains the right to respond at a time and place of it’s choosing in case Pakistan Army continues to assist terrorist activities across Indian borders,” Army sources said.

On Tuesday, a 27-year-old woman was killed due to unprovoked mortar shelling from the Pakistani side and small arms fire along the Line of Control in Poonch district.

The number of ceasefire violations by Pakistan has seen a spike this year. The months of July, August, and September saw more combined violations than in the same months in the last two years.

Last week, Northern Army Commander Lt General Ranbir Singh had said Pakistan was trying to push in militants to keep the Valley in turmoil after India in August removed the special status of Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370.

Terrorist training camps are still active across the border and Pakistan is trying to provide them with all kinds of support, including weapons, he said, adding that the recent air-dropping of weapons in Punjab with the help of drones was a step in that direction. He assured that the Army was competent and fully prepared to foil all such designs.

In 2019, there have been 296 ceasefire violations in July, 307 in August and 292 in September. There were 68 violations in July in 2017 and 13 in 2018, 108 violations in August in 2017 and 44 in 2018, and for September 2017 and 2018, the figures stood at 101 and 102, respectively.
