17-year-old rape accused consumes poison at observation home in Tamil Nadu

A preliminary investigation conducted by the police has suggested that the boy died as he had consumed poison (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 17-year-old rape accused consumed poison at a government observation home in Tamil Nadu The deceased had been arrested on October 8 for allegedly raping a shepherd The police are yet to find out how the boy got the poison inside the observation home

Madurai: A teenager accused of raping a woman consumed poison in a bid to end his life on Saturday. The 17-year-old boy had been living in a government observation home for children. The boy had been arrested on October 8 by the Sambavar Vadakarai police.

According to police sources, the 17-year-old was taken to the Tirunelveli Government Medical College and Hospital after he complained of stomach pain. The boy reached the hospital around 8.30 pm and was declared dead on arrival.

A preliminary investigation conducted by the police has suggested that the boy died as he had consumed poison. A case of suspicious death has been registered by the Melapalayam Police. The police are investigating the case to find out how the boy caught hold of the poison without the knowledge of the authorities and the guards.

According to a report, he had been booked under Section 376 (punishment for rape), 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement), 326 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means) and 506 (ii) (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The boy had been sent to the observation home as he had allegedly raped a shepherd at an isolated spot in Sambavar Vadakarai near Tenkasi. The woman had taken her goats for grazing when the accused allegedly raped her.

This is not the first instance where a person facing allegations has ended his life. Similar instances have surfaced from different parts of the country. In some of the cases, guilt drives the accused to suicide while in some cases, the fear of trial forces them to take their lives. In some of the cases, however, the police have been involved in the cases of custodial deaths.

Rape-accused scribe commits suicide in Bengaluru's Central Prison, family cries foul

In another incident reported from Bengaluru, a rape-accused journalist allegedly ended his life under judicial custody in October this year. Identified as Anil Raj, the deceased was the editor of a Bengaluru-based tabloid. Raj hanged himself from a bell in the Shiva temple located inside the premises of the prison.

He had allegedly raped an employee who was working in the office. While the prison staff said that the rape accused had ended his own life, his family members claimed that there was foul play involved. One of his family members said that Anil Raj had injury marks on his forehead, along with other parts of his body.
