Six to ten terrorists killed in Army's artillery firing on terror camps: General Bipin Rawat

Army chief Bipin Rawat | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Three to four terror camps have been destroyed in the artillery firing: Army chief 6-10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed: General Bipin Rawat Artillery attacks were launched in retaliation to Pakistan’s unprovoked firing and ceasefire violations

New Delhi: Army chief General Bipin Rawat, on Sunday, said that six to ten terrorists were killed by the Indian Army in the artillery attack on terror camps in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.

Giving details of the Army’s action, General Rawat said that three to four terror camps have been destroyed in the artillery firing that also caused severe damage to terrorist infrastructure across.

“Last evening an attempt was made in Tangdhar to infiltrate terrorists, we retaliated. Pakistan carried out the attack, firing at our post in which we did suffer, but before they could make the infiltration attempt, it was decided that we target the terror camps across. We had the coordinates of these camps. Terrorist camps opposite Tangdhar sector have been destroyed,” the Army chief said.

“On the basis of reports that we have been getting, 6-10 Pakistani soldiers have been killed, three to four camps have been destroyed. A similar number of terrorists have also been killed,” he said while speaking to reporters.

The Army chief further said that they received several inputs of infiltration attempts from across the border following the abrogation of Article 370.

“Ever since Article 370 was abrogated from J&K, we have been getting repeated inputs of infiltration by terrorists from across the border to disturb peace and harmony in the state,” he added.

He also said that attempts are being made to disrupt a peaceful atmosphere in the Valley where life is limping back to normalcy after the revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir and subsequent restrictions.

“Gradually things are returning to normalcy in the Valley, but obviously there is somebody who is working behind the scenes at the behest of terrorists and agencies, in Pakistan and PoK, who're trying to disrupt the peaceful atmosphere,” he said.

“Of late, we had info that terrorists are coming closer to camps in the forward areas. In the last one month, we have seen repeated infiltration attempts by terrorists from different sectors,” he added, news agency ANI reported.

Earlier in the day, the Indian Army launched heavy artillery attacks, targeting terror camps and several Pakistani military positions opposite the Tangadhar sector along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir.

The Indian Army launched the artillery attacks in retaliation to Pakistan’s unprovoked firing and ceasefire violations.

Last evening, the Pakistani Army resorted to unprovoked ceasefire violations to help terrorists infiltrate into Indian territory in the Tangadhar sector, an Indian Army official said.
