Diwali 2019: Know the stories associated with the festival of lights

Pic for representation purpose only. Pic credit - Pixabay

Indian festivals are all about the celebration of the good over the evil. Like Holi, the festival of colours that marks the victory of Prahalada's Bhakti over his father, Hiranyakashyapu and aunt Holika's arrogance, Deepavali or Diwali commemorates the return of Shri Rama to Ayodhya after annihilating demon-king Ravana.

Diwali, which is also known as the festival of lights, is by far the most important festival celebrated pan India. It is also a day when people worship the Goddess of wealth, Lakshmi and Lord Kubera, the treasurer of wealth. One of the five days is also devoted to the worship of Dhanavantri, the God of medicines and Lord Yama, the God of death.

Interestingly, each of these Gods and Goddess is closely associated with the festival, that symbolises the victory of light over darkness and knowledge over ignorance.

Check out the legends related to Diwali to make your celebrations even more meaningful.

Lord Rama

Lord Rama spent fourteen years in exile to honour the promise made by Dasharatha (Rama's father) to Kaikeyi (Rama's step-mother). His consort Sita and younger brother Lakshmana accompanied him as he travelled to several places. However, during their stay in the woods, Ravana, the demon-king of Lanka, who was enchanted by Sita's beauty, abducted her. He took her to his kingdom and held her captive. After learning about Sita's abduction, and tracing her whereabouts, Rama and Lakshmana, along with the army of monkeys, fought a fierce battle against Ravana. The battle ended with Ravana's death at the hands of Shri Rama.

Meanwhile, the people of Ayodhya, including Kaikeyi, who regretted her action, awaited the return of Rama. His absence had created a void that none could fill. Upon his arrival, people lit lamps not only to welcome him but express their sincere devotion. Thus, his arrival marked the return of light to Ayodhya that had plunged into darkness.

Lord Dhanavantri, Goddess Lakshmi and Lord Kubera

According to one of the legends, Lord Dhanavantri, Goddess Lakshmi and Lord Kubera emerged during Samudra Manthan. The devas and the asuras participated in a tug of war. The Mandara mountain posed as a rod and Vasuki, the snake, was used as a rope for churning out the divine nectar. Lord Dhanavantri emerged with the Amrita Kalasha (divine nectar) while Lakshmi and Kubera emerged with wealth on Trayodashi Tithi in the month of Kartika (Punrimant calendar) / Ashwina (Amavasyant calendar). Hence, Diwali is also associated with good health and wealth.

Lord Yama

People worship Yama, the God of death on Trayodhashi Tithi to seek his blessings for the protection of their family from untimely death. Hence, to honour and please him, devotees light an earthen lamp and place it outside the main door. And this lamp is called Yama Deepam.

.
