Farmer gets 4-year RI for sexually assaulting minor

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a 40-year-old farmer to four years rigorous imprisonment for sexually assaulting a minor girl. The court also imposed a fine of Rs30,000 on the convict, and on default of payment of fine, he will have to undergo a further rigorous imprisonment for one and a half years. The court ordered that out of the amount of fine of Rs30,000, a sum of Rs25,000 would be paid by the accused to the prosecutrix as compensation.

On September 30, 2016, Division 4 police had booked the accused for attempting to rape a 17-year-old girl living in his neighbourhood. As per prosecution, in her statement to police, the victim, who is a complainant in the case, said her date of birth was July 15, 1999, and she had studied up to class VIII, and thereafter, had been doing household chores. She has elder twin siblings — a brother and a sister. The accused lives in front of the complainant’s house, and he used to frequently make gestures and tease her.

On September 29, 2016, after completion of household work, at about 9.30pm, she and her other family members slept in the courtyard, and she had slept alone on her cot. At about 12.30am, she woke up suddenly and saw a person lying nude with her and fondling her private parts, after which she raised an alarm. Hearing her distress, her family members and siblings tried to catch hold of the accused, but he succeeded in running away, after which they informed the police. Cops later arrested the accused and produced a chargesheet against him in the court.

During the trial, the accused pleaded false implication due to political rivalry. The defence counsel challenged the prosecution of the accused on the grounds of false implication, saying that earlier, a scuffle took place between the accused and father of the prosecutrix on account of which the latter was nursing a grudge against him.

Turning down the defence plea, the court observed that there was no previous enmity between the complainant and the accused party. Saying that it was evident from the testimony of the first defence witness that he had referred to the scuffle that allegedly took place between the accused and the other person, who was neither a complainant nor a witness of the prosecution in the present case, the court questioned how that could have led to false implication of the accused.

The court ruled that there was no previous enmity between the complainant and the accused due to political or any other reason, and therefore, overruled the arguments of the defence party.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
