UP Police announce Rs 2.50 lakh reward for information on Kamlesh Tiwari's killers

Uttar Pradesh Police has announced a reward of Rs 2.50 lakh each for information leading to the arrest of the two suspected killers of Hindu Samaj Party leader Kamlesh Tiwari. The two suspected killers of Tiwari have been identified as Sheikh Ashfaq Hussain and Pathan Moinuddin Ahmed.

In the latest development, the suspected killers have been spotted in Shahjahanpur near Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh following which the Special Task Force (STF) raided the hotels and madrasas in the city.

Live TV

The presence of the suspects in the city was captured in CCTV cameras. The STF is currently camped in the city. According to sources, the suspected killers had booked an Innova car from Palia in Lakhimpur district and reached Shahjahanpur.

The STF conducted raids at several hotel madrasas at 4 am. The CCTV footage of the camera in Hotel Paradise at the railway station showed both the suspected killers. The two suspects left the Innova car at the railway station and were seen walking towards the roadways bus stand.

STF has captured the driver of the Innova vehicle. It is being feared that the suspects are hiding somewhere in Shahjahanpur.

The two suspects Sheikh Ashfaq Hussain and Pathan Moinuddin Ahmed had met Tiwari on Friday (October 18, 2019) on the pretext of gifting him sweets and spent almost 30 minutes with him before killing him. Kamlesh Tiwari was stabbed and shot at inside his residence in Lucknow's Naka Hindola area allegedly by the above-mentioned duo. He succumbed to his injuries at a Lucknow hospital during treatment. The killers fled after committing the crime but left behind vital clues including their footage in a CCTV camera.

A Special Investigation Team of Uttar Pradesh Police is investigating Tiwari's murder, the links of which have been found in Gujarat, Maharashtra and even overseas. Kamlesh Tiwari was a former leader of Hindu Mahasabha. He later founded the Hindu Samaj Party in 2017.

Gujarat Anti Terrorist Squad (ATS) claimed that a local leader Jaimin Bapu has claimed one of the key suspects involved in the murder case got in touch with Kamlesh Tiwari using a fake Facebook account. According to Jaimin Bapu, a man called Ashfaq created a fake Facebook account in the name of Rohit Solanki in June 2019 and befriended Tiwari. The so-called Rohit had also arranged a meeting with Tiwari on October 18, the day the latter was murdered.

During the probe, it was revealed that the sweet box in which the suspects carroed the weapons was from a shop in Gujarat's Surat. A joint team of Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh police arrested Maulana Mohsin Sheikh (24), Khurshid Ahmed Pathan (23) and Faizan (21) in connection with Tiwari's murder.
