Two Kamlesh Tewari killers may have fled to Nepal

UP cops: Found knife used by Tewari’s killers

Accused had called Tewari on Oct 16 to seek his blessing

Two more picked up for questioning

AHMEDABAD: Investigators suspect that the two Surat men who allegedly murdered Uttar Pradesh Hindu outfit leader Kamlesh Tewari on Friday last may have fled to Nepal Fareed alias Moin Khan Pathan and Ashfaq Khan Pathan, both residents of Limbayat area in Surat, had stabbed Tewari to death at his house in Khursheda Baug locality of Lucknow. They had hidden a pistol and knife in the box of ‘ghari’ (a famous Surat sweet) that they offered him as Diwali greetings.A knife and a blood-soaked towel were seized on Sunday from the room of a hotel located just 2km from the Lucknow office-cum-residence of slain Kamlesh Tewari, helping police establish this as the place from which the assassins had set out to carry out their plan. TNN P10Preliminary investigation of the trio revealed that Moin and Ashfaq travelled by train to Kanpur from where they took a taxi to Lucknow on October 16. In Lucknow, they stayed at Khalsa Inn and cops have recovered saffron clothes from their room in the hotel. They had donned saffron clothes when they went to murder Tewari.“Through Google, they found the location of Tewari’s house at Khursheda Baugh. They called up Tewari at around midnight on October 16 and told him that they wanted to seek his blessings for Diwali and give him famous sweets of Surat,” said an ATS official.The next day they reached Tewari’s house and stabbed him to death. They also shot at him once. The bullet grazed him on the butt and ricocheted.Gujarat anti-terrorism squad (ATS) had cracked the case and nabbed Moin’s brother Rashid and two others -Maulana Mohsin Sheikh and Faizan Member - from Surat on Saturday early morning. The families of the trio have been summoned by the ATS for recording their statements.Till now, six people have been arrested in the case, which is strongly suspected to be a blasphemy killing.Two persons were picked up by the police from Surat on Sunday for their alleged links with the suspected killers and conspirators. The duo, whose identities were not revealed, had allegedly arranged for the pistol for Moin and Ashfaq.
