Adani Group offers Rs 10,000 crore to buy Mumbai airport stake: Report

File photo | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Billionaire Gautam Adani-led Adani Group is reportedly contemplating to pump in Rs 18,000 crore into its airport business, including Rs 10,000 crore in attaining a major stake in Mumbai International Airport (MIAL). Besides, the balance Rs 8,000 crore is to be invested in developing Ahmedabad, Lucknow Jaipur, Thiruvananthapuram, and Mangaluru airports.

It is worth noting that the Ahmedabad-based conglomerate entered the airport sector in February this year by winning the bids to operate six airports in the country for the next 50 years. The government had given the approval to privatise six Airports Authority of India (AAI)-run airports on public-private partnership model. The group faced hurdles investing in Thiruvananthapuram airport because the Kerala government filed a petition in the high court, saying it will not allow a private company to take over the airport.

The diversified Adani group signed a pact to buy out 13.5 per cent stake in MIAL, and it has set aside Rs 10,000 crore for increasing its stake in MIAL. The group’s planned investment, however, depends on the outcome of the legal battle with the GVK Group, which is resisting the Adanis’ bid to acquire the 13.5 per cent stake being held by its South African JV partner Bidvest in MIAL.

GVK owns a 50.5 per cent stake in MIAL, while Bidvest and ACSA Global Ltd hold 13.5 per cent and 10 per cent, respectively. The rest 26 per cent is held by AAI. The two South African firms have been trying to offload their combined stakes in MIAL, which runs the Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport in Mumbai, and exit the 13-year-old joint venture.

A business daily quoted a person familiar with the matter as saying, “We are ready to offer an investment of Rs 10,000 crore in the Mumbai airport and are awaiting the outcome of the litigation.”

Bidvest had agreed to sell its entire stake in MIAL to Adanis for Rs 1,248 crore or Rs 77 a share, valuing the airport at Rs 8,000 crore. At present, the deal has not yet completed due to the litigation over the right of first refusal (RoFR) vested with the Hyderabad-based infrastructure major.

As per the agreement, Bidvest first offered to sell its stake to the GVK group, but GVK failed to acquire the stake within the deadline which expired in March-end. In the meanwhile, the Adani group took the matter to an arbitration tribunal which asked GVK to make the payments by September 30 first and then it was extended to October 31.

Also, the Adani group had moved the Bombay High Court last month seeking execution of its pact with Bidvest for sale of its stake in the Mumbai airport. Adani and Bidvest by consent have extended the time to make payment and transfer shares to November 7.

GVK is reportedly not letting Bidvest sell its stake to Adanis instead it wants to acquire both South African entities. Meanwhile, news reports suggest the corporate affairs ministry has been examining the affairs of GVK after a whistle-blower alleged diversion of funds, issuance of fake bills among others.
