Woman Shares Horrific Details Of Theatre Prof Sudipto Chatterjee Molesting Her

Trigger warning

A student from a renowned college in Kolkata recently accused 55-year-old theatre professor, Sudipto Chatterjee, of sexually assaulting her while asking her to practice dialogues for a play. She alleged that Chatterjee penetrated her with his fingers and made her spurt out the dialogues louder and louder. "I had become a corpse, completely non-functional," she claimed.

Sudipto Chatterjee, a serial offender?

In a detailed description of what Chatterjee subjected her to, a woman narrated to the media: “I auditioned for a play called Lysistrata, which happened to be an in-house production of the institute, whereupon I was selected by Sudipto Chatterjee for the lead role of his own production ‘Bhadroja’....After three shows of Bhadroja, he suddenly realized that a scene wasn’t working and wanted to help me out with that. He called me to his place to teach me diaphragm breathing and psycho-physical approach to acting,” she said.

“Then, he asked me to lie down on the bed with my eyes closed and deliver the dialogues of the above mentioned scene. He started touching me and asked me to respond to his touch while delivering the dialogues. Then without a warning, he sexually assaulted me and asked me to spurt out the dialogues louder and louder,” she added.

The woman also alleged that Chatterjee was a serial offender and filed a police complaint along with two other survivors. She even claimed that Chatterjee’s wife was in the know of his antics and requested the women to “forget” the incident.

Chatterjee gets arrested

After the women filed a complaint of sexual abuse against Chatterjee, they were called for a meeting at the college, where they learned that he had already resigned from his post. According to the authorities, Chatterjee was called by the college's human resources department after the student complained and was told that the college had zero tolerance for sexual abuse.

After the allegations of rape spread like wildfire over social media and the FIR was registered against Chatterjee, the professor was nabbed by the Kolkata Police. He was arrested on Friday evening.

When asked for a reaction on the claims, Chatterjee said: "I am shocked at this allegation against me. I have been using this technique for a long time, but nobody has ever accused me of something as false and perverted.”

Chatterjee also called the allegation “a case of distortion and misrepresentation of facts” and said he was absolutely innocent. “It was completely educational and consensual, there was nothing sexual about it. It was about training and allowing her to get deeper in the role she was portraying in a play. It was geared towards the success and improvement of the play,” he told a leading daily.

Chatterjee taught film and theatre to media science students at the college. Prior to that, he taught at Jawaharlal Nehru University in Delhi and Centre for Studies in Social Sciences in Kolkata. An expert in the field, he has also delivered lectures at the National School of Drama in Delhi and has taught at universities in the United States.
