Pakistan Army Resorts To Shelling, Targets School Children Across LoC

Pakistan's unprovoked ceasefire violations across the LoC in the Poonch sector's Balakot have left children stranded within the premises of their schools.

At least two civilians were injured on Tuesday as Pakistan Army resorted to heavy shelling along the LoC in Poonch district on Tuesday. The mortar shelling from across the border started in the Balakote area of Mendhar sector around 1.20 pm, prompting strong retaliation by the Indian Army, the officials said.

They said two civilians were injured in the Pakistani shelling and are being evacuated to the hospital. People in the shelling hit villages rushed to the safety of their homes and underground bunkers, while the children in some schools falling within the range are being taken to safety, the officials said.

READ| Pakistan violates ceasefire, 2 soldiers, civilian killed in Kupwara

Earlier in the day, the Indian Army defused three live mortar shells fired by Pakistan troops along LoC in Poonch district, officials said on Tuesday. With the safe defusal of the mortar shells by Army engineers, a tragedy has been averted in Karmara village of Poonch district, they said.

Indian Army foils Pak's Plot

Pakistan has been resorting to heavy mortar shelling along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir for the past over one month. On Tuesday, October 22, Republic accessed an exclusive video of the Indian Army destroying live 120mm artillery shells fired by Pakistan, which has been continuously violating the Line of Control in the Mendhar sector of the Poonch district. The video shows soldiers risking their own lives and taking the unexploded shells to a safe distance and defusing them. Thus, the Army successfully foiled Pakistan’s conspiracy to target civilians along the border.

Speaking exclusively to Republic, Brig. Mahalingam (retd.) categorically stated that the Indian Army was going to retaliate if Pakistan attacked India. Thereafter, he explained the threat of these artillery shells. Later, he observed that the Indian government and the Army would not allow the terror camps to operate.

READ| Hafiz Saeed pulling strings in Pakistan from behind bars: Pak media

He said, “See the point that we must understand is that the Indian Army receiving blows from Pakistan is over. As far as India is concerned, today it is in a state where if Pak decides to hit India, it will certainly retaliate. But having said that as far as the particular bombs are concerned, we must understand that the bombs fired by Pakistan which does not explode are a big threat to human beings who are living in that area. Therefore, What the Indian Army is doing is to take out those bombs, recover them and take them to a safe place and then they are exploding them so that there is no such unexploded bomb in that area affecting the life and limbs of the civilians. That is what is being done. As far as the other issue of India hitting back at Pakistan is concerned, it is certainly going to be like that. And whenever any terror camps are there, the government of India and the Indian Army is not going to allow them to stay there and then infiltrate. Those days are over.”

(With PTI inputs)

READ| Republic TV reports from Tangdhar, J&K over Indian Army's strike
