Indian Army's Counter: Here's Where Pak Terror Bases Were Obliterated

In a massive retaliation to Pakistan's attempts to infiltrate into India along the Line Of Control (LoC), sources have said that the Indian Army has struck as many as 7 terror camps operating across the LoC, killing as many as 50 terrorists, if not more. As per reports, the counter came in response to 7 Pakistani SSG commandos trying but failing to infiltrate in the Tangdhar sector to carry out a BAT action. Upon the Indian Army receiving the information, all seven Pak commandos were eliminated, with Pakistan reportedly letting their dead bodies remain unclaimed 300 meters inside the Pakistan side of LoC.

READ: Pakistan Army resorts to shelling, targets school children across LoC

Detailing about the areas that have been struck by the Indian Army, as per reports, as many as seven locations across the Line of Control have been hit. Two locations are near the Tanghdar sector where the Pakistan army tried infiltration, other areas are near Neelam valley. As per sources, artillery positions near Pakistan's Army brigade headquarters in Muzaffarabad have also been hit by the Indian army in retaliation to the Pak army helping terrorists. As per sources, Gate no. 3 of the Neelum-Jhelum Hydropower Project (Noseri Dam) in Pak occupied Kashmir has been damaged when 2 artillery shells hit the gate.

READ: Pakistan violates ceasefire, 2 soldiers, civilian killed in Kupwara

Pakistan's unprovoked ceasefire violations

Earlier in the day, Pakistan's unprovoked ceasefire violations across the LoC in the Poonch sector's Balakot had left children stranded within the premises of their schools. As per officials, at least two civilians were injured on Tuesday as Pakistan Army resorted to heavy shelling along the LoC in Poonch district. The mortar shelling from across the border started in the Balakote area of Mendhar sector around 1.20 pm, prompting strong retaliation by the Indian Army, the officials said. The Indian Army also destroyed live 120mm artillery shells fired by Pakistan, which has targeted civilians in the Mendhar sector of the Poonch district, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K)

READ: Ceasefire violation: 27-year old woman killed in firing from Pakistan

READ: Hafiz Saeed pulling strings in Pakistan from behind bars: Pak media
