Salary bonanza for J&K from Oct 31

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, October 22

Government employees of the new Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh will get salaries and other benefits as per the recommendations of the 7th Central Pay Commission from October 31, the Union Home Ministry said on Tuesday.

The Home Ministry has issued the necessary orders in this regard, said sources. Union Home Minister Amit Shah had approved the proposal of payment of all 7th CPC allowances to the government employees of J&K and Ladakh UTs, which shall come into existence from October 31, an official statement said.

The move will benefit 4.5 lakh government employees working in the existing state of J&K and will become the employees of UTs of J&K and Ladakh from October 31, it said. On August 5, Parliament had passed a resolution abrogating special status to the state under Article 370 and passed a law to bifurcate it into two UTs. After Parliament cleared the J&K Reorganisation Bill, 2019, PM Narendra Modi had, in his address to the nation on August 8, said that all financial facilities being given to employees of other UTs would be extended to the two new UTs too.

The annual financial implication of the 7th CPC allowances, including for children’s education, hostel, transport, leave travel concession (LTC) and health, will be around Rs 4,800 crore.

Not ready for exams, cut syllabus: students

Srinagar: Students in J&K, particularly in the Valley, are in a dilemma as authorities have decided to go ahead with annual examinations even as almost half of the syllabus is yet to be completed. The students want exams deferred or at least some reduction in syllabus so that question papers be set accordingly. pti

School set afire

Anantnag: Miscreants on Tuesday set ablaze the building of a government middle school here in Kulgam district of south Kashmir. The incident took place about 7.30 pm in Watoo village. TNS

Financial boost

4.5 lakh

Total employees

Rs 4,800 cr

Additional burden on exchequer

Allowance break-up

Hostel

Rs 1,823 cr

Transport

Rs 1,200 cr

LTC

Rs 1,000 cr

Child edu

Rs 607 cr

Medical

Rs 108 cr
