Man predicts killing of Hindu leader on social media, lands in police net

Ludhiana: The Jodhewal police have arrested a 24-year-old man for sharing video of a Hindu leader with comment that ‘next is him after Kamlesh Tiwari’. The post was made on Facebook by accused on October 18, when Tiwari was assassinated in Lucknow.

The police took cognizance, when over 100 people on twitter tagged Ludhiana police on the post of accused seeking action against the man, while apprehending that he wanted to assassinate the Hindu leader, who was yet to be recognized. Notably, Hindu Samaj Party’s national president Kamlesh Tiwari, 45 was assassinated in Lucknow on October 18.

The police zeroed in to a facebook profile of Farhan Khan and started tracing him. On Tuesday Jodhewal police traced him to Rahon road and identified him as Farman Khan 24, who was a labourer. Senior police officials said the police have not found anything suspicious about him as yet.

SHO Jodhewal Sub-inspector Arshdeep Kaur Grewal said, “The accused said that he was ignorant that making a comment on a facebook post will land him in police custody. He is a school drop out and works as a labourer. During preliminary inquiry, the police have not found any suspicious connection of Farhan. However investigation is still on.”

The Police have registered a case against accused under sections of 298 (uttering words with deliberate intent to wound the religious feelings of any person), 153A (Promoting enmity between different groups of religion, race etc by words, either spoken or written) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of IPC.

Grewal said soon after the accused shared the video with his comments, several people including some right wing leaders raised objections and started sharing his post on twitter. Following objections by some right wing leaders and others, who started criticising police for inaction, Ludhiana police responded from its official twitter handle assuring that a stern action would be taken.

Top cop warns

Commissioner of Police Rakesh Agarwal said, “We have formed a social media cell that monitors activities and posts on social media. Anyone making provocative posts, targeting communal harmony and anything which challenges national security would face stern action.”

Cautioning people to be careful while posting comments on social media, he added, “All agencies are probing the assassination of Hindu leader Kamlesh Tiwari. The accused by uploading a post linking it to the killing has made himself a suspect in the conspiracy. We are still probing in what context the accused posted the comments. He said that the social media cell of Ludhiana police is keeping a watch on posts of social media. After examination, counselling would also be provided to those who are ignorant and FIR would be lodged on those who misuse social media.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
