After India registers protest, Bhindranwale portrait and 'genocide' plaque removed in Connecticut, USA

1984 Sikh Genocide Memorial Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale unveiled in the Norwich City Library, Connecticut, USA (Source: @SikhFedUK) | Photo Credit: Twitter

While Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and US President Donald Trump were speaking before thousands, mostly Indian-Americans in Dallas, Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, the Sikh extremist leader held responsible for hundreds of murders in Punjab during the early eighties and killed when the Indian Army stormed the Golden Temple in June 1984, was alive and well in the United States of America.

After a fashion, of course. As the Otis Library in Norwich, Connecticut, about 2,500 km from Dallas, was keeping his memory alive. In the Otis Library in Norwich, a wealthy 300-year old town of over 40,000 people, the '1984 Sikh Genocide Memorial' was unveiled on June 1 along with a portrait of Bhindranwale.

It stayed in place till the end of September. Then, after protests by the Indian government and some people of Indian origin, the Otis Library and the Norwich Monuments Committee decided to remove the plaque, the Bhindranwale portrait and the flags that accompanied them, ending three months of great embarrassment for the Government of India.

After a series of complaints, the Norwich Monuments Committee, including Alderwoman Stacy Gould, Alderman Joe De Lucia and Council President Pro Tem Bill Nash decided that Bhindranwale had to go. Nicholas Fortson, the president of the board of trustees at Otis, also agreed with the decision. The US authorities had, before agreeing to participate in the unveiling of Bhindrawale's portrait and plaque, missed the Indian government's version.

Indian authorities apprised the US counterpart that the 'Operation Bluestar' that saw the Indian Army storming the holiest shrine of Sikhism happened when Khalistani separatists were using the temple complex to store weapons and are also said to have been using a few pilgrims as human shields.

Indira Gandhi, then prime minister of India, was assassinated five months later by two of her Sikh bodyguards - and that soon after that - anti-Sikh riots broke out at several places across India.

"We had to explain to the authorities that people honouring Bhindranwale were a minuscule minority of the Sikh population, including in the US. We explained what happened in Punjab during that period and what he (Bhindranwale) had done," a senior Indian government official said.

Reports about the plaque had reached top officials in Delhi in July. Indian officials began reaching out to local leaders in Norwich, who later said they were not aware of the 'scope of display.'

At the June 1 dedication ceremony, Ned Lamont, the state Governor, was present. June was also declared Sikh memorial month and the state assembly decided to observe 30 November as the Sikh genocide remembrance day.

The plaque and portrait were donated by Swaranjit Khalsa, a local community leader and president of the Sikh Sewak Society International, USA. The '1984 Sikh Genocide Memorial' plaque reads: "In memory of the thousands of Sikh men, women, and children who lost their lives and loved ones in 1984. The Indian Army carried out a pre-planned attack on Harmandir Sahib, the holiest place of the Sikhs. This was followed in November by a state-sponsored genocidal campaign against Sikhs all across India.

"May 'chardhi kala' (everlasting optimism) reverberate through us as we stand against hatred, ignorance and intolerance."

The plaque, by the "Sikhs of Connecticut" also has a quote by Bhindranwale reading "freedom from slavery is achieved only when a person realises he would rather prefer death than be enslaved (sic)”.

The Norwich authorities, now aware of what really happened in Punjab in the 1980s, have returned the portrait and plaque to Khalsa. "The library is a non-political organisation. We want to make sure our visitors are in a safe atmosphere," Fortson told the Norwich Bulletin.
