Gujarat: 2-year-old girl molested, stripped by 22-year-old neighbour; accused on the run

The four-year-old boy started crying as he was standing outside the building (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A man in Kutch, Gujarat has been booked for molesting a two-year-old girl and tried to rape her The accused managed to escape from the spot The accused, Mahesh Aathu, has been booked under sections of the POCSO Act

Rajkot: A 22-year-old man has been accused of trying to rape a two-year-old girl in Gadhsisa village, Mandvi in Kutch. The accused was arrested on Tuesday. Identified as Mahesh Aathu, the accused works as a labourer. The arrest was made after the minor girl's father lodged a complaint with the police.

Mahesh Aathu is the minor's neighbour. The police have booked Mahesh Aathu for molestation and attempt to rape. Relevant provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act have also been added to the complaint.

How it happened

Around 7.30 pm on Tuesday, the two-year-old girl and her four-year-old brother were playing outside their house. Allegedly, Mahesh Aathu took the two of them to an under-construction building near the main market. He asked the minor's elder brother to stand outside and took her to the terrace.

According to a report, the four-year-old boy started crying when he was standing outside the building. Some of the shopkeepers saw the boy and reached the spot. When they asked him what was wrong, the boy said that a man had taken his sister inside the building.

Meanwhile, Aathu saw the shopkeepers and escaped. He jumped onto the terrace of another house and fled. When the girl's parents learned about this, they informed the police. The police have said that the accused had molested the girl and stripped her.

Neighbour rapes minor returning home from the movies

A similar incident came to light from Lakhimpur Kheri in Uttar Pradesh in May this year where an eight-year-old girl was allegedly raped by her neighbour. The accused, Rudal allegedly murdered the girl after raping her. Rudal approached the girl when she was returning after watching a movie.

The minor had gone to a movie theatre with her family. They were all watching a movie when the girl started feeling drowsy. She told her parents and decided to return home. The girl's parents started looking for her when she did not return home until late.

The following morning, they found the girl at Rudal's residence. The locals beat up Rudal before handing him over to the police. The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the POCSO Act. During interrogation, the accused confessed to committing the crime.
