Terror outfit Ansar Ghazwat-ul Hind eliminated from Kashmir: J&K DGP Dilbag Singh

Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbag Singh said on Wednesday that terrorist group Ansar Ghazwat-ul Hind group (AGH) has been wiped out from the valley after three local militants associated with the group were killed in Tral on Tuesday.

Among those killed was slain terrorist Zakir Musa's successor Abdul Hameed Lelhari. Lehari became the head of the terrorist group Ansar Ghazwat-ul Hind after the death of Zakir Musa.

"In Tral, 3 local militants associated with Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind were killed yesterday. You would recall that when Zakir Musa was killed, the command of this group was handed over to Hameed Lelhari," said Singh.

He also went on to blame the Pakistani Army and the ISI of promoting terrorism by 'pushing in maximum number of militants towards the Indian side.'

"Through launching pads near Line of Control (LoC), Pakistan army & ISI are involved in pushing in maximum number of militants towards Indian side.", Jammu & Kashmir DGP said.

Despite speculations expressed by some about the fact that more Kashmiri youth will join terror outfits after the abrogation of Article 370, he said that the rate of recruitment has been very low.

He also said that India will be successful in its efforts to curb terrorism only when the local youths of Kasmir don't take part in militancy and choose the path of peace.

Speaking on media reports about alleged detention of children after the abrogation of article 370 in the valley, he said that some media outlets were spreading 'misinformation' and 'propaganda' without 'verification'.

"No one has been tortured. No youngster, teenager or juvenile has been arrested by us. Wherever juveniles were arrested, provisions of Juvenile Justice Act was followed very strictly," he said.

He also held a meeting at Police Control Room Jammu in which he took stock of security situation in the region, preparedness for Block Development Council elections, the situation on the borders, security of airports&railway stations.

(With Zee Media inputs)
