The Shillong Times

Ownership rights granted to 40 lakh people in Delhi’s unauthorised colonies

New Delhi: The Union Cabinet on Wednesday decided to give ownership rights to 40 lakh people living in unauthorised colonies across the national capital. “The Cabinet has approved regulations for conferring and recognizing ownership or mortgage or transfer rights to 40 lakh residents of unauthorised colonies in Delhi,” Union Minister Prakash Javadekar said in a press briefing after the cabinet meeting. A Bill in this regard may be introduced in Parliament during the Winter Session, that commences on November 18, he said. The announcement comes a few months ahead of the Delhi Assembly elections slated in early 2020. The Delhi government run by Aam Aadmi Party in June this year had sent a proposal to the Centre to regularise 1,797 unauthorised colonies in the city with a charge of one per cent cost of land circle rate for up to 200 square metre plot from occupants and a nominal penalty. (IANS)



3 armed men nabbed in police trap

New Delhi: Three armed men, who targeted morning walkers and cyclists at Connaught Place, were nabbed following an exchange of fire with the police near Shankar Market on Wednesday morning, officials said. The suspects were identified as Mohammad Salim (22), Mohammad Ismail (24) and Sayud (22), they said. One of their accomplice managed to flee the spot, they said. The police laid a trap after they received information that the suspects would again try to target morning walkers near Shankar Market. The suspects, who arrived on a motorcycle, were asked to stop by a police team. Instead of stopping, the duo started firing at the police. In self defence, the police also fired back at them, a senior police officer said. During the exchange of fire, Salim and Ismail suffered bullet injuries in their legs and were taken to RML hospital for treatment, the officer added. While Sayud was arrested, another suspect managed to flee from the spot, the officer said. It is suspected that the accused were involved in allegedly robbing an expensive bicycle and an iPhone from a 24-year-old man at Connaught Place last week. A case has been registered and raids are being carried out to nab the absconding suspect, police said. (PTI)

Man held with 870 kgs of firecrackers

New Delhi: A man was arrested after 870 kgs of firecrackers were recovered from his shop in northwest Delhi’s Mahindra Park area, police said on Wednesday. The accused, Pankaj Kansal, who also lives in Mahindra Park, was arrested on Tuesday, they said. Following a tip-off, a raid was carried out at a shop, Kansal Fireworks, in Jahangir Puri’s DDA market on Tuesday. During a search, 46 cartons containing 870 kgs of firecrackers were recovered from the shop, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Northwest) Vijayanta Arya said. During enquiry, the shop owner failed to furnish the license for stocking the firecrackers, he said. Subsequently, a case was registered and an investigation is underway, the officer added. (PTI)

Couple found murdered in Delhi

New Delhi: The bodies of a couple with stab injuries have been found at their rented house in southeast Delhi’s Pul Prahladpur area, police said on Wednesday. They were identified as Aakash (32) and Bhawna (29). They were married for six years, they said. The incident took place on Tuesday morning when their five-year-old son was in school, police said, adding that they suspect that following a domestic quarrel the man may have killed his wife before killing himself. The couple was found lying in a pool of blood on the floor of their one-room house. Stab injuries were found on their bodies, police said. Police said the landlord told them that he a heard loud noise from the couple’s room which was bolted from inside, following which he along with others broke the door and entered the room. A blood stained vegetable knife was also found in the room, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southeast) Chinmoy Biswal said. The couple were taken to Apollo Hospital where doctor declared them dead, he said. Since they were married for less than seven years, the Sub Divisional Magistrate of the area has been informed and inquest proceedings are being conducted, he added. On local enquiry, police learnt that both Akash and Bhawana used to quarrel regularly as Akash who was working as sanitation supervisor did not give money to Bhawna for daily needs, the officer said. (PTI)



2 killed, 4 injured in knife attack

Malkangiri (Odisha): Two persons were killed and four others critically injured when a man attacked them with a knife during a meeting at a village in Odisha’s Malkangiri district, police said. The incident took place when a meeting was being held at MPV-33 village under Kalimela police station limits to resolve a dispute over the accused’s alleged involvement in an extra-marital affair, a police officer said. The accused also sustained injuries after he was thrashed by the villagers following the incident, he said. Forty five-year-old Bidhan Mirdha got infuriated by remarks made against him and took out a knife and attacked the people present in the meeting, Malkangiri Superintendent of Police Risikesh D Khilari said. He stabbed at least six people, including three women, before the villagers overpowered him, he said. While two persons, including a woman, died of their wounds, four others sustained critical injuries, the SP said. The injured were taken to Kalimela Community Health Centre and later shifted to the Malkangiri district hospital. Three of them were then shifted to a hospital in neighbouring Koraput district, another police officer said. The deceased were identified as 35-year-old Madhavi Ray and 45-year-old Biswanath Ray. Mirdha and his wife Kalpana have been taken into police custody, the officer said. Security personnel have been deployed in the village to prevent any flare-up, he added. (PTI)
