33 held for violence during funeral procession in Mumbai

Several detained based on CCTV camera footage; audio clips reveal attack planned on police station

The Mumbai Police have registered cases against around 200 people and arrested 33 after a mob attacked police personnel during the funeral procession of a Nehru Nagar resident, who had allegedly committed suicide, on Tuesday.

On Wednesday evening, the Nehru Nagar police detained another 15 to 20 people based on CCTV camera footage of the incident, and they are likely to be arrested, an official said. Seven police personnel were injured in the stone-pelting.

The police were also examining two audio clips, in which some persons are heard discussing a plan to attack a police station to ‘take revenge’ for the police action during the mob violence, the official added.

In one clip, a person was heard urging people, including women from the community, to gather outside the Nehru Nagar police station with chilli powder.

“We picked up one person whose name came up in the clip and found that someone from Ahmedabad had sent it to him,” senior police inspector Vilas Shinde said. The clips originated from Gujarat and Rajasthan, he said.

Pancharam Rithadiya (44) allegedly committed suicide near Tilak Nagar railway station last week. In the suicide note, he alleged the police had failed to trace his 17-year-old daughter who was abducted a few months ago.

During his funeral procession in Chembur on Tuesday, some mourners hurled stones at police, Additional Commissioner of Police Lakhmi Gautam said. “Seven police personnel, including four officers, were injured in the attack,” he said.

A police van, a taxi, a car, 10 to 12 motorcycles and three autorickshaws were damaged in the incident. The police lodged an FIR late on Tuesday against nearly 200 people and arrested 33 of them, Mr. Gautam said.

They were booked under Sections 143, 145, 147 (rioting), 307 (attempt to murder), 326 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapon), 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) of the Indian Penal Code, and the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act and Maharashtra Police Act.
