Selfie menace: Youth seriously injured after being attacked by elephant in Karnataka

The tusker was captured on Thursday morning near Bandipur Tiger Reserve. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Elephant attacks youth while taking selfie with the animal Youth seriously injured in the incident Tusker captured on Thursday morning near Bandipur Tiger Reserve

Bandipur: The selfie menace is getting dangerous by the day. In a fresh incident, a youth was seriously injured after he and his friends were chased by a wild elephant after they tried to take a selfie with the jumbo.

The incident took place on the outskirts of Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Chamarajanagara district of Karnataka on Tuesday.

According to a report, the youth has been admitted to a hospital in Gundapet and is stated to be out of danger. Before attacking the youth, the tusker also charged a 50-year-old man who was in the area to graze his cattle. Later, the elderly man was admitted to a hospital in Bengaluru.

Earlier, the jumbo was shifted from Krishnagiri to Mudumalai Tiger Reserve by the Tamil Nadu forest officials. But the tusker later crossed into Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

The forest officials said they were keeping a watch on the lone elephant, who has already been radio-collared.

The jumbo was earlier captured by Tamil Nadu forest department officials near Dharmapuri and released into Madhumalai National Park. But the officials had lost track of the elephant due to battery issued in its radio-collar.

A radio-collared wild elephant, which attacked two people, captured by Karnataka forest department on the outskirts of Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka’s Chamarajanagara district on Thursday. @IndianExpress

Read: https://t.co/G44rA3lcv5 pic.twitter.com/QtofCEdekv — Darshan Devaiah B P (@DarshanDevaiahB) October 24, 2019

However, the tusker was captured on Thursday morning near Bandipur Tiger Reserve. Recently, the forest officials had also captured a tiger, who had killed two people in Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

The tiger is being kept at Chamundi Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre in Koorgalli near Mysuru.

Man trampled by elephant while trying to click selfie

In a similar incident in May this year, a man was trampled by an elephant when he tried to click a selfie with the animal in Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal.

The unfortunate incident took place in Dhugpuri block. Identified as Ashit Minz, the victim was a resident of Uttar Chanadiba village.

The elephant came out of the neighbouring Sonakhali forest and started destroying everything in its path, including four to five houses. The tusker's rampage sparked panic among villagers who ran for their lives in pitch dark conditions.

However, Minz decided to go in the direction of the wild jumbo in order to click a selfie with the mammal using his new mobile phone. He followed the elephant into a banana plantation after which the animal began chasing him.
