Subedar Rewel Singh — A braveheart acclaimed the world over

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Col Dilbag Dabas (Retd)

Subedar Rewel Singh was born on January 2, 1956, at Mohan Pur village in Pehowa tehsil of Kurukshetra in Haryana.

After matriculation from High School Bakhli near Pehowa, Rewel Singh was enrolled in the 4th Battalion of Jammu & Kashmir rifles on May 21, 1975.

Rewel Singh, now a Sepoy in one of the oldest Infantry Battalions of Jammu & Kashmir Rifles, steadily rose through the ranks and was promoted to the rank of Subedar in 1991.

Cambodia, known as Kampuchea from 1975 to 78, is located in mainland South East Asia between Vietnam, Laos, Thailand and the Gulf of Thailand. It witnessed the longest spell of civil war and cold war machinations since its independence from France in 1953.

The world witnessed stoically as the peninsular country was being ruined by the Kampuchean communist party, popularly known as the Khmer Rouge. Mass killings of Cambodians of Vietnamese descent by the Khmer Rouge appeared daily in the headlines of the international dailies. Finally, the United Nations woke up to the stark realities prevailing in Cambodia and decided to intervene. The result was deployment of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in February 1992 to establish peace and harmony in the ravaged country and facilitate the formation of a popular government through a fair election process.

UNTAC force contributed approximately 16,000 military personnel from 46 countries with Indian Army contributing two Infantry Battalions, a field ambulance of Army Medical Corps and personnel from the Corps of Engineers for clearing the minefields laid by the Khmer Rouge. The Indian Army contingent was deployed in the areas that were the hot beds of Khmer Rouge tyranny.

The 4th Battalion of Jammu & Kashmir Rifles (JAK Rif) replaced 1 Assam Battalion in March 1993 and took over the task of providing security to the four provinces of Prey Ving, Kampong-Cham, Kraitie and Stung Treng. It was during leading a protective patrol in Stung Treng district on May 3, 1993, that Subedar Rewel Singh of 4 JAK Rif, for his unmatched bravery, was awarded the Kirti Chakra, the second highest gallantry award.

Subedar Rewel Singh, KC, after a long and meritorious service retired from the Army in 2003 in well-deserved rank of Honorary Captain. Honorary Captain Rewel Singh, KC, with an artificial left hand palm, is still active in Kurukshetra district in helping ex-servicemen in whatever manner he can.

PS. It was after the breaking news in The Chicago Tribune that the Door Darshan (DD) team from India went to Cambodia on May 10, 1993, and interviewed the gallant Rewel Singh and his brave men.

The act of bravery recorded in the digest of service of 4 JAK Rif...

"On May 3, 1993, at 9 am, Subedar Rewel Singh, as a part of United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, was leading a vehicle patrol on Trach Chas-Stung Treng road. En route, the front vehicle, in which Subedar Rewel Singh was seated, was subjected to a heavy volume of automatic fire. A rocket launched by the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea (NADK) guerillas hit the fuel tank of the vehicle and the tank exploded. Subedar Rewel Singh received grievous bullet injuries on both his hands, while the driver, who was also hit, slumped over the steering wheel of the vehicle.

Subedar Rewel Singh, unmindful of the serious injuries to his hands, ordered his men to return the fire and, in a remarkable display of courage, in spite of the hail of bullets and leaping flames, he dragged the driver out of the burning vehicle. Even with his left hand palm totally severed with AK-56 assault rifle bursts, Subedar Rewel Singh led the charge holding and firing his sten gun with his right hand, as he dashed forward on the cry 'Fateh Shiv Ji Ki Jai'. This immediate retaliatory charge took the NADK guerillas by surprise. Meanwhile, the support group of the patrol had also opened fire with Light Machine Guns and 2-inch mortars. Two NADK guerillas were killed in this action, while the rest, surprised by the ferocity of the quick counter ambush, fled the scene. This was the first instance, when a NADK ambush was successfully broken and the credit for this goes to Subedar Rewel Singh and the brave men of the 4th Jammu & Kashmir Rifles. The encounter was widely covered by the world press, including by The Chicago Tribune dated May 7, 1993. It is widely believed the world over that this determined encounter led by Subedar Rewel Singh, a Junior Commissioned Officer of the Indian Army, shattered the will of Khmer Rouge and demolished its aura of invincibility in its own backyard. In this operation, Subedar Rewel Singh displayed conspicuous gallantry, outstanding camaraderie and exceptional courage, for which he was awarded the Kirti Chakra."

About the award

Kirti Chakra, the second highest military decoration, is awarded for 'conspicuous gallantry' in situations other than in the face of the enemy

It can be awarded to the military personnel as well as to the civilians, including the police and para-military personnel

The medal may also be awarded posthumously



The decoration carries with it the right to use KC as a post-nominal abbreviation

(The writer is a veteran Gunner, 6 Field Regiment)
