Rajiv Gandhi assassination case convict Nalini Sriharan goes on hunger strike demanding release

Nalini Sriharan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Nalini and six others were convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by LTTE suicide bomber during an election rally in Sriperumbudur In 2016, she was granted a 12-hour parole to attend her father’s funeral

Chennai: Rajiv Gandhi assassination case convict Nalini Sriharan has gone on a hunger strike inside the Vellore Women's prison today. In a letter to prison officials, she has said that she and her husband Murugan have been inside the prison for the last 28 years and want to be released now.

She further said that they have given multiple petitions to the state government requesting an early release.

Nalini, who is lodged in prison for the past 28 years, was last released on parole on July 25, after the court granted her parole for 30 days which eventually came to an end after 51 days on September 15.

In 2016, she was granted a 12-hour parole to attend her father’s funeral.

Charithra Sriharan, Nalini's daughter, was born in prison and is currently a medical practitioner in London.

Nalini and six other people were convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case.

In May 1991, Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) suicide bomber during an election rally in Sriperumbudur in Tamil Nadu in which 14 other people had also died.

Earlier this month, actor-director-turned politician Seeman was booked by Tamil Nadu police for justifying the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi. He, however, said that he will not retract his statement.

A case was registered against him by the Vikravandi police after a complaint was filed by Congress leader in Villupuram RP Ramesh.

Campaigning for his party NTK's candidate in the Vikravandi bypoll, Seeman justified the brutal killing of Rajiv Gandhi for sending the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) to Sri Lanka.

While campaigning Seeman had said history will be rewritten in the future that Rajiv Gandhi who had sent IPKF to Sri Lanka to kill Tamilians was later murdered in the Tamil land.

Tamil Nadu Congress Chief KS Alagiri condemned Seeman and demanded that he be booked for sedition.

However, Seeman was booked for provocative speech with an intention to cause a riot and an intentional insult to breach the peace.

The Jain Commission in its 5,280 page report had concluded that the “LTTE was getting its supplies, including arms, ammunition, explosives, fuel and other essential items for its war against the IPKF from Tamil Nadu, that too with the support of the Tamil Nadu government and the connivance of the law enforcement authorities.”

The report further highlighted the political antagonism between the DMK government and the Rajiv Gandhi government at the Centre.
