Protesting students at Jamia Milia Islamia accuse professor of making sexist remarks in class, on text message

Students staging protests inside the Jamia Milia Islamia campus (Picture Courtesy: @Gurpree46492633) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Damning allegations have emerged against a veteran professor at Delhi's famed Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI) college. A group of students currently staging protests against the professor claim that he not only indulged in brazen favouritism but also passed sexist remarks in class and over text messages.

As the protest entered its ninth day on Friday, a crowd of 150 agitating students was allegedly assaulted by another group of students who are believed to be "close to the accused professor", reported Indian Express. The professor in question, Hafeez Ahmed is the Head of Department (HOD) of applied arts and has been teaching at the college for over 25 years now.

Not fazed by this, the women students continue their protest as students from different universities have also joined the protest. #Jamia pic.twitter.com/2J3sPj63GH — Pinjra Tod (@PinjraTod) February 8, 2019

Students told the national daily that they were manhandled and assaulted during the protest which led to a female student getting injured. She was rushed to the nearby Holy Family Hospital where she is currently being treated.

Meanwhile, the accused professor claims that he was held captive inside his studio for over five hours by students staging a protest right on his door. He further added that attempts made to thrash him were foiled by campus security who intervened between him and the protestors.

Ahmed Azeem, the JMI public relations officer issued a statement saying students are permitted to protest near gate 7 but moved their demonstration to the department of arts. While announcing that the charge of applied arts has been handed over to the dean of arts pending an inquiry into the matter, Azeem also said that three students who were protesting against Ahmed have been suspended.

Must Read: In a first, Karnataka makes budget allocation to make courts child-friendly for minor victims
