Bihar: Vaishali Zila Parishad vice president masterminded bank robbery in Motihari, say police

The arrest of the accused came after a police crackdown against inter-state gang of robbers. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Police: Vaishali Zila Parishad vice president masterminded Bandhan Bank robbery Accused Pankaj Thakur is still on the run All the seven robbers are residents of Vaishali district

Motihari: In a shocking revelation, Motihari police in Bihar have said that the vice president of Vaishali Zila Parishad was the one who masterminded the robbery in a bank on September 13.

The accused has been identified as Pankaj Thakur, who is still on the run. He has dozens of criminal cases against him.

The revelations come following the arrest of the two of the seven men involved in the robbery.

According to a report, the mastermind Pankaj Thakur transported the robbers in his vehicle till Chakia Bazar in East Champaran.

The robbers looted over Rs 10 lakh from Bandhan Bank situated at Sahibganj Road in Chakia Bazar on September 13. The robbers had also destroyed the weapon of the security guard during the robbery.

Police have arrested two main members from Hajipur Sadar Police station area. Superintendent of Police Upendra Kumar Sharma said all the accused including Pankaj Thakur had fled to Kolkata, West Bengal, after the bank loot.

The SP also said that the arrested men were given only Rs 20,000 and the rest of the looted money was kept by Pankaj Thakur.

The arrest of the accused came after a police crackdown against inter-state gang of robbers. The police team was led by DSP Shailendra Kumar. Police said they have also identified five other accused who are still on the run.

According to the SP Upendra Kumar Sharma, the loot robbery masterminded by an inter-state gang which has its roots in Vaishali. All the accused are residents of Vaishali district.

Delhi's 'best beat constable' accused of robbing bank

A similar incident came to light on October 17 where a Delhi Police constable was accused of robbing a bank. The Haryana Police had arrested the constable for his involvement in a case of robbery. Shockingly, this constable was the one who was conferred the 'best beat constable' award.

The constable was accused of robbing jewellery worth Rs 5 crore from a bank in Panipat, Haryana.

A police officer familiar with the case said that in the CCTV footage of the bank, the constable can be seeing looting the bank with his associates. The police have said that the accused is a native of Panipat.

After the police checked the CCTV footage, they raided his parents' house. The cops nabbed the accused's father and his relative, Rs 12 lakh was also confiscated during the raid.

Apart from being involved in a robbery, the constable was also accused of raping a woman in January this year. According to the police, the constable was transferred to Police Lines during the investigation of his rape case.
