Even parents of minor sexual abuse survivors cannot plead for accused's bail: POCSO court

A protest march held against raising awareness for prevention of child abuse (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused was arrested in December of 2018 on the basis of a complaint by the victim's mother He has been booked under section 377 and 506 of the IPC along with relevant sections of the POCSO Act Granting him bail would pose danger to the minor survivor, argued the prosecution

Mumbai: A court in Mumbai while dismissing the bail plea of a 43-year-old man on Thursday said that even natural parents do not have the right to consent for grant of bail to the accused in cases of sexual abuse against children. The matter being heard by the special court concerns the alleged sexual assault of a 14-year-old boy in 2018.

Earlier this year, the boy's mother submitted an affidavit in the court. In her affidavit, she gave her consent to the accused being released on bail. The court responded by stating that if released, the accused could pose danger to the victim. The stance was based on the prosecution's argument that the application submitted by the mother cannot be entertained keeping in mind the nature of the offence.

The special court judge in his ruling said that if minors are assaulted sexually, then even the natural parents do not have the authority to give consent in favour of the bail of the accused. The matter is being heard by the Special Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act court since the accused's arrest in December of last year.

Contrary to claims made by the accused, the prosecution said that the victim was a minor and the claim that he and the victim exchanged photographs did not amount to consent. In his plea, the accused had argued that no incident of sexual assault took place and that he exchanged pictures with the minor who reciprocated the act. According to a report, the matter came to light in December of last year when the boy's mother read messages on his phone sent and questioned him.

The minor told her about his conversations with the accused who ran a tailoring business and a case was registered against him. He was booked under sections 377 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which correspond to charges of unnatural sex and criminal intimidation along with relevant sections of the POCSO Act.

A similar incident had come to light from Mumbai in September of this year when a special POCSO court convicted a man for barging into the home of a 17-year-old girl and biting her cheek. The accused was sentenced to 11 months imprisonment a little over a year after he committed the crime. At the time, police officials familiar with the case had told media outlets that the same man was accused of kidnapping, raping and forcibly marrying the same girl in 2015. The court had in that year found out that the girl consented to the relationship and got married to the man.
