Tamil Nadu: Stepfather sexually assaults daughter for months; booked under POCSO

The accused has been booked under POCSO Act, 2012 and is currently in judicial custody (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Coimbatore: Another appalling incident which challenged the safety of women in the country and even more so at home happened in Tamil Nadu. A 42-year-old man was accused of sexually assaulting his step-daughter. The 15-year-old victim ran away from her house with her eight-year-old sister to free herself from the accused.

The 42-year-old accused allegedly used to sexually abuse his stepfather. The victim ran away from her house situated in the Narasimmanaikenpalayam with her younger sister and contacted the Childline officials after reaching the city.

Also Read: Tamil Nadu: 72-year-old Jain woman attains ‘sallekhana samadhi’ after fasting for 7 days

While talking to the Times of India, a police officer stated that the 15-year-old used to live with her mother, sister and the accused in Narasimmanaikenpalayam after her first father died a few years ago. The officer also added that within a few months, the accused had started assaulting the victim.

The accused has been identified as S Muthuraj and is a resident of Karunanithi Nagar at Saibab Kovil. The victim left the house and after reaching the city, contacted the Childline officials. The officials came to her rescue and the teenager and her younger sister are now in a home under the Child Welfare Committee (CWC).

After getting to know of the assault, the mother left Muthuraj's house but Muthuraj persuaded the mother against it. After this, he continued preying on the teenager. The victim, however, left the house and took a bus to the Ukkadam stand.

The victim got to know about the Childline from a seminar that she had attended at school and therefore she contacted the Childine and called on 1098, the helpline number. A case under Section 7 and of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012 has been filed against the accused. The accused has been arrested and is in judicial custody.
