Row ahead of EU team’s visit to J&K

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, October 28

The Centre’s clearance to at least 28 European Parliament members to visit Jammu and Kashmir has come under attack from the Opposition as well as BJP supporters.

Sources said most of these MPs belonged to European far-right parties. The team, that arrived on Sunday, met Prime Minister Narendra Modi and National Security Adviser Ajit Doval today.

Edit: Soft targets in kashmir

The PM reportedly told the delegation that their visit to J&K should give them a better understanding of the cultural and religious diversity of its different regions as well as of their development and governance priorities. The PM said urgent action was required against all those who supported or sponsored terror activities and used terrorism as a state policy.

He also mentioned the jump in India’s position in World Bank’s “Ease of Doing Business” index which was a “massive achievement for a country of such enormous size, demography and diversity.”

The 28 MPs, who government sources claim are on an “unofficial visit in their personal capacity”, will be taken to J&K tomorrow. The permission to these MPs, even as several Indian parliamentarians were in the past turned back from Srinagar, came under attack from Congress leaders, including former Union Minister Jairam Ramesh. BJP leader Subramanian Swamy expressed surprise that the EU MPs were visiting J&K in private capacity even though it was the government that had arranged for the visit. Several RSS leaders went public with their opposition to allowing “western MPs” to examine the situation in J&K.

The tour comes after India denied permission to a US Senator and was lukewarm to a suggestion by the US Administration to permit American lawmakers to the Kashmir valley. Senior US Administration official Alice Wells had told a US Congress hearing that India had indicated that the time was not right for such a visit.

Kashmiri leaders meet delegation

Srinagar/Jammu: PDP patron Muzaffar Hussain Baig, former Finance Minister Altaf Bukhari, former lawmaker Usman Majid and former adviser to Mehbooba Mufti Amitabh Mattoo were present at a lunch for the EU delegation. BJP representative Khalid Jahangir was there too. “I met the EU delegation in New Delhi. I told them the matter should be resolved as per the Simla pact,” Baig said. tns

19 civilians injured in grenade attack

Srinagar: At least 19 persons were injured in a grenade blast at Sopore’s busy bus stand on Monday. Six of the injured were taken to Srinagar hospitals, said sources.

Another trucker shot

Anantnag: Yet another truck driver, Narayan Dutt, hailing from Katra in Udhampur district of Jammu, was shot dead by terrorists in Bijbehara in Anantnag, the police said. tns
