Chhattisgarh civil supplies scam: Special DGP among two IPS suspended

The two officers were booked on Thursday night by the EOW on a complaint filed by Deputy Superintendent of Police (EOW) Anil Bakshi, who is the investigation officer of the SIT. (Representational photo)

Two IPS officers from Chhattisgarh, including a Special DGP, were suspended Saturday after the Economic Offences Wing registered an FIR against them for alleged criminal conspiracy and illegal phone tapping during the Civil Supplies Corporation scam probe in 2015.

The officers are identified as Special DGP Mukesh Gupta, posted at the Police Headquarters, and Narayanpur Superintendent of Police Rajnesh Singh.

They have been placed under suspension, a senior state Home Department official said, adding that Gupta and Singh will be attached to the state Police Headquarters in Raipur during their suspension.

The case was lodged on the basis of the investigation carried by a Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by the newly-formed Congress government to probe the alleged multi-crore civil supply scam unearthed during the previous BJP government.

Issuing separate orders, the Home Department said the act of the two officers is the violation of the All India Services (Conduct) Rules 1968, and the process to institute disciplinary action against them is underway.

In view of circumstances of the case, the suspension of the IPS officers is necessary and desirable, the orders said.

The two officers were booked on Thursday night by the EOW on a complaint filed by Deputy Superintendent of Police (EOW) Anil Bakshi, who is the investigation officer of the SIT.

The EOW found that some important documents related to the case had been tampered with, an EOW official had said.

EOW Head Constable Johit Ram Sahu allegedly told Bakshi that he had committed the tampering on the direction of then-inspector RK Dubey, he said.

Dubey allegedly admitted to have committed the act under pressure from Gupta and Singh, the official said quoting the complaint.

Dubey also disclosed that the two IPS officers wanted to show certain unlawful phone interceptions as legal, and therefore documents were tampered with and fabricated.

Gupta and Singh were booked under sections 193 (false evidence), 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender), 466 (forgery), 471 (Using as genuine a forged), 120B (criminal conspiracy) and other relevant sections of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and under provisions of Indian Telegraph Act, the official had said.

Denying charges, Gupta had said all telephone interception were done lawfully and “with the approval of home department in every case”.

“The SIT has deliberately ignored the records and FIR has been hurriedly registered on the basis of oral statements of subordinate officers taken under duress,” Gupta said in a statement.

The alleged scam was exposed in February 2015 when the ACB and the EOW conducted simultaneous raids at 25 premises of the Civil Supplies Corporation.

The Bhupesh Baghel government on January 8 set up a 12-member SIT under Inspector General of Police, ACB and EOW, SRP Kalluri to probe the alleged multi-crore scam citing that some points, including political involvement, were left uncovered in the previous probe in the case.

The Congress had earlier alleged that then chief minister Raman Singh, his wife and other high-profile people were named as beneficiaries in the diary which was recovered during the raid, a charge refuted by the BJP leadership.

The Congress had been claiming that the civil supply scam works out to the tune of Rs 36,000 crore, and that several high profile people were involved.
