Ticketless traveller injures ticket collector by pelting stone at Mumbai's Kurla railway station

The incident took place at Kurla railway station (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The incident took place at Kurla railway station on Monday night GRP is examining CCTV footage to identify the assailant(s) The attacker(s) pelted stones at the ticket collector, injuring him severely

Mumbai: In a shocking incident that has come to light from the city of Mumbai, an on-duty ticket collector employed with Western Railways (WR) was attacked by unknown men on Monday night. The incident took place around 11 pm at the Kurla railway station when the ticket collector was standing outside the TC office.

In his statement to the police, the ticket collector said that he was checking tickets when unidentified men pelted stones at him. He incurred severe injuries on his forehead while the assailant(s) fled the spot. It is still unclear whether it was an individual or a group of men who attacked the victim.

A case was registered in this regard and government railway police (GRP) have lodged an FIR on the basis of a complaint by the ticket checker. Unidentified persons have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of causing hurt voluntarily and causing hurt using a weapon. Going by the most recent inputs, the assailant(s) are still at large and CCTV footage retrieved from Kurla railway station is being scanned for any hints leading to the identity of the assailant(s).

While more details are awaited in this regard as this is a developing story, the incident brings back memories of a similar case from 2017. A constable with the Mumbai Police was suspended after he was found guilty of assaulting a ticket collector at the Dadar station. The constable later registered a cross-complaint against four TCs, accusing them of assaulting him inside a room at the Dadar station.

Similarly, a TC was booked in May of this year for allegedly manhandling a passenger at Bandra station. A GRP officer familiar with the case had told media outlets at the time that the passenger had a valid ticket but his identification pass was not stamped. The TC claimed that a fine must be paid by the passenger and he disagreed which led to a heated argument between the two. Following the incident, the passenger registered a complaint against the TC under Sections 323 and 504 of the IPC.

In 2017, the India Railway Ticket Checking Staff Organisation (IRTCSO) had written a letter to the Divisional Railway Manager (DMR) of Mumbai. In the letter, staffers had alleged that they were given unrealistic targets and they had to flout rules to achieve these targets. An official had responded by saying that targets are often revised whenever there is a spike in ticketless travelling.
