Punjab’s Rajoana village shows the way — no farm fires in 2 years

Twenty-four years ago, a police constable from the Rajoana Kalan village, Balwant Singh Rajoana, was arrested for masterminding the assassination of then Punjab chief minister Beant Singh. He was sentenced to death. The Centre recently allegedly commuted his death sentence, triggering a fresh controversy. That was Rajoana Kalan’s past.

The village near Raikot in Ludhiana now is busy shaping a future, which if replicated across Punjab and in other states, may prove to be the biggest tool in fight against burning of crop residue and the resultant air pollution.

Here’s how: Not a single farmer in the village, with about 1500 acres of agriculture land, set paddy stubble on fire in 2018. This year too, the farmers are resolute that they would not burn crop residue to clear their fields.

The change, however, didn’t happen overnight. It all started in 2005 when a farmer Jagdeep Singh decided he would not set his fields on fire to clear them of crop residue.

“I incorporated the stubble in my fields by using a rotavator (an equipment that uses a set of blades which, spin and break, churn and aerate the soil prior to sowing). The results weren’t visible immediately. But within three years, the move started paying me dividends. The consumption of fertiliser in my fields reduced dramatically. I did not need to use too much pesticides and the grain was of good quality,” Jagdeep Singh told the Indian Express.

Jagdeep decided not to sit back with the results. “I wanted to tell all my fellow farmers. And from there it became a campaign. Last year we did not have a single farmer setting his fields on fire in the village. We have arrived. We have to take the message to the entire state that we can do without farm fires,” he added. Jagdeep was recently called by CM Amarinder Singh for a meeting in Chandigarh. The CM hailed him for his contribution in fight against stubble burning.

The village now owns a set of machines used for stubble management. “We paid Rs 10 lakh last year to get the machines with 80 per cent subsidy. We have a village level farmers’ club. The machines are used in each field to incorporate the stubble and sow the next crop. We charge the farmers a token amount. The money is used for the maintenance of the machines,” he added.

Satnam Singh, the biggest farmer in the village owns 125 acres. He has harvested his paddy crop and is now sowing potato in the fields where the stubble is still visible. “We are sowing potato under the mulched paddy stubble. Just come back to see my produce. You will be amazed,” he said.

Another farmer, Rajwinder Singh, recalls how till just three years back, the village used to remain engulfed in a blanket of smoke in the post-harvesting season. “We could not breathe. It was then that all the villagers decided that we would not burn our stubble. And last year we achieved it. This would be the second year when we won;t be setting our farms on fire,” he said.

The farmers of this village had formed a group to claim 80 per cent subsidy on machinery such as happy seeders. The state government offers 50 per cent subsidy to individual farmers and 80 per cent to a group of at least 10 farmers. “We have an MB plough, rotavator, two happy seeders and a mulcher. Our village cooperative society too has a happy seeder. This helps us incorporate the stubble on all 1,470 acres,” said Parminder Singh, another farmer.
