J&K: Jawan injured in ceasefire violation by Pakistan in Nowshera sector

Before the ceasefire on Feb 24, Pakistan resorted to over 4,000 border violations

J&K: Jawan injured in ceasefire violation by Pakistan in Nowshera sector

India

oi-Vikas SV

Srinagar, Feb 9: One jawan was reportedly injured on Saturday after the Pakistani troops to ceasefire violation along the border in Jammu and Kashmir's Nowshera sector.

Even on Tuesday, Pakistani troops resorted to ceasefire violation yet again along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch region. The ceasefire violation took place around 10.30 am on Tuesday morning at Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch.

The year 2018 had witnessed 2,936 ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the India-Pakistan border, the highest in the last 15 years.

On January 9, Pakistani troops indulged in ceasefire violation in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch sector which was said to be fourth in 2019. Even on January 2, Pakistan violated the ceasefire along the Line of Control in Poonch sector.

[J&K: Gunbattle breaks out between security forces, terrorists in Pulwama]

On Janaury 11, Pakistan troops had resorted to firing and shelling along the LoC in forward areas of the Rajouri and Poonch districts of Jammu and Kashmir in which an army porter was killed. Army porter, Hemraj, was critically injured when Pakistani troops resorted to unprovoked firing in Sunderbani Sector of Rajouri district. He was provided immediate resuscitation and medical aid, but he succumbed to the gunshot wounds, an Army PRO had said.

[Valley remains tense on 6th death anniversary of Afzal Guru]

On December 21, 2018, two Army officers were killed as Pakistani troops violated ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir's Kupwara district.

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) had on January 16 had summoned Pakistan High Commission official to register a strong protest over the death of Army porter Hemraj in unprovoked ceasefire violation by Pakistan forces on January 11 in Sunderbani Sector.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Saturday, February 9, 2019, 22:13 [IST]
