Mumbai: Youth dies in police custody, five Wadala cops suspended

TimesView For those who believe that only hardened criminals die in police custody—perhaps after some third-degree treatment —this should serve as a wake-up call. If it could happen to Vijay Singh, a 26-year-old without a criminal record, it could happen to anyone. The state has been topping in custodial deaths, and this latest infamy will do little to inspire public confidence in the police force.

Probe ordered into custodial death as Antop Hill erupts

Mumbai: Five cops including two assistant police inspectors and a sub-inspector of Wadala Truck Terminal police station were suspended following the alleged custodial death of a 26-year-old youth on Sunday night. The incident led to protests as a crowd from Antop Hill where the victim, Vijay Singh, lived gathered at the police station demanding a case for murder be filed against the cops involved in his alleged torture. Police resorted to a lathicharge to disperse protestors.CM-designate Devendra Fadnavis demanded strict action. Maharashtra tops among states in custodial deaths, accounting for nearly 70 of 442 over the last three years.Vijay Singh was picked up by a patrol team after he clashed with a couple. The duo, known to him, had called police and accused him of harassing them by pointing the headlights of his bike at them while they were seated together.The city police has asked its crime branch to investigate the alleged custodial death of a 26-year-old youth at Wadala police station on Sunday. The couple, whose complaint led to the detention of the victim, Vijay Singh, has also been booked under various IPC sections for culpable homicide not amounting to murder, misleading police about the circumstances of the incident and destruction of evidence among other charges.Five cops—sub inspector Sandeep Kadam, assistant inspector Salim Khan and three constables Bhabal, Choure and Chole—have been suspended following the death of Vijay Singh, an Antop Hill youth who was picked up by a patrol team and allegedly beaten up in the lock-up. According to family and friends, Singh was whipped and denied medical treatment when he complained of chest pain. However, CCTV cameras at the station which would have helped establish the sequence of events were found to be defunct.Mumbai police commissioner Sanjay Barve said, “I have suspended the five policemen for their carelessness. If a suspect is detained by the police and he is complaining of chest pain, officers present there should have immediately given him medical aid. Rest the crime branch will inquire and give its final findings.”The case again casts light on the notorious reputation of the Maharashtra police for custodial torture (see accompanying report on NCRB data). Singh had clashed with a couple; the duo, who was known to him, had called police and accused him of harassing them by pointing his bike’s headlights at them while they were seated together in a public place.Singh, who was picked up at 11pm and allegedly beaten up inside the lock-up, complained of chest pain, but was denied medical help and made to sit on a bench until 2am. He was eventually taken to Sion hospital where doctors declared him dead before admission.When Vijay and the couple were taken to the police station, two of his friends, Shivam Singh and Ankit Mishra, followed the police vehicle. “Even in front of the policemen, the couple beat Vijay, myself and Ankit,” said Vijay's friend Shivam.The three friends were held in the lock-up. Vijay's parents who learnt about his detention, also rushed to the police station. It was at 11.30 pm that Vijay complained of chest pain and asked for a glass of water. But the cops laughed and said he appeared to be feigning it to gain sympathy, said his family.Vijay’s sister Dimpy said, “While the couple was sitting in the police station, laughing and writing out their complaint, policemen were hitting him with a belt. That was when Vijay got his first heart attack, which police ignored. But half an hour later, they brought him out of the lock-up and made him sit in the station house when he got the second attack. When Vijay’s nephew (a minor) tried to give him water, inspector Sandeep Kadam kicked him and abused him.”A friend of Vijay, Sushil Pandey, said around 2am, police decided to take him to Sion hospital. “Despite the fact that several police vehicles were available and an ambulance was just a call away, they took him to hospital in an Ola cab. We were told the police vehicles were short of fuel.” Doctors at Sion hospital declared Singh dead before admission. “When they broke the news to us, the policemen shouted at the doctors for informing us directly,” said Pandey.A post-mortem examination was done at JJ Hospital in the presence of a metropolitan magistrate as per guidelines of the National Human Rights Commission, an official added. Late on Tuesday, the body was handed over to the family for the last rites. Sources at JJ Hospital, where the autopsy was carried out, said that it, prime facie, looked like a case of a heart attack.
