Fact Check: Did Mamata’s goons attack Hindus at a BJP rally in Kolkata?

The image of an injured man that went viral on social media. (Image: Facebook)

In the middle of the ongoing bitter political battle between BJP and Trinamool Congress, a Facebook post with a collage of three pictures has gone viral with the claim that TMC goons have attacked Hindus at a BJP rally in Kolkata. India Today TV's Anti-Fake News War Room (AFWA) found this claim in the viral post to be completely false. These pictures are of different incidents, not even distantly related to BJP or TMC.

A Facebook user by the name Anil Singh BJP has posted a collage of three images, showing heavily injured youngsters, with the caption 'Kolkata me BJP ki rally me Mamta Banerjee ne apne gundo se hamla karai Hindu bhai logo par desh ko bachana hai 2019 me BJP ko jitana hai' (Mamta Banerjee goons attacked Hindu brothers at a BJP rally in Kolkata. We have to save the country and make BJP victorious in 2019).

Image: Facebook

Archived version can be seen here

This post has already been shared more than 7000 times at the time of filing this report.

By using reverse image search we found many media reports related to these images. As per these news reports, the first two photos were taken at a student protest outside the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly in Lucknow on November 2, 2018. Many students were injured in police lathicharge during the protest.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi had criticized the Yogi government for brutal police action against the students.

We found the third image showing a woman bleeding from her head in one of the articles of PrabhatKhabar.com.

According to this news report, the incident took place at a south Kolkata school, where a teacher was accused of molesting a minor girl. The incident had triggered a massive protest by angry parents outside the school premises. Kolkata Police resorted to lathicharge on the protesters.

Many were hurt, including women.

Bengali news website Anandabazar.com also used this image while reporting the same incident.



INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Goons of Mamata Banerjee's Trinamool Congress attacked Hindus at a BJP rally in Kolkata Conclusion All three pictures of the collage are of different incidents. The first two are of Lucknow. The third photo is from Kolkata but it has no link to politics. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
