Mumbai custodial death case: 26-yr-old victim’s kin seek govt job, action against cops, couple

The police, however, said Vijay Singh was not assaulted and died while he was leaving the station after being released.

The final rites of Vijay Singh, a 26-year-old man who allegedly died in the custody of Wadala Truck Terminal Police, was held in Sion late Tuesday. A Sion Koliwada resident, Vijay Singh, who worked as a medical representative, died reportedly after he was detained at the police station for questioning after an argument with a couple at a petrol pump in Wadala East Sunday. His family and friend have alleged he was beaten to death in police custody.

The police, however, said Singh was not assaulted and died while he was leaving the station after being released.

Ankit Mishra, Singh’s friend, demanded strict action against the five policemen and the couple. Mishra was with Singh when he had gone for refueling Sunday.

Claiming that the Crime Branch was conducting a probe into the case, Mishra said his statement was yet to be recorded by police. Earlier, Mumbai Police said assistant inspector Salim Khan, sub-inspector Sandeep Kadam and constables Bhabal, Chaure and Chole have been suspended.

The Crime Branch has now summoned the five policemen to record their statement. “We will record the statement of the five policemen, eyewitnesses, and the family members who were present at the police station late on Sunday, as well as Mishra…following which an inquiry report will be submitted,” an officer said.

Singh and Mishra reportedly had an argument with a couple who accused them of flashing a head light on them. A patrolling police van later took them to the police station. “The police officials kept assaulting us. They took us to a room…and assaulted us again. When Singh complained of chest pain and asked for water, they refused,” Mishra said.

He added after Singh collapsed, he was taken to Sion hospital where he was declared dead. “Singh’s father is a taxi driver and doesn’t earn enough to finance the needs of the family. Vijay took care of the basic needs of the family,” a family member said, while demanding a government job for a kin.
