‘Marital Rape Is A Small Problem’ & Other Things I Learnt Working In Politics

I worked in politics for a year in the lead up to the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. I did policy research for a Rajya Sabha MP and the political party he is affiliated with. To say that I learnt a whole lot during that one year is an understatement. I didn’t realise just what a bubble we, the people who reside in urban India, are living in.

I spent the first 18 years of my life being part of a privileged family in a small town in the Northeast. I went to school, learnt how to play the piano, went on vacations, and enjoyed a sheltered little life. Then, I moved to Delhi where I studied English at St. Stephen’s. Post which, I joined Delhi University’s Faculty of Law. The shift from the hallowed halls of Stephen’s to the rowdy world of DU politics in Law Fac was a shocker, to say the least.

I thought I had seen it all. I’d avoid going to college on the days leading up to the DU election because I feared being groped by intoxicated young men. But nothing prepared me for real world politics. Nothing.

Marital rape is small fry

The day I realised that the reality of most of India is not my reality was when we were discussing manifesto promises to India’s women. The suggestions were diverse and ranged from offering to make access to sanitary products free for all women to ensuring that marital rape is made a crime.

One of the female politicians present, who has worked with rural women for decades, flat out said, “Making marital rape a crime looks great for the small number of educated, upper middle class women in India, but it means nothing to women in rural India.”

There was a stunned silence. Please take note, this woman is a veteran in female politics. She has shown more empathy and compassion towards the average Indian woman than anyone I have come across in the political field. Yet, here she was telling us that women in rural India didn’t care about things like marital rape.

She continued and said, “What’s a man grunting over you for a few minutes compared to living without toilets and barely managing to afford one sqare meal for your six children? At least it’s just one man having sex with you. For many of these women, especially those from lower castes, gang rape is an everday reality.”

Stats are terrifying

Women who live in rural areas, especially from vulnerable sections of society like the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes, are amongst the most unfortunate. According to the 2017 report of the National Crime Records Bureau, rape accounted for the second highest number of crimes against STs with 1,041 cases (14.6%) followed by assault on women with intent to outrage her modesty with 925 cases (13%).

Dalit women in rural areas have it very rough as well. According to the 2016 report of the National Crime Records Bureau, of all crimes committed against members of the Scheduled Castes, the highest are against Dalit women.

A new study shows that poor women are treated extremely badly while giving birth in government hospitals, which almost all rural women go to because they can’t afford private healthcare. They are physically assaulted, have their genital areas examined and prodded without consent, and are routinely verbally abused. They are also abandoned by family members if they give birth to a girl child.

Though I do believe that marital rape is a major concern and should be made a crime, I learnt one valuable lesson. We may think that India is what we see in our everyday lives, and it partly is, but the majority of the country and its women live in circumstances that are appalling. Free bus and metro rides to women, as given by the AAP government in Delhi, are just the beginning. We have so much more to do.




