Man tortures wife by inserting broom in pvt parts

Ludhiana: Suspecting his wife of infidelity, a 35-year-old man allegedly assaulted her by inserting a broom and pipe in her private parts. And this had been going on for the past seven months.Jodhan police on Tuesday evening booked the man for unnatural sex after the woman got admitted to a hospital and doctors informed the cops after checking her condition.The couple had got married 14 years back and had a 10 and 14-year-old sons.In her complaint to police, the woman said three years ago, a person from another village sexually abused her with the help of a woman living in neighbourhood. Following the incident, the panchayat had helped the parties reach a compromise.The woman said after that incident, her husband started torturing her, claiming that she had illicit relations with other persons in the village and would defame her as well. She alleged that the accused would force her to give an application to police, claiming that more villagers had violated her. But she refused to submit the application.She said since April 2019, the accused would beat her up every day and would insert broom and pipe in her private parts. She alleged that the accused would beat her children as well and would force her to lodge fake complaints against several prominent villagers.The woman claimed that the accused first got a complaint of gangrape lodged from her side and later forced her to name around 25 prominent villagers in various complaints. She alleged that the accused would lock her in a room and do inhuman things with her.Police officials said after suffering an injury in the private parts, she got admitted to Pakhowal civil hospital. Seeing her condition, the doctor informed the police.Cops from Jodhan police met the woman at the hospital and started a probe into the matter.Police later booked the accused under Section 377 ( Unnatural offence ) of the IPC.Sub-inspector Jaspreet Kaur, investigating officer of the case, said the accused suspected that she had illicit relations with several persons and tortured her almost every day.The official said the woman in her statement had claimed that she never had illicit relations with anyone. She said the complaint lodged by the complainant after being allegedly forced by the accused was investigated and was found to be false.Police officials said the complainant didn’t want to go home and was undergoing treatment at the hospital.The SHO, Jodhan police station, said the accused was yet to be arrested. Cops said the two sons of the complainant study and they haven’t been able to attend their classes for two days.
