MP: With no doctors at health centres, gang-rape survivor forced to carry husband's body for autopsy

Meanwhile, police have arrested the two accused and booked them under various sections including rape and murder. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman carried husband's body for 100-km for getting an autopsy done Woman was raped and her husband by friends of the deceased during a liquor party at home Incident was reported from Vidisha district of MP; police have arrested two accused

Bhopal: In a shameful incident, a gang-rape survivor was made to run from one health centre to another for her murdered husband's autopsy and her medical examination.

The shocking incident has been reported from Alampur village in Vidisha district of Madhya Pradesh. The woman faced harrowing ordeal as no doctor was available at any of the health centres to perform post-mortem and medical examination of the survivor.

According to a report, the woman was gang-raped and her husband murdered by the deceased's friends who were invited for a liquor party a day after Diwali.

The two accused have been identified as Sunil Kushwaha and Manoj Ahirwar, who dragged the woman behind the house and took turns to rape her. The rape survivor travelled at least 100-km to various health centres with her husband's body.

The woman's husband was killed by the men when he tried to prevent them from violating his wife.

According to police, the couple's 12-year-old child is a witness to the crime. While two other children of the couple were asleep during the incident.

Police on Tuesday (October 29) arranged a tractor-trolley for the rape survivor to transport her deceased husband to the hospital.

However, as the woman reached Lateri public health centre for autopsy, no doctor was available at the health centre. Later, the police took her to Sironj where the woman was made to wait for nearly two hours without any doctors.

Finally, the police received a call from Lateri health centre about the arrival of the doctor. The post-mortem was performed on the body at 5:30 pm in the evening.

As the woman struggled with her husband's body all day, the three of her children were left to fend for themselves at home.

Later, the woman was taken to Basoda from Lateri, a distance of 80-km, for her medical examination. District Medical Officer (DMO) BS Ahirwar has denied having any knowledge about the issue.

Meanwhile, police have arrested the two accused and booked them under various sections including rape and murder.
