President of Kashmir guest of honour at Bristol event

One speaker said now is “the most crucial time in the history of Kashmir”, during a special event held at Bristol’s City Hall

Masood Khan, president of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, was guest of honour at the evening gathering hosted by Pakistan Association Bristol (PAB) and Bristol Kashmir Foundation (BKF).

The aim of the visit was to give reassurance to the Kashmiri population of Bristol given the recent events in their home country and offer solidarity with all those affected.

Get the top Bristol stories emailed directly to you - choose the news you want and when you want it Your email address

An earthquake with a magnitude of 5.8 that hit on the September 24, leaving at least 500 injured and at least 37 fatalities, was one of the concerns discussed. Abdul Malik, chair of BKF, spoke of his close ties to the affected areas in both English and his native language.

Article 370, which gave Kashmiris a separate constitution and provided special rights to permanent residents of the state, was revoked by the Indian government, in order to join Kashmir with the rest of India.

This was one of the issues discussed, as communication with the state – including phone lines and internet – was closed off as the Indian military moved into one of the few Muslim-majority states of India.

During the event many people spoke passionately.

Raja Sikander Khan, member of the Global Pakistan and Kashmir Supreme Council (GPKSC), described the recent movements as “torture”. He said: “This is the most crucial time in the history of Kashmir,” urging everyone to contact their leaders and do whatever they can to get word out that the treatment of their brothers and sisters is unacceptable.

Sikander Khan described a tight curfew placed on people in Kashmir as an “open jail” and spoke of unexplained disappearances reportedly 30,000 youths.

“He (Indian prime minister Modi) wants complete genocide. He wants only Hindus, no Muslims or Christians, no Sikhs. No other religion to live in India,” said Sikanfer Khan.

President Masood Khan stated: “India is committing crimes against humanity.”

He said this is no secret and added: “Kashmir will be free, and will be free very soon.”

Guest speaker Saliha Iqbal spoke in her native language and gave explicit accounts of those who live in Kashmir, of incarceration, torture and molestation of women.

The event heard speeches from West of England mayor Tim Bowles, Mhairi Threlfall, a councillor and Labour’s Parliamentary candidate for Filton and Bradley Stoke, and Afzal Shah, a Labour councillor for Easton, as well as a recorded message from Bristol mayor Marvin Rees. All expressed their support for the cause and to strengthen their ties with the Kashmiri community.

Abdul Malik told Bristol24/7 that the next steps for PAB and BKF are to work on getting a humanitarian gateway into Kashmir from Bristol. He says he will be meeting with leaders and politicians, as well as local charities who work locally and nationally to find out how they can achieve this.

They are also continually fundraising money to help those affected by the earthquake and delivering aid to the needy, as well as holding a weekly vigil in the city centre.

All photos by Mireya Gonzalez

Read more: ‘It’s important we have a voice in decisions being made now’
