13-year-old porn-addict rapes, murders six-year-old cousin in Maharashtra

During the interrogation, the police noticed that the 13-year-old boy had cuts and scratches on his legs (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A six-year-old girl was taken to a secluded spot and was raped by her cousin in Bhiwandi The 13-year-old boy was addicted to pornographic websites The accused confessed to committing the crime when he was being interrogated

Mumbai: A 13-year-old boy confessed to killing and raping his six-year-old cousin on Thursday. The confession came two days after the minor girl was found dead in Bhiwandi. The accused has been detained by the Kongaon police. Allegedly, the teenager raped the girl and strangled her to death.

It is being suspected that the 13-year-old boy's addiction to porn prompted him to commit the crime. The incident had taken place on Monday when the girl was bursting crackers outside her residence.

How it happened

On Monday, the girl was bursting crackers with her cousins outside her residence in Bhiwandi. The girl went missing around 8.30 pm, following which, her parents approached the police and lodged a missing person's complaint. Allegedly, the 13-year-old boy took the girl to a secluded spot and raped her. He strangled the six-year-old girl to death when she tried to raise an alarm. On Tuesday, a local saw the girl's body near a pipeline and informed her parents.

The police formed seven teams to track the accused. The cops also began interrogating the relatives and neighbours of the deceased. During the interrogation, the police noticed that the 13-year-old boy had cuts and scratches on his legs. When the police started questioning him, the teenager confessed to raping and murdering the six-year-old girl.

RT Katkar, senior police inspector said that the accused is addicted to porn sites. When the cops checked the mobile phones of the accused's parents, they learned that several porn websites had been searched on the devices. Katkar said, "We asked the father but he denied knowing anything about it. His father is not educated and hence he (the father) does not have any idea about mobile phones." The accused has been sent to a remand home in Bhiwandi.

Man, addicted to porn, rapes mother; victim says he asked for sexual favours in past too

A similar incident came to light from Gujarat's Palanpur in April this year where a 46-year-old man allegedly raped his mother when she was sleeping. It was also alleged that the man was addicted to pornography. He used to watch pornographic videos in front of his mother and sister as well.

On the night of the incident, the accused was under the influence of alcohol when he went to his mother's room. The accused tried to rape his mother. The woman started shouting but none of the neighbours intervened as they thought that the mother and son were having an argument. A complaint was lodged and the accused was arrested.
