Civilian dies in Pak shelling in Machil

Civilian dies in Pak shelling in Machil

Labourer injured in Kulgam attack recovering # Mamata seeks probe, sends officer to find details

SRINAGAR, Oct 30: A labourer injured in the terror attack in south Kashmir's Kulgam district, in which five persons were killed, is recovering from his injuries at a hospital here, police said on Wednesday.

Earlier a national news agency had quoted a police officer saying the labourer had succumbed to his injuries. Five migrant labourers from West Bengal were shot dead by militants in Kulgam district on Tuesday. All the men hailed from Murshidabad district of West Bengal, the police said.

The attack had happened at a time when a delegation of parliamentarians from the European Union is in Kashmir to talk to locals and ask them about their experience after the abrogation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status under Article 370 of the Constitution.

All the victims hailed from Sagardighi in Murshidabad district of West Bengal, the police said. Reports said the labourers were abducted on gun point from their rented accommodation at Katrasoo and shot dead near a meat shop, some 200 yards from their accommodation.

Meanwhile, a civilian was killed and five others (children) were injured as Pakistani troops opened fire along the line of control (LoC) in Machil sector officials said.

The deceased was identified as Mohammad Yousuf Khan, 50, a resident of Thali-Dudi, Machil. The injured children were identified as a girl child Nayeema Bano, aged 10, Tariq Ahmed Khan aged 9, Muneer Ahmed Khan aged 8, Aqib Khan aged 9 and Uzair Ahmed Khan aged 8. The killing of the civilian caused panic across Machil sector with many people deciding to shift their base towards safer areas.

In the meanwhile, condemning the killings of five labourers from Murshidabad in Kulgam terror attack in Kashmir, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee demanded a “strong investigation” into the incident to find out the “real truth.” She also announced a compensation of Rs 5 lakh each for the families of the victims.

“In a most unfortunate incident in Kashmir yesterday, five innocent labourers were brutally killed in a pre planned manner. We are totally shocked! Presently there are no political activities in Kashmir and entire law and order is with the Government of India,” she said.

Banerjee tasked a senior Bengal police officer to find out details about the brutal killings. “We, therefore, demand a strong investigation so that the real truth comes out. We are deputing Shri Sanjay Singh ADG South Bengal to find out details from them,” she tweeted.

The Chief Minister also assured the families of the victims of all possible help.

“Our party MPs and MLAs have reached Murshidabad to meet the family members of victims. Our government is providing Rs five lakh each to the victim's family and render all assistance to them,” she posted on the microblogging site.

Earlier in the day, Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar had termed the killings as a “cowardly act” and sought help from the government for the bereaved families. “@MamataOfficial. In deep pain and sadness, I condemn the wanton killing by terrorists in J&K of workers from Murshidabad. This cowardly and dastardly act is by enemies of humanity. We need to shun violence. Appeal to Government and NGOs to extend help to bereaved families,” he tweeted.
