Six men sodomise minor boy in Kolkata's Khidderpore area

Kolkata police have apprehended one of the accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The survivor is aged 17 and knew all of the accused, revealed police He was forcefully pulled inside a vehicle on Monday night One of the accused has been apprehended while a hunt is on for the others

Kolkata: In a shocking incident that is coming to light from the capital city of West Bengal, a minor boy was allegedly sodomised by a group of men, city police told media outlets on Wednesday. The survivor, 17-years-old, was returning home from work on Monday night when the incident took place. A case was registered on the basis of a written complaint by his family members and him.

Going by the most recent inputs, one out of the six accused has been arrested while the others continue to remain at large. A senior police official stated that the boy knew the accused. The survivor was walking home on the night of October 28 when the accused halted next to him and pulled him inside the vehicle in Khidderpore area. In his statement to the police, the boy has alleged that the accused rode around for over an hour while taking turns to sodomise him.

They then pushed him out of the vehicle and he managed to return home. Family members rushed the boy to a local hospital where doctors confirmed that he had been sodomised. They found several bruise marks and deep cuts on parts of his body, indicating sexual assault. A case of abduction was registered against the six accused under sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

The horrific incident brings back memories of a similar case that was reported from the state of Uttar Pradesh in June of this year in which four men gang-raped a 13-year-old boy. The incident took place in Puwaya area of Shahjahanpur district. An officer familiar with the investigation had told media outlets that the accused took the boy to an orchard where they took turns raping him. He further added that a case was registered only after the boy narrated the ordeal before his parents and they decided to approach local law enforcement.

In July of this year, a five-year-old girl was gang-raped by two minor boys in the Kapasera area near the Delhi border. The accused were aged 11 and 10 years at the time of the incident, said police. They lived in the same neighbourhood as that of the victim and were playing in the park when the crime took place. The child was rushed to a hospital where doctors confirmed that she had been sexually assaulted. A case was registered under the POCSO Act against the two accused who were apprehended and sent to a juvenile correction home.
