Uzbek rape victim stands outside police station in protest

‘Investigating officer shielding accused’

The 35-year-old Uzbek national who recently registered a complaint of rape against suspended police inspector Bhanudas Jadhav, on Thursday stood outside the Chembur police station to protest alleged apathy by the police in her case.

Her lawyer further claimed that the investigating officer was passing on information about the probe to Mr. Jadhav, as they have worked together in the past.

The victim, who now stays in Navi Mumbai, had on October 10 registered a complaint with the police, alleging that Mr. Jadhav had repeatedly sexually assaulted her and forced her to undergo abortions twice. Her allegations also included a murder in Pune.

On Thursday, she stood outside the Chembur police station with a placard that read, “I am Uzbekisthani woman and Rape Victim by the hands of Police Inspector Bhanudas Jadhav, I want justice from Mumbai Police Commissioner by arresting him, if I don’t get Justice I will commit Suicide, and Mumbai Police Commissioner will be responsible for this, So please Arrest Accused and Reveal Murder Mystery by the Accused.”

Advocate Nitin Satpute, who is representing the victim, said that police inspector Manisha Shirke, who is the investigating officer, is purposely dragging her feet and hampering the probe.

“Ms. Shirke has worked under Mr. Jadhav when they were both posted with the Anti Narcotics Cell in Mumbai and is providing him updates about the investigation. The entire case is being handled in a very biased manner and there is no serious effort to arrest the accused,” Mr. Satpute said.

He said he had meetings with Mumbai Police Commissioner Sanjay Barve and Joint Commissioner of Police (Law and Order) Vinoy Kumar Choubey regarding the issue and has asked that the case be transferred to the Mumbai Police Crime Branch.

“Both the officials have assured us of prompt action in the matter. The victim has disclosed everything and yet Ms. Shirke has not taken appropriate action,” he said.

The victim and her son underwent a medical test on Thursday, during which their blood samples were also collected for DNA comparison with the accused.

Senior police inspector Jayprakash Bhosale, Chembur police station, denied allegations of Ms. Shirke shielding Mr. Jadhav.

“The investigation is being conducted with utmost sincerity and care. The case has multiple angles to it as according to the victim, the abuse has been going on for years. We have made inquiries with the hotel where the victim claims to have been raped and we are also in touch with the Pune Police regarding the allegations of murder. We have requested the victim to be patient,” Mr. Bhosale said.
