Hyderabad: Blackmailed and sexually abused by neighbour, girl killed mother, say police

A relationship that took an unexpected turn led to blackmail and murder, and finally the arrest of three people, all residents of the same locality here, police said.

The details came to light during the investigation into the murder of a woman, whose decomposed body was found on the railway tracks on the outskirts of Hyderabad on October 21. The woman’s daughter and her boyfriend, both college students, and their neighbour, an unemployed engineer, have been arrested. The daughter and boyfriend have been charged with murder, while the two men have been charged under POCSO Act.

Police officials said that the woman was strangled to death by her daughter under the instructions of and with help from the neighbour. “The neighbour decided to eliminate the mother as he was not able to spend time with the daughter freely at her house. He was blackmailing and sexually exploiting the girl,” an official said.

“The girl was in a relationship with a boy from the same locality. Last September, the girl, who was then a minor, got pregnant. The boyfriend sought the neighbour’s help and took her to a clinic for an abortion. After the abortion, the neighbour began blackmailing her for sex, threatening to inform her parents about the abortion. He forcibly took photos of her and demanded Rs 10 lakh to start a real estate business. He threatened to reveal the photos to her boyfriend and spoil her chances of marriage with him. When the neighbour heard that the mother owned land, whose value had appreciated recently, he started pressuring the girl to kill her so that the land could be sold and he could get the money,” the official said.

The mother often objected to her daughter spending time with the neighbour, police said. “But she could not tell her mother that she was being blackmailed. The neighbour also threatened to jeopardise her marriage plans with her boyfriend,” an inspector said.

Police said that the neighbour convinced the girl to kill her mother and sell her land. On October 19, the girl allegedly threw chilli powder into her mother’s eyes and incapacitated her. The neighbour knocked her down and the teen strangled her with a chunni. The neighbour then returned to his house while the girl went to her boyfriend’s house. But both returned several times over the next two days to plan how to dispose of the body.

“They tried to hang the body to make it look like suicide. But the body had started decomposing, so they wrapped it in a blanket and on October 21 morning, took it to Ramanapet and dumped it on railway tracks. The Government Railway Police found the body, and cremated it the next day as they could not identify it,” an official said.

After dumping the body, the girl called up her boyfriend’s father using her mother’s mobile phone, police said. Posing as her mother, the girl reportedly said that she was with her husband at a hospital at Nalgonda and asked him to allow their daughter to stay with them till they returned. Accordingly, the girl stayed at their house for three days.

On October 24, her father, a truck driver, returned home and found it locked. When he called up his daughter, she said she was at Visakhapatnam, and feigned ignorance about the whereabouts of her mother. On October 26, she returned home. When her father told her he could not locate his wife, she lodged a missing complaint with police. She also told the police informally that she suspected her father’s role in the disappearance of her mother.

While police started investigating, the boyfriend’s father visited the girl’s father and mentioned that she was at his house for three days. Suspecting something amiss, the girl’s father called up the police and told them she had lied about her whereabouts. The police then took her into custody and interrogated her. It was then that she revealed the story, police said.
