Amrita Pritam: Here Are The Best Books Of The Pinjar's Author

Amrita Pritam is a renowned poet, novelist and a lyricist who has written in Punjabi and Hindi. Expressive and brave, Pritam was born in Gujranwala, Pakistan on August 31, 1919. The fierce writer was beyond her time with her thoughts, on paper and in real life. Known for her notable work in Pinjar, she has more than a hundred books, Punjabi folk songs and beautiful poems to her credit which still manage to impress people this day. On the occasion of the 100th anniversary year of Amrita Pritam, we have penned down some of her most spellbinding books.

1. Pinjar

Written by Pritam in 1950, the book revolves around a Hindu lass Puro, who is abducted by a Muslim. In Pinjar, Puro manages to free herself and runs back to her family from Rashid. Much to her shock, her parents refuse to accept the defiled girl. Written with the backdrop of India-Pakistan partition, this book is considered as one of the distinct literature by Pritam. In 2003, Pinjar was adapted into a Bollywood film with the same name. Moreover, the novel was translated in English by author Khushwant Singh and in French by Denis Matringe.

Also read: Google Doodle Celebrates Amrita Pritam - Why Is She Popular

2. Raseedi Ticket

Amrita Pritam’s celebrated autobiography, Raseedi Ticket revolves around the horrors of the Partition in 1947, which also bore her poem Vaaris Shah. The autobiography tells us how a writer should not be scared of criticism, no matter how hostile and belligerent the world becomes. Amrita takes you through the journey of the time between her intimacy with Sahir Ludhianvi and beautifully described friendship with Imroz.

Also read: Aishwarya Rai: Will She Share Screen Space With Abhishek In A Film?

3. The Shadows of Words

After Raseedi Ticket, this autobiography is penned down with the author’s intense desire to give the readers an insight into her inner world. The Shadows of Words takes the audience on a spiritual ride. The book captures her life beautifully.

Also read: Google Celebrates Kamini Roy, A True Women’s Rights Activist

4. In the Times of Love and Longing

The book showcases Amrita Pritam and Imroz’s love letters. In the Times of Love and Longing provides an interesting view of the two great personality’s creative thought process. This book gives several glimpses of the incredible relationship between the writer and her artist friend.

Also read: Google’s Teachers Day 2019 Doodle Impresses, But No Dr Radhakrishnan
