Ahmedabad airport: Customs officer demands gold jewellery bills from 2 women passengers, ‘assaulted’

K C Rathva, in charge of the Airport police station, said that while the two women were let off, they have arrested the two men who were accompanying them. (Representational Image)

Two women passengers who reached Ahmedabad International Airport from Dubai on Friday were booked for allegedly assaulting a customs official at the city airport after they were asked to produce bills for the gold ornaments they were wearing. Two men accompanying the women have also been arrested for allegedly threatening another customs officer.

Police have booked Naseefa Chauhan, Altaf Chauhan, Heena Kausar Pathan and Firoz Pathan, all residents of Ahmedabad, under Indian Penal Code sections 332, 353, 323, 186, 294 and 506 for causing hurt to deter public servant from duty, assault on public servant to deter him from discharge of duty, causing hurt, obstructing public servant, obscenity and criminal intimidation, respectively.

The assistant commissioner of Ahmedabad Customs, Minguel Miranda was allegedly slapped by one of the two accused women around 12.30 am Friday when they arrived at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel (SVP) International Airport from Dubai, police said.

As per a complaint filed by Ahmedabad Customs Superin-tendent Jyothimohan Dethan, the incident occurred near the “Green Channel” of the airport where scanners and metal detectors are kept.

“When I asked the two women to produce the bills for the gold ornaments they were wearing, they claimed they didn’t have any. Then I asked them to step on to the ‘red channel’ where assistant commissioner Miguel Miranda was present and we demanded that they hand over the ornaments for checking. However, the two women created a chaos at the counter. When we asked them not to do so, one of them slapped Miranda and verbally abused us. The two men accompanying them threatened me that they will ‘see me’ once I am out of the airport,” Dethan alleged in his complaint.

K C Rathva, in charge of the Airport police station, said that while the two women were let off, they have arrested the two men who were accompanying them.

“We have arrested Altaf and Firoz and the two women will also be held soon. The gold ornaments which the two women were wearing have been seized by the customs department,” he said.

Dethan, however, refused to comment on the value of the ornaments that were seized by the customs from the two women.
