Delhi: Lawyers and police personnel fight at Tis Hazari Court complex, nearly 15 injured

Several police personnel and lawyers were injured on Saturday afternoon during a fight at the Tis Hazari Court complex, PTI reported. As many as 17 vehicles were also set on fire during the violence, which reportedly began over a parking dispute.

The 10 injured police personnel included Additional Commissioner of Police (North District) Harinder Kumar, and the station house officers of Kotwali and Civil Lines, the police said. The lawyers said that four advocates were injured, one of whom was hurt in police firing. The police, however, denied the allegation. The police said eight bikes and a police van were torched, while eight other vehicles were also vandalised.

Tis Hazari Bar Association office bearer Jai Biswal said the quarrel began after a police vehicle hit a lawyer while he was entering the court, ANI reported. Biswal alleged that the six police personnel beat up the lawyer when he questioned this. After witnesses called the police, a local team went to the spot but were not allowed to enter.

“We informed the High Court, a team was sent there along with 6 judges but even they were not allowed to go in,” Biswal said. “When they started leaving, cops fired bullets.”

Secretary of Tis Hazari Bar Association Jaiveer Singh Chauhan alleged that the police manhandled the lawyers. “This was an incident of complete negligence by the police,” Chauhan said.

“We strongly condemn the brutal and unprovoked attack on lawyers by police at Tis Hazari Court,” Chairman of Bar Council of Delhi KC Mittal said. “One lawyer is critical. A young lawyer was beaten in lockup, a high-handedness of the police. They should be dismissed and prosecuted. We stand with Delhi lawyers.”

The lawyers also blocked traffic in the area in protest. The Delhi Traffic Police also warned Twitter users that traffic in the area was affected due to a demonstration. Those injured were taken to St Stephen’s Hospital in Delhi.

Clash broke out between lawyers and @DelhiPolice at Tis Hazari court. There's a complete chaos in court premises. Lawyers set ablaze vehicles including police vans. @DcpNorthDelhi @LtGovDelhi @ArvindKejriwal pic.twitter.com/x7P5WX1FRY — Rizwan Arif (@arifriz) November 2, 2019

Delhi: A scuffle has broken out between Delhi Police and lawyers at Tis Hazari court. One lawyer injured and admitted to hospital. A vehicle has been set ablaze at the premises. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/8wrvNXuLLT — ANI (@ANI) November 2, 2019

Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi said he was “really disturbed” by the incident. “Since my sources tell me that a lawyer was shot, anger within legal fraternity is justified but not violence,” he wrote on Twitter. “Let’s hope the legal recourse is taken.”
