Fact-finding team presents a grim report on IOK

New Delhi, November 01, 2019 (PPI-OT): The largest fact-finding team, which recently visited occupied Kashmir Valley, revealed that Kashmiris are reeling under strict restrictions, torture and trauma. The team found that people are unable to access the judicial system, there are widespread and repeated claims of torture and an overwhelming majority is afflicted with psychological trauma.

The team, which visited five districts of the valley between September 28 and October 4, comprised human rights lawyers Mihir Desai, Lara Jesani, Veena Gowda, Clifton D’Rozario, Aarti Mundkur and Saranga Ugalmugle, psychiatrist Amit Sen, trade unionist Gautam Mody and activists Nagari Babaiah, Ramdas Rao and Swati Seshadri.

The 160-page report released in New Delhi and Bangalore disclosed that people were beaten and tortured by electric shocks on genitals and boys and women were subjected to sexual abuse. “Victims’ screams were said to be recorded and played on loudspeakers. However, the victims or other witnesses were unwilling to reveal their names for fear of reprisal,” they added.

The Telegraph quoted Ugalmugle as saying at a news conference, “After a BBC story on torture (of a militant’s brother by the Rashtriya Rifles, with the victim’s screams played on a loudspeaker) in a village in Shopian, the Indian forces came again and tortured him, and said, ‘How dare you speak to the media?’”

As per the report, people in the Valley don’t have access to the courts as the entire judiciary had been rendered non-operational due to the communications blockade and movement restrictions and the lawyers too have decided to boycott the regular court proceedings over the abrogation of Kashmir’s special status and the arrest of lawyers. Many Kashmiris are suffering from mental health problems due to extreme violence by Indian forces and night raids, which have created an atmosphere of terror and panic amongst young people and their families.

The report stated that the mental health professionals shared the experiences of paralysing fear, acute anxiety, panic attacks, depressive and dissociative symptoms, post-traumatic symptoms, suicidal tendencies and severe anger outbursts. They noted a marked increase in psychological distress in 70 per cent (as estimated through a recent survey) of the population.

According to a senior psychiatrist, the constant state of paranoia has made people in the community mistrust anyone and everyone. Young people are mostly affected by the situation, the report said. Teenagers who were subjected to torture and abuse are suffering from acute reaction to stress and post-traumatic stress disorder, it said, adding that two of them tried to commit suicide while many young people ran away from home fearing persecution.

The authors of the report recommended among other things repeal of draconian laws Public Safety Act and Armed Forces Special Powers Act, withdrawal of Indian forces from civilian areas and finding a political solution that respects the democratic will of the people in accordance with human rights and international law.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
