Delhi: Lawyers, cops clash at Tis Hazari

A view of a police vehicle after it was burnt down during clashes between lawyers and police personnel at Tis Hazari Court complex in New Delhi. (Photo: PTI)

Columns of smoke rose into the sky and chaos prevailed on the ground as lawyers and cops fought a pitched battle that was triggered by a parking dispute inside Delhi's Tis Hazari Court Complex on Saturday. The afternoon violence left at least 20 police personnel and eight advocates injured, officials said. A police vehicle was set on fire and eight jail vans were vandalised.

They said 12 private motorcycles were also damaged. The Fire Department dispatched ten fire tenders to the spot. A huge posse of police and anti-riot vehicles was also deployed at the site to control the situation.

Those wounded included Additional DCP (North District) Harendra Singh and the SHOs of Kotwali and Civil Lines Police Stations, sources said. Lawyers said that one of their colleagues was injured in police firing.

"The scuffle was only over parking, between a sentry and an advocate. Some other lawyers joined in. They wanted to enter the lockup where the advocate had been kept. They wanted to take revenge," Singh said.

"We intervened and didn't allow them to come inside. We closed the lockup from inside so that not only jawans but also prisoners, scheduled to be presented before court, are not exposed to risk."

"When lawyers couldn't get in, they set 2-3 bikes ablaze in a bid to open the gate through explosion. We doused the fire with the help of drinking water but the smoke caused suffocation. We made a human chain and moved everyone to a different lockup," the officer said.

POLICE VERSION

"By being inside we tried to save the lives of not only police personnel but prisoners as well. If someone received bullet injuries, it will come out in medical report. We received injuries. I'm proud that I sustained injuries but I saved my people," he said.

Bar associations condemned the incident and called a one-day strike across all district courts in the National Capital on Monday. They will also submit a memorandum to the Commissioner of Police and the Home Ministry on the violence.

Secretary of Tis Hazari Bar Association Jaiveer Singh Chauhan said that a lawyer's car hit a jail van following which an argument broke out between him and the police.

"He was then taken inside a lockup and beaten up. The SHO came but was not allowed inside. Eight judges also went there but were unable to free the lawyer," Chauhan alleged. He further claimed that after about 20 minutes, the police fired four rounds of bullets, while the judges were leaving the spot.

He claimed that one of the lawyers, Ranjeet Singh Malik, who was protesting outside along with others, suffered a bullet injury. The injured lawyers were rushed to St. Stephen's Hospital here, he said.

"The police manhandled the lawyers. This was an incident of complete negligence by the police," Chauhan alleged. The lawyer was released from the lockup after about half an hour, he claimed.

The police said the situation is now under control and the under-trial prisoners who were stuck inside the court premises due to the clash were returned to their respective prisons in police vehicles. Lawyers earlier sat on a protest at the gate of the court premises, demanding action against those responsible.

KC Mittal, Chairman of Bar Council of Delhi, said, "We strongly condemn the brutal and unprovoked attack. One lawyer is critical. A young lawyer was beaten in lockup. They should be dismissed and prosecuted. We stand with Delhi lawyers."

BAR FURIOUS

Assam Bar Council member Khushboo Verma, who was in town for some work, alleged that she was attacked by policemen while protesting against the incident.

"There were no women police personnel present," she claimed. The Bar Council of India has decided to send a team to Tis Hazari Court to take stock of the situation and recommend necessary action. It has appealed to lawyers to maintain peace.

Delhi Congress chief Subhash Chopra visited the court complex along with party members and called for action against the personnel involved in the clash. Meanwhile, the Delhi Police said the circumstances of the gunshot injury to the lawyer are being investigated with help from forensic experts.

"We have received complaints from both sides and cases are being registered. CCTV footage is being examined. We have decided to form an SIT of the Crime Branch for investigation. A team headed by a Special CP will probe the entire sequence of events and on its findings further action will be taken," a police officer said.
