2 more rape cases reported in city

Ludhiana: Two more rape cases were reported in the city on Friday. In the first case, a youth has been arrested for raping a 19-year-old domestic help when she was alone at home. The accused, who is a carpenter, was called for work on Friday by the employer.

In her complaint, the girl stated that she worked as a domestic help for a doctor couple. On Friday morning, her employer brought a carpenter in the house. After assigning work to him, the employers left the house. In the afternoon, when she went to the washroom, the accused followed her, overpowered her, and raped her inside the washroom. Then, he threatened her to keep silent, and continued working there. However, by evening, when her employer came home, she narrated the entire incident to her. The employers then called the police and handed over the accused to them.

Inspector Amandeep Singh Brar said a case was registered against accused Suhel (20) of Hargobindpura. The accused was confident the domestic help would not tell anyone about this incident, and so he continued working there.

In another case, the police on Saturday arrested two minors aged 16 and 17 years for raping two minor girls of a neighbouring locality. The accused barged into the house and raped two girls aged 15 and 16 years. When they tried to escape, the girls raised an alarm, but the accused managed to flee.

In his complaint, the brother of the 15-year-old girl told police that in the early hours of Friday, the accused had raped her sister and a tenant. He stated that his sister would often sleep with the three tenant sisters on the first floor of their house. On Friday night, the main door of the house remained unlocked by mistake. He added that in the early hours, the accused entered the house, raped his sister and a minor tenant. The two sisters of the minor girl were threatened by the accused who kept mum. However, when the accused tried to escape, all the girls raised an alarm.

The family and residents tried to nab the accused, but failed. Thereafter, a complaint was lodged with the police. Investigating officer ASI Harbhajan Singh said a case was registered under section 376 (rape) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act. The police arrested the accused on Saturday, who are also minor. They have been sent to a juvenile home.

5 booked for sexual harassment

On the complaint of a 35-year-old married woman, the police on Friday booked a resident of her locality and four accomplices for allegedly harassing her sexually. The woman told police she had illicit relations with the main accused, which she ended some time ago. On October 21, when she was going to her paternal house, the accused intercepted her way, dragged her in a car, and sexually harassed her. She alleged that the accused was forcing her to have sexual relations, which she refused. He also threatened to make her obscene pictures and videos go viral. An FIR has been lodged after an investigation, said investigating officer ASI Bhupinder Kumar.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
