One dead, 13 injured as TNSTC bus hits container truck in Chennai

One dead, 13 injured as TNSTC bus hits container truck in Chennai

The accident took place during the early hours of Saturday, killing the bus conductor and grievously injuring 13 others, including the driver.

news Accident

A Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation (TNSTC) bus rammed into a container truck at Thathankuppam in Villivakkam, Chennai during the early hours of Saturday, killing the bus conductor and grievously injuring 13 others, including the driver. The accident reportedly took place at 2.40 am on Saturday at 200 Feet Road in Thathankuppam, near Padi flyover.

The deceased, Veeramuthu, (42), was a resident of Red Hills and succumbed to his injuries soon after the collision. The bus driver, Govindasamy (53), a resident of Alamathi, has been admitted to Kilpauk Medical College (KMC) Hospital with critical injuries. The other injured passengers are undergoing treatment at the hospital.

The bus was coming from Nellore and was heading towards Koyambedu Mofussil bus terminus. According to The Hindu, the police suspect that the bus driver could have dozed off at the wheel, causing the accident. Thirumangalam Traffic Investigation wing have registered a case and investigation is underway.

In September this year, three people were killed and 33 injured as a Tamil Nadu government bus collided with a lorry in Krishnagiri district. According to reports, the accident happened around 4 am on the Krishnagiri-Hosur highway near Samalpallam.

The bus, owned and operated by the Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation (TNSTC), was going to Hosur from Tiruvannamalai. As the bus was crossing Samalpallam area, around 60 kilometres from Hosur, the bus collided with a lorry that was coming from the opposite direction. In the impact, the bus driver Vediyappan died on the spot while conductor Sudhakar and a passenger Chinnakkannu died in hospital shortly after.

In November last year, one person was killed and five others were injured in an accident near Trichy when a bus, trying to avoid a crossing motorcycle carrying three people, ran into a bus stop near Trichy. As the bus approached Ramji Nagar, a motorbike with three persons on it allegedly tried to cross the road. In order to avoid hitting the bike, the bus swerved to the side of the road, thereby hitting the bus stop at the Ramji Nagar bus stop.
