Two village residents charged with drug and gun possession – The Daily Gazette

Share 1 Email

COBLESKILL — Two village residents were arrested Friday on drug and gun possession charges after a joint investigation of the Cobleskill Police Department and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

The Cobleskill Police Department in a release said it received information from the Department of Homeland Security that indicated two village residents had been illegally receiving a “large quantity” of opiate-based controlled substances from India.

“A search warrant was then executed by CPD members and HSI agents at the residence of the two suspects; who live together. During the search, multiple illegal firearms were discovered, including assault rifles, an Uzi pistol, and other semi-automatic handguns. Additional drugs and drug paraphernalia, body armor, police badges, and other contraband were also seized,” according to the release.

Police charged Kathleen Pitzel, 36, of Cobleskill with third-degree criminal possession of a controlled substance, a class B felony.

Police charged Luigi Pandolfi, 54, of Cobleskill, with two counts of criminal possession of an assault weapon, a class D felony; second-degree criminal possession of a weapon, a class C felony; third-degree criminal possession of a weapon.

Police said Pandolfi was found to be in possession of two AR-15 assault rifles, an Uzi pistol, and two other pistols without having a pistol permit/registration for any of them.

Both Pitzel and Pandolfi were arraigned in Cobleskill Town Court and sent to the Schoharie County Correctional Facility on $5,000 cash bail each or $15,000 bond bail. They are to return to Cobleskill Town Court on Tuesday at 3 p.m. for further proceedings.

Cobleskill police said the investigation is continuing, and additional charges may be filed. Anyone with information about this incident is requested to contact the police at 518-234-2923.

Share 1 Email

Categories: Fulton Montgomery Schoharie, News
