Tis Hazari Court clashes: Lawyers call indefinite strike in district courts, SIT formed to probe incident

Many vehicles were burnt in Delhi Tis Hazari clashes between lawyers, cops | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights 20 Delhi Police officers and 8 lawyers injured, 1 lawyer shot on chest Lawyers calls indefinite strike in all district courts demanding action against cops involved in the shooting incident SIT formed to probe incident. FIRs lodged against both parties

New Delhi: As many as 20 police officials and eight lawyers were injured in the clashes between the Delhi Police personnel and lawyers in Delhi’s Tis Hazari Court on Saturday. The Delhi Police has formed a Special Investigative Team (SIT), headed by a special commissioner-level officer, to probe the incident.

As per reports, lawyers went on a rampage and burnt police and private vehicles after cops locked up a lawyer who insisted on parking his vehicle outside a lock-up. The concerned lawyer was “rudely” told by the cops to park his vehicle somewhere else when he insisted on parking the vehicle at the spot as he had an urgent “hearing”, a lawyer reportedly said.

"Some lawyers were parking their cars in front of the lock-up. The police asked them not to do so as it would create an obstacle. The CCTV footage also shows that the lawyers tried to enter the lock-up forcefully," Delhi Police spokesperson, Anil Mittal, told news agency IANS.

"The police tried to explain to them but they continued to misbehave. They set police vehicles on fire. When things went out of control, the police personnel protecting the undertrials fired in the air," he added.

Any opinion?This was starting point of tussle what I could guess.For how long police will be at receiving end just because they have no support and leadership. pic.twitter.com/eZBxuvUlH6 — Aslam Khan (@aslam_IPS) November 3, 2019

Lawyers set more than 20 vehicles on fire and attacked the police officers in the compound as the situation escalated.

Twenty police officials, including one additional DCP, two SHOs have sustained injuries. Eight advocates were injured during the scuffle. In the fire, 12 private motorcycles, one police vehicle and eight jail vans outside the lock-up were damaged, the police said.

Lawyers announced an indefinite strike starting Monday in all district courts demanding action against the police personnel involved in the firing incident which injured a lawyer.

Delhi High Court Justice DN Patel met senior police officers to discuss the matter. Some judges of the high court were also present. Members of the Supreme Court Bar Association also met Justice Patel over the issue. It was reported that Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik will meet Justice Patel later today.

After holding a meeting with Commissioner of Delhi Police, Amulya Patnaik, judges of the administrative committee and District judges at Tis Hazari Court & Delhi High Court have decided to hear the case (yesterday's clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari Court) shortly. https://t.co/6IzmOIQ3HI — ANI (@ANI) November 3, 2019

Three senior judges of the Delhi High Court reportedly met advocate Vijay Verma who received a bullet wound on his chest during the clashes.

Bar Council of Delhi said it will grant Rs 2 lakh each to two lawyers who are currently recuperating in ICU and Rs 50,000 rupees to the lawyers who got injured in the clashes.

Meanwhile, the police released the photo of injured station house officer (SHO) Rajeev Bhardwaj who received stitches in the police-lawyers clash at Tis Hazari Court on Saturday.

The clash between the lawyers and the police personnel at Tis Hazari Court in Delhi took place yesterday. More than 20 people including police personnel and lawyers were injured in the incident. https://t.co/nVzVM4mHa6 — ANI (@ANI) November 3, 2019

The Delhi Police said cross FIRs were registered under Sections 186, 353, 427, 307 of the CrPC on the basis of complaints received from both lawyers and police.

Commenting on the incident, senior Congress leader and advocate Salman Khurshid said: "The attack on the lawyers is a matter of concern. I believe the attack on the lawyers is a problem for democracy. Proper inquiry should be done. Facts and truth should come out but it's a sad incident."
