Tis Hazari scuffle: Delhi HC orders immediate suspension of accused police officials, judicial inquiry

Police vehicle torched after clash at Tis Hazari court complex | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Delhi HC ordered suspension of police officials involved in the clash The court directed the police commissioner to record statements of the injured advocates At least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured in the scuffle

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court, on Sunday, directed the Delhi Police Commissioner to immediately suspend the police officials involved in the clash that took place outside Tis Hazari Court on Saturday.

A scuffle broke out between Delhi Police officials and advocates after a heated argument over parking on Saturday. At least 20 police personnel and several lawyers were injured in the scuffle while 17 vehicles were vandalised. The lawyers had also accused the police of opening fire on them as the situation escalated, but the police denied the charges.

The Delhi HC, while hearing the matter today, also ordered the transfer of Special Commissioner Sanjay Singh and Additional DCP Harinder Singh.

The court directed the police commissioner to record statements of the injured advocates and instructed to lodge an FIR immediately in connection with the clash.

During the course of hearing, the Delhi Police told the high court that a special team of Crime Branch is investigating the matter and an internal inquiry has also been set up to look into the incident.

“Special Investigation Team has been constituted to investigate the matter. One assistant sub-inspector of police who was accused of taking the lawyer to the lockup has been suspended,” the Delhi Police said.

Meanwhile, all bar associations and bar councils sought judicial inquiry from a retired judge of Delhi High Court in the clash.

“Chairman of the inquiry should be instructed to complete the same within a stipulated period of time,” Bar Council of India said in the court, seeking compensation for the injured advocates.

The high court directed the Delhi government to provide a lump sump ex-gratia amount of Rs 50,000 to advocate Vijay Verma who was shot at, and Rs 15,000 and Rs 10,000 to other two injured advocates.

It also ordered a judicial inquiry into the matter led by the Delhi HC judge, Justice SP Garg and gave six weeks to complete the probe.

Justice Garg will be assisted by the Director of the CBI, the Director of Intelligence Bureau and the Director of Vigilance or any superior rank officer appointed by them.
