Women empowerment: Heartland heroes

film Son Rise

HeForShe campaign

In a scene from Son Rise, a farmer from Haryana places his pugdi on the head of his daughter to signify that she is his rightful heir. This ritualistic ‘passing on’ of the pugdi is usually carried out between a man and his son

Delhi gang rape

Filmmaker Vibha Bakshi

Filmmaker Vibha Bakshi’s Son Rise, about a few brave men working for women’s empowerment in Haryana, has been adopted by the UN for a global campaign.If Vibha Bakshi ever made a behindthe-scenes documentary about shooting her secondin Haryana, it might be as compelling as the original. The Mumbaikar, who spent a year-anda-half in the Jat heartland, says that her crew and she were constantly watched and followed. From having drunk men park themselves outside her hotel room to being accosted by a van-load of hooligans at a court, Bakshi was always on her guard. “One policeman casually told my husband that if I didn’t drop the film, I might meet with a violent accident on the highway,” says Bakshi. “We visited over 50 villages in Haryana, and would often lose cell reception. But even something as trivial as that would make me nervous.”None of this is surprising given that Bakshi’s film deals with some of the thorniest issues in this part of the country: Decades of female infanticide that have skewed the gender ratio, and led to a spate of crimes against women, from gang rapes and bride trafficking, to domestic violence. Bakshi, however, has found support from the UN which has adopted the film for its global. At the film’s first screening, in Mumbai on February 19, Bakshi will be accompanied by the UN Under-Secretary General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.Instead of throwing statistics and preachy statements at the viewer, Bakshi tells the story through three everyday heroes “who are trying to change the system”. Sunil Jaglan, sarpanch of Bibipur village in Jind district, and father of two young girls, goes from house to house talking to women about their situation, and preparing pop quizzes through which teen girls may learn about their legal rights. Baljit Singh Malik, head of the all-powerful, all-male Khap committee, takes a very public and unexpected stand against infanticide. And then there is Jitender Chhattar whose wife Kusam was drugged, gang raped and then blackmailed into becoming a sex slave for over a year before they were married. Chattar gets to know about her past, marries her anyway and then takes her eight rapists to court, only to lose the case. A chilling still sourced by Bakshi for the film, shows the eight rapists (who were let off by the court for lack of evidence) posing with their supporters who are shown tossing wads of money onto the street. “It was an open demonstration of power to show that they could buy anyone off,” says Bakshi. “We later heard that Jitender’s lawyer had turned for a princely sum of Rs 15,000, and that the file with all the evidence had conveniently disappeared. And here was Jitender, who had wiped out his savings and even sold his land to seek justice for his wife.”Through her film Bakshi hopes to garner support for these, and other unsung heroes in Haryana. “In Jitender’s case, I know help is coming,” she says. “Once I screen the film in Mumbai and Delhi, I know a lot of people will come forward to support him.”Bakshi’s 2015 film Daughters of Mother India, based on the 2012, picked up a National Award. But she says the tight, punchy Son Rise was a much more challenging project to undertake. “It focused on something which runs deeper than gender violence,” says Bakshi. “We wanted to see where all this [hatred against women] was coming from, and it simply came down to biases. I also knew that these were issues nobody would discuss with me, especially since I was a woman. So I practically moved to Haryana, met lots of people, had meals at their homes, even lived with them — all, to win their trust. People would invite us over, welcome us into their homes and would discuss all sorts of issues with me, except this one.”The journalist-turned-filmmaker says she had to set aside her prejudices too. When speaking to the Khap head, Bakshi could feel that her questions were laced with sarcasm, which then put him on edge. But the minute she decided to stop being judgmental about him, his attitude changed too. The turning point in their relationship came when Malik, at an annual Khap meeting attended by hundreds of community leaders and elders, announced a ban on infanticide and a social boycott of any family carrying this out. Bakshi and her crew, lulled by the tedium of a seven-hour-long meeting — but still rolling the camera — were taken aback. The film had finally got its ending. “The three men in my film are ordinary people who are doing extraordinary things,” says Bakshi. “They’ve grown up amid patriarchy, and are now working to change the very biases that have been ingrained in them. They are the real heroes.”
