HC orders judicial probe into clash

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

New Delhi, November 3

The Delhi High Court today ordered a judicial inquiry by a retired judge into the clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari court complex here and transfer of two senior police officials during pendency of the investigation.

A Bench of Chief Justice DN Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar, which sat on a holiday after taking suo motu cognisance of media reports of Saturday afternoon incident in which 29 persons were injured, said former High Court judge Justice SP Garg (retd) would hold the judicial inquiry into the matter. Two lawyers had suffered gunshot wounds in the incident.

The Bench, after hearing various lawyers’ associations, directed no coercive action would be taken against any lawyer on the basis of an FIR lodged at the behest of police officials.

The Bench said Justice Garg would be assisted by directors of CBI, Vigilance and Intelligence Bureau or any other senior officers appointed by them. The inquiry would be completed within six weeks and a report submitted in the court, it said.

The Bench directed the Delhi Police Commissioner to transfer Special Commissioner Sanjay Singh, who allegedly ordered lathicharge on lawyers inside the court complex, and Additional DCP Harinder Singh, who allegedly had ordered firing at lawyers, during pendency of the investigation.

It also directed the Police Commissioner to take action with regard to suspension of ASI Kanta Prasad, who allegedly dragged an advocate inside the lockup and beat him up, and ASI Pawan, who allegedly opened fire at lawyers. The directions were issued after hearing the heads of various lawyers’ bodies, including Bar Council of India, Bar Council of Delhi, Supreme Court Bar Association, Delhi High court Bar Association, coordination committee of Delhi district courts, which demanded a judicial probe into the incident.

They urged the court that senior officials of Delhi Police who ordered lathicharge and firing be arrested and suspended along with those who allegedly manhandled advocates. Advocate Rahul Mehra, representing the Delhi Police, told the court that in the clash, 21 cops and eight lawyers were injured while 14 bikes and a police gypsy were burnt and eight vans vandalised. — PTI
