Telangana: 32-year-old domestic help raped by landlord, no arrest yet

The survivor also alleged that the family also hurled casteist slurs and insulted her. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Landlord in Telangana rapes 32-year-old domestic help, no arrest yet Woman was raped when family of the accused was visiting Delhi Survivor alleges she was also threatened and insulted by the family of the accused

Secunderabad: A 32-year-old domestic help has alleged rape by her landlord in Lalapet area of Secundrabad in Telangana. Though police have registered a first information report, there has been no arrest in the case.

The survivor was living as a tenant with her mentally ill husband in the house of the accused.

According to a report, the woman was raped in June this year, but the matter came to light on Sunday. Police had filed a case against the accused on October 21.

"The accused raped the woman when his parents were visiting Delhi in June. The woman had called the parents of the accused complaining about the crime committed by him. The accused's parents asked her to wait until they are back in the city," the report quoted a police officer as saying.

According to police, after their return from Delhi, the family threatened the victim and told her not to inform anyone about the crime.

The survivor also alleged that the family also hurled casteist slurs and insulted her. After several weeks, the woman finally decided to lodge a police complaint against the accused.

Police have booked the accused under Section 376 (rape) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and other relevant sections of the Scheduled Caste ad Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.

After her medical examination, the woman was sent to Bharosa Centre for counselling. Police say they are probing the matter and an arrest will be made accordingly.

In a similar incident in July this year, a Delhi Police head constable allegedly raped his 14-year-old domestic help in Mundka area of the outer Delhi.

The incident took place when the accused and the minor girl were alone at his residence as the policeman's family was out. The police had booked the accused cop under sections of the IPC and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act.

The accused was posted at the Tis Hazari court complex. However, the police were also probing whether the accused had sexually assaulted the minor on previous occasions as well. The case was transferred to Crime Branch for investigation. A similar case was also reported last year, where an Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) was booked for allegedly raping a woman and molesting her minor daughter.
