Kolkata trainer arrested for molesting 11-year-old athlete in stadium; booked under POCSO

The accused molested her and touched her inappropriately in the stadium | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Survivor used to come at the stadium for her regular practising The minor raised an alarm and other staffers at the stadium rushed out and nabbed the accused Loxcal police have registered a case under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act

Kolkata: The Howrah City Police apprehended a physical trainer at Dumurjala stadium after he allegedly molested an 11-year-old athlete on Sunday. The accused was identified as 42-year-old Sujit Pal.

Survivor used to come at the stadium for her regular practising. On Sunday after completing her morning practice session the minor was about to leave and her father had come to pick her up. Suddenly, she realised that she forgot her shoes in the stadium and she immediately went back inside the stadium to bring it. Meanwhile, the police officials told media outlets, that as the minor went inside following a conversation, the accused molested her and touched her inappropriately. Immediately, the girl raised an alarm and other staffers at the stadium rushed out and nabbed the accused.

According to a report, the Deputy Commissioner (South), Howrah Police, Swati Bhangalia told media person that they have registered a case under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Further probe in the case is underway.

Three get life imprisonment for rape of 5-year-old

Meanwhile, in Madhya Pradesh, a court in Gwalior has sentenced three people to life imprisonment for the repeated rape of a five-year-old girl. The court had also imposed a fine of Rs 99,000 on the convicts, a major part of which will be given to the survivor.

A special judge Archana Singh convicted three persons, including the minor's sister, brother-in-law and a neighbour They were convicted for the rape and under provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Reportedly, the minor was living with her elder sister and brother-in-law after the death of her parents. Meanwhile, the survivor's brother-in-law and a 55-year-old neighbour repeatedly raped her while her sister abetted the crime. The case came to light after the survivor's neighbours lodged a complaint.

The survivor will get Rs 75,000 compensation out of Rs 99,000 fine imposed on the convicts. According to the prosecution, the case was registered on April 20, 2017, at Maharajpura in Madhya Pradesh's Gwalior district.




