Bengaluru: Nigerian national killed over lunch box; accused apprehended

Samuel has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The deceased was identified as Morado, a resident of Janakiram Layout The accused was named as 30-year-old Samuel, a student with KNS College near Hebbal After an heated argument, Samuel stabbed Morado on his chest and stomach and he died on the spot

Bengaluru: A 39-year-old Nigerian national was allegedly stabbed to death by a fellow national in Hennur area of east Bengaluru on Sunday. The deceased was identified as Morado, a resident of Janakiram Layout and the accused was named as 30-year-old Samuel, a student with KNS College near Hebbal.

Reportedly, Morado had been jobless and he was irked over Samuel for leaving his tiffin box at food joint. The police officials told media outlets that Samuel and Morado were partying at a common friend's house in Hennur from Friday night. On Saturday afternoon, Samuel took Morado's lunch box to buy chicken from Africans' Kitchen- a food joint in Hennur.

Reportedly, Samuel forgot the lunch box at the food joint and got the chicken packed in an aluminium foil. Meanwhile, as soon as Samuel returned and Morado found out that his lunch box was missing. Irked over the situation, Morado abused and slapped Samuel, meanwhile, others intervened and pacified them.

Later, Samuel returned to his room in Jakkur, armed with a kitchen knife, he then rode back to Morado's residence in Janakiram Layout at 3 am. After he reached his house, Samuel asked Morado to apologise for having slapped him to which he denied. After an heated argument, Samuel stabbed Morado on his chest and stomach.

Hearing the commotion in the apartment, Morado's neighbours alerted the police control room and cops rushed to his apartment. Reportedly, by the time police officials came at the site, Morado had died and officials arrested Samuel. He was hiding in Morado's kitchen.

However, the accused- Samuel has been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway.
