The curse of third degree

Representational image | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Shocking instances of police brutality and torture have been reported from all across the country. India has around 15,555 police stations and the existing general reputation of the Indian police is that it is difficult to find a police station that does not have a past stigma of brutality or lurking suspicion in the mind of people that the police can resort to violence.

Two glaring examples of recent custodial deaths are indicative of the larger malaise that is afflicting the department. One incident pertains to district Hapur, Uttar Pradesh, when a security guard, Pradeep Tomar was picked up by the police, along with his 10-year-old son, and was subsequently subjected to continuous custodial violence at the police station, tortured by piercing screwdriver into his body; his posterior was battered mercilessly by a wooden plank. All this was happening in front of his minor son. The assaulting policemen are accused of shoving the barrel of a revolver into the mouth of this petrified child, in illegal custody, scaring him to keep quiet. Subsequently, for some inexplicable reason, the child was given a packet of chips. Pradeep Tomar after this inhumane torture was later taken to the hospital where the doctors diagnosed that he was brought dead. The photos and videos of the deceased go to show that Tomar had an innumerable ante-mortem injury on his body which gave a grisly account of the battering that the deceased was subjected to. It has come as no consolation that three policemen have been placed under suspension.

In the other case, a twenty-six-year-old youth, Vijay Singh, died as a consequence of alleged police brutality on October 27, 2019, in police station Wadala Truck Terminal, Mumbai. Here also the matter has not gone beyond the suspension of five police personnel.

The enormity of the problem can be gauged by the fact that there have been around 442 deaths in police custody, in India, in the intervening period of three years. Gujarat tops the list with 68 and is followed by UP, which had 36. The most shocking statistics is that there has not been a single conviction of an accused police officer after 2017. The negative signal that emerges after these incidents is that the cases have seldom been taken seriously and to logical conclusions. Suspend the accused police officers till the public outcry subsides, then quietly rehabilitate them once the dust settles down. What else will explain the knee jerk response in these two and other instances where murder cases are seldom filed promptly, sending the guilty to jail happens after an inordinate delay or after protracted public agitations, the mandatory magisterial enquiry is seldom instituted with a purpose and with stated time-bound finalisation deadline. All these add up to a cumulative administrative failure that emboldens the inefficient thana staff, still further.

Why do the police right across indulge in third-degree even after 72 years of independence?

It is a matter of shame not only for the police leadership but for all police officers. It does irreparable damage to the credibility of the police but also shows it in a very poor light to society as a whole.

It is said that third-degree has almost become a part of the DNA of the police in India because of the feudal legacy from the British, who gave us the archaic Police Act of 186. But for themselves, the British gifted the friendly “Bobby”, an epitome of a polite and people-friendly beat constable, who was not equipped with even a single firearm. The British had a purpose in creating an oppressive police force: they could subjugate the Indian masses. But after decades of independence, the nation deserves much better.

There have been innumerable Police Commissions, like the National Police Commission (1977-1981), the Ribeiro Committee 1999, Padmanabhaiah Committee, 2000, etc. and the solemn orders passed by the honourable Supreme Court in the case of Prakash Singh versus Union of India in the year 2006. Despite that, the seven-point charter of police reforms is yet to see the light of the day. Prime Minister Narendra Modi motivated and exhorted the police forces and the Directors General of Police on November 30, 2014, gave the acronym SMART for the police, meaning thereby that the force should strive to become strict and sensitive, modern and mobile, alert and accountable, reliable and responsive, tech-savvy and trained. This could easily be translated into reality if the solemn orders passed by the Supreme Court had been implemented in letter and spirit. But the administrative tragedy is that hardly any political party is serious in implementing police reforms. Because once the reforms are introduced, the police department would be insulated from extraneous and illegal political pressures from unscrupulous politicians. Under the prevailing circumstances, however, it is apparent the police are inclined towards politicians and succumb to frivolous pressures and manipulations. Consequently, under constant illegal pressure, the police resort to shortcuts and unprofessional ways to work out crime, which in extreme cases end up in torture and custodial deaths.

There is a very long history of police brutality. Many police stations in northern India are reported to have devised devious measures of torture and third-degree during the course of interrogation to extract confessions illegally. Very often this is done with the self-righteous stand than in the interest of working out the case. The police leadership, by and large, is a mute spectator to this gross violation of human rights and the rule of law. The implements of torture and their ugly presence in police stations were conveniently ignored in the line of expediency. This, in turn, gives an impetus to the protracted use of third-degree in policing. In light of these disturbing developments, the Supreme Court gave a significant directive in the year 2015. The court directed the central and state governments to ensure that police stations and the interrogation rooms were suitably covered by CCTV, that each police station must have at least two women constables. All police stations must be periodically inspected by senior officers to check and contain incidents of torture. But the incidents of Mumbai, Hapur and elsewhere are not reassuring and the follow-up action is even more disappointing.

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
