Watch: Militants throw grenade in Srinagar market; one dead, 35 injured

Policemen at the spot of a grenade explosion at a market in Srinagar. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi)

Militants lobbed a grenade in a busy market area in Srinagar on Monday, leaving one dead and 35 persons injured, in the second such attack in a week. The attack took place at 1.20 pm in Hari Singh High street, following which the area was cordoned and a search launched for the attacker.

#CCTV The moment when terrorists threw a grenade in a market on Maulana Azad road in Srinagar earlier today. 15 people were injured in the attack. #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/V0Hy0OTICi — ANI (@ANI) November 4, 2019

The 35 injured, including three security personnel, were rushed to the nearby SMHS hospital where the condition of two is critical, PTI reported. The person killed has been identified as 40-year-old Rinku Singh, a resident of Saharanpur, PTI quoted officials as saying.

The incident comes less than a week after at least 19 civilians were injured when militants hurled a grenade near a bus stand in Sopore district. Residents said they heard a loud bang and there was panic in the area. “People started running. There were some injured on the ground,” said Riyaz Ahmad, a local resident.

A woman injured in the grenade attack receives treatment at a hospital in Srinagar. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi) A woman injured in the grenade attack receives treatment at a hospital in Srinagar. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi)

In the last week of October, militants hurled a grenade on a CRPF deployment in Srinagar’s Karan Nagar area, leaving six personnel injured.

Meanwhile, amid tight security arrangements, the J&K Civil Secretariat and other offices reopened in Jammu after functioning for six months in Srinagar as part of the bi-annual ‘Darbar Move’. This is the first after the state’s bifurcation into two Union Territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh that came into existence on October 31.

Police officers near the spot of the grenade attack at a busy market in Srinagar. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi) Police officers near the spot of the grenade attack at a busy market in Srinagar. (Express photo by Shuaib Masoodi)

During his visit to the police headquarters after the bi-annual move, Jammu and Kashmir Lieutenant Governor GC Murmu advised the officers to stay alert and deal firmly with elements inimical to the safety and security of the people.

“Murmu advised the police officers to stay alert and deal firmly with elements inimical to the safety and security of the people and stressed stern action against those involved in economic offences,” a government spokesperson said.
