Cops assaulted by bootleggers selling liquor

Two officials from Shikrapur police station of Pune district were attacked by a family of bootleggers, including the mother, who were caught by the cops for allegedly selling liquor illegally in the district on Saturday.



The accused have been identified as Kaluram Dhumal, Tukaram Dhumal and their mother Sunita Dhumal, all resident of Pimple Dhumal in Shikrapur.



Cops said that the constables, Dattraya Bankar and Ambadas Dhore, were sent to raid a spot where the accused have been allegedly selling liquor illegally.



When the constables arrived at the spot and found Kaluram and Tukaram carrying bags that contained suspected bottles of liquor, they questioned the duo. However, the accused got into an argument with the constables and later began thrashing the cops. The police added that when the incident escalated, their mother, Sunita, also came to the spot and started beating the policemen. Several locals from the village also joined them and began abusing the police personnel.



Constable Ambadas Dhore lodged a complaint at the Shikrapur police station after the assault. Sub-inspector SM Khose told Mirror, “The family has been illegally selling country liquor from their home since long. They would sell it at a highway spot. Our constables were sent to trap and arrest them; however, the accused attacked the two. The injured constables have received treatment.”



The police seized 43 bottles of liquor from the accused, which, the accused had brought for sale at the selected spot. The police have booked the accused under sections 353 (assault or criminal force to deter a public servant form doing his duty), 332 (voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant form doing his duty), 332 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace), 506 (punishment for criminal intimidation) and 34 (act done by several persons with common intention) of the Indian Penal Code and the Bombay Police Act.


