Chennai: Drug sellers attack youth's family after he alerts police; cops choose to stay mum

Chevandhi realised that the group was selling drugs (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A group of persons in Chennai allegedly assaulted a family on Sunday The family was assaulted after a member tried to lodge a complaint against the group for selling drugs The police did not take any action against the accused after the family informed them about the accused

Chennai: A family from Chennai who informed the police about drug dealers operating in their locality was allegedly beaten up on Sunday. The accused allegedly came to the family's residence and brutally thrashed them. The accused attacked the family and slashed the ear of one of the victims.

How it happened

On November 1, Chevandhi saw a group of men and women near her house in Ambedkar Nagar. The group was giving boxes to boys in exchange for money. Chevandhi realised that the group was selling drugs. Meanwhile, the group noticed that Chevandhi was looking at them.

They allegedly hurled abuses at Chevandhi, called her a prostitute and asked her if she was going to the police. The 19-year-old then got intimidated and ran away. She went to her house where she lives with her nine relatives.

According to a report, Chevandhi rushed home and narrated the entire incident to her 20-year-old cousin Doulraj. Doulraj then went to the accused and asked them to stop selling drugs in the area. When the accused did not pay any heed to Doulraj, he turned to the police for help.

Doulraj went to the Adambakkam police station and to lodge a complaint. The police, however, advised Doulraj to stay away from such "matters" and did not register a complaint. At around 7.30 pm on Sunday, some of the accused came to Chevandhi's house and asked about Doulraj's whereabouts.

Doulraj's mother Alamelu told them that he was not at home. When the accused left, Alamelu rushed to the Adambakkam police station. She told the police that the accused might attack them. After some time, the accused returned and attacked the family.

The accused women allegedly threw powder and Chevandhi and her relatives while the men threatened them with knives. The accused told the family to "mind their business". Chevandhi said that the accused were planning to kill Doulraj but they could not succeed as he was not at home.

One of the accused allegedly slashed Chevandhi's ear and six stitches were administered to her. Chevandhi's relatives also suffered minor cuts in the incident. Contrary to the claims made by the victims, the police have said that the assault took place due to personal enmity.
