In Delhi, 4 incidents of violence allegedly by lawyers reported

Protesting advocates broke mobile phones of people recording violence

At least four incidents of assault on commuters, journalists and police personnel allegedly by lawyers staging protest were reported from district courts in the city on Monday.

Lawyers broke mobile phones of people who were recording violence.

Abstain from work

Advocates in the Delhi High Court and all district courts abstained from judicial work protesting against the clash between lawyers and police in the Tis Hazari court complex on Saturday.

The incidents of violence took place in Tis Hazari, Karkardooma and Saket while no such incident took place in Dwarka, Rohini and Patiala House courts.

Policeman thrashed

A video of a policeman on an official visit to Saket Court was being thrashed by a man appeared to be a lawyer has gone viral on social media.

“We have procured the video footage of the incident that was shot by someone. We are going through it to identify the person in the video. An FIR will be registered,” said a senior police officer.

An auto driver recording vandalism by lawyers outside the Saket court on his mobile phone was thrashed by a group of advocates. A video of the incident has gone viral where an auto driver was seen thrashed by lawyers. They tore off his clothes.

Journalist attacked

In another incident of violence reported from Tis Hazari court, a woman journalist working with a TV news channel was roughed up by lawyers when she was on the court premises for the coverage of lawyers’ protest. A visitor recording the act was held and his mobile phone was smashed on the ground. The journalist was rescued by senior advocates and policemen.

Lawyers protesting outside Karkardooma court in East Delhi thrashed a motorist and abused a woman on two-wheeler when they were passing through the area during the protest.

A senior police officer said they were procuring videos of violence that took place during the protest called by lawyers. “We will approach victims and if no one comes forward then we will take suo motu cognisance in the cases of violence,” said the officer.
