Chennai: Food delivery boys thrash customer after he complains about delay

Agitated at the delay, Balaji had an argument with the delivery boy (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A group of delivery boys allegedly beat up a man in Chennai The accused have been identified as D Rajesh Kanna, I Sreenivasan, Jaya Surya, P Mathiyalagan and Dhanasekaran The police let off the two parties with a warning

Chennai: A man in Chennai's Ashok Nagar was allegedly beaten up by five persons on Sunday. The accused were detained for interrogation by the police. The victim has been identified as R Balaji. Three of the accused were employees of online food delivery app- Swiggy. It was also alleged that Balaji was inebriated at the time of the incident.

At around 8 pm on Sunday, R Balaji ordered food through Swiggy. As the delivery did not reach Balaji on time, he contacted Swiggy customer care and lodged a complaint. After around an hour, a delivery boy reached the mentioned location with the food.

Agitated at the delay, Balaji had an argument with the delivery boy. The delivery boy has been identified as D Rajesh Kanna. Kanna lives in Saligramam. On the day of the incident, Rajesh Kanna was unwell, so he asked his father to accompany him for the delivery. Rajesh Kanna's father has been identified as Dhanasekaran.

According to a report, Dhanasekaran said that there was a delay in the delivery as the customer (R Balaji) had not provided his exact location. When they reached the spot, Balaji and Rajesh had an argument. When the argument escalated, Rajesh allegedly called his colleagues.

Rajesh's colleague reached the spot within a few minutes as they were in the same area. They have been identified as Jaya Surya and P Mathiyalagan. A college student named I Sreenivasan was also accompanying Rajesh's colleagues.

Following this, Rajesh and his associates beat up Balaji. According to Balaji, he also lost his ten sovereigns gold chain in the incident. Balaji approached the police and lodged a complaint. In response to this, Rajesh also filed a complaint against Balaji. Both the parties were let off by the police after a warning.

Delivery boy stabbed to death in Mumbai's Vikhroli after heated argument

A delivery boy in Mumbai's Vikhroli was allegedly stabbed by unidentified persons in August this year. The 22-year-old was allegedly killed after a heated argument. The deceased used to work for Red Chilly restaurant.

On the day of the incident, the delivery boy allegedly had an argument with two persons following which, he was stabbed. The police said that the youth had been stabbed by a sharp object.
