punjab road rage: Trader kidnapped after firing in Punjab road rage; escapes

LUDHIANA: In a road rage case, a 23-year-old hosiery trader was attacked and kidnapped by three accused in New Shivaji Nagar of division number 3 area in Punjab's Ludhiana district headquarters town on Sunday late night. The incident was also captured on a CCTV installed near the crime spot.The police have registered an FIR against the accused - identified as Jassu, Kaku and Rahul Joshi of New Hargobind Nagar - under sections of 307 (attempt to murder), 365 (kidnapping), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 341 (punishment for wrongful restrain), 294 (uttering obscene words) 148 (rioting, armed with deadly weapon), 149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object) of the IPC and Arms Act.Victim Mayank Khanna said, "I, along with my three friends, had gone for dinner to Doraha. At around 11:30pm we reached New Shivaji Nagar. I was crossing by the office of a councilor in my Creata car when a Dezire car was coming from opposite side. We got stuck at one point following which I asked the Dezire car occupants to reverse it, but they started abusing me."“Following this, I alighted from the car and the accused also came out. We had heated arguments and then I gave one accused push. The accused then overpowered me and thrashed me. Meanwhile, one accused Kaku took out a weapon from his car and opened fire at me. I immediately turned around and bullet grazed my ear. Even after that I resisted but the accused overpowered me and kidnapped me in their car at gunpoint,” he added.The accused kept roaming in the city with him for at least ten minutes.Inspector Satish Kumar, SHO at police station division number 3, said that, Mayank's friend also tried to chase them, but the accused hit their car which turned over. Thereafter, near Samrala Chowk, Mayank pulled the hand break and escaped.The inspector added that the police have found one bullet shell from the spot which is of .32 bore pistol. The police have yet to ascertain if the weapon used in the crime is licensed or not.The police are conducting raids while the injured was admitted to the hospital.
