Hyderabad: Police identify man who burnt woman official alive in her chamber

Allegedly, Suresh attacked Vijaya Reddy as there had been a delay in processing his documents (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A tehsildar was set ablaze in her chamber in Hyderabad on Monday The woman official was set ablaze by a farmer The farmer and the victim are undergoing treatment

Hyderabad: According to a recent development, the man who set a block revenue officer from Hyderabad ablaze on Monday has been identified. The deceased was identified as Vijaya Reddy. Reddy's driver and another visitor present at the office tried to rescue her, in vain. The accused has also suffered 60 per cent burn injuries and is undergoing treatment.

The accused is under police custody. The incident took place at Abdullapurmet tahsildar office in Rangareddy district on Monday afternoon. The staff was on a lunch break when the tehsildar was attacked. She died on the spot. Identified as Suresh Mudiraj, the accused is a farmer. He loves in Gourelli village. Suresh was also injured during the incident and is undergoing treatment.

Allegedly, Suresh attacked Vijaya Reddy as there had been a delay in processing his documents. Instead of approaching senior officials with his grievances, the farmer took the law in his hands and set the tehsildar ablaze.

Mahesh Bhagawat, Rachakonda police commissioner said, "This is first of such ghastly attack on a woman officer in the premises. We have taken it seriously. We will complete the probe in a fast track court and ensure that the accused gets capital punishment. "

The police have said that Suresh had been waiting for Reddy outside her chamber. After some time, Suresh entered the chamber with a bottle containing petrol. He poured petrol on the officer and set her on fire. Within minutes, Reddy rushed out of her chamber, engulfed in flames. Vijaya's driver and another visitor tried to help her. The driver and visitor also sustained burn injuries.

A woman who was present at the spot said that she heard a blast coming from inside Reddy's chamber. She said that she rushed to the tehsildar's chamber and saw her lying on the floor as she burned. Sabitha Indra Reddy, education minister condemned the incident and said, "If people have grievances against officers, they should take it to the notice of the higher authorities. But attacking lives is dangerous. We have instructed the district collector to bring the culprit to book and take stringent action. "
