Angered by Tehsildar's murder, revenue staff in Telangana to boycott work for 3 days

Angered by Tehsildar's murder, revenue staff in Telangana to boycott work for 3 days

An association of revenue officials has called for protests across the state on Tuesday to demand severe punishment to the accused.

news Crime

The gruesome act of burning and killing Vijaya Reddy, a Tehsildar or Mandal Revenue Officer (MRO) of Abdullapurmet at her office in Telangana's Ranga Reddy district, has sent shockwaves among government employees and evoked widespread condemnation.

Vijaya Reddy was in her chamber on the outskirts of Hyderabad on Monday when a man walked in, and while talking to her, poured petrol and set her ablaze around 2 pm. The official died on the spot while two employees who tried to save the Tehsildar were injured.

An association of revenue officials called for protests across the state on Tuesday to demand severe punishment for the guilty. Scores of employees are expected to attend Vijaya's last rites in Nalgonda district on Tuesday, and also plan to boycott duties for three days, as a mark of protest.

V Lachireddy from the Telangana Deputy Collectors Association, Telangana Revenue Employees Services Association (TRESA) President Vanga Ravinder Reddy and S Ramulu from the Telangana Tehisildar Association (TTA) have issued statements condemning the murder.

Stating that they had never seen such a heinous attack, they demanded protection to revenue officials who were carrying out their duties.

The police said the murder took place over a dispute relating to accused Suresh's land in Bacharam.

The body of Vijaya Reddy has been taken to the Osmania Hospital for autopsy. A large number of revenue officials gathered at the hospital.

The Abdullapurmet mandal or block was carved out recently and Vijaya Reddy was its first MRO. She is survived by her husband and two children.

Director General of Police M Mahender Reddy also condemned the incident and said that such a barbaric act was totally unacceptable in a civilised society.

"We shall bring the culprit to book and ensure that the severest punishment is awarded at the earliest. Justice will be rendered to the victim and her family members," he said.

IANS inputs
