Delhi Police vs Lawyers Highlights: Licences of guilty lawyers should be cancelled, says Central IPS association

Tis Hazari, Saket court violence LIVE updates: Police personnel outside Tis Hazari court. (Express photo)

Tis Hazari, Saket court violence Highlights:

The BCI said, "Hooliganism and violence has no place in the bar. Identify the advocates involved in violence and send their names to BCI. We are tarnishing the image of the institution by soaring such rowdy elements. The BCI said that the strike would not yield any positive results and instead of being obliged to the judiciary, advocates showing disrespect to it and any sort of disrespect to HC order will brand lawyers as unreliable people."

On the other hand, Delhi police has submitted the report to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on the Tis Hazari incident, in which at least 20 security personnel and several advocates were injured, news agency PTI reported. Also, hundreds of police personnel have gathered outside the Delhi Police headquarters at ITO to register their protest.

The protest was building since last week when violent clashes between lawyers and policemen last week at Tis Hazari court in the national capital left many injured. Policemen in uniform and civilian clothes, with many holding placards, began assembling at the police headquarters since morning today. Some of the placards read “We are human in police uniforms” and “Protectors Need Protection”.

Addressing the police personnel protesting at the Police Head Quarters (PHQ) in ITO, Delhi Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik said, “In last few days, there have been certain incidents in the capital which we handled very well. The situation is improving after that. I appeal to all to maintain peace. It’s trying time for us. We need to fulfill the responsibility of maintaining and assuring law and order. It is expected from us that we the protectors of law will continue to assure law and order in the capital.”

Both sides have blamed the other — police claim lawyers started the violence and attacked 3rd Battalion personnel, while lawyers maintain police used excessive force and said firing inside court premises was unacceptable.
