10 shops gutted in Srinagar market

SRINAGAR: At least ten shops dealing in garments and electronic items were completely gutted in a fire in Iqbal market in Batamaloo area on Monday night, even as fear gripped street vendors and shopkeepers following the grenade attack at Hari Singh High Street (HSHS) in Srinagar earlier in the day that left one non-Kashmiri toy-seller dead and 44 others injured. While sources said miscreants had set the shops on fire to cause scare among shopkeepers to keep their shops shut, police on Tuesday blamed short-circuit for the blaze.A police officer said fire tenders with the assistance of cops and locals brought the fire under control and saved more shops from being burnt down. An inquiry has been ordered into the incident, he added.Coming close on the heels of the second grenade attack in the HSHS area since August 5, the Batamaloo fire incident added to the fear of street vendors and shopkeepers, who stayed away from plying their trade in uptown Srinagar on Tuesday. The first grenade blast in the HSHS area had taken place on October 12.“There is a lot of fear since yesterday’s (Monday’s) episode. So, today (Tuesday) we decided not to set up stalls in uptown market area,” said Abdur Rashid, a street vendor.Though pedestrians were seen moving freely in the area, street vendors and shopkeepers were conspicuous by their absence. Unlike other days, shopkeepers in Goni Khan market of HSHS said they downed their shutters at 10am due to the fear caused by the latest grenade blast and the fire incident. “We closed our shops at 10am. We don’t want to face a similar situation that we faced on Monday,” a shopkeeper said.Amid uncertainty in Kashmir ever since Article 370 was defanged by Parliament on August 5, shopkeepers had been opening their shops only for a few hours in the morning and observing shutdown for the rest of the day. Of late, however, things had changed as shops had started to function normally, but the grenade attack came as a spoiler.Meanwhile, reports said that two private cars were set ablaze at Bagh-e-Alimardan in Hawal in downtown Srinagar on Tuesday morning. However, police denied the reports and said miscreants had tried to cause damage to some private vehicles but timely police intervention saved the day.
