Agitating Delhi Cops Call Off 11-Hr Protest After Assurances

All Eyes Now on Review Petition in HC Tomorrow

WEB DESK / AGENCIES

AN UNPRECEDENT 11 DHARNA PROTEST by cops of Delhi Police ended today after assurance from the higher authorities.

From very morning thousands of personnel on Tuesday laid siege to the police headquarters at ITO for 11 hours and staged a virtual revolt, bringing traffic in the area to a standstill. The stir was called off at night following multiple appeals, including from their chief and other senior officers, which promised that their demands would be addressed.

The protests, which were sparked by two attacks on police personnel, also witnessed the families of cops take to the streets and demand justice.

More than six appeals were made by senior police officers like Joint Commissioner of Police (Southern Range) Devesh Srivastva, Joint Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Anand Mohan, Joint Commissioner of Police (Central) Rajesh Khurana, Special Commissioner of Delhi Police RS Krishnia, but the protestors did not budge.

The protesters ended their stir late in the evening after Special Commissioner of Police (Crime) Satish Golcha assured them that a review petition will be filed against the Delhi High Court order in connection with the police-lawyer clash at the Tis Hazari court complex, and ex gratia of at least Rs 25,000 will be given to the injured policemen. He assured the protesters that their demands are being looked into, but he was heckled by his juniors.

“We have always been told about two types of crowd. The unruly crowd and peaceful crowd. We are protectors of the world. Who will protect the nation? We will. But who will protect us? No one. We will have to protect ourselves,” said a woman constable in her address to the gathering.

The Delhi Police has a strength of over 80,000 personnel.

Clashes between cops and advocates

The protests were triggered by the two attacks on their colleagues — the first one on Saturday at the Tis Hazari Courts Complex after a parking dispute between an on-duty policeman and a lawyer, which injured at least 20 security personnel and several advocates. The second attack took place on Monday outside the Saket District Court.

Ordering a judicial inquiry by one of its retired judges into the clash, the high court at a special sitting on November 3 had suspended a police official and transferred two senior police officials while the investigations are ongoing.

Two FIRs were registered against unidentified persons who were seen in a video hitting a uniformed policeman on a motorcycle and slapping him outside the Saket court.

Shouting slogans like “We Want Justice” and “Go Back, Go Back” as their senior officers appealed for calm, the surging crowd of protesters, some in uniform and some in civvies, gathered outside the headquarters on Tuesday morning. In the evening, one of the protesters read out the demands, including revoking the licences of those lawyers who assaulted policemen and quashing of FIRs against the cops.

“The entire nation is watching us today. Even if it takes a day or more, we will not leave the protest unless our demands our heard,” one of the protesters said while addressing his colleagues. “Our only weakness is that we don’t have an association. There is no one to listen to us. When we get thrashed, our seniors say, get medical aid and resume duty.”

The agitating officers urged their co-workers, families and civilians to stand in solidarity with them. “You citizens are our family. If you think we have done even one percent of good to you, stand in solidarity with us,” said a woman constable.

Those spearheading the agitation urged their colleagues to maintain peace. “We want our demands to be fulfilled in a peaceful manner,” said one of them. “Everyone has an association, even IPS officers have their association. We also want one. We protect the citizens and politicians. We stand for them? Can’t they stand for us at this hour?”

The family members of the police personnel gathered to protest at India Gate, about 2 km away from the police headquarters, in an effort to spread the agitation.

“Delhi Police officers are on duty round the clock so that the people can celebrate every festival without fear. But while making those sacrifices, they get thrashed on roads. Don’t we have feelings or any rights?” said Munesh Dahiya, the wife of a police officer.
