Need clarity on ‘no coercive action’ order: Govt to HC

The Centre moved the Delhi High Court Tuesday, asking for a clarification on its order passed Sunday that said no coercive action can be taken against advocates, in the wake of the clash between lawyers and police at Tis Hazari court complex a day earlier. The Centre sought to know whether the HC order should be applicable on subsequent incidents as the law should take its own course without any fetters.

A bench of Chief Justice D N Patel and Justice C Hari Shankar issued notice and sought response of the Bar Council of India, the apex body of lawyers, and several other bar associations of the national capital on the Centre’s plea.

The Central government, represented by Additional Solicitor General Maninder Acharya, sought a clarification from the court that “the order dated November 3, 2019, is no impediment in taking any action in accordance with law to maintain law and order”.

“Therefore, clarification is required from this court as various unfortunate incidents have happened during the last two days as observed by the respondent (Centre) and widely reported by the media, which requires the law to take its own course without any fetters.

“It is prayed that this court may clarify that order dated November 3 pertains only to the two FIRs registered at Subzi Mandi police station on November 2,” the application, filed through Central government read.

Read | Delhi’s police pour out in protest

The Centre’s plea came after a policeman and two litigants outside outside Saket court premises were assaulted by advocates Monday. On Tuesday, two separate FIRs were lodged by the police in this regard.

The bench declined to pass an interim order and said the matter would be heard in detail Wednesday.

The bar associations have opposed the Centre’s application, saying that police was seeking the relief so it can harass lawyers, and insisted that the entire legal fraternity cannot be held responsible for stray incidents.

Congress, AAP lash out at Centre

The Congress meanwhile has accused the government of being “missing in action”. “This is a new low in 72 years. The Delhi Police, which is directly under the charge of Home Ministry, is protesting on the streets and the Home Minister Amit Shah and the Home Ministry is missing in action,” Congress communication department head Randeep Surjewala said. “This is an utter failure of leadership.”

The AAP also targeted the Centre, with spokesperson Saurabh Bharadwaj saying: “Since the time Amit Shah ji has become Home Minister, Delhi law and order has deteriorated so much that it has become the worst in 70 years. The ugly situation existing in the capital today shows complete incompetence of the Home Minister and Central government. The situation could have been handled in a mature way but Central government is sitting like a mute spectator.”

Deputy CM Manish Sisodia said: “The whole situation is very unfortunate. Lawyers provide justice to the people and police provide security. The conflict between them should have been resolved way back. We want the violence to end and a solution should be devised to end the issue.”
