Mumbai: Out on bail for rape of woman, man ‘kidnaps, rapes’ her again; arrested

According to the police, the accused and the woman were neighbours and knew each other since 2012.

A 36-year-old man has been arrested for allegedly threatening, kidnapping and raping a 25-year-old woman at knife point, police said Tuesday. In 2013, police said, the accused had been arrested for raping the victim on the pretext of marriage. He reportedly sexually assaulted the woman again after he came out of jail on bail a few days ago, police added.

According to the police, the accused and the woman were neighbours and knew each other since 2012. “In 2013, the accused and the complainant were in a relationship. The woman, in her statement, had then said that the accused had raped her after promising to marry her. She had registered a case against him after he refused to marry her later, following which he was arrested,” a police officer said. The accused, the officer added, had managed to get bail a few months ago.

“He reportedly tried to meet the complainant after coming out of jail, but as she kept refusing, he allegedly accosted her near her residence,” an officer said. As per the complainant, the accused asked the woman if she wanted to marry him, but she declined.

On October 25, the accused reportedly again tried to intercept the woman near her residence. When she protested, the accused forced her on a bike at knifepoint. “He reportedly took the woman to his residence and raped her,” senior police inspector Jayprakash Bhosale of Chembur police station said.

In her complaint, the woman claimed that the accused had assaulted her brutally, and even threatened to harm her if she raised an alarm for help. The woman claimed that she managed to escape when the man went to the bathroom.

Police said a case under relevant IPC sections of kidnapping, assault, rape, criminal intimidation and intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of peace has been registered in the matter. The woman has been sent for medical examination and primary reports suggested that she was sexually assaulted, police said.

“After registering an FIR, teams were dispatched to different locations in eastern Mumbai. The accused was caught from near his residence earlier this week and has been remanded in judicial custody,” an officer said. Police added that they were also checking footage captured by CCTV cameras installed near the spot from where the woman was allegedly accosted. “The CCTV footage would act as crucial evidence in the case,” police said.
