Chaos after Delhi cops strike against lawyers’ attacks

New Delhi:The nation’s capital saw an unprecedented 11-hour strike by Delhi Police personnel on Tuesday against attacks on cops by lawyers.The strike which disrupted traffic in the city was called off late in the day after an assurance by police brass that grievances would be addressed.Thousands of policemen who protested outside the police headquarters near ITO demanded action against lawyers who attacked them in different city courts in the last few days.The cops received statements of support from police associations across the country. Special Commissioner of Police later said a review petition would be filed against the high court verdict which suspended policemen and ordered a judicial inquiry into clashes between police and lawyers which began outside Tis Hazari courts last Saturday.The Delhi Police also announce an ex-gratia compensation of Rs 25,000 for injured policemen. An FIR has been registered on the incidents outside Saket courts. Appropriate legal action and medical assistance will be provided, it said. Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal said, “advocates and police are important pillars of the criminal justice system who should work in harmony.In the wake of the recent unfortunate incident, it is imperative to restore the trust between the two and also to ensure that justice is done impartially in the entire matter.”“We are closely monitoring the situation in Delhi. A judicial inquiry has been ordered. Let us wait for the outcome of the inquiry,” said home secretary AK Bhalla.Earlier during the day, Delhi police submitted a report to the home ministry on the clashes between lawyers and police at the Tis Hazari court complex in which at least 20security personnel and several advocates were injured. Delhi Police have given details of the circumstances which led to Saturday’s incident and the action taken in the report, a home ministry official said.It does not cover what happened after Saturday, including an incident on Monday where a group of lawyers assaulted a policeman outside the Saket Court, he added.Policemen and their family members holding placards stating “We are humans in police uniforms” and “Protectors Need Protection”, gathered outside the police headquarters at ITO on Tuesday and urged their seniors to support them to save the honour of men in uniform.A policeman was thrashed by advocates outside the Saket Court on Monday, which provoked the protests.A video of the incident, showing some men beating up a man in uniform on a bike, was circulated widely on social media. When the policeman was leaving the spot, a man hit his bike with his helmet. The protesters demanded action against the lawyer who assaulted.Delhi police commissioner Amulya Patnaik told policemen: “We have to behave like a disciplined force.The government and the people expect us to uphold the law, it is our big responsibility. I urge you to resume your duty.”The protests threw traffic out of gear as large traffic snarls were witnessed till late evening on Tuesday.Delhi traffic police took to Twitter to issue traffic advisories.“Traffic movement is closed in the carriageway from ITO towards Laxmi Nagar. Motorist are advised to use Delhi Gate & Raj Ghat”.
