Dakha assault case; Complainant records statement, Next hearing on Nov 29

Ludhiana: The complainant seeking action against against cabinet minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu in the alleged Dakha assault case recorded his statement in a local Court on Tuesday. The next date of hearing of the case in the court of Civil Judge (Junior Division) Ankit Airi has been fixed for November 29.

Gurdayal Singh Grewal, counsel for complainant said the complainant Saudagar Singh recorded his statement before the court during the hearing of case and Gursewak Singh (son of the complainant) has already got statement recorded before the court during the last hearing. Gursewak Singh still remains in judicial custody.

On October 16, The Congress worker from Dakha, Gursewak Singh Gora, was arrested after fight between Congress workers outside party candidate’s office and later his father had filed a court case seeking registration of FIR against Cabinet Minister Bharat Bhushan Ashu among others for allegedly beating his son

Notably Saudagar Singh had filed a complaint in the court praying that Ashu and others involved in the case be summoned, tried and punished for offences committed by them under various sections of IPC.

The case pertains to alleged beating and tossing of turban of Gora allegedly involving Ashu during election campaign of Dakha bypolls. Gora had alleged that Ashu had manhandled him and removed his turban inside the office of Congress candidate from Dakha, Captain Sandeep Sandhu. Later however Gora was booked by Dakha police on various sections of IPC including 379-B (snatching), 341 (wrongful restraint),323 (voluntarily causing hurt),506 (criminal intimidation) and 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention). Along with Gora, his associate Tarandeep Singh too was booked under similar offences by the police. The FIR against Gora and his associate was registered on the complaint of another Congressman, Kuldeep Singh Baddowal who in his complaint had alleged that Gora and his accomplice Tarandeep abused him and attacked him. Baddowal also said that during the attack both of the accused snatched Baddowal’s gold chain and also snatched a mobile phone from him and fled the spot.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
