Rape of Russian national: ‘Complaint prima facie shows accused helped victim prepare false documents’

IN ITS detailed order rejecting pre-arrest bail to a Pune policeman, booked for the alleged rape of a Russian national, a special court has said the possibility of the accused suppressing the voice of the victim cannot be ruled out. The court also said that the complaint prima facie showed that the policeman had helped the victim prepare false documents.

“The complaint shows serious allegations against the police officer, who knows the law. He is a protector of the law. He knows the consequences of the act. It prima facie shows that false and fabricated documents were prepared by him for the help of the complainant (victim). Applicant being a police officer, should not prepare false and bogus documents to help foreign national,” additional sessions judge Justice K S Hore said in her order.

While the court had last month rejected the anticipatory bail plea of police Inspector Bhanudas Annasaheb Jadhav, 50, its detailed order, which was made available this week, states that the allegations against the policeman are “serious”.

Last month, a 38-year old Russian national, who resided in Uzbekistan before moving to Mumbai in 2003, had alleged that Jadhav had sexually assaulted her multiple times since 2006. Jadhav had submitted that the woman was staying illegally in the country and had extorted money from him. During arguments on the anticipatory bail plea, the court was told that after the victim’s visa expired, she had got in touch with Jadhav, who had promised to help her.

He allegedly told her that he would put her in touch with well-known film producers, who would help her become a lead actress in movies. She had alleged that Jadhav had sexually abused her first in 2006, and subsequently sexually abused her repeatedly with the promise of marriage and threats. The victim also has a child with the accused.

Jadhav had claimed that the victim’s statement had discrepancies and that she had herself deceived immigration authorities to stay in India without a valid visa. He had also claimed that the woman had demanded Rs 50 lakh and had been paid Rs 10 lakh.

The police had opposed Jadhav’s pre-arrest bail plea stating that if granted pre-arrest bail, Jadhav could put pressure on witnesses.
