Delhi cops lay 11-hour siege to HQ

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

New Delhi, November 5

In unprecedented protests by the Delhi police, thousands of its personnel on Tuesday laid siege to the Police Headquarters for 11 hours and staged a virtual revolt sparked by two attacks on their colleagues before calling off their stir following multiple appeals from their chief and other senior police officers.

The protests in which families of the personnel also took to the streets were withdrawn late evening after an assurance by senior officers that their grievances would be addressed.

Addressing the protesters, Special Commissioner of Police (Crime) Satish Golcha urged them to end their stir and resume duty, while assuring them that a review petition would be filed against the Delhi High Court order in connection with a clash between cops and lawyers at the Tis Hazari Courts Complex. Golcha also said the injured policemen would get an ex gratia of at least Rs 25,000. The Delhi Police have a strength of over 80,000 personnel.

Ordering a judicial inquiry by one of its retired judges into the clash, the high court at a special sitting on November 3 suspended a police official and transferred two senior police officials during pendency of the investigation.

The protests were triggered by the two attacks on their colleagues, one on Monday outside Saket District Court and another on Saturday at the Tis Hazari Courts Complex after a parking dispute between an on-duty policeman and a lawyer led to at least 20 security personnel and several advocates being injured.

Two FIRs were registered against unidentified persons, who were seen in a video hitting a uniformed policeman on a motorcycle with his elbow and slapping him outside the Saket court.

Shouting slogans like “We Want Justice” and “Go Back, Go Back” as their senior officers appealed for calm, the surging crowd of protesters, some in uniform and some in civvies, gathered outside the Police Headquarters in the

Income Tax Office (ITO) area in the morning itself. In the evening, one of the protesters read out the demands, including revoking the licences of the lawyers who assaulted the policemen and quashing of FIRs against the cops. The family members gathered to protest at the India Gate, 2 km from the police headquarters, in an effort to spread the agitation. As the protests escalated, the Centre was understood to be unhappy over the manner in which it was held in violation of service conduct even though, according to an official, it is sympathetic to their grievances.

The Bar Council of India asked various bar bodies to identify lawyers “indulging in hooliganism” and requested advocates to end their protests, which are “bringing a bad name to the institution”.

The Centre too rushed to the Delhi HC urging it that its order for no coercive action against advocates, passed on Sunday following the lawyers-police clash at Tis Hazari court, should not be applicable for subsequent incidents. The protesters did not relent despite several appeals by top police officers all through the day.

Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik had also made an unsuccessful appeal to the protesters to end their stir. “We have to behave like a disciplined force. The government and the people expect us to uphold the law, it is our big responsibility. I urge you to resume duty,” Patnaik said. The cops urged their seniors to stand by them to save the honour of the uniform.

As the protests continued, Deputy CM Manish Sisodia said the Delhi Government wanted an immediate solution to the police-lawyer standoff and termed the prevailing situation “unfortunate”. The Congress seized upon the police protests to target the Centre, saying it is a “new low” for India since Independence and shows Home Minister Amit Shah’s “failure of leadership”. — PTI

Special branch had warned

The special branch of the police had on Monday warned the top brass at Police Headquarters about a “revolt-like situation” in the department. Sources said young batches of constabulary had been circulating violence clips. IANS

Home Ministry steps in

The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and Delhi Police officers discussed the protest and decided to file a review petition on the Delhi High Court order regarding the Tis Hazari court incident.

‘Maintain discipline’

We have to behave like a disciplined force. The government and the people expect us to uphold the law, it is our big responsibility. —Amulya Patnaik, Police Commissioner

The trigger: Brawl over parking on Nov 2

The protests triggered by a brawl on Saturday between Delhi cops and lawyers at Tis Hazari court over parking

Violence erupts and some parked cars set on fire and 20 cops and lawyers injured

Monday Violence

Scuffle between lawyers and cops at Saket court. One cop brutally assaulted

Delhi police register 2 FIRs against unidentified lawyers

Court order on FIRs

Delhi HC issues directions not to take coercive action on FIRs

HC order angers police personnel

Tuesday Cops protest
