Three women groped, threatened and assaulted by miscreants while waiting for cab in Delhi

An FIR has been registered in this regard at the Hauz Khas police station (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Less than a week since the horrific gang-rape in neighbouring Gurugram, three women were allegedly molested by a group of men in Delhi's Hauz Khas area late Tuesday night. The matter came to light after a male companion who was accompanying his wife and her friends told police officials that the women he was with were harassed and assaulted by three-four people as they were waiting for a cab on January 1.

In his complaint to the Hauz Khas police, the husband said that he and his wife along with her two friends were waiting for a cab on Aurobindo Marg when a group of men approached them. "They groped my wife, threatened rape," he told Indian Express adding that they also slapped her two friends before turning to him. They began brutally assaulting me and even snatched my wife's iPhone when they saw a team of policemen approaching the scene and fled, claims the husband.

As we, in #DelhiPolice,focus on improving further our visibility, response &service-delivery, we request the citizenry also to devote some thought to security of their home & colony. With police &public partnership, we can make Delhi a lot safer. Wish you a very #HappyNewYear2019 — CP Delhi (@CPDelhi) January 1, 2019

Based on his complaint, police have registered an FIR under sections 354, 506, 379, 323 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). These sections correspond to charges of outraging the modesty of a woman, criminal intimidation, theft, voluntarily causing hurt and common intention respectively. An investigation has been launched into the matter and officials with the Hauz Khas police station are in the process of retrieving CCTV footage from the area.

According to a report by Asian Age from December of last year, Delhi Police data suggests that more than five rapes were reported in the national capital every single day from January to November 30, 2018. Records assert that over five cases of rape and nine cases of molestation came to light from Delhi every single day.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Molestation survivor kills self after village panchayat lets accused go scot-free in Agra
