Minister's supporters beat up municipal staff removing illegal

A case was registered here against four supporters of Madhya Pradesh minister Tulsi Silawat on Wednesday for allegedly beating up municipal employees who were removing illegal banners put up on the occasion of the minister's birthday.

A video showing four men beating employees of the Indore Municipal Corporation (IMC) went viral on social media.

Taking note of the incident, Chief Minister Kamal Nath instructed officials to remove all illegal hoardings, posters and banners across the state.

An official at Sanyogitaganj police station here said a case under IPC section 353 (assault on public servant) besides the Madhya Pradesh Prevention of Defacement Act was registered against Rahul Silawat, Chandu Silawat, Kapil Kaushik and Vikki Khatik.

No arrest has been made yet, he said.

Health minister Tulsi Silawat, who hails from Indore, celebrated his 65th birthday on Tuesday.

His supporters had put up banners and hoardings greeting him in Residency area, which houses bungalows of judges and top government officials.

When personnel of the Anti-Encroachment Squad of the IMC were removing banners and hoardings put up on electricity poles on Tuesday, the accused reached the spot and allegedly attacked them with sticks.

Chief minister Nath later took to Twitter to say that he had directed officials to crack down on illegal posters and banners.

In a series of tweets, he said, "I have taken strict decision against hoardings, posters and banners, put up without permission at public places and directed the officials to remove them across the state.

"Don't hesitate to remove the hoardings even if they display my photos," he said.

"These hoardings mounted on traffic indicators, statues of great personalities, electricity poles, buildings and public places are not only blot on the beauty of cities but also cause accidents," Nath said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
