Manodhairya scheme: To pay compensation, Pune unit looks for 32 ‘missing’ rape survivors

WCD officials said that till 2018, a total of 236 cases in Maharashtra were approved as eligible for compensation under the Manodhairya scheme, meant to rehabilitate women and child survivors of rape and acid attacks.

The Women and Child Welfare department’s Pune district unit is trying to trace 32 rape survivors, as part of its efforts to pay compensation to these women under the state government’s Manodhairya scheme. The department has now issued a circular, redirecting efforts to locate these victims.

WCD officials said that till 2018, a total of 236 cases in Pune district were approved as eligible for compensation under the Manodhairya scheme, meant to rehabilitate women and child survivors of rape and acid attacks.

In the last five years, a total of 171 rape survivors have been given compensation to the tune of Rs 4 crore under the scheme.

While the scheme was launched back in October 2013, officials admitted that it started on a slow note as procedures had to be put in place and committees were set up to scrutinise proposals for financial assistance.

Initially, the scheme had envisaged providing between Rs 2 lakh and 3 lakh to victims of rape, child abuse and acid attacks. Later, in accordance with directions by the Bombay High Court, the state revised the financial norms and decided to allocate up to Rs 10 lakh in special cases to rape survivors.

Among the cases considered eligible, 65 survivors are yet to be given compensation under the Manodhairya scheme, said WCD officials. The state is yet to locate as many as 32 rape survivors, while 14 families of rape survivors have rejected the compensation amount, said officials. In the remaining cases, issues pertaining to documentation, legal and other procedural formalities have to be completed.

“It is sometimes difficult to track down a rape survivor who leaves the place after the incident. They give incorrect addresses… if the victim has passed away, court procedures have to be followed to get a succession certificate,” a WCD official told The Indian Express.

“It is of utmost importance to ensure that victims of rape and acid attacks are brought out of the psychological shock that they suffer. It is also equally important to provide them shelter, financial assistance, medical and legal aid and counselling services,” added the WCD official.

In the last week of October, the state government has released another order, redirecting efforts to locate the missing rape survivors. An amount of Rs 1.73 crore is yet to be disbursed, said a WCD official.

The scheme has undergone several revisions and now the complete process, from accepting the forms to providing financial assistance, has been handed over to state and

district-level Legal Services Authority since December

last year.
