Customs take women to hospital to retrieve smuggled gold, Chennai gang kidnaps them

CHENNAI: In a cat-and-mouse game in which the mouse seems to have outsmarted the cat, a gang on Tuesday allegedly kidnapped two women passengers, who were taken by air customs sleuths to a hospital to retrieve smuggled gold, in a car in Chromepet.According to sources, the women were suspected to have swallowed 30 capsules each stuffed with gold granules which may totally weigh more than a kg. The duo, who reappeared before the customs officials on Wednesday, claimed that a gang kidnapped them, took them to a private hospital, and removed the gold from them after giving them a stomach wash . They also claimed that they were not smugglers, but were only carriers of gold. The Pallavaram police have filed a case and are searching for the gang, while the customs officials are questioning the women to track down the kidnappers.Customs officials in their complaint said the women were abducted by the henchmen of smugglers as they were walking into the hospital. Police, however, said CCTV camera footage lifted from the scene did not show any such drama. The police have filed a case under charges of obstructing a government servant from performing duty.Police said the CCTV camera footage shows the customs officials and the women walking into the hospital, a car entering the campus, and the women getting into it. Customs officials said they tried to give chase, but the car sped away. The two women, identified as Teresa and Fathima, landed from Colombo on Tuesday. Air customs officials stopped them after they found something abnormal in the way they were walking with their bloated bellies. A body check in the screening room revealed that they were smuggling gold, and the women confessed that they had swallowed gold pellets.Based on the complaint of the customs officials, the Pallavaram police have registered a case under IPC Section 353 (punishment for the use of criminal force against a public servant to deter from serving the duty). An investigation officer said, “Customs are investigating smuggling; we are focusing on the case we have slapped on the suspects.”
