Issewal gang-rape: Survivor’s friend cross-examined

Ludhiana: The defence counsels cross-examined the friend of the Issewal gang-rape survivor during the hearing of the case in a city court on Wednesday. The next date of hearing of the case in the court of additional session judge Rashmi Sharma is on Friday, November 8.On February 9, a group of miscreants had allegedly gang-raped a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage, as they had gone to Issewal to celebrate Chocolate Day. Police had booked 10 unidentified accused in the case and arrested six accused, including Jagroop Singh, a private vehicle driver of Jaspal Bangar, Ajay of Tibba who originally belonged to Gonda in Uttar Pradesh and worked as a driver at a petrol pump, and four nomads (two from Ludhiana, and one from Nawanshahar), including a juvenile from Jammu and Kashmir.Special public prosecutor for state in the case, BD Gupta, said defence counsels cross-examined the friend of the prosecutrix (victim) substantially, and the same would continue in the next hearing of the case on November 8. He added that cross-examination of the friend of the prosecutrix continued for around two-and-a-half hours after lunch.The special public prosecutor said during cross-examination, the survivor’s friend had fully supported the prosecution case and supported the statement of the prosecutrix. The counsel had said that the prosecution had already got the examination-in-chief of the prosecutrix and her friend done. On October 30, the court had dismissed the revision petition filed by one of the accused in the Issewal gang-rape case, praying he be considered a juvenile and tried by the Juvenile Justice Board.Drawing a parallel with the juvenile’s trial in the infamous Nirbhaya gang-rape and murder case, the counsel for one of the accused in the Issewal gang-rape case had claimed the accused was a minor on the day of the offence, and had sought a trial before the Juvenile Justice Board. In the review petition filed before the trial court, the defence counsel had submitted a matriculation certificate of the accused as a proof of his date of birth to substantiate his claims.BOXTEST IDENTIFICATION PARADEThe test identification parade was done in the presence of judicial magistrate Ankit Airi on February 22 at Central Jail, and during that, the survivor had identified all the accused. The police had presented a chargesheet against the accused in the court of Ankit Airi on April 4.The copy of challan assessed by The Times of India had suggested that from the investigation, only six accused were found involved in the case. It added that from the DNA sample reports, call mapping records of talks between the accused, mould from the crime spot, and evidence on the record, only six accused have been found to be involved in the case, and they have already been arrested.The challan also mentioned that the survivor and her friend had got sketches of the six accused made. The police said that with the arrest of the accused, the investigation is complete. It had, however, added that if more persons are found involved in the case, it will produce supplementary challan into the matter. The police had said it had added more sections, including 354-B (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 379-B (snatching), 364-A (kidnapping for ransom, etc) and 397 (robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) of the IPC on March 25.
