US woman raped in 2015: Witness identifies main accused, corroborates prosecution’s case

The lone independent witness in the US woman rape case testified in the Chandigarh district court, and identified the accused auto driver. The witness, Gaganpreet Singh of Kurukshetra (Haryana), recorded his statements in the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge, of Poonam R Joshi, and supported the Prosecution.

While testifying in the court, Gaganpreet Singh, have submitted that on the the night when the incident happened, he had reached Sector 17 ISBT (Inter State Bus Terminal) riding in the auto rickshaw of the accused, Baldev Singh. Around 7 pm, at Sector 17, he met the woman, who was looking for a hotel to stay. He thus went with her in the auto rickshaw of Baldev to help her find a suitable hotel. However, when they could not find one as per the woman’s requirements, he left from Sector 17 ISBT to Kurukshetra, and told Baldev Singh, to help her find a hotel.

The chief examination of Gaganpreet Singh has concluded, however his cross examination is now scheduled forNovember 7, in the special woman and child Court.

According to the complaint, the US national woman had been allegedly raped by an auto driver at Kharar while she had come to Chandigarh in 2015. The woman in her statements have stated that she had come to India on tourist visa in 2015, to visit Haridwar and other places and then she was scheduled to go to France.

On the night when the incident took place, she met the auto rickshaw driver and asked him to find a reasonable hotel room for her.

Baldev allegedly took her to Kharar at the room of his friend where the accused himself and his accomplice committed crime with her. The accused then left her to Sector 43 ISBT, in the morning on the next day, from where she left to Haridwar and then from India to France, according to the complaint. After reaching France, she got a medical examination conducted and sent a formal complaint to Chandigarh Police through email, with the medical report attached with it.

Baldev Singh, who is presently lodged at Burail jail, is facing trial under Sections 328 (causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence), 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement), 366 (kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her to marriage), 376 (punishment for rape), 392 (punishment for robbery) and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the Indian Penal Code.
