Visually impaired minor girl raped for months by two blind teachers in Gujarat

Police have launched a manhunt to nab the accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The girl was studying in a school in the temple town of Ambaji Her aunt lodged a police complaint and a case was registered Police are yet to arrest the accused, one of whom is 62-years-old

Ahmedabad: An appalling turn of events has come to light from the state of Gujarat where a 15-year-old girl has accused two blind teachers of sexually assaulting her multiple times over a course of nearly four months. The survivor herself, is visually impaired.

Going by the most recent inputs, a manhunt has been launched to track down the accused teachers, one of whom is 62-years-old. In her complaint, the girl's aunt alleged that the child was raped at a school run by a private trust in the temple town of Ambaji. A case has been lodged against the two under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The matter came to light when the girl went to her native village of Premnagar in Radhanpur taluka of Patan district to celebrate the festival of Diwali. When she refused to go back to school, the child's aunt nudged her to explain why. The minor broke down and narrated her ordeal following which, an official police complaint was filed in this regard.

According to a report, the girl studied up till Class 8 in a school in her native village before she joined the school in Ambaji to learn music in July of this year. She alleged that 30-year-old Jayanti Thakor and 62-year-old Chaman Thakor raped her on multiple occasions. They only stopped after she told three other school teachers about their actions.

A senior police officer familiar with the case said that the case is being investigated and that a manhunt has been launched to nab the teachers who are on the run. Earlier this year, the central government added stringent measures to the POCSO Act with an aim to deter sexual crimes against children. More details are awaited as this is an ongoing investigation and the police are yet to nab the accused. In order to achieve the goal, the death penalty was introduced in POCSO.

The case brings back memories of a similar matter that was reported in April of this year when a blind man was arrested in Delhi for allegedly raping his minor daughter. Following his arrest, Delhi High Court ordered the police to investigate him on charges of molestation and rape. The court had set aside a trial court order discharging the man. In her statement, the child had accused her father of sexually assaulting her for several years before she realised that his actions amounted to a crime.
