Fury after blind schoolgirl repeatedly raped by teachers in India - manhunt underway

Cambodia: Moment French backpacker dragged into car

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The victim's ordeal only came to light after her family became suspicious when she refused to return to school after the Diwali holidays last month. She broke down and confided to her aunt, who contacted the police.

The 15-year-old had studied up to grade eight in her home village of Premnagar before transferring to the school in July to study music.



She was living in the school's hostel at the time of the attacks.



According to the complaint lodged by the victim's aunt, the first rape occurred two months ago in the school's music room by 30-year-old Chaman Thakor.



The second attack took place three days later in the same room, by 62-year-old Jayanti Thakor.



She was raped once more by the older teacher on the day before an Indian festival.

India has seen widespread protests against the rise in reported crimes against women

Women from different communities across India have been demonstrating in support of rape victims

Jayanti Thakor is a native of the Bhabhar town of Banaskantha, while Chaman Thakor lives in Gadh village near Palanpur. It is not known if the two men are related.



The victim said the attacks only stopped when she revealed her trauma to three other teachers at the school.



The men were immediately fired.



Police Inspector, Ambaji, JB Agrawat, told the Times of India: "We are investigating the case in detail and a manhunt has been launched to trace the two accused teachers who have fled."

Protests over rape cases are common in India, where a child is sexually abused every 15 minutes

The shocking case comes a week after a 17-year-old girl told police she was partially blinded and gang raped by two men in an isolated spot in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh.



Two other separate cases of rape were registered in the same city on the same day, including a 15-year-old girl who claimed she had been raped by a man she met at a wedding.



According to government crime figures up to 2016, a child is sexually abused every 15 minutes in India and there has been a steady rise in offences against children. READ MORE: India horror as mother and daughter who fought off rapists shamed

A study revealed 93 percent of rapes in India are committed by persons known already to the victim

Campaigners claim the real number of rape attacks is likely much higher than reported
