Tis Hazari violence: Hoodlum lawyers harassed DCP Monika Bhardwaj during November 2 clashes

Tis Hazari violence: Hoodlum lawyers harassed, chased DCP Monika Bhardwaj | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Monika Bhardwaj, DCP North Delhi, was harassed and forced to flee after she tried to intervene when lawyers tried to set ablaze a vehicle near a lock-up at the Court premises Delhi Police is yet to register a complaint in the matter Eight lawyers were injured during the November 2 clashes. 21 cops including one additional DCP, two SHOs also sustained injuries

New Delhi: A CCTV footage of the violence at Delhi’s Tis Hazari Court accessed by Times Now shows a group of hoodlum lawyers harassed female police on Tuesday. DCP North, Delhi, and her Protective Service Officer (PSO) barely escaped the ordeal in which as many as 21 police officers and several lawyers were injured.

The PSO of the DGP said Bhardwaj was not injured but she was heckled by a group of five lawyers who pushed her and abused her.

“They misbehaved with her. They tried to push her by the shoulder. They even tried to grab her collar. They were all male. There was not a single lady. They also abused her very badly,” the PSO said.

Among those injured included one additional DCP, two SHOs who sustained injuries. Eight lawyers were injured during the November 2 clashes. In the fire, 12 private motorcycles, one police vehicle and eight jail vans outside the lock-up were damaged, the police said.

Lawyers went on a rampage and burnt police and private vehicles after cops detained a lawyer who insisted on parking his vehicle outside a lock-up. The concerned lawyer was “rudely” told by the cops to park his vehicle somewhere else when he insisted on parking the vehicle at the spot as he had an urgent “hearing”, a lawyer reportedly said.

The latest footage accessed by Times Now shows DCP running towards the place where lawyers had indulged in arson and set afire government vehicles. Later the DCP is seen being chased by a group of lawyers, as she is rushed to safety by other police officers.

Look how these Delhi lawyers are vandalising the Court premises, breaking open buildings and attacking police men in uniform. Do these lawyers deserve to hold their professional licence and later become judges of the High Court and Supreme Court? pic.twitter.com/dGUEQEyvcY — Indian Police Foundation (@IPF_ORG) November 6, 2019

As per eyewitnesses, Bhardwaj was forced to flee after she tried to intervene when lawyers tried to set ablaze a vehicle near a lock-up where cops locked themselves to seek protection from lawyers.

The authorities are examining the CCTV video and appropriate action will be taken, said authorities. The Delhi Police is yet to register any complaint in the matter.
