Gujjar agitation in Rajasthan turns violent; protesters pelt stones at police, torch vehicles

A state government delegation, including Tourism minister Vishvendra Singh and senior IAS officer Neeraj K Pawan, Saturday met Bainsla and his supporters to hold talks, but no agreement could be reached. "We will continue the dharna on the rail tracks. No compromise was made with the government delegation. We want a 5 per cent reservation order," Bainsla had said Saturday. Gujjars had given a 20-day ultimatum to the state government to clear its stand on providing the quota. Currently, the five communities are getting one-per cent separate reservation under the most-backward category in addition to the Other Backward Class (OBC) quota. Meanwhile, Bharatiya Janata Party on Saturday accused the Congress-led Gehlot government of ignoring crucial warnings given by the Gujjar leaders. "In their election manifesto, Congress had promised reservation for Gujjars," said BJP leader and former Rajasthan Minister Arun Chaturvedi. "The Congress government has neither given a complete loan waiver to farmers as promised nor has it provided unemployment allowance. They have also failed to deliver on their promise of Gujjar reservation," he said.

JAIPUR: The agitation by the Gujjar community, pressing for their quota demand, in Rajasthan's Dholpur turned violent on Sunday after protesters hurled stones at police teams, prompting officers to open fire in the air to disperse them. A clash between the police and protesters broke out at the Dholpur highway where some vehicles were reportedly vandalised and torched. Gujjar community members continued their sit-in protest on rail tracks in Swai Madhopur district for the third day, forcing authorities to cancel three trains and divert one. The blockade by Gujjar Arakshan Sangarsh Samiti chief Kirori Singh Bainsla and his supporters began Friday evening and has forced the West Central Railway (CWR) to divert, cancel or partially terminate nearly 200 trains in the last two days.
