Surat: Man gets 7 years jail term for rape, spared Pocso punishment

SURAT: A court in Valsad sentenced a 45-year-old man to seven years imprisonment for raping a young girl, but the convict was spared severe punishment under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO) as it could not be conclusively proved that the survivor was a minor.The convict Kishan Gaju Bhekhar had raped the girl in Manda village of Umargam taluka on March 22. He was arrested by Bhilad police the next day and booked for rape and sections of Pocso as the survivor’s mother had told police the she was 15 years old.However, as her family could not produce any documents to prove her age, the court ordered a bone ossification test to determine her age.Isha Gandhi, the then medical officer at Vapi and a radiologist who conducted the ossification test, claimed in court that she had erroneously mentioned the survivor’s age as less than 16. However, in her statement to the court, Ganshi said she had erred in writing the report. “I assumed the survivor’s age as less than 18, but by mistake I wrote it as less than 16. According to my opinion, the girl’s age was in between 14 years and 18 years but in the certificate notice, I erroneously wrote 14 to 16,” she stated in the court.Additional sessions judge Mamta Shah, therefore, convicted Bhekhar under IPC sections of rape and not Pocso on Thursday.“Prosecution could not prove in court that the survivor is a minor. Hence the convict got minimum sentence for rape. The convict would have got life imprisonment if prosecution had succeeded in proving age of the survivor,” said A R Tripathi, district government pleader, Valsad.Earlier, the defence lawyer had argued that no full dental X-ray was done on the survivor and merely bone ossification test cannot prove the exact age.The survivor used to live with Bhekhar and his wife and did casual labour work in Manda village. On March 22, he took the girl along with him to a flour mill and while returning home, he raped her at an isolated spot. A woman working in nearby farm saw him and rushed to rescue the girl and pelted stones at Bhekhar who escaped. The woman brought the girl to her house and informed her mother who lived in a near-by village. The girl’s father had died in 2015.(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)
