Couple With 2 Children, Stoned To Death For Inter-Caste Marriage. Who Will Take Care Of Their Kids Now?

We are living in the twenty first century but some abhorring incidents transports you to ancient times. In yet another tragic case of honour killing, a Dalit man and his wife, who married against wishes of the woman's family, were allegedly stoned to death when they returned to their village in Gadag district in Karnataka, four years after fleeing it.

According to police, Ramesh Madar and Gangamma had married Gangamma, belonging to the Lambani community, disregarding the opposition from her family members four years ago.

bccl/representational image

Fearing backlash from the family, they had fled their village Lakkalakatti near Gajendragad town and migrated to various places in Karnataka and worked as labourers. On Wednesday they returned to their village.

Spotting them on a road, some people from the Lambani community attacked the couple and later stoned them to death, police said.

unsplash/representational image

"Our investigations are on. There's a progress in the case, which we cannot disclose at this point," said a police officer at the Gajendragad police station.The couple had two children.

This is not the first time a case of such disgust has come to the fore. Earlier in September this year, a 20-year-old Dalit youth from Bhadesa area of Hardoi district in UP was set ablaze by the relatives of a girl whom he was in a relationship with.

The incident happened when the youth identified as Abhishek alias Monu, had gone to meet his girlfriend, who is also from the same village.

The girl's adoptive parents who belonged to an OBC caste were reportedly opposed to her relationship with a Dalit boy.

The girl's father caught them in a compromising position and in a fit of rage beat him up with the help of some relatives inside his house and later set Monu on fire.

"Abhishek alias Monu was in a relationship with a girl who used to live in Bhadaicha village. The boy was found in a suspicious state from the girl's house. Monu's relatives filed a complaint and leveled allegations that 5 people set him ablaze. We have registered the FIR. Three people have been arrested and two are absconding," SP East Hardoi, K Gyananjay Singh told ANI.

Abhishek was rushed to a hospital by some villagers who rushed to the spot hearing his cry.

"Abhishek was admitted in the district hospital in Hardoi. Later, he was referred to the trauma centre in Lucknow but he succumbed to his injuries on his way to the centre," Singh said.

Abhishek's family also said that his mother Ram Beti, who was unwell, died of shock hearing about her son's death.

(With inputs from agencies)
