SP chief Akhilesh Yadav celebrates demonetisation anniversary with boy born on day it was announced

Akhilesh Yadav had named the boy born on day of demonetisation as Khajanchi | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights In 2016, while condemning demonetisation, Akhilesh Yadav had named the boy Khajanchi Earlier today, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said that demonetisation 'devastated' Indian economy

Lucknow: Samajwadi Party (SP) chief and former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav, on Friday, condemned demonetisation by celebrating the birthday of three-year-old Khajanchi, the boy who was born in a queue in front of an ATM on the day the government announced demonetisation. While opposing demonetisation and note-ban, Yadav had reportedly named the boy Khajanchi. He had also reportedly allotted a house and extended financial help to the family.

Earlier today, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi attacked the government over demonetisation, calling it a 'vicious attack' which left 'millions unemployed'.

"It's 3 yrs since the demonetisation terror attack that devastated the Indian economy, taking many lives, wiping out lakhs of small businesses & leaving millions of Indians unemployed. Those behind this vicious attack have yet to be brought to justice," Gandhi said in a tweet.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi said that "every claim made by the government and those hailing it as a slayer of all evils has been turned on its head. It proved to be a disaster that has all but destroyed our economy. Anyone want to claim responsibility?"

Calling the decision a 'disaster', Mamata Banerjee said that demonetisation was a 'futile' exercise. "Renowned economists, common people and all experts now agree. Figures from RBI have also shown it was a futile exercise Economic disaster started on that day and look where it has reached now. Banks are stressed, the economy is a complete slump. All affected. From farmers to the young generation to workers to traders, housewives... everyone is affected," she said.

On November 8, 2016, PM Narendra Modi announced demonetisation of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 notes to fight black money, fake currency and corruption.
