Andhra Pradesh: Six-year-old girl found murdered in function hall, parents suspect rape

Chittoor district

Andhra Pradesh

Kurabalakota

Kothakota block

Mahbubnagar district

Untitled Carousel 36-year-old woman raped in Vikhroli, accused arrested The complainant is a resident of suburban Malad.

Untitled Carousel Kolkata: 17-year-old boy raped by six men in moving car A 17-year-old boy was allegedly sodomised in a moving car by six men known to him after they forcibly picked him up, the city police said on Wednesday

In a tragic incident, a six-year-old girl was found dead under suspicious circumstances in a function hall inofin the early hours of Friday morning.The girl’s parents suspect the girl was raped and murdered. They found the girl’s clothes removed and scratches on her shoulders. They also spotted some liquor bottles close to the place.The police said they have registered a case of death under suspicious conditions and are waiting for the post-mortem report.The girl, along with her parents, had gone to a local function hall inon Thursday evening to attend a wedding. She hailed fromof theThe girl was with her parents till 9:45 pm, after which she went missing and the parents and relatives began to look for her. Around 6 am on Friday, they found the girl lying lifeless behind the hall. They then lodged a complaint with the police.The parents also said that they saw a youth clicking photos of the girl on his mobile phone.The police have deployed their teams and dog squad for clues.The incident shocked the people of the area. Local women organizations staged protests demanding death penalty for the man who they suspect to have committed the rape and murder.Andhra Pradesh Mahila Commission chairperson Vasireddy Padma directed the police to bring the culprits to book immediately. She expressed the shock over the heinous murder of the girl.She also enquired with police inspector Ashok Kumar who is investigating the case and directed him to identify the culprits. “The CCTV footage shows a youth taking the girl’s photos and later abducting her. The girl was lying dead under mysterious conditions”, Padma said.
