Isseal gangrape: Survivor’s friend cross examined

Ludhiana: The defence counsels cross examined the friend of the Issewal gang-rape survivor during the hearing of the case in a city court on Friday.

The next date of hearing of the case in the court of Additional Sessions Judge Rashmi Sharma is on November 16.

A group of miscreants had allegedly gang-raped a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage on February 9, 2019. The two had gone to Issewal area to celebrate chocolate day.

The police had booked 10 unidentified accused in the case and arrested six, including Jagroop Singh, a private vehicle driver of Jaspal Bangar; Ajay of Tibba, who belongs to Gonda in Uttar Pradesh and worked as a driver at a petrol pump; and four nomads (two from Ludhiana and one from Nawanshahar), including a juvenile from Jammu and Kashmir.

Rachpal Singh Mand, advocate of one of the accused, said the defence counsels cross examined the friend of the prosecutrix (rape survivor) partly and the same would continue in the next hearing on November 16.

He said the cross examination of the friend of the prosecutrix continued for around two hours before the lunch time.

The special public prosecutor said the friend of the rape survivor had fully supported the prosecution case and supported the statement of the prosecutrix during the cross examination.

On October 30, the court had dismissed the revision petition filed by one of the accused in the Issewal gang-rape case praying that he should be considered as a juvenile and tried by the juvenile justice board.

----------------------------

All six accused identified

The test identification parade was done in the presence of Judicial Magistrate Ankit Airi on February 22 at the Central Jail. The rape survivor had identified all the accused.

The police presented a charge-sheet against the accused in the court of Judicial Magistrate Ankit Airi on April 4.

A copy of a challan had suggested that only six accused were found to be involved in the case after investigation. It mentioned that accessing the DNA sample reports, call mapping records of talks between the accused, crime spot and evidence on the record indicated that only six accused were involved in the case and they had already been arrested.

The challan also mentioned that the survivor and her friend had got sketches of the six accused made. The police said with the arrest of the accused, the investigation was completed.

The police, however, mentioned that if more persons were found to be involved in the case, they would produce a supplementary challan into the matter. The police had said it had added more sections, including 354 B (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 379 B (snatching), 364 A (kidnapping for ransom, etc) and 397 (robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) of the Indian Penal Code were added in the FIR on March 25.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
