‘At Least He Doesn’t Beat You’ Is Not An Excuse. Men Should Behave Better

If you’ve noticed, misogynistic trolls on the internet always use one line of argument when women are out protesting anything--be it rape, sexual harrassment in the workplace, or the gender pay gap. They will almost always use a form of this (non)logic, “At least you are not in Saudi Arabia. There, women can’t even work. Be thankful you are in India where you are allowed to work.”

This argument comes with two assumptions, the first being that worse is happening to others, so women should be grateful that they don’t have it as bad; and the second being that men can easily “take away” these “liberties” they have so benevolently bestowed upon us women.

If you observe closely, this reasoning follows a disturbing pattern. A woman in the US will be told that she should be grateful she is not in India where women are being brutally raped and assaulted on a daily basis. An upper middle class woman in India will be told to be grateful that she is not living in rural Haryana where women are routinely beaten up and oppressed. That same woman in rural Haryana is told to be happy she is not in Saudi Arabia where women aren’t allowed to even step out of the house or travel without a male “guardian”.

You see what I mean? Each step of the way, women are reminded that it could be worse. If, however, you flip that on its head, it could also mean that men could be treating them a lot worse than they actually are. There is an underlying threat in that, “Behave, or else we will make you suffer”.

Men use the example of violent men to do the bare minimum

Instead of trying to improve the behaviour of men who catcall, stalk, beat up, molest, rape, and kill women, other men are busy using the actions of their violent counterparts to make themselves look better.

It lets “normal” non-violent men get away with doing the bare minimum--don’t assault, catcall, stalk, rape, or murder women and voila! You’re a “decent” man. Should we really be setting such low standards for fully-functioning adult men? Should they not be expected to be gentle, kind, empathetic, and sensitive? The #NotAllMen counter movement to the #MeToo movement is an example of this. Instead of introspecting on how violent men make life downright dangerous for women, other men are busy trying to prove that they are not the same. This post by popular page, Humans of Patriarchy, sums it up very well.

A practical example of how men are expected to do very little to be considered decent is when a marriage breaks up. The first thing women are asked in this situation is, “Did he beat you?” If the woman says no, then most people will believe that there is no need for a divorce. Things like emotional abuse, blackmail, and negligence are not something men are held accountable for. At least he doesn’t beat you up black and blue, right? Yay!

The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) Report of 2017 reveals startling statistic about crimes against women, which is constituted by crimes like murder, rape, dowry death, suicide abetment, acid attack, cruelty against women, and kidnapping.

“Cruelty by husband or his relatives” accounts for 27.9% of the crimes against women. A majority of the IPC cases were filed under this heading, which sheds light on the extent of domestic abuse in this country. And these are just the reported cases. Many more go unreported because women are too scared of the repercussions should they seek legal action against a spouse. Many women are also beaten to death by their husbands. They can’t exactly go reporting abuse when they’re no longer alive.

We should hold men to higher standards of behaviour. It does not matter if women in other countries have it worse. Abuse is abuse. It is still wrong regardless of its degree or kind. Men who are not violent should not use violent men’s actions as a way to make themselves look better. They should instead try to make sure that all men are no longer violent at all, instead of patting themselves on the back.




