India: Woman sets husband's lover's house on fire, kills her and her son

A cheating scandal led to an Indian doctor allegedly setting her husband’s lover’s house on fire, killing her and her six-year-old son on November 7.

The incident happened in Bharatpur, Rajasthan, according to an international news website.

The accused and her husband are both doctors, whereas, the lover worked at their clinic as an assistant.

Police identified the victim as 25-year-old Deepa Gurjar.

The accused, Seema Gupta allegedly set Gurjar’s house on fire and locked it from the outside.

Deepa and her son were inside. As the fire became more serious, her brother tried to save them but ended up getting injured.

The accused’s husband, Sudeep Gupta and his mother have also been arrested while the investigation continues, according to the report.

Police said that Gurjar worked as a receptionist at Sudeep’s clinic from two years and the pair had an affair.

Once Seema found out about her husband’s illicit relationship, she immediately fired Deepa. However, the two continued their relationship.

The doctor even moved his lover and her son into a villa he had purchased in 2015.

On November 1, 2019, the Indian doctor discovered that her husband continued to see his lover when Gurjar opened a new spa centre as he was invited to the opening.

Seema decided to take action and went to Gurjar’s house with her mother-in-law.

The confrontation soon became heated and Seema allegedly poured lighter fluid on the furniture, set it alight and ran out of the house, locking it from outside.

Deepa and her son could not escape as the fire became more severe and a crowd watched the house burn.

Meanwhile, Gurjar’s 21-year-old brother Anuj arrived at the house and tried to enter in order to help his sister and nephew. However, he ended up getting burnt. The two stuck inside subsequently died.

The fire brigade later arrived and managed to extinguish the fire. Upon entering, they discovered the victim’s bodies and alerted the police.
