Doc, 3 of family found murdered in Faridabad

editorial@tribune.com

Bijendra Ahlawat

Tribune News Service

Faridabad, November 9

A 60-year-old doctor running an X-ray diagnostic centre in Sector 7-A here and three members of his family were stabbed to death by unidentified assailants last night.

The incident came to light around 3 pm today when the neighbours noticed no activity in house number 19, where an X-ray diagnostic centre had been operational for the past many years.

“Some patients, who had come for testing, started enquiring from neighbours after they found the gate locked and a dog barking inside,” said Sunder Lal, a neighbour.

The police was informed and they found the bodies of Dr Praveen Mehndiratta, his wife Bharti (Sudesh) (56), daughter Priyanka (27) and son-in-law Saurabh Kataria (30) lying in a pool of blood with stab injuries.

While Dr Praveen was found seated in a couch in the X-ray lab in the basement of the house, the bodies of the other three were found in two bedrooms of the house.

They had been stabbed around midnight by unidentified assailants who might have come inside on the pretext of getting an X-ray done for an emergency,” said police sources.

Police officials, including DCP (Crime) Rajesh Kumar and Jaiveer Rathi, ACP, Ballabgarh, reached the spot and took the help of the forensic team and dog squad to gather clues.

As the reason behind the incident is not known, the police are looking for clues, said a police official who added that CCTV footage of the area was being checked.

Dr Praveen Mehndiratta lived in the house with his wife. His son Darpan (25), who is employed in Gurugram, used to come there on weekends. He told the police that he was on his way to Faridabad when a neighbour informed him on his mobile phone about the incident.

The couple’s daughter and son-in-law, who resided in Delhi, also used to visit them often. It is reported that Priyanka and her husband had come there on Friday evening.

Sunder Lal, who lives in the neighbourhood, said that the doctor did not come for the morning walk. The dog kept barking till the incident came to light.

The bodies have been sent for post-mortem examination and a probe has been launched, said the police.
