Faridabad doctor, family found dead at home, accused on run

A 65-year-old doctor and his three family members were found dead at their Faridabad Sector 7 house Saturday afternoon — over 12 hours after a man allegedly known to the doctor’s son stabbed them, police said.

The accused, who is absconding, has been identified using CCTV footage as Mukesh, a gym trainer in Sector 7. Police said they are also probing if close relatives had any role to play.

Dr Praveen Mediratta was found in a pool of blood on the couch in the basement, where the clinic he ran is located. Police said he had stab injuries, while his wife Sudesh (61) was found with a deep cut to her neck in a bedroom on the first floor.

Faridabad Police PRO Sube Singh said, “In the second bedroom on the same floor, their daughter Priyanka (30) and her husband Saurabh (36) were found in a pool of blood with multiple stab injuries.” Police said that while the doctor and his wife lived at the house, their daughter and son-in-law lived in Ghaziabad and had come to visit.

Police added that they found no signs of robbery or forced entry into the house. The accused is absconding and the Faridabad Police Crime Branch is investigating the matter.

“Footage from a CCTV camera outside the victims’ house shows a man arriving at 10.20 pm Friday on a grey scooter and leaving at 11.50 pm. We narrowed down four suspects and called them to the police station. When Mukesh didn’t show up, we went to his house and found a pair of blood-soaked trousers, a blood-stained key and a note that his wife handed over to us,” said ACP (Crime Branch) Anil Kumar.

The ACP said the note, which was allegedly written by Mukesh, said he went to the Mediratta house to rob them but “ended up killing the four members”. “I am sorry, I have left my house and might commit suicide,” the note read, as per police.

A neighbour, A K Sardana, said: “Mediratta takes his dog for a walk every day around 7-8 am, but I didn’t see him on Saturday. The newspapers were still outside and I heard their dog barking from inside. I knocked on the door but nobody answered, even though I could hear the TV playing. I finally called police.”

Mediratta’s son, Darpan (28), who lives in Gurgaon, said, “I was working the late shift on Friday… Around 2 pm on Saturday, I received a call from police about the incident. I reached Faridabad an hour after that.” Police said Darpan told them he knew Mukesh, and that he had visited their home in the past.

Police are ascertaining the reason behind the crime and have registered a case of murder and under sections of the Arms Act against the accused.
