Sri Lankan woman refutes reports, says she wasn't allowed to enter Sabarimala

In the aftermath of Bindu and Kanakadurga, both in their early 40s, visiting the temple, a dawn-to-dusk hartal was called by several Hindu outfits. (File photo of women protesting SC verdict: Reuters)

The Sri Lankan woman, who was earlier reported to have become the latest to enter the Sabarimala temple, has now refuted reports, mentioning she was not allowed to enter the Sabarimala shrine.

This happened despite her furnishing a medical certificate, saying she had reached menopause, she told India Today.

"They did not let me in. I showed them the medical certificate too," the woman, Sasikala, said.

She added, "I had performed the 48-day long penance too. But they were not ready to listen. I was forced to return."

Sasikala was earlier reported to have entered the temple around 9.30 pm on Thursday night. She was stopped by several people en-route and was asked about her age.

READ THE FULL STORY HERE | Sri Lankan woman is latest to enter Sabarimala temple

Several policemen claimed she did reach the abode of Lord Ayyappa and succeeded in offering her prayers.

All this panned out a day after Kerala saw violent protests over two women of menstruating age entering the hill shrine.

On January 2, two women -- Bindu and Kanakadurga -- entered the temple resulting in protests across the state. After the news became public, the head priest closed the temple for an hour for "purification rituals".

For the unversed, women have been being traditionally barred entry at the shrine, citing the celibate nature of Lord Ayyappan.

The Supreme Court, however, in its September verdict, lifted this ban and threw open the temple gates to women of menstruating age. The judgment was met with violent protests soon after across the state and neighbouring states.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and state Congress sparred over the turn of events and attacked Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan for breaking the age-old tradition.

No woman between 10 to 50 years had been able to visit the temple until January 2.

In the aftermath of Bindu and Kanakadurga, both in their early 40s, visiting the temple, a dawn-to-dusk hartal was called by several Hindu outfits.

As per reports, a 55-year-old man, who was seriously injured in stone throwing at Pandalam, died late Wednesday night. A Kerala government-run hotel in Tamil Nadu was also attacked on Wednesday night by unidentified persons.

Agitators even hurled a crude bomb at a local beedi manufacturing unit managed by the CPI(M) in Thalassery in Kannur district, but it did not explode, police said, adding 10 right-wing activists were arrested.

Another crude bomb was thrown at Nedumangadu police station about 17 km from there.
