Hardlook: Disquiet in the ranks

“Simon go back.”

The 1928 boycott cry against the British empire reverberated through the grey skies of Delhi last week as 2,000-plus police personnel shouted the slogan in unison. The scene played out Tuesday outside the ITO headquarters of the Delhi Police, as senior IPS officer Ranveer Singh Krishnia attempted to address their demonstration, only for his appeals to be drowned out by slogans.

More senior officers followed, including Commissioner of Police Amulya Patnaik. Each time, the result was the same.

After a parking row at the Tis Hazari district court on November 2 escalated into a clash between police and lawyers, the Delhi Police has found itself facing an unprecedented crisis — of policemen and women questioning their leadership, and making their displeasure with them known.

Several personnel The Indian Express spoke to said they were dissatisfied with the way they were “abandoned” and “under-represented” by the leadership following the November 2 clash, in which over 20 personnel, including a woman DCP, were assaulted and manhandled, with many landing up in the hospital with serious injuries.

A 32-year-old policeman who was injured in the clash said he was let down in the days that followed: “No one stands up for us when we are treated unfairly. Kabhi public se maar, kabhi vakilo se maar… We haven’t heard a strong statement from any IPS officer here about ensuring justice for us. Action is taken very swiftly against us, not for us.”

A day after the incident, the Delhi High Court had sought a judicial enquiry into the matter and called for action against some officers present at the scene. It also directed that no coercive action be taken against the advocates “in pursuance of FIRs (lodged) with regard to the incident”.

Opinion | Due process, the imperative to follow it, was missing in the Tis Hazari incident

This, personnel said, led to further discontentment since they felt that while the Bar Council moved swiftly to represent lawyers, the Delhi Police had dragged its feet. “We thought lawyers would have to face the consequences. But then we were told two assistant sub-inspectors had been suspended. It was infuriating,” said a policeman.

A 31-year-old constable who suffered injuries to his face, head and stomach, said: “After being discharged from the hospital later that night, I went home with a bandaged face and got a call from my seniors to reach a police station in the North district to record my statement. The Special CP and seniors made me wait all night.

No one asked me how I was doing. The next morning, I went home and was asked to return. I was hurt because it was insensitive of them to make me run around with injuries all over my body. I refused to go and asked them to come to me if they needed a statement.”

Family members of Delhi Police protests at India Gate against lawyers on Tuesday, Express photo by Gajendra Yadav Family members of Delhi Police protests at India Gate against lawyers on Tuesday, Express photo by Gajendra Yadav

Five days after the 20-odd personnel landed at the hospital with injuries, Patnaik visited two at their homes and met some at the office of the DCP (North). A DCP-rank officer told The Indian Express, “The lower staff is hurt because they feel there’s a lack of empathy. This relationship will require a lot of mending.”

Boiling point

Two days after the clash emerged a video of a lawyer slapping and assaulting a constable on a bike outside Saket court. That’s when Delhi Police personnel decided they had had enough.

By evening, a message on WhatsApp asked personnel to gather outside the PHQ for a protest the next morning. It read: “We would like to inform the citizens of Delhi that on November 5 and 6, Delhi Police will not be able to serve you. To save our astitva (identity), we won’t be working for two days. At 9 am tomorrow, all police personnel will gather outside the ITO PHQ and meet the Commissioner of Police… Before you say no, remember that even if you didn’t get beaten up at Tis Hazari, why are you hurt?”

At first, many didn’t take the message seriously. Soon, official police and media groups were flooded with the same message. “We reached the PHQ early next morning, took photos and videos and sent it to our friends, who then joined us and the crowd swelled,” said a sub-inspector from the Eastern range.

The police personnel received support from SHO- and even DCP-rank officers, with many permitting them to join the protest. “We do have strong grievance redressal mechanisms in place but despite that, if such a protest happens, it means the staff has not found relief,” said an IPS officer.

Believing that assurances would quell the protest, a DCP-rank officer was sent to address the crowd. A joint CP and a Special CP too were quickly sent out, but the protesters were in no mood to listen. By the time Patnaik arrived, his assurances were barely audible.

Road jam during Delhi police protest at PHQ in New Delhi on Tuesday. (Express photo by Prem Nath Pandey) Road jam during Delhi police protest at PHQ in New Delhi on Tuesday. (Express photo by Prem Nath Pandey)

A sub-inspector with the East district said, “It is CP saheb’s duty to keep the force safe. Like the judiciary got the Additional DCP and Special CP of North district transferred, Delhi Police should also order arrests of the culprit lawyers.”

Many seniors had sent at least five policemen from every police station to join the protest. In the evening, calls from senior officers went out, asking them to return after a day of sloganeering. “We wanted an assurance about the investigation and action being taken; instead, we were told to stop the protest,” said a woman constable posted in the Central district.

Tuesday’s protest, senior officers admitted, was a wake-up call for the force. “In the force, discipline is of utmost importance and we are taught not to question seniors. But after this protest, there is a possibility our subordinates will protest for everything,” said an IPS officer heading a district.

It is also learnt that the Home Ministry did not take a favourable view of the protest, or how things leading up to it had been handled.

Return to 1966

The last time Delhi Police saw such an unrest was 1966, when over 6,000 personnel walked till Rashtrapati Bhavan demanding better wages and the right to unionise. The Khosla Commission, under Justice GD Khosla, was formed and reforms were rolled out.

Nikhil Kumar (78), who served as Commissioner of Police from 1995-97, said, “After the unrest, the Sampark Sabhas also came up — subordinates could express their grievances to their seniors and be assured they would be addressed.”

A minor police-lawyer standoff also took place during the year-long tenure of T R Kakkar (79), who served as CP from 1997-98.

“There was some trouble between my men and the lawyers, and I believed my men were right. I sent senior officers to lawyers’ bodies to tell them that their rules won’t prevail, and I met the Home Minister and explained to him that the force will be demoralised if a weak stand is taken. He told me I was in-charge and that he will support me,” said Kakkar.

Maxwell Pereira, who retired as Joint CP over 15 years ago, said, “The HC direction of not allowing coercive action against lawyers was a trigger point… but history shows that the court protects their own. This has happened in the past too, and police has to work with such constraints.”

New Delhi: Special Commissioner of Police (headquarters) R S Krishnia addresses his colleagues gathered outside their headquarters at ITO (File/PTI Photo/Manvender Vashist) New Delhi: Special Commissioner of Police (headquarters) R S Krishnia addresses his colleagues gathered outside their headquarters at ITO (File/PTI Photo/Manvender Vashist)

Kakkar recalled another instance of a former Delhi Chief Minister “badmouthing” the force after his nephew was embroiled in a murder case. “I had to tell the former CM not to express such views. The force is not allowed to express their grievances publicly, so we are the custodians of their grievances,” said Kakkar, adding that “had Tuesday’s protest gone on for a day longer, the city would have gone to the dogs”.

B K Gupta, who served as Delhi CP from 2010-12, said: “Nowadays, videos go viral on social media. The protest by the police is a cause of concern but they have been driven to the wall and are resorting to this. Sampark Sabhas are important to ascertain the brewing problems.”

Calls for calm

How did a parking row snowball into a standoff in which 20 police personnel and eight lawyers were injured? Several high-ranking members from the coordination committee at Tis Hazari court told The Indian Express that the bar association elections, slated to be held on November 5, could be one of the factors that led to the situation spiralling out of control.

And then there was the flashpoint: The issue of parking that has, even in the past, been the cause of arguments between police and lawyers.

Also Read ‘Staff are encouraged to raise grievances’ Speaking to The Indian Express in the wake of the Tis Hazari clash, Additional PRO Anil Mittal said the Delhi Police is a professional and disciplined force and is “known not only for raising the level of its performance but also for acting with restraint in due cognizance of its responsibilities in demanding times”. On addressing grievances of personnel, he said: “We have a mechanism for our staff to express grievances by approaching senior officers, including the Commissioner of Police. On that day, too, a group of policemen came to express their feelings about the current issue. Our senior officers, including the CP, assured them their grievances will be addressed at the appropriate platform. It is important to keep in mind that even when this group of policemen had come to the Police Headquarters, others were performing their duties diligently at the duty points.” “We also have ‘Sampark Sabhas’, held regularly by senior officers to address grievances. If any staff has a personal problem, our system encourages that he/she meet the officer concerned or even the CP. To boost morale of field functionaries, Delhi Police regularly organises ‘bara khanas’ (get togethers) where senior officers interact with staff and commend them for performing hard-pressed duties,” he added. Stating that police and lawyers are “critical parts of the Criminal Justice Administration System”, Mittal said: “We are making all necessary efforts to sort out the issue amicably, following directions of the Hon’ble High Court.” He added: “Since a judicial inquiry has been ordered by the HC, and SIT, Crime Branch, is investigating the case, it would not be appropriate to comment on anything pertaining to the incident at this stage.” ENS

Former president of the Delhi Bar Association, R N Vats, said, “The parking issue has been a source of constant fights between the two sides.”

With a parking space for over 1,700 vehicles, the Tis Hazari court sometimes runs out of space, and advocates rushing to court hearings and policemen producing prisoners occasionally jostle for the same spot.

A policeman tasked with handling security at Tis Hazari court recalled another tense situation in the complex recently: “When Unnao rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar was produced in court for the first time, lawyers chased us, shouting for his death penalty. Such tense situations arise and we have to be aggressive in tackling them.”

Amid appeals by the Bar Council of India to lawyers to maintain calm and not resort to violence, former District and Sessions Judge at Rouse Avenue court O P Saini said that “lawyers calling a strike is not the way forward. There are some lawyers who create trouble, not all of them are involved in such activities.”

Senior advocate Vikas Pahwa said the entire judicial system has come to a standstill: “Undertrials could not travel to courts as Delhi Police has abstained from working, like the lawyers. Lawyers and police should work in tandem with each other.”

Senior Advocate Rebecca John said that while lawyers and police “are in an adversarial role (in the courtroom), that is not necessarily a bad thing”. “We challenge each other in court, but that does not mean we resort to violence,” she said.

With inputs from Jignasa Sinha
