Crime ratio has decreased in Sindh as compared to 2013, claims IG

Sindh Police Inspector General (IG) Syed Kalim Imam has said that the ratio of crime has decreased in Sindh as compared to 2013. He said that currently Sindh Police have established peace in the province.

Syed Kalim Imam was briefing the media at SSP Office Dadu on Monday. He was accompanied by Additional IGP Hyderabad Dr Waliullah Dal, DIGP Hyderabad Naeem Shaikh and SSP Dadu Dr Farrukh Raza Malik. He said that any terrorism incident was not happened and ratio related with extortion was clearly decreased. He said that there was no any such incident of kidnapping in Sindh. He said that situation was peacefully handled. He said that in this year 23 percent cases were more registered in compare of last year. He said that million rupees recovery was occurred. He said that police was active for rule of law and to control the crime. Speaking on registration of cases against journalists, he said that the investigation will be started following the registration of cases against journalists. He directed additional IGP Dr Waliullah Dal to conduct inquiry against police officials for torturing on journalist Paveel Junejo at Mehar. He directed additional IGP Hyderabad to arrest the involved police officers those had tortured Paveel Junejo. IGP Sindh also directed to SSP Jamshoro to conduct investigation over issue of registration of fake FIR against him at Sehwan police station.

He said that the summary of Sindh police for up gradation of police officials was signed by Sindh Chief Minister Syed Murad Ali Shah and very soon police officials will be upgraded and their salaries will be raised. Speaking on question of differences between CM Sindh and IGP Sindh police, he said that there was no difference with CM Sindh and IGP Sindh police. He said that as IGP Sindh police, he was working under CM Sindh and he has good relation with CM Sindh. He said that for the important meetings he has to travel Islamabad to attend meetings and to suggest federal government on important issues.

He said that he was government servant hence he has to attend meeting on important issues but the news related with differences with CM Sindh were falsely. Speaking on repairing of old buildings of police stations, he said that 355 old buildings of police stations were repaired in Sindh and now we are moving to repair more 111 police stations along with police lockups, barracks and washrooms. He said that Decentralized system was introduced in Sindh Police and additional IGPs and DIGPs were empowered and being IGP , he was only working for welfare of the police and supervising them and looking after auditing as well as. He said that Sindh police was taking efforts to improve the system in police as they can provide more relief to the people at police stations. He said that efforts were taken to improve the culture at police stations.
