T-shirt inscribed with ‘swag’ leads Mumbai Police to man who ‘raped, killed’ minor

According to police, they were on the lookout for the man after he was spotted with the child, after she reportedly went missing, on CCTV cameras installed in the area. (Representational Image)

A blue T-shirt inscribed with the word ‘swag’ led Bhandup police Monday to a man wanted for allegedly raping and murdering a 10-year-old mentally unstable girl November 5.

According to police, they were on the lookout for the man after he was spotted with the child, after she reportedly went missing, on CCTV cameras installed in the area. “After her father filed a missing complaint, police started going through CCTV cameras in the area and spotted her with a young man wearing a blue T-shirt with the words ‘swag’ written on it. We traced them to the Vidyavihar railway station, where they got off the train,” a police officer said.

After searching the area, police reportedly found the girl’s body from some bushes at an isolated spot near the railway station. Postmortem reports, police said, confirmed that the child had been sexually assaulted and strangled to death.

“We had shared the footage with police teams and have been looking for the accused since then. On November 8, a day before the Ayodhya judgment, there was heavy security deployment in the city. One of our officers, who was on duty, spotted a man dressed in a similar looking T-shirt with the word ‘swag’ on it. He alerted other officers and tailed the man. A police team detained the man and arrested him after questioning,” a police officer said. The officer said they were checking if the man has any criminal record and if he had come to Bhandup to look for another victim.

Senior Inspector Sham Shinde of Bhandup police station said the accused, who is from Bihar, earlier worked at a restaurant in the area. A few weeks ago, after the restaurant went in for renovation, he took a job as a cleaner at a Ghatkopar restaurant.

The accused had come to Bhabdup on November 5 in an inebriated state. The police said that the accused did not know the victim and took his chances after spotting her alone. “The girl does have some issues due to which she cannot communicate. But in the footage we saw, at some point it does appear that she tried to resist and also had tears. It is surprising that no one along the route (Bhabdup to Vidyavihar) found anything suspicious,” an officer said.

On Monday, the accused was produced before a court and was remanded to police custody.
