Ludhiana: Not your servant to take your call, SHO tells 'assault victim'

LUDHIANA: "Don't you know the time? Am I your servant? Call the police station, why are you calling SHO?" These were the words of inspector Gurbachan Singh , SHO, Dugri police station, when a local RSS worker called him after he was allegedly attacked by some persons at Passi Chowk, Pakhowal road here.The RSS worker Charanjit Singh alias Jasraj Grewal (36), resident of Phase-1, Dugri was returning home on Saturday night after attending a marriage function at Pakhowal road. He stopped near a vend at Passi Chowk when he got into an argument with four men.Charanjit Singh said, "When I stopped at the vend I found my friend there. He further introduced me to his four friends stating that I am an RSS worker following which those men started saying bad things about RSS and used derogatory language. When I argued, one of them pushed me and I fell down. When I stood up, two men held me and one of them attacked me with an iron rod that he took out of their Innova car. He hit me on my shoulder thrice and fled away. Then I asked my friend about them however he also escaped from there.""Thereafter I reached Dugri police station. The main door of police station was closed. I kept knocking it, but to no avail. Then I went back home and called SHO Gurbachan Singh, who said that this was not the time to call him. He said he was not a servant, to which I replied that he was a public servant. SHO again asked me to go to police station and was not ready to listen that nobody was opening the gate of police station. When I reached police station again, the Munshi misbehaved with me after which I came back," he added.Charanjit Singh said on Monday he along with other workers of RSS will be meeting with the commissioner of police Sukhchain Singh Gill to take up the matter.When contacted, SHO Dugri, inspector Gurbachan Singh said, "The main door of police station remains closed at night however a cop is deployed there. Munshi was present in the police station who told me that Charanjit Singh was drunk and he went back without lodging a complaint."When asked about his statement of 'not being a servant', the inspector said, "I already told him to meet Munshi but he was not listening." Deputy commissioner of police Ashwani Kapur said, "I have got the audio recording. ACP Ramandeep Singh Bhullar has been asked to investigate the matter."
