Death sentence of Beant Singh's assassin Balwant Singh Rajoana commuted to life term

Balwant Singh Rajoana | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Centre has commuted the death penalty of Balwant Singh Rajoana, who was convicted for the assassination of former Punjab chief minister Beant Singh. The Ministry of Home Affairs conveyed the order to Punjab and Chandigarh administrations. The remission order will be pursued by the Chandigarh administration.

Rajoana, who was awarded death sentence in 2007, will now serve life imprisonment.

Earlier, the Central government had approved the commutation of Rajoana’s death sentence to a life term as a humanitarian gesture on the 550th birth anniversary of Sikhism founder Guru Nanak Dev. The decision was criticised by Beant Singh’s grandson Ravneet Singh Bittu who called the decision shocking.

“It will be a black day (in the history of Punjab) if it is true,” Bittu, who is an MP from Ludhiana, had said.

On August 31, 1995, the then Punjab CM, Beant Singh, and 16 others were killed in an explosion outside the Civil Secretariat in Chandigarh.

Dilawar Singh, a Punjab Police officer, had acted as a human bomb to assassinate Beant Singh. Rajoana, the Babbar Khalsa terrorist, was the second human bomb in case Dilawar Singh would have failed in assassinating the Congress leader.

In July 2007, Rajoana and another terrorist Jagtar Singh Hawara were sentenced to death by a special court in the assassination case of Beant Singh. Rajoana was scheduled to be executed on March 31, 2012. However, two days before his execution, the then United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government at the Centre stayed Rajoana’s hanging after Shiromani Gurudwara Prabhandak Committee filed a mercy petition. The plea was then forwarded to the home ministry by the President.

In September this year, a home ministry spokesperson said the government would release eight Sikh prisoners, kept in different jails across the country for committing crimes during the militancy period in Punjab, on the occasion of Guru Nanak Dev’s 550th birth anniversary in November as a token of goodwill.

The spokesperson had also said that the death sentence of another Sikh prisoner has been commuted to life imprisonment through a special remission without mentioning the name of Rajoana.

"In one case, the decision has been taken to commute the death sentence to life imprisonment. In eight cases, the decision has been taken for premature release of prisoners serving life sentences and other sentences, through special remission," the Ministry of Home Affairs had said.
