Surat: Haryana gang used borrowed cards to carry out ATM frauds

SURAT: Investigation by crime branch of city police into automatic teller machine (ATM) cheating case has revealed that the four arrested fraudsters belonging to Haryana not only used to dupe the bank that had set up the ATM booth but also the one where they had their bank accounts. The fraudsters before travelling to a place to commit the fraud, used to take along with them the debit cards of their friends, relatives and neighbours. Niyamat Dinmohammad Mev, 33; Mosim Aalam Khan, 28; Rehan alais Rinni Allauddin Meu, 20; and Rehman alias Chunna Rangrej, 25, were arrested from Haryana on Sunday. The four accused were produced in a local court which remanded them in police custody until November 16 on Monday.The fraudsters told police that it was their second visit to the city in last one month and that they duped the banks of over Rs1 lakh in each trip. “They used to switch off the ATM unit as soon as it had dispensed cash so that the transaction was not recorded,” said a crime branch officer.“Later the bank account owner, whose debit card was used by the fraudsters, would contact his bank to say he didn’t receive the money. Thus they used to get the money deposited in their account by the bank,” the crime branch officer added.They used to share 50 per cent of the earnings with people who had provided them their debit cards. Police investigation revealed that it takes long for a bank to verify if a transaction has been completed or not because the process involves several agencies and banks. Taking advantage of this, the accused used to carry out frauds away from their native place. They would use debit card of X bank in Y bank’s ATM to make it difficult for the banks to confirm if a particular transaction failed or had been completed.Police recovered 25 debit cards from the accused. “The burglars have committed similar crimes in Ahmedabad and Vadodara. Further questioning will reveal more details,” said police.
