Assaulted over relationship with girl, Kerala boy commits suicide

Malappuram police have booked 15 people in connection with the case | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The victim has been identified as 22-year-old Shahir The incident took place in Kottakkal area of Malappuram district Shahir and his brother were thrashed in front of their parents by relatives of the girl

Coimbatore: An unfortunate incident in Kerala led to the tragic death of a 22-year-old boy on Tuesday. The victim has been identified as one Shahir, a native of Kottakkal in the state's Malappuram district. Shahir decided to take his own life reportedly because he could not handle the humiliation he and his family had to face in front of the entire locality.

Shahir was in a relationship with a girl from the locality. Earlier this week, relatives of the girl surrounded him and thrashed him in front of his parents for 'daring' to fall in love with a girl from their family. He was brutally assaulted in front of his parents. When Shahir's brother tried to intervene, the girl's relatives thrashed him as well. He is currently being treated in a local hospital for severe injuries.

Following the violence in their locality over their relationship, the girl consumed poison and is hospitalised. Her condition is critical, suggest recent inputs. On the other hand, Shahir felt responsible for dragging his family through the pubic humiliation and believed that he had no other option than to take his own life. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

Following his death, Malappuram police registered a case against 15 people in connection with the incident that drove the 22-year-old to commit suicide. They have been booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). However, it is not clear whether abetment to suicide has been invoked against them as of now.

A similar incident was reported from Gadag district in Karnataka where an inter-caste couple was stoned to death earlier this month by locals. Reports at the time indicated that the couple had eloped four years earlier and were working as labourers in Shivamogga and Bengaluru. Survived by their two children, the husband and wife decided to visit the village and their decision turned fatal. According to reports, they were stoned to death after getting into a fight with locals over their choice to run away and get married in 2015.

Similarly, a 19-year-old girl and her lover jumped in front of a train in Uttar Pradesh's Kanpur earlier this year. Reports suggested that the couple was driven to suicide by their families who disapproved of their relationship. They were together for two years before the incident in October. While the girl was a student, the boy was the son of a farmer.
