Missing for 24 hours, 8-year-old found dead; stuffed in sack at neighbour's house

The case comes days after, a five-year-old girl was murdered at a wedding hall in Kurabalakota block of Chittoor district. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor was missing since Sunday afternoon The minor's body was found stuffed in a gunny bag in their neighbour's house The police are yet to find out if there was any sexual assault on the girl

Hyderabad: An eight-year-old girl who was missing from Sunday, was found dead, stuffed in a sack at their neighbour's residence on Monday. The missing report was lodged on Sunday night. The incident happened in Nallakunta area of Ibrahimpatnam in Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh.

Bhavanipuram police inspector told media outlets that the minor's body was found stuffed in a gunny bag in their neighbour's house and the owner - Mekala Prakash's wife recovered it on Monday afternoon.

According to a report after the body was recovered, the deceased's neighbours began thrashing the accused and later they handed him over to the police. The body has been sent for a post-mortem examination and the police are yet to find out if there was any sexual assault on the girl.

Reportedly, the girl's father is a daily-wage worker and her mother is a sweeper in a nearby college. The case came to light when the girl went to play around 3 pm on Sunday evening but she did not return home. Upon finding her missing, the parents along with their relatives began a search for her but all efforts went futile. Later, they lodged a complaint with the local police.

The police then went through CCTV footage from the area but could not get any clues. Meanwhile, on Monday afternoon while the investigation was underway, the neighbour's wife recovered the minor's body in her house stuffed in a sack. She immediately alerted the girl's parents and the police.

However, the police have taken Prakash into custody for interrogation and they are reportedly suspecting it to be a revenge murder case. Moreover, a murder case has been registered in the matter and it is being probed. The Andhra Pradesh Women's Commission chairperson, V Padma, visited the girl's parents and have assured them of justice in the matter.

The case comes days after, a five-year-old girl was murdered at a wedding hall in Kurabalakota block of Chittoor district.
