In Punjab, Rs 500 crore goes up in flames as straw management experiment fails

PATIALA: Stubble management experiment in Punjab for which Rs 500 crore was spent this year on crop residue management (CRM) machinery was not successful this year. On Tuesday, 529 incidents of stubble burning were recorded in Punjab, taking the total to 48,684 since September 23 this year. The number is close to the last year’s mark of 49,000 and is likely to rise by the time harvesting is over.The central government had allocated Rs 657 crores to provide subsidies on stubble management machines in Punjab to cut down the farm fires. Facing flak from various quarters, including the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the Union government had come up with the scheme to provide subsidies to farmers buying equipment to manage stubble in the fields rather than setting it ablaze. In February last year, then Union finance minister Arun Jaitley had announced special provision for management of crop residue in Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. Besides, based on recommendations of National Steering Committee on Climate Change, a sum of Rs 100-crore had been also been sanctioned for a regional project in December 2017. This project had five components, including setting up 12 demonstration clusters for 1,000 villages each, centres from where farmers can hire straw management machinery and also assisting cultivators, who wish to buy the machinery for individual farms, with subsidies. Besides, a state-level centre was also to be set up coordination all these activities.After the project was launched, the government started giving 80% subsidy on machinery for the co-operative societies and 50% subsidy for induvial farmers buying stubble management machines.However, the farmers were clear that instead of forcing them to buy expensive machines that would also increase their input cost on agriculture, the government should give compensation of Rs 200 per quintal to the cultivators to manage crop residue.Many farmer groups spearheaded so-called struggle to get Rs 200 per quintal compensation from the government on the basis that that 86% of farmers in Punjab were small and marginal farmers and were not in a position to buy such machinery. This demand was finally approved this year on intervention of the Supreme Court that ordered Punjab and Haryana to compensate the cultivators.Jagmohan Singh, general secretary of Bhartiya Kisan Union (Dakaounda), said a large number of farmers did not want to set stubble on fire as they are aware of its ill-effects on soil and also environment. But subsidized machines have either not reached all the cultivators and those who did manage to get these machines had to spend an additional Rs 2,500-3,000 an acre to get rid of stubble from their fields. This discouraged many farmers from adopting these green techniques.According to Pritam Singh of Batti village on the outskirts of Patiala, short window between harvesting paddy and sowing the next crop also prompted farmers not to opt for green means to manage the stubble and instead set the crop residue on fire to clear their fields on time.The Punjab Preservation of Subsoil Water Act, 2009 is also facing criticism as it prevents farmers from planting paddy before mid-June and this has pushed the harvesting period to October and November instead of September, which was the case earlier. As November is ideal time to sow wheat, farmers rush to clear their fields by setting these on fire.Earlier, farmers use to plant paddy in April and May and were able to harvest it by mid-September. In September, even if farms were set on fire, climatic conditions dispersed the pollutants over a large area. But in November, as winter inversion sets in, pollutants get trapped in the lower layers of the atmosphere leading to higher levels of pollution in the northern parts of the country.According to Punjab agriculture secretary KS Pannu, Punjab Preservation of Subsoil Water Act, 2009 was needed to prevent reckless pumping out of groundwater, especially when free power was given to farmers in the state. “The act enables farmers to go for paddy planting with the arrival of monsoons, which prevented overuse of subsoil water. For every five-day delay in paddy plantation, the state saves water which is enough to meet its industrial and domestic requirements for one-and-a-half year,” Pannu explained.Now that compensation of Rs 100 has been announced by Punjab for small and marginal farmers not setting their crop residue on fire, those involved in efforts to end stubble burning in the state are expecting that by the next harvest the farmers will give up this practice and instead start managing the stubble using alternate means.
