The Shillong Times

Mehbooba praises Pak PM for naming forest after Guru Nanak

Srinagar: Jammu and Kashmir’s former chief minister Mehbooba Mufti on Sunday praised Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan for deciding to name a forest reserve in Nankana Sahib district after Sikhism’s founder Guru Nanak. “How times change. Centre’s top priority is seemingly renaming historic cities & building Ram Mandir. On the other hand, heartening to see that Pak PM has initiated steps to name Baloki forest reserve after Guru Nanak ji & create a university under his name,” she said in a tweet. Imran Khan had on Saturday announced that the Baloki forest reserve and a new university in Nankana Sahib will be named after the first Sikh Guru. “Pakistan belongs to all citizens equally and we will ensure that Sikh pilgrims are facilitated for celebrating the 550th anniversary of Guru Nanak,” he said. (IANS)

First four CH-47F Chinooksfor IAF arrive in Gujarat

New Delhi: Aerospace company Boeing on Sunday announced the arrival of the first four CH-47F (I) Chinooks — an advanced multi-mission helicopter — for the Indian Air Force (IAF) at the Mundra Port in Gujarat. The CH-47F (I) Chinooks will be ferried to Chandigarh, where they will be formally inducted into the IAF later this year, said a Boeing news release. “The CH-47F (I) Chinook is an advanced multi-mission helicopter that will provide the Indian armed forces with unmatched strategic airlift capability across the full spectrum of combat and humanitarian missions. The Indian Air Force currently has 15 Chinook helicopters on order,” said the release. (IANS)

Cops probe two policemen seen misbehaving with woman

Srinagar: Police said on Sunday they are probing the conduct of two policemen seen in a video clip misbehaving with a woman in Jammu and Kashmir’s Shopian district. The clip went viral on social media. A police spokesman said a complaint was lodged by a 15-year-old girl’s father saying the minor had been kidnapped by three persons. “During the investigation, a team from the Shopian police station went to the residence of the accused persons for recovering the kidnapped girl. “On reaching there, the police couldn’t recover the girl but found two of the three accused persons, Mohsin Khan and Saleem Khan. “While trying to arrest them, the other family members including women attacked the police party… This led to the escape of one of the accused persons. “Family members of the accused, especially ladies, tried to block the policemen on duty. “The video surfaced on the incident is being probed and an inquiry is ordered to examine the conduct of the men on duty. “It is, however, clarified that the incident happened during the investigation of a serious crime of kidnapping of a minor girl,” the spokesman said. (IANS)

BJP reaches out to Dalit voters through community meals

New Delhi: Seeking a stronger connect with Dalit voters in the run up to the Lok Sabha elections, the BJP is holding ‘Samrasta Bhoj’ (social harmony feast) in the 12 reserved assembly constituencies spread across six parliamentary seats in Delhi. The SC Morcha of the Delhi unit of the party, that had successfully organised the ‘Bhim Mahasangam’ rally at Ramlila ground here last month, is reaching out to the Dalit voters in the 12 reserved assembly constituencies through the ‘Samrasta Bhoj’, said morcha president Mohanlal Gihara. The reserved assembly constituencies, including Trilokpuri, Kondli, Seemapuri, Gokalpur, Ambedkar Nagar and Deoli, among others, will be covered under the programme, seeking support for the BJP in the Lok Sabha polls, he said. These 12 constituencies fall under North East Delhi, New Delhi, East Delhi, North West Delhi, South Delhi and West Delhi Lok Sabha seats. Delhi has a total of seven Lok Sabha seats. “We are holding these ‘Samrasta Bhoj’ programmes to reach out to the Dalit voters, (to tell them) how their interests have been served under the Modi government through different welfare schemes,” Gihara told PTI. “We have lined up Union ministers Thawar Chand Gehlot, Krishna Raj, Harsh Vardhan and Vijay Goel to participate in these events,” he said. A day before a ‘Samrasta Bhoj’ is held, the workers of the BJP’s SC Morcha asked locals to attend the event. (PTI)
