Hyderabad: Women tehsildars carry pepper spray to ward off possible attackers

Officials have asked visitors not to carry bags when they the offices with their complaints in Telangana. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Women tehsildars carry pepper spray to ward off possible attackers Move comes after a woman tehsildar Vijaya Reddy was set ablaze by a farmer in Telangana Officials have asked visitors not to carry bags when they visit the offices

Hyderabad: A week after a woman tehsildar was burnt alive inside her office in Telangana, women officers have started carrying pepper spray to defend themselves against similar possible attacks.

A woman tehsildar Vijaya Reddy was set ablaze inside her office by a disgruntled farmer. It was suspected that a land dispute prompted the accused Kura Suresh to target Vijaya.

According to a report, the revenue official's two staff members were injured while trying to save the officer. However, Reddy's driver later succumbed to his injuries. The attacker doused petrol on her and set her ablaze.

Meanwhile, president of the deputy collector's association, V Lachi Reddy, said the women officers are on guard after the unfortunate attack on Vijay Reddy. "We have already advised women officers to be vigilant and carry pepper sprays," the report quoted Lachi Reddy.

An office-bearer of Telangana Tehsildar Association, S Ramulu, said they have asked visitors not to carry bags when they visit the offices with their complaints.

S Ramulu said people will now be screened before being allowed to enter offices. However, he said that strict security measures will only create a divide between the people and the officials. The report suggests that some of the revenue department officials are not attending offices after the murder of Abdullapurmet Tehsildar.

In another incident on November 6, a woman official put up a rope barricade inside her office to keep away visitors at a safe distance. Uma Maheshwari, a tehsildar in Andhra Pradesh's Pathikonda, tied up a rope inside her office to stop the visitors from coming close to her.

If the visitors have to pass documents to her, they are supposed to maintain a safe distance. Uma Maheshwari told the media that she was forced to take this step to ensure her safety.
