Three including juvenile held for allegedly sexually assaulting TN minor for 8 months

Three including juvenile held for allegedly sexually assaulting TN minor for 8 months

The crime came to light recently when the girl complained of severe stomach pain.

news Crime

The Sethiathoppu All Women Police Station in Cuddalore district of Tamil Nadu arrested three persons, including a juvenile, on Wednesday for sexually assaulting a minor girl over the last eight months.

According to the Times of India, the juvenile, who is a class 12 student, had sexually assaulted the girl, by promising to marry her. The crime came to light recently when the girl complained of severe stomach pain.

The juvenile reportedly befriended the minor girl a year ago. Two of his friends, 19-year-old R Suriyaprakash and 20-year-old R Vigneswaran, had then taken advantage of the relationship and threatened to reveal her secret if she did not comply with their demands. The two men then allegedly sexually assaulted her on different occasions. The ordeal continued for a period of eight months.

When her parents took her to the hospital, upon examination, it was found that the girl had been sexually assaulted. The doctor then referred her to another medical college and hospital for further treatment.

Following her parents’ complaint, the police have arrested the juvenile and his friends, booking them under sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The juvenile has been sent to a government observation home while the two boys have been remanded in custody.

In similar incidents in Tamil Nadu this year, three men in Puducherry were arrested in April on charges of raping a class 9 student. The horrific incident came to light after the girl, who had been missing from her home, returned in a semi-conscious state. The girl was rushed to a hospital, where it was discovered that she had been drugged and raped, by three men, including her boyfriend.

In July, a horrific case of child sexual abuse came to light in Pollachi in Coimbatore district, where a 16-year-old teenager was abused by as many as nine men. The teenager, who eventually managed to escape, informed her grandmother about the incident. Following this, they lodged a complaint.
