Ahmedabad: Woman assaults husband after he fails to curb mosquito menace

Bhupendra Leuva sells LED lights from his car and for the last few months, he has been struggling to make both ends meet (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A woman allegedly beat up her husband after mosquitoes started biting her The man had to get six stitches on his right eye A case has been registered against the woman and her daughter

Ahmedabad: A man in Ahmedabad was allegedly beaten up by his wife and daughter as he failed to 'control' mosquito menace. The man was thrashed with a wooden bat which is used to clean clothes. A resident of Naroda, Gujarat, the woman beat up her husband after mosquitoes started biting her in her sleep.

The victim was identified as Bhupendra Leuva. Leuva lives in Sanjaypark Society with his wife Sangita and 20-year-old daughter Chital. Bhupendra Leuva lodged an FIR in relation to the incident at Naroda police station.

Bhupendra Leuva sells LED lights from his car and for the last few months, he has been struggling to make both ends meet. Due to his financial problems, Bhupendra had not paid the electricity bills for the last two months. As a result, the power supply of Bhupendra's house had been cut.

Late night on Tuesday, Sangita and Chital went to sleep. During the early hours of Wednesday, Sangita complained to her husband that mosquitoes were biting her. Sangita could not even switch on the fan as there was no electricity at their house.

Bhupendra allegedly asked Sangita to sleep with him on the bed if she wanted to feel comfortable. Agitated with the solution proposed by her husband, Sangita went to the kitchen and returned with a pestle in her hand. She pushed Bhupendra on the bed and attacked him on the head with the pestle.

Within moments, Chital joined her mother and started thrashing Bhupendra with a laundry bat. Bhupendra started crying in pain, following which, his neighbours rushed to his house. One of the neighbours informed Mahendra, Bhupendra's younger brother. Mahendra reached the spot and rushed his brother to a hospital. Six stitches were administered to Bhupendra above his right eye. The police booked Chital and Sangita for criminal intimidation and abetment.
