Chouhan pays tributes to Nehru, urges MP govt to restart schemes for children

BHOPAL: Senior BJP leader and former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan , who had dubbed former Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru as `criminal', remembered him on the `Children's Day' and paid him rich tributes saying there could be differences of opinion but, he was the first Prime Minister of the country. Chouhan also demanded that Congress government in MP should revoke all welfare schemes launched by the previous BJP government for the children else, face agitation."On the occasion of Children's Day, I pay tributes to former Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. There could be differences of opinion between us but, he was the first Prime Minister of our country. He has taken up several important tasks for the country hence, we pay our tributes to him," said Chouhan, on Wednesday.In August, when the Parliament revoked Article 370 and 35 A, Chouhan had attacked Nehru and said, "Jawaharlal Nehru was a criminal. First, he committed the crime of announcing ceasefire in war with Pakistan. Second he did the crime of imposing Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir." His statement drew flack from various political parties, including chief minister Kamal Nath who said that Nehru’s work and contribution to the country was unforgettable. Calling him a criminal 55 years after his death is objectionable and condemnable, he had reacted sharply.After paying tributes to Nehru, Chouhan attacked the Congress government and said, “Paying tributes to Nehru by Congress government on Children's Day is mere a drama. The government has stopped all schemes launched by the previous BJP government for the children. Now, remembering Nehru as `Chacha' (uncle) of the children is a farce.”"Nehru did a lot for the children. We celebrate his birthday as Children's Day. But, the Congress government has deprived these children of the schemes which were launched by the previous BJP government. I request the Congress and its president Sonia Gandhi to revoke all the schemes in the interest of children's future," said Chouhan.The BJP leader said, "BJP started giving bicycles, lap tops, mobiles to children, scholarship to meritorious students and deposited fees for higher education to the students of class 12th. But all these schemes were ceased. If these schemes are not revoked, the BJP will launch a state-wide agitation against the Congress government," said Chouhan.
