Drug peddlers stab ‘police informer’ to death

SURAT: Nine people were booked at Rander police station for murdering a 38-year-old man near weir-cum-causeway in Rander area of the city at around 5.30am on Thursday. Elder brother of deceased was booked for planning the murder along with his son-in-law. They suspected the deceased to be a police informer and that he had shared information about drug dealing of his brother and associates with cops in the past. The accused had attacked the victim a month ago too, but luckily he survived.Arif Saiyed, an autorickshaw driver who worked with a catering service firm, was stabbed multiple times in thigh by the assailants near Causeway Circle at Rander. Saiyed was shifted to a private hospital in Rander, but doctors there declared him dead.Police booked Altaf Atihur Rehman Saiyed, elder brother of deceased; Ismail, son-in-law of Altaf; Tufel alias Koylaka Sadhu Hanif Shaikh; Appu; Shamsher Mohammad Shaikh; Allarakha alias Lal Bhathhawala Shafi Barafwala; Rashid Todu; Salman alias Gandhi and Farhad Galiyara for murder. The police complaint was lodged by Firoz, 42, another brother of the deceasedAccording to the FIR, Saiyed was going home in Iqbalnagar slums on Causeway Road when accused Salman alias Gandhi stopped him opposite Ajmeri Tenement. Salman told Saiyed that their friends Tufel and Appu were calling him. Since Saiyed knew Salman, he went along with him on his motorcycle. Meanwhile, Saiyed’s friends, who were at the spot, became suspicious and followed them in an autorickshaw.Salman later stopped near Causeway Circle where the other accused were present. Salman informed those present at the spot that as planned by Altaf and Ismail, he has brought Saiyed. The accused started stabbing him in thigh and injured him seriously. Saiyed collapsed on ground. Saiyed’s friends, who had followed him, tried to save him, but the accused tried to attack them before escaping. Altaf and Ismail were not present at the spot that time.Police investigation revealed that the accused suspected Saiyed to be a police informer. The accused are into peddling of methamphetamine drug known as MD. They suspected Saiyed had given information about them to police in the past.“We are investigating the case. No arrests have been made so far,” said a police officer in Rander police station.
