Lucknow: Decomposed body of missing girl found, police rule out sexual assault

After the girl went missing, her father had lodged a complaint on Saturday against an unidentified person under IPC Section 363 (kidnapping).(Representational)

Five days after a 10-year-old girl went missing from near her house in Gosaiganj police station area on the outskirts of Lucknow, her decomposed body was recovered some 300 metres away on Thursday.

Circle Officer (CO) of Mohanlalganj area, Raj Kumar Shukla, that the girl was strangulated to death. “The post-mortem report has confirmed strangulation as the cause of death. The report has ruled out any sexual assault.”

After the girl went missing, her father had lodged a complaint on Saturday against an unidentified person under IPC Section 363 (kidnapping).

The officer said that now sections 302 (murder) and 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender) of the IPC will be added to the FIR.

“On November 9, we had registered an FIR on the complaint of her father after she went missing. Policemen and her family members were searching for her, but could not trace her till the body was found,” said Lucknow SSP Kalanidhi Naithani.

On Thursday, her body was found lying in bushes near an empty plot around 200-300 metres from her house.

The SSP added they will proceed on the case on the basis of the post-mortem report and forensic evidences. “A forensic team has collected samples from the spot. The policemen are talking to the villagers to gather more information about the case,” the SSP said.

Shukla said the girl had gone missing on Saturday morning after she went to bring her younger brother, who was playing outside, back home. While the brother returned home, the girl did not come back.

“On Thursday, a villager was cleaning his plot and saw a girl’s body lying amid the bushes there. The girl was identified with the help of her clothes. We then informed her family members. We are checking if there was any CCTV camera installed around the area,” CO said.
