Election process in J&K to begin shortly: Lt Governor - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Terrorism now on its last leg: DGP

Gopal Sharma

JAMMU, Nov 14: While dropping hint on holding of Assembly polls in Jammu and Kashmir in the near future, Lieutenant Governor, Girish Chandra Murmu today said that the election process will begin shortly in Jammu and Kashmir.

“Elections will be held here soon. Jammu-Kashmir is a Union Territory with a Legislature, it (LG’s rule) will not continue like this for so long,” he said while addressing a function of the Police department at Talwara near Reasi.

Click here to watch video

“The process for holding the election will come soon,” Murmu said on the occasion of Attestation-cum-Passing out Parade of the 14th batch of Constables held in Reasi district today.

” There will be Legislature shortly in place and the people of this new UT will be benefitted in big way. Under UT, massive Central schemes are being implemented and people here will realize about the benefits gradually,” Murmu maintained.

He did not say anything about conduct of delimitation exercise before holding elections in J&K, but assured massive fast track development in the Jammu and Kashmir with the setting up of new Legislature.

Asking the police force to get ready for shouldering their responsibility, the LG said there will be an important role for the men in uniform in the forthcoming election.

It may be recalled that Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly Speaker Nirmal Kumar Singh met the LG at the Raj Bhavan here on Wednesday.

The statement of Murmu, who took over as the first LG of the Union Territory on October 31, will come as a relief to several political parties and their leadership.

Earlier, Lt Governor who was the chief guest on the occasion, inspected the parade and took the salute. A total 1155 recruits/ constables passed out after completing their basic recruit training which started in July last year.

Speaking on this occasion, Lt Governor said that this 14th passing out- cum- attestation parade is coinciding with the Children’s Day which is being celebrated today. He complemented Jammu and Kashmir Police for organizing the parade successfully. The LG said that it is heartening to note that most of this group have been recruited through Transparent Recruitment Process (TRP) and the education profile of the passing out recruit constables is very encouraging. He said that along with the law, the education of IT and computers has become very necessary. He advised the passing out jawans to serve the public with utmost devotion and dedication. He said that Jammu and Kashmir Police has faced the challenges of terrorism very boldly and gave huge sacrifices.

Referring to the recent snowfall and inclement weather conditions the Lt Governor said that the cooperation of police force is very important for relief and rescue operations. He said that all people including the Jammu and Kashmir Police have the responsibility of developing the Union Territory by implementing the fruitful welfare schemes and programmes of the county with utmost devotion and dedication in an accelerated manner.

Earlier, in his welcome speech, Director General of Police, Dilbag Singh thanked the Lt Governor, GC Murmu for his presence on the occasion. He said that shortly after taking over as Lt Governor of the UT, the Governor visited the Police Headquarter on the very first day of the opening of the Darbar which show his love and care for our force.

The DGP said that Jammu and Kashmir Police has fought a war against terrorism and because of our sacrifices, the terrorism is on its last leg and it needs a final assault to neutralize it forever. He said that though J&K Police has achieved a lot on different fronts yet we will have to work further to bring peace and happiness to the UT and to bring the terrorism to an end. The DGP said that the work and sacrifices of the force have been acknowledged by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister, Amit Shah.

He thanked the Government, particularly the Chief Secretary BVR Subramanyam, Financial Commissioner Finance Dr Arun Kumar Mehta and Principal Secretary Home Shaleen Kabra for approving a number of proposals for the welfare of the Jammu and Kashmir Police personnel. DGP thanked Government of India for enhancing remuneration of SPOs, enhancement in ex-gratia for martyrs and also State administration for enhancing ration money allowance and hardship allowance for J&K Police Personnel.

The DGP complemented jawans for undergoing rigorous training successfully and said that with their joining the Jammu and Kashmir Police will become more stronger. He advised the recruit constables to perform and fulfil the intent of the oath which they have taken today. He complimented the Principal, his staff, both indoor and outdoor for the splendid parade. He congratulated the award winning jawans as well.

Principal of the STC Talwara, Anil Kumar Katoch highlighted the profile of the passing out recruit constables and also gave brief about the trainings conducted for them. He also gave a resume of the development works completed in the training centre campus.

ADGP CID, Dr B Srinivas, ADGP (Coord.) PHQ AK Choudhary, ADGP Armed SJM Gillani, ADGP (Hqrs.) PHQ AG Mir, ADGP M Suleman Salaria, ADGP Security, Law & Order Muneer Ahmed Khan, GOC, Uniform Force Reasi, Major General Dheeraj Seth, Director SKPA Udhampur Dr SD Singh Jamwal, IGP Jammu Mukesh Singh, IGP Traffic Alok Kumar, Director SSG Surinder Gupta, Director ACB Anand Jain, DIG Udhampur-Reasi Range Sujit Kumar, DC Reasi Indu Kanwal Chib, SSP Reasi Rashmi Wazir and other senior police officers were also present on the occasion.

On this occasion Constables Tariq Ahmad of IRP 15th Battalion was declared all-round best. He was given out of turn promotion to the rank of Selection Grade Constable. Recruit Constable Deepak Sharma was declared 2nd all round best and Recruit Constable Muzamil Hussain Zaki was adjudged 3rd all round best. They were rewarded with cash prize of rupees 10,000 and 7,500, respectively. Recruit Constable Shahid Hussain, Pritam Singh and Shabir Ahmad bagged first position in Indoor, Outdoor and Range classification, respectively. They were also rewarded with cash reward of rupees 7,500 each.
