Noida: 21-Year-Old Gangraped Near Sector 63 Police Chowki, 4 Arrested

New Delhi:

In yet another stark reminder of poor women safety record in India, a 21-year-old was allegedly gangraped by six men near a police chowki in Noida Sector 63. The survivor, who is a resident of Chhajarsi village, had gone to the area to meet a man in connection with a job opportunity. The man, whom the young woman had met a few days ago, had called her to the place along with her Aadhaar and PAN card on pretext of discussing a job offer.

The man took her to a nearby secluded area and tried to hold her hands. Alarmed, the woman spurned his advances and started walking in a different direction. Soon, a group of men came to that area and abducted her and took her to the ‘green belt’ area. They held her hostage and took turns to rape her. The girl survived the horror and managed to reach the Phase 3 police station after nearly two hours of her abduction.

Her dishevelled appearance and wounds all over gave the clear picture to the police. She was taken to nearby hospital for medical aid. The police has registered a case and have begun to probe the incident. Various teams have been set to look out for the culprits. Some suspects have been already been detained. So far, four men have been arrested in connection with the case.

The survivor, who suffered deep wounds in her private parts and scratches all over, is out of danger and recovering.

The recent NCRB numbers had shown how unsafe UP is for women. The statistics highlight the poor law and order situation in the country with 3.59 lakh cases of crime reported against women in 2017. Uttar Pradesh recorded the maximum number of crimes against women with 56,011 cases in 2017, while Madhya Pradesh registered the highest number of rape cases at 5562. The definition of ‘crime against women’ includes murder, rape, dowry death, suicide abetment, acid attack, cruelty against women and kidnapping, according to the NCRB report.

As many as 32,559 rapes were reported in India in 2017 and the accused were known to the victims in 93.1% of the cases, according to the report.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
