Chennai: Man sets wife ablaze after she threatens to commit suicide

On Wednesday, the couple was having an argument when Panchavaram threatened to end her life (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 40-year-old man allegedly set his wife ablaze at their residence in Chennai The accused man was identified as Rajan Rajan set his wife ablaze when they were having an argument and she threatened him with suicide

Chennai: A man in Chennai allegedly set his wife ablaze in the middle of an argument. The incident took place on Wednesday. The woman suffered 65 per cent burns in the incident and is undergoing treatment at Kilpauk Medical College and Hospital. She has been identified as Panchavaram.

Panchavaram's husband has been identified as Rajan. Rajan and Panchavaram used to have arguments with each other constantly.

On Wednesday, the couple was having an argument when Panchavaram threatened to end her life. Panchavaram allegedly told her husband that she would pour kerosene on herself and commit suicide.

On hearing this, Rajan allegedly flew into a rage and set his wife on fire. The 40-year-old accused fled from the spot after the incident. According to an investigation, 40-year-old Rajan had been arrested multiple times in the past for his alleged involvement in theft cases. He had recently stolen a mobile phone and had come out on bail.

After the Adambakkam police were informed, they located Rajan and arrested him. Following this, the 40-year-old accused was produced before a magistrate court and sent to jail.

Unemployed man immolates himself after setting wife, children ablaze

A similar incident came to light from Bengaluru in October this year where a man allegedly immolated himself after setting his wife and children ablaze. Identified as Murali, the man suffered 70 per cent burns in the injuries and succumbed to his injuries. Murali's wife was identified as Geeta. The couple had two children- Srikanth and Kaveri.

Murali died while treatment was being administered to him. Murali had been unemployed for around two years and this was the reason for their constant fights. The neighbours said that the couple used to fight over Murali's drinking habit and unemployment. On the day of the incident as well, the couple had a fight, during which, Murali left the house. Murali told his family that he was going out to get tea.

After some time, Murali returned with a can of petrol and poured it on his family. After setting his family ablaze, Murali immolated himself. Meanwhile, the couple's neighbours saw the flames and informed the Fire Emergency Services.


