British DJ and RJ Bobby Friction is highlighting music from the South Asian diaspora & it's only the beginning

The fact that Friction’s mildly frustrated with the Brit desis who are “having a rest” presently has little to do with this. But even as he exhorts his countrymen to “look within themselves”, to “not sell out” and to “not overthink everything” over viral tweets, he has hope that they’ll catch up. How could he not, having adulted in the 1980s and 1990s, when Asian music was synonymous with a notorious underground movement in the UK?

“My dad’s from Dilli; my mom’s from Chandigarh,” he says. “Houndsville, where I grew up, has a big Punjabi community, so naturally, I grew up listening to Gurdas Maan and Bollywood. But my entry point into the wider world of music, especially Western music, was Prince. What a wizard. Listening to him, I realised ‘Oh, that’s funk.’ Then a friend said, ‘If you like funk, you’ve got to listen to George Clinton.’ Another came along and said, ‘If you like Prince on the electric guitar, then get into Jimi Hendrix.’ And another would say, ‘Oh you like Hendrix, you’ve got to listen to The Doors!’ I realised that Morrison took the name of the band from a book by Aldous Huxley, who was on Sgt. Pepper Lonely Hearts Club Band. And then I got into The Beatles!”

Even as he went about educating himself in an “almost religious way”, he remembers specifically being intrigued by the idea of presenting music rather than making it. Coming up in the 1990s, his first natural course of action was to take to the turntable.

“I was never technically good at it, but I would play eclectic music. 1997 was when I got my first gig at a club called Blue Note; at Talvin Singh’s club night ‘Swaraaj’. Think of it as an early-days version of blueFROG,” he adds, helpfully. “There were just so many people who’d hover around the club: the British Asians, the multicultural Londoners, the East Enders (which was then known as the arsehole of London). I’d play bhangra, go into BBC sound effects from World War II, throw in a little sitar – it was interesting to see this different class of community coming together, these inclusions and explosions within music.”

It’s not just the moniker that stuck from his time as Blue Note’s resident DJ: Bobby Friction’s career rose parallel to the Asian Underground movement. “For someone like me, who’d watched with a lot of fascination, the rise of movements like rock ’n’ roll in the 1960s, hip-hop in the 1970s, Warhol’s counterculture in the 1980s, the rise of the Asian Underground was a moment of reckoning. I literally went, ‘Yes our music scene has arrived!’ I just decided the British Asian music scene was going to be my muse.”

If you’ve been around for as long as Bobby Friction has, you’ve seen the whole game – the way music is made, produced, broadcast and consumed – change in real time. “Back then, it was all sharp burning points and big bright musical scenes; all about tribes. The people who liked bhangra would prefer the folk nights; the Talvin and Nitin [Sawhney] loyalists walked about with an almost academic snobbishness. But no one today says things like, ‘I’m goth.’ You don’t identify with any one style of music anymore,” Bobby says. “I think it’s amazing that the internet has picked away our precociousness and liberated the music fan to love and celebrate everything.”
