UK Photographer Made Fake Model Agency So That He Could Rape Aspring Models

The casting couch is notorious the world over. The coming of the #MeToo movement showed that nobody was safe from the clutches of predatory men. Gwyneth Paltrow, Angelina Jolie, Cara Delevingne … women you’d think would be powerful enough to escape being sexually harassed came out with their horror stories.

So, you can only imagine what happens to women who are not as connected and influential. A UK photographer took advantage of aspiring models’ hopes of making it big by setting up a fake model agency. Paul Brown, also known as Paul Smart, would lure women to his studio and then rape them.

The details are harrowing

Paul has been accused of 18 rapes by seven women, three of sexual assault, one of assault by penetration and six of voyeurism. He has denied all charges. But the details of his activities are difficult to hear.

Paul would tell women that he was casting for adult movies and then lure them to his studio by posting ads on social media for his fake agency called Model South West. When they got to his studio, he would force them to perform more and more explicit acts by telling them that it was necessary to do so if they wanted to become successful models.

But, as would be expected, none of the models ever received any payment or work offers after they agreed to meet Paul for these “photoshoots”.

Little black book of sexual assault

The prosecutor in the case revealed that Paul kept a diary where he logged the details of the rapes and explicit sexual acts he committed. He had put in details like the women’s breast sizes and shapes and described the sexual acts they performed.

Speaking to a leading UK publication, the prosecutor said, "It is a personal sexual document. His wife is in there. She gets 9 out of 10.” He then added, “He is a man so obsessed that he needs to write it down, to grade people, so he ensures he knows what he has done with them. He may well have been proud of it, I don't know."

India is not far behind

India has had multiple cases of women being raped and subjected to the casting couch by men who promised them glittering careers in exchange. Tanushree Dutta sent shockwaves by calling out senior actor Nana Patekar in the #MeToo movement last year.

But it looks like nothing much has changed. Even though Deepika Padukone had vowed not to work with anyone implicated in the #MeToo movement, she’s been rumoured to have signed a movie with #MeToo accused Luv Ranjan.

When will the world and especially the creative industry learn to take allegations of sexual harassment seriously? How many more women need to get raped before any real action is taken?




