Indian Teen To Face Legal Action After Admitting She Lied About Sexual Assault

A Madras High Court said that a minor is set to face legal action after she admitted that she lied about being a “rape victim” earlier this year.

Authorities said mi-using the laws of India are pretty common, but this time, the incident happened with a child, who claimed that she was raped earlier this year.

The incident was reported by the teen from Jhunjhunu district in Rajasthan in October 2019.

The complainant said the incident happened when she was a minor.

The teen said she was kidnapped and raped on January 1, 2019, when she was on her way to the Gudha Town to submit her scholarship form at a school.

Authorities filed a case under the POCSO (Protection of Children from Sexual Offences) act after getting the statement of the girl and her mother’s.

But everything changed when the case came up for a trial.

The mother and the daughter started to change their statements and ended up claiming that the rape never happened.

The girl also told the court that she was not a minor when the rape happened.

She also said that she was forced to file a complaint after the villagers forced her to do so.

The victim and her mother also turned hostile after changing their statements.

The High Court then issued a notice to the mother and daughter under Section 193 (false evidence), which is punishable by law in India.

The court also reached out to the district collector to find out if any compensation was granted under the SC/ST act to the teen and her family.

Lokendra Singh Shekhawat a special public prosecutor, said, “It was my humble submission before the court that woman had filed the rape case under POCSO Act, and the resources of the state machinery were marshaled for the pursuance of justice. Despite a charge sheet being submitted against the accused, the survivor and her mother completely backtracked from their earlier allegations.”

The teen and her mother are now facing legal consequences.
