Odisha govt booklet describing Mahatma Gandhi's assassination as 'accident' sparks row

The Odisha Government came under fire after a government booklet described Mahatma Gandhi's assassination as "accidental sequence of events." The matter sparked a row in the state assembly on Friday with both opposition Congress and ruling Biju Janata Dal (BJD) members condemning the incident.

The School and Mass Education Department had published a two-page booklet: ‘Aama Bapuji: Eka Jhalaka (Our Bapuji: A Glimpse) and distributed it in all schools to commemorate the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. The booklet says that Gandhiji died in New Delhi at the Birla House on January 30, 1948, due to an ‘accidental sequence of events’.

When this incident came to light, many organisations like Lohia Academy, National Youth Organization strongly opposed it and also demanded strict action against those who made leaflets.

Raising the issue during 'Zero Hour' in the assembly, Congress Legislature Party (CLP) Narasingha Mishra said facts have been distorted in the booklet and the inaccuracies are too glaring.

“The BJD and the BJP are trying to mislead people and the students on Gandhiji’s death. There is no mention of Nathuram Godse, who was hanged for this heinous crime, in the booklet. By providing such misinformation, the Odisha government seems to have given a clean chit to Nathuram in the Mahatma’s death. If this is so, then when is the state government planning to build Nathuram’s statue?" Mishra asked.

Mishra said Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik should tender his resignation if he was aware of the situation, otherwise, he should issue an apology on the same before the house.

After hearing the CLP leader's concern on the issue, the assembly speaker Surya Narayan Patro directed School and Mass Education Minister Samir Das to come up with a reply on this issue on Saturday.

Later, Das said he had ordered a probe into the incident.

“Whoever has done it would be taken to task. Instead of saying that it was an accident, it should have been clearly mentioned the way he was killed. It should be elaborated clearly how he was killed. We will withdraw the booklets,” he said.

Mahatma Gandhi was assassinated by Nathuram Godse on January 30, 1948 in Delhi. Incidentally, Godse was hanged on November 15, 1949.
