Stubble burning dips in north India, satellite data show

Stubble burning in Punjab and Haryana is one of the major contributor of air pollution in Delhi. (Photo: Reuters)

Is Delhi-NCR heading for some relief from smog and air pollution that has engulfed it since late last month? Satellite data show a dip in stubble burning incidents in Punjab and Haryana, though Delhi registered an air quality index (AQI) 15 times worse than the World Health Organisation (WHO) recommendation.

According to satellite data from Nasa, stubble burning incidents in north India reduced about 88 per cent on Friday (November 15) than the earlier peak level last Sunday (November 10). However, such instances have shown erratic behaviour in the past.

In Punjab, Haryana and other north Indian states, farmers set fire to crop residue after harvest season to pave way for newer plantations. Stubble burning adds more deadly pollutants to the air which drift to Delhi, counted as one of the most polluted cities in the world.

Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have had more than 7,000 fires detected in the first three days of last week.

Slow and northwest-directed wind worsened the pollution level of Delhi-NCR to "severe" category.

The hourly average of PM2.5, a dangerous particulate matter, hit the maximum level on Friday (November 15), data show.

But though stubble burning incidents are witnessing a downtrend, it is not reflecting upon the air quality of Delhi-NCR.

The AQI of Delhi at 8.40 am on Saturday (November 16) was 412 against 467 at 10 am on Friday.

The AQI in Faridabad was 427, Ghaziabad 424, Greater Noida 377, Noida 411 and Gurgaon 420 on Saturday morning.

However, air quality may improve slightly on Sunday as per data related to wind speed, and as lower stubble burning suggests.

Delhi and its surrounding areas have high pollution levels in winters due to drop in atmospheric temperature and inversion, which is responsible for smog. Inversion is a process where warmer air lies above cooler air.

If stubble burning incidents continue to dip and wind speed increases (as is expected on Sunday), then Delhi will feel some respite from air pollution.

(Graphics source: Base Layer: Terra MODIS True Color Corrected Reflectance, Overlay Layer(s): MODISTerra_Thermal_Anomalies_Day, Coastlines)

ALSO READ | Delhi chokes: MPs, key officials skip meeting on pollution called by Parliamentary panel

ALSO READ | Delhi pollution: Half-baked odd-even no solution, how will people breathe, SC asks govt

ALSO WATCH | Delhi's air quality dips to severe level
