Vadodara: Man kidnaps businessman friend, demands Rs one crore ransom; held

Ravi Ahir in police custody

VADODARA: A young businessman from Bodeli was kidnapped by his friend who demanded ransom of Rs 1 crore for his release! The kidnapper, however, released the friend after being paid Rs 1.5 lakh by the latter’s father, though he got arrested on Saturday for the betrayal.

Accused Ravi Ahir had called Deepak Mistry to meet him on November 14 night. Mistry, a marble and tiles trader, went to meet Ahir along with his friend, Rohit Suthar.

When the duo reached Chandrajyoti Society, Ahir met them here but on the pretext of having some personal work with Mistry, asked Suthar to go back.

After Suthar left, the duo proceeded Vaniyadri canal where two unidentified persons were already waiting for them.

The four then proceeded towards Kosindra village where the two unidentified persons suddenly pushed Mistry from his vehicle.

Ahir then tied Mistry’s hands, while another person sealed his mouth with cellotape.

After switching off Mistry’s phone, Ahir called up Naran Mistry, the trader’s father, from his own mobile phone and asked him to come near Vaniyadri canal with ransom money of Rs 1 crore.

When the father reached Vaniyadri canal with Rs 1.5 lakh, Ahir took the money from him as well as his car and left the place. Later, he picked up Mistry and the other two aides and kept driving on until Mistry’s father called. They dropped Mistry near a closed ginning mill and informed his father about his location.

Mistry was later rescued by his father and his friends and taken to hospital where he also informed the police about the crime.

On Friday, an offence of kidnapping, assault and criminal intimidation was registered at Bodeli police station.

Meanwhile, Ahir abandoned Naran’s car and fled to Surat from where he was nabbed on Saturday.

During interrogation, Ahir confessed to befriending Mistry only because he was rich. “His sole intention of kidnapping Mistry was to get money from his family. We are in search of two other persons who had helped him,” said a police official.


