Issewal gang-rape survivor’s friend cross-examined

Ludhiana: The defence counsels cross-examined the friend of the Issewal gang-rape survivor during the hearing of the case in a city court on Saturday. The next date of hearing of the case in the court of additional session judge Rashmi Sharma is December 3.

On 9 February, a group of miscreants had allegedly gang-raped a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage, as they had gone to Issewal to celebrate Chocolate Day. Police had booked 10 unidentified accused in the case, and arrested six accused, including Jagroop Singh, a private vehicle driver of Jaspal Bangar; Ajay of Tibba (originally from Gonda in Uttar Pradesh), who works as a driver at a petrol pump; and four nomads (two from Ludhiana, one from Nawanshahr, and a juvenile from Jammu & Kashmir).

Special public prosecutor for the state BD Gupta said the defence counsels cross-examined the friend of the prosecutrix (survivor) partly, and the same would continue in the next hearing of the case on December 3. He added that cross-examination of the friend of the prosecutrix lasted for about 45 minutes, and he had fully supported the prosecution case till now.

One of the counsels of the case said the friend of the prosecutrix was apparently down with viral fever, so he could not be cross-examined for a longer period. The prosecution has already got the examination-in-chief of the prosecutrix and her friend done. On October 30, the court had dismissed the revision petition filed by one of the accused in the Issewal gang-rape case, praying that he be considered a juvenile, and tried by the Juvenile Justice Board.

COPS SAY PROBE COMPLETE

The test identification parade was done in the presence of judicial magistrate Ankit Airi on February 22 at Central Jail, and during that parade, the survivor had identified all the accused. The police had presented a chargesheet against the accused in the court of Ankit Airi on April 4.

The copy of challan assessed by the The Times of India had suggested that from the investigation, only six accused were found involved in the case. It added that from DNA sample reports, call mapping records of talks between the accused, mould from the crime spot, and evidence on record, only six accused were found involved, and they have already been arrested.

The challan also mentioned that the survivor and her friend had got sketches of only the six accused made. The police said that with the arrest of the accused, the investigation has been completed. It had, however, added that if more persons were found involved, it would produce a supplementary challan into the matter. The police said it had added more sections — including 354-B (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 379-B (snatching), 364-A (kidnapping for ransom, etc) and 397 (robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) of the IPC — in the FIR on March 25.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
