Body Of Missing Minor Girl Found Dumped In A Park In Delhi With Limbs Tied, Injuries On Head

Delhi has a dubious reputation of being unsafe for girls and women. Between 2015-2018 a total of 27,356 children went missing from Delhi. According to Delhi Police figures, 18 children went missing every day in the national capital in 2017.

A report by the Alliance for People's Rights (APR) found that out of every 10 children going missing in the national capital, six remain untraced.

Often the missing children end up being in the hands of traffickers or sexual predators who are scouting for easy prey.

representational image

In a gruesome crime, the body of a seven-year-old girl who went missing on Saturday was found dumped on Sunday, after an apparent sexual assault.

The girl, a resident of outer Delhi’s Nihal Vihar had left home on Saturday evening to buy momos along with her younger sister and never returned.

The girl's father, an auto driver began searching for her after noticing that his daughter has not returned even by 9.30pm.

Initially, the family searched in the neighbourhoods and later filed a police complaint.

On Sunday morning, a passerby spotted a body in a bag dumped outside a park and informed the Nihal Vihar police station.

According to police, the limbs of the girls were tied together and two ropes were found dangling from her neck. Several bruises on the head suggest that she was hit on the head with something like a stone, causing the death. Even though the girl's dress was found to be intact, police have not ruled out the possibility of a sexual assault.

representational image

An autopsy will be conducted to ascertain the cause of death. An investigation has been launched to identify the killer. Police are examining CCTV footage from the area and questioning shopkeepers for any leads.

Saturday's incident is the third such case Delhi this year, where minor girls who went missing was found dead.

On January 19, the body of an unidentified minor girl was found in a sack in Daryaganj with her throat slit.

On January 27, the body of a six-year-old girl who went missing was found dumped in a sack near her home in Samaypur Badli

Despite the police investigating all these cases, no arrests have been made in any of the cases.
