Opposition Holds All Party Meet Ahead Of Parliament Winter Session: Highlights

An all-party headline was held ahead of the winter session of parliament.

The centre is likely push for the passage of the contentious Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, a key BJP plank which is aimed at granting nationality to non-Muslim immigrants from neighbouring countries, in Parliament's Winter Session which beings on Monday. Among the other bills expected to be taken up are those on regularizing unauthorised colonies in Delhi and punishment for assault on doctors. The government will also bring bills to replace two ordinances on corporate tax rate cuts and ban on e-cigarettes. The opposition is likely to target the government over economic slowdown and unemployment. Prime Minister Narendra Modi today expressed hope that the winter session of Parliament would be "productive" and "people-centric issues" would be discussed.

Ahead of the parliament's winter session, an all-party meeting was held. The BJP's executive meeting took place at 1 pm followed by an NDA meeting, At 3.30 pm, Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla held a meeting with the leaders of various parties.

Here are the highlights of meetings ahead of parliament's winter session:

Nov 17, 2019 19:17 (IST) Had a very good NDA meeting. Our alliance represents India's diversity and the aspirations of 130 crore Indians. Together, we will leave no stone unturned in ushering a qualitative change in the lives of our farmers, youngsters, Nari Shakti and the poorest of the poor. pic.twitter.com/Mm8Rc5kkaO - Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) November 17, 2019

Nov 17, 2019 18:16 (IST) Prime Minister @narendramodi attends All Parties Leaders Meeting ahead of Winter Session of Parliament beginning tomorrow#WinterSession to have 20 sittings between 18th November 2019 to 13th December 2019



Read here: https://t.co/awQLQaBAY0pic.twitter.com/1uBdS3f6UR - PIB India (@PIB_India) November 17, 2019

Nov 17, 2019 18:15 (IST) Rajya Sabha Chairman and Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu met the floor leaders ahead of the Winter Session of the Parliament that begins tomorrow.

Rajya Sabha Chairman and Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu met the floor leaders ahead of the Winter Session of the Parliament that begins tomorrow.

Nov 17, 2019 16:40 (IST) Opposition raises Farooq Abdullah's detention at All Party meet

Opposition raked up the issue of the detention of former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah, who is a member of the Lok Sabha, during all party meet convened by the Government, a day ahead of the Parliament session.

Farooq Abdullah is under detention along with two other former Chief Ministers Omar Abdullah and PDP leader Mehbooba Mufti since the abrogation of Article 370 and re-organisation of the state.

Nov 17, 2019 14:08 (IST) Ready To Discuss All Issues Within Framework Of Rules And Procedures Of The Houses: PM Modi At the government-convened meeting, the Opposition demanded that the issues of economic slowdown, job loss and farm distress must be discussed during the session, Congress leader in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said. At the meeting attended by 27 parties, PM Modi said most important job of the House is to discuss and debate, Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pralhad Joshi told reporters. PM Modi said that this session should also be as productive as the last one, according to Joshi. "Government is ready to discuss all issues within the framework of rules and procedures of the Houses," PM was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

Nov 17, 2019 13:59 (IST) Farooq Abdullah's Detention Discussed At All-Party Meet: National Conference

Farooq Abdullah's detention raised at all-party meet, government under constitutional obligation to ensure his participation the parliament session, news agency PTI reports quoting a National Conference MP.

Nov 17, 2019 13:54 (IST) At All-Party Meet, Opposition Demands Discussion Of Economic Slowdown, Jobs And Farm Distress

The opposition, at all-party meet, demanded that economic slowdown, job loss and farm distress be discussed during parliament's winter session, says Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury.

Nov 17, 2019 13:22 (IST) All-Party Meeting



The all-party meeting was attended by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, BJP chief Amit Shah and several senior opposition leaders.

The meeting was also attended by Union minister Thawarchand Gehlot, Congress'' leader in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad and deputy leader of opposition in Rajya Sabha Anand Sharma.

TMC leader Derek O'Brien, LJP leader Chirag Paswan and Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav, Telugu Desam Party Jayadev Galla and V Vijaysai Reddy were among those present at the meeting.

Nov 17, 2019 12:26 (IST) PM Modi Arrives For The All-Party Meeting



Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrives at the Parliament Library Building for the all party meeting called by Union Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pralhad Joshi, ahead of winter session of Parliament. The Winter Session of the Parliament begins tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/E3GQ1gnUjA - ANI (@ANI) November 17, 2019

Nov 17, 2019 11:46 (IST) Bills That The Centre Will Take Up During Winter Session



Nov 17, 2019 11:22 (IST) Leaders attending the all-party meet

Amit Shah

Anand Sharma

Anupriya Patel

Adhir Ranjan Chaudhary

Sanjay Singh

Manoj Jha

Ram Gopal Yadav

Ghulam Nabi Azad

Chirag Paswan

Satish Chandra Mishra

Lallan Singh

Ramdas Athawale

Danis Ali

Arjun Ram Meghwal

Vaiko

TR Balu

A Navneet Krishnan

T K Rangarajan

Vinod Vishwam

B Muralitharan

Vijay Sai Reddy

Derek O Brian

Sudeep Bandopadhyay



Nov 17, 2019 11:00 (IST) All Party Meeting Underway





Nov 17, 2019 10:50 (IST) Day Before Winter Session, Opposition Sena To Skip NDA Meet: 10 Facts

A day before the winter session of parliament begins, several key meets, including two all party meetings are in the line-up today where leaders across party lines will discuss the agenda for the next session. A day before the winter session of parliament begins, several key meets, including two all party meetings are in the line-up today where leaders across party lines will discuss the agenda for the next session.

Nov 17, 2019 10:32 (IST) Home Minister Amit Shah Arrives For The All-Party Meeting



Delhi: Home Minister Amit Shah, Union Minister Thawarchand Gehlot, Arjun Ram Meghwal arrive for the all party meeting called by Union Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pralhad Joshi, ahead of winter session of Parliament which begins tomorrow. pic.twitter.com/7NLNZCEbWw - ANI (@ANI) November 17, 2019

Nov 17, 2019 10:18 (IST) Parliament's Winter Session: Tax, E-Cigarette Ordinances To Be Replaced

The winter session of Parliament will see government replacing two ordinances -- one on tax and another on ban of e-cigarettes, news agency IANS reports According to both Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha business list, about 35 legislations, including the crucial Industrial Relations Code, will be taken up during the winter session of Parliament beginning Monday including the Prohibition of Electronic Cigarettes (Production, Manufacture, Import, Export, Transport, Sale, Distribution, Storage and Advertisement) Ordinance, 2019 (No. 14 of 2019) promulgated by the President on 18th September, 2019 and the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 promulgated by the President on 20th September, 2019.

Nov 17, 2019 10:06 (IST) Congress To Raise Gandhis' SPG Cover Withdrawal In Parliament

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said on Saturday that the party will raise the issue of withdrawal of SPG cover of the Gandhi family during the winter session of parliament and also seek government''s response on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

Mr Chowdhury said the party will also raise issues concerning the common man including "unemployment and economic slowdown" and the high levels of pollution in Delhi.

"We will raise the issue of unemployment, economic slowdown, Jammu and Kashmir and stubble burning," he told news agency ANI.

Nov 17, 2019 09:51 (IST) Had a wonderful interaction with leaders and MPs across party lines this evening.



We look forward to a productive Parliament session, where people-centric and development oriented issues would be discussed. pic.twitter.com/EsNze39bSA - Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) November 16, 2019
