When Delhi Police took a strong stand against MPs

New Delhi, Nov 17 : : The force which is "With You, For You, Always", was once with itself too.

There was a time when the Delhi Police took a strong stand even against MPs during a face-off.

In 2002, a rally led by the then MP Devendra Kumar at Jantar Mantar turned violent and attacked policemen with stones and lathis when they were prevented from moving towards Parliament.

Around 15 policemen, including DCP Manoj Lall, were injured. To control the violence, the police had to use water cannons and tear gas.

A Parliamentary Committee ordered Lall's suspension for the police action.

As the news of the DCP's suspension spread like wildfire, top officials rushed to the police headquarters to meet the police commissioner and asked him to save the force from feeling demoralised and demotivated.

Senior officials of the force condemned the move to suspend the DCP.

From top officials to the junior most ranks, everyone slammed the decision of the Committee, saying it was a big blow to the morale and honour of the force which had always given its supreme sacrifice to safeguard the national capital.

Subsequently, Lall's suspension was revoked.

In contrast, after the violent clash between cops and lawyers at the Tis Hazari court complex on November 2, the Delhi Police was on the receiving end.

On November 2, a minor argument between some policemen and a lawyer over parking at the Tis Hazari court complex flared up, leading to violence and arson. A lawyer was also left with a bullet injury.

The police alleged that the advocates assaulted them and set ablaze some police vehicles.

"Twenty police officials, including one Additional DCP and two SHOs have sustained injuries. Eight advocates have also sustained injuries. In the fire, 12 private motorcycles, one QRT gypsy of the police and eight jail vans outside the lock-up were damaged," the police said.

A Special Investigation Team comprising officials of the Crime Branch and headed by Joint Commissioner of Police (Jt. CP) will be formed to probe the sequence of event. Action will be taken on the findings of the SIT.
