Rashami Desai dethrones Disha Patani and Salman Khan as Bigg Boss host confers 'Slow Motion' title to famous daughter-in-law of Indian TV

Disha Patani and Salman Khan may have sizzled on the Slow Motion track in this year’s blockbuster Bharat, but both of them were left dethroned as the Bollywood megastar personally handed over the title to Bigg Boss contestant Rashami Desai.

Slow Motion was one of the most popular tracks of Bharat as Salman and Disha Patani set the screen on fire with their sizzling performance. The film had gone on to become one of the biggest hits of 2019.

While hosting the Weekend Ka Vaar episode of the Colors TV’s reality show, Salman informed the housemates that Rashami was deserving of the Slow Motion title because of her lack of enthusiasm after her re-entry into the house.

Salman asked Rashami if she was happy on being declared the Slow Motion contestant in the house. Rashami promises to improve her game in the days to come.

Rashami was evicted out of the show along with Devoleena Bhattacharjee, but they were given a second chance by the makers of Bigg Boss. But her lack of enthusiasm has come under scrutiny ever since she made a second entry in the house.

Salman wondered if her new strategy was to provoke two people to fight with each other while she remained a spectator. The Bollywood megastar also slammed Rashami for backstabbing her friend Arhaan Khan by not picking him for the captaincy role as she had voted for Aditya Vishal Singh.

Each housemate on Saturday night was asked to pick a placard with a title. Most of the contestants felt that Rashami deserved the title of Slow Motion. Salman too agreed and said that the popular daughter-in-law of Indian TV ought to have changed her game inside the house to make her presence felt.

The house once again saw a brief war of word between Shefali Jariwala and Mahira Sharma. What irked Mahira was Shefali calling her a ‘problem child.’ An angry Mahira shouted, “You can’t speak to me like that.” Unfazed by her shouting, Shefali replied stating that she was indeed a problem child as she had to be sent to the jail last week for her questionable behaviour.

The house once again witnessed romance blossoming between Siddharth Shukla and Devoleena Bhattacharjee. Devoleena’s flirtatious behaviour towards Siddharth has become the most-talked-about development in the Bigg Boss house.

Salman did not announce the name of the contestant leaving the show. He said that he will announce the name on Sunday night.
