Mumbai: 18-year-old, who fled home in Punjab, raped

The complainant in her statement to police said that she stayed with her parents in Punjab. (Representational Image)

An 18-year-old woman from Punjab was allegedly raped by a 45-year-old man under the pretext of providing her food and shelter. Nagpada police, who arrested the accused, said the woman had fled her home on October 17 after an argument with her mother.

The alleged incident took place on November 9 after she got off a train at Mumbai Central station.

The complainant in her statement to police said that she stayed with her parents in Punjab.

“My father and mother do not share a cordial relation and I was tired of seeing them fight. On October 17, after I fought with my mother, I took Rs 10,000 cash from the house and left,” she told the police.

After visiting Amritsar, Surat and Hanumangarh in Rajasthan she came to Mumbai on November 9. “She alighted from the train at 4.10 am. As she stepped out of the station, the accused offered to help her,” a police officer said.

The accused took her to a nearby restaurant and gave her food. “The complainant told him that she had run away from home after which he offered to provide her shelter and took her to Kamathipura,” the officer said.

“He left her in a room there and an hour later returned with food. While they were eating, the accused allegedly started touching her inappropriately,” the officer added.

As the girl resisted, the accused allegedly pushed her on the bed and forced himself on her, the police said.“The accused then allegedly raped her and left,” the officer said.

The victim managed to leave the place and narrated her ordeal to policemen standing nearby.

“While she was talking to the policemen, the accused was standing nearby. On the basis of her complaint, police caught the accused and took him to the police station,” the officer added. The police registered a case under Section 376 (rape) of the IPC.

The police said that the accused was initially produced in Mazgaon court, where he was remanded in police custody till November 17. He was again produced in holiday court on Sunday and was remanded in police custody.

The police are now trying to reunite the teen with her family.
