Hyderabad: Drunk woman assaults, bites female police officer; case registered

A case has been registered under Section 353 and Section 294 under the Indian Penal Code | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The police officials have registered a case against the accused Allegedly, the woman was found in an inebriated state and semi-naked The woman's family members were informed about the situation

Hyderabad: A Nagaland-based woman created quite a stir after she assaulted a female constable at the Banjara Hills police station, Hyderabad. Allegedly, the woman was in an inebriated state and was semi-naked. The police officials have registered a case against her.

The incident took place on Sunday when the police officials received a call and they were informed about a woman lying semi-naked and consuming alcohol on the footpath in Zahara Nagar area. According to a report, Banjara Hills inspector Kalinga Rao said that a few women personnel, led by a woman inspector went to the spot and tried to shift the woman into a police vehicle. but she turned violent and attacked the police officers. He added that the woman was later brought to the police station where she tried to remove her remaining clothes. While the police officers tried to dress her up, the woman bit one of the police officers and assaulted another. The woman's bid to assault and threatened cops on duty was recorded.

Around two hours later when the woman regained consciousness, the police found out that she works for a private firm in the Madhapur area. The woman's family members were informed about the situation. Although, the police claimed that the woman stated she was a software professional but she failed to provide any proof stating her profession.

However, a case has been registered under Section 353 (Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of her duty) and Section 294 under the Indian Penal Code against her. However, further probe in the matter is underway.

Hyderabad doctor offers free treatment to victim who complained of triple talaq due to 'crooked teeth'

A dental hospital in Hyderabad has offered free treatment to Rukhsana Begum, who was allegedly given triple talaq because she had 'crooked teeth'. Reportedly, Nada Mir, a doctor at the Alux Dental Hospital, has come forward to help the woman and offer her treatment.

The doctor told a news agency that they read about the plight of a woman who was allegedly given triple talaq due to dental issues. The dental organisation wants to help the victim in her dental treatment without taking any fee from her.

Rukhsana Begum's husband Mustafa allegedly gave her triple talaq due to her crooked teeth last month. She had married Mustafa on June 27, 2019.


