Uncle gets life term for sexually assaulting one-year-old child in 2012

Representative image

NEW DELHI: In a rare conviction in the rape of a survivor who was just one year old when she was attacked in 2012, the accused, her uncle, has been awarded a life term behind bars. The court held that he did not deserve any leniency for he not only “betrayed the family’s trust” but also displayed “extreme perversity and monstrosity”.

Given the nature of the social setting and the relationship of the survivor and the accused, special judge Dr Saurabh Kulshreshtha called it an “abhorrent act” on the child. “The accused not only betrayed the trust of the child’s family but also displayed extreme perversity and monstrosity,” said the court, which deals with cases of sexual assaults against children.

The accused and the child’s family hailed from the same village and the accused was regarded as the child’s paternal uncle according to village tradition. On December 1, 2012, the child’s father had returned home after drinking with the accused. The child’s mother claimed that the accused took her daughter out for a stroll but when her daughter did not return, she became suspicious.

The child was crying inconsolably when the mother found her with the man. On checking her body, the mother found injuries on her private parts. On hearing the mother’s cries for help, locals thrashed the accused and handed him over to the police.

In court, counsel for the survivor advocate Chandra Suman pointed out that the survivor’s medico-legal report suggested five signs of injuries indicating sexual assault. Besides, the forensic reports showed the presence of the DNA of the accused on the child’s clothes, he submitted. The accused was also found to have 161 mg/100 ml alcohol in his blood stream at the time of incident.

The advocate relied on Section 106 of the Evidence Act to argue that the burden of proving the fact that the accused was not guilty or had not committed rape was upon him. Judge Kulshreshtha observed that medical evidence clearly pointed towards rape.

The accused denied the charges, arguing his clothes were given to the police by the survivor’s mother so that he could be implicated in a false case. However, the court was unimpressed with the submission. It said, “It appears that the clothes of the survivor were handed over by her mother to the doctor through the police officer who was present at the hospital and the clothes were immediately sealed.” Though he said he was beaten up “abruptly”, the accused could not explain the motive behind such a serious allegation.

When it came to sentencing, special prosecutor Inder Kumar sought a severe punishment that could act as deterrence as well as a message to the society. The court order highlighted that sexual crimes against children were on the rise. “Offenders such as the convict should be dealt with an iron hand to deter others from committing such ghastly crimes,” it said.

The age of the survivor was crucial in determining a compensation of Rs 4 lakh towards her rehabilitation. “Such an act is sufficient to cause grave physical, mental and psychological harm to the child as well as incalculable damage to her reputation in the society,” the court held.


