15,000 birds dead and counting: Sambhar Lake a safe haven no more

Civic workers prepare to bury birds which were found dead, at the Sambhar Salt Lake in Rajasthan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Around 10 species of migratory birds arrive at the Rajasthan's Sambhar Lake every year The experts fear that it might reoccur or even cause a large number of birds dying again The dead birds include plovers, common coots, blank winged stilts, northern shovelers In order to make sure that this does not occur next year, precautionary measures need to be put in place

Jaipur: The death toll for the water migratory birds of nearly ten species at the Rajasthan's Sambhar Lake has crossed over 15,000. It is becoming a concern for both the central and the state governments. The preliminary forensic report in the case stated that the birds at the country's largest inland saltwater lake near Jaipur were caused by botulism- a serious and fatal illness that affects the nerves.

The officials were suspecting water contamination as one of the major reasons for the unprecedented deaths. According to a report, the experts fear that it might reoccur or even cause the death of a large number of birds once again in the massive natural wetland. Reportedly, the bacteria remain dormant in soil but it can multiply as it feeds on proteinaceous items which also includes carcasses of birds, cattle or kitchen waste.

In order to make sure that this does not occur next year, precautionary measures need to be put in place to deal with the challenge, experts added. A Bikaner-based microbiologist, AK Kataria, who conducted the post-mortem of the birds found near the lake, told a media person that this year many birds perished due to the disease and it is a possibility that this could flare-up.

He added that as the organism is already in the soil, it would have also seeped into the carcasses and remain there in the form of spores which are resistant to extremely high temperatures. Reportedly, eradicating the factors causing an outbreak and prevention also remains a challenge considering the massive size of the lake. A forest official told media that the infection has already spread over 65 sq km area of the lake.

The dead birds include plovers, common coots, blank winged stilts, northern shovelers, ruddy shelducks and pied avocets. Reportedly, carcasses of several birds have already been buried by the authorities while many still lay strewn around.
