School student turns kidnapper in Hyderabad, demands ransom worth Rs 3 lakh

At around 2.30 pm on Sunday, the accused was returning from his class when he saw Arjun (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A seven-year-old was abducted from near his residence on Sunday in Hyderabad The accused allegedly demanded a ransom of Rs 3 lakh from the minor's family The police nabbed the accused four hours after they were informed and reunited the seven-year-old with his family

Hyderabad: A seven-year-old boy was kidnapped by a 17-year-old in Meerpet, Hyderabad on Sunday. The accused allegedly demanded Rs 3 lakh as ransom for the minor boy. The accused has been arrested and the police have said that strict action will be taken against him.

The accused is a juvenile and his name has been changed to Amar to guard his identity. He is a student of Class 10. The victim - name changed here to Nagarjun - also is a resident of Hyderabad.

How it happened

At around 2.30 pm on Sunday, the accused was returning from his class when he saw Nagarjun who was playing with his friend near his residence in PSR Colony. Amar then struck a conversation with the seven-year-old.

After befriending the seven-year-old boy, Amar took him to a temple near his (Amar's) residence and called up Nagarjun's father. It is alleged that Amar changed his voice and demanded Rs 3 lakh as ransom while also threatening to kill Nagarjun if the kidnapped boy's father dared to inform the police.

The worried father of the kidnapped child then tried to negotiate with Amar and told him that he was not in the position to pay Rs 3 lakh ransom money. Amar refused to accept the scaled-down offer of Rs 1.5 lakh as a ransom payment. Scared for his son's life, the distraught father made another offer to the kidnapper: Rs 25,000 in cash and the remaining Rs 2,75,000 in a cheque. Surprisingly, Amar agreed to the proposal and disconnected the call.

Despite being threatened, Nagarjun's family turned to the Meerpet police for help. Within four hours of being informed, the police located the accused and nabbed him. Amar confessed to the crime after he was arrested.

An investigation revealed that the accused has a criminal history. He had allegedly stolen Rs 1 lakh from his neighbour in the past but no legal action was taken against him as both the parties had agreed to 'settle' the matter amongst themselves.

Mahesh Bhagwat, Rachakonda police commissioner said, "Though the minor is 17-years-old, we are going to approach the Juvenile Justice Board, appealing them to treat the arrested accused as a regular offender. There is a provision for it under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, to treat 16 and 17-year-olds as regular offenders for serious crimes like kidnapping, murder and rape. "
