Opposition MPs seek CBI probe in IIT student’s suicide

Expressing dissatisfaction at HRD minister Ramesh Pokhriyal’s response, the Opposition MPs staged a walkout.

The RSP MP claimed that the girl's family had alleged that she was facing religious discrimination, which could have led to her death, and sought a high level probe. (Photo: File)

New Delhi: Several Opposition Lok Sabha MPs from Kerala and Tamil Nadu on Monday sought a CBI probe into the alleged suicide of a student, Fathima Latheef, who was found dead insider her hostel room in IIT Madras on November 9.

HRD minister Ramesh Pokhriyal told the lower house that Secretary (Higher Education) from his ministry has been sent to Chennai and an IG-level probe has already been initiated into the matter.

“Depending on the findings of the probe, suitable action would be taken,” Mr Pokhriyal said.

However, expressing dissatisfaction at his response, the Opposition MPs staged a walkout from Lok Sabha.

The issue was raised by N.K. Premchandran, the RSP MP from Kollam (Kerala), who said that the girl’s family was his neighbour and after her mysterious death, the parents have made specific allegations against some faculty members of IIT Madras, and therefore, a high-level probe should be conducted into the matter.

Mr Pokhriyal was present in the house when other opposition members from the Left, DMK and the Congress raised the issue.

“You may kindly see that a brilliant girl, Fathima Latheef, who belonged to my constituency and was my close neighbour, was found dead in the Chennai IIT campus on November 9, 2019. Sir, she was a brilliant girl and was the first rank holder in the entrance examination.... She was found dead under mysterious circumstances. Her parents are making specific allegations regarding her death which was under mysterious circumstances,” Mr Premchandran said.

The RSP MP claimed that the girl's family had alleged that she was facing religious discrimination, which could have led to her death, and sought a high level probe. The girl's father had last week met Chennai DGP, seeking a fair probe into her death.
