JNU Protests: Delhi Police Registers FIR Against Students As 'Brutality' Debate Rages On

New Delhi:

The Delhi Police registered two FIRs in connection with the JNU protest march on Tuesday. The case has been registered against students for violating the prohibitory orders. The police said that the students climbed the barricades twice despite warning them about the prohibitory orders. Two FIRs, one in South district and another in South-West district, have been registered under appropriate sections of the Indian Penal Code. Around 30 police personnel and 15 students were injured during a march to Parliament protest led by JNUSU against a hostel fee hike in New Delhi on Monday, said the Delhi Police. The Delhi Police has registered a case under section 186/353 of the IPC at Kishan Garh Police station . Case is registered from the police side. They have not received any compliant from students as of now.

The clashes broke out between the students and the police after the former were stopped from march to Parliament in which thousands of students participated from different universities across the national capital, paralysing traffic and bringing the city to a halt. The JNU Students Union has appealed to all students injured in the ‘brutal and inhuman crackdown’ unleashed by the Delhi Police to come to Freedom Square at 3 pm to narrate their experience.

Traffic was affected in some parts of Lutyens’ Delhi as the students marched towards Parliament. Among other intersections, vehicles were moving at a snail’s pace on Nelson Mandela Marg, Aurobindo Marg and Baba Gang Nath Marg.

The entry and exit points of three Delhi Metro stations near Parliament were shut down temporarily and trains did not halt at Udyog Bhawan and Patel Chowk. The services resumed four hours later.

Students took to Twitter to share pictures of the march and of injuries they received allegedly in a lathicharge by police, as the hashtag “emergencyinJNU” trended on the microblogging site.

CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury on Monday slammed the Narendra Modi government over police action on Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students, who were protesting against the massive fee hike. "This is Modi’s emergency. The number of police personnel present at the spot of the protest is higher than what we saw during emergency," Yechury said during a press briefing in New Delhi.
