Bharat Ratna to Veer Savarkar? Centre says no recommendation required, but refuses to give a timeline

Vinayak Damodar Savarkar

Key Highlights MHA responded to the query raised by a BJP MP in the Lok Sabha Maharashtra BJP unit had promised a Bharat Ratna for Veer Savarkar in its elections manifesto

New Delhi: Amid fierce opposition from certain political parties to confer Bharat Ratna on Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, the central government on Tuesday stated that no formal recommendation is required to confer the highest civilian award on the Hindutva ideologue. The government, however, did not give any timeline about conferring the Bharat Ratna on Veer Savarkar.

The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) was responding to Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Gopal Shetty's query in the Lok Sabha where he had asked about the progress in conferring the Bharat Ratna on Veer Savarkar.

The MHA said, "Recommendations for Bharat Ratna are received regularly from various quarters, but no formal recommendation for this award is necessary. The decisions regarding Bharat Ratna are taken from time to time. This is the decision that the government would take on its own."

During the electioneering phase of the recently-held Maharashtra elections, the BJP had promised to confer Bharat Ratna award on Veer Savarkar in its election manifesto. This promise of the saffron party has once again got it at loggerheads with various other political parties.

Veer Savarkar, a vociferous proponent of Hindutva ideology, is a revered figure among many leaders. However, there are some who portray him in a negative light.

Many BJP leaders in the past have endorsed the idea of conferring Bharat Ratna award on Veer Savarkar. But opposition leaders like AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi have slammed the BJP for propagating such an idea citing Savarkar advocated the use of rape as a political tool.

Last month, Tushar Gandhi, the great-grandson of Mahatma Gandhi, had said that Savarkar was the 'patron' of Mahatma's assassins. Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel also made accusations on the same lines saying Savarkar was part of the conspiracy to assassinate Mahatma Gandhi.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena, which is at loggerheads with the BJP in Maharashtra, said that it strongly supports the idea of conferring Veer Savarkar.
