Visually Impaired Student Amongst Those Injured in Brutal Police Action

A Day After

NEW DELHI: Around 15 Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) students have been severely injured after brutal action by the Delhi Police on Monday. this includes a visually impaired student Shashi Bhushan Samad, a JNUSU councillor.



In spite of him being visually-impaired, Delhi Police cops stomped over his chest, mercilessly beating him up. Currently, he is admitted in the AIIMS Trauma Centre.







Sashi, who is a second-year student at History (Hons.) at JNU is also known for his revolutionary poetry. Hailing from a rural family, JNU's education and poetry had empowered him from the morass of poverty.



Later, he also said that Police taunted him for protesting in spite of being visually impaired.



The JNU Visually Challenged Students' Forum has accused Delhi Police of this barbaric misconduct. They have demanded an apology from the Delhi Police for grossly violating the democratic right of disabled students and plan to organize a peaceful protest outside Delhi Police headquarters on Wednesday afternoon.



Several photographs of the atrocious manner in which Delhi Police baton-charged the student protestors are circulating on the social media.



Around 800 police personnel and 10 companies of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) were deployed within and outside the JNU Campus on Monday to contain the protest march.



Student protestors have also alleged that Delhi Police Cops switched off the streetlights near Jor Bagh and lathi-charged the students.



Meanwhile, the Delhi Police has denied such allegations. They also reiterated that no tear-gas, lathi-charge or water cannons were used against the students.



Around 100 JNU students were detained for long hours on Monday by Delhi Police. JNUSU President Aishe Ghosh, stated that she was detained and groped by four male police officials.



“Most of the protesting students from the morning were beaten up and then detained. Several students are also badly injured. But what form of oppression will be there the #Jnuprotest will continue until the IHA manual will be completely rolled back,” Aejaz Ahmad Rather, former JNUSU General Secretary tweeted.



Delhi Police had arrested the students for showing ‘aggressive defiance.’



Aishe Ghosh, after being released, met GC Hosur (Joint Secretary of the Human Resource Development) along with other JNUSU representatives.



Two FIRs have been launched by the Delhi Police against the students who were protesting at Aurobindo Marg. This case has been registered under Damage to Public Property Act. The FIRs have been lodged at Lodhi Colony police station and Kisangarh Police Station.



BSP member Danish Ali and Congress lawmaker TN Prathapan spoke about it during zero-hour in the Lok Sabha on Monday. They demanded a ‘high-level probe’ into the police’s atrocity against students.



Rajya Sabha was adjourned on Tuesday on account of opposition parties raising the hostel fee-hike at JNU and the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.



JNUSU has called November 18, 2019, as a ‘Black Day.’



“The hate against JNU is symptomatic of the privileged class/caste hating the idea of their "inferiors" rising up to the same socioeconomic circles that they are in. #ShutDownJNU because how dare people with less than 6k income be studying in India's top University #jnuprotest,” tweeted Anwesh, an Economics Research Scholar at JNU.



JNU’s Administration has condemned the students for violating the High Court Order of August 9, 2017, for also assembling and holding protest within the 100m of the Administration building.



A press release by ABVP students condemned the police atrocity against the students. They also blamed the continuous propaganda and Sangh-bashing by Left Unity members.



‘ABVP’s demand for a multi-pronged struggle against the UGC-MHRD, MCD, Delhi Government and JNU Administration was rejected by the Left,’ stated the release.



Meanwhile, anti-hike protests at JNU have garnered ample support.



“The government has collected 94,000 Cr as tax from us for higher education which remained unutilised according to the CAG. Yet they want a several fold hike in JNU fees to prevent people like Kanhaiya Kumar from studying there. It is a war on education & thought itself,” tweeted Prashant Bhushan, Public Interest Lawyer and Activist.



“JNU students protest so their below poverty line families won't have to pay 40% of their annual income to educate one child. #FeesMustFall for us all,” tweeted Kavita Krishnan, Secretary AIPWA.



The JNU Teacher’s Association has demanded the resignation of the Vice-Chancellor.



“Our students are asserting their right to acquire and create knowledge. They are not begging for favours. #FeesMustFall,” tweeted Ghazala Jamil, Assistant Professor at Centre for the Study of Law and Governance, JNU.



“Why has the JNU administration refused to talk with teachers' and students' representatives to resolve this crisis? Why bring paramilitary forces to intimidate unarmed student protestors? Why use physical violence with terrible consequences to stop a peaceful march?” tweeted Jayati Ghosh, Chairperson of the Centre for Economic Studies and Planning, JNU.



The growing solidarity and support from JNUTA, other universities, journalists, activists and academics in the wake of the police action is further strengthening the students movement. The face off between the students and the JNU authorities continues with no direct communication .


