Missing minor girl was raped, murdered by neighbour after she turned down his proposal: Police

The missing child's charred body was found in a nullah in Talasari (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The girl went missing from her home on October 1, said police Her phone records led police to the accused who is her neighbour and works as a cobbler The suspect, Ajav Banvashi has confessed to the heinous crime

Mumbai: Police in India's economic capital have finally solved the case of the disappearance of a 14-year-old girl who went missing from her house on October 1. The child's charred body was found in a nullah along Talasari in Palghar district with investigators alleging that she was raped and assaulted in the minutes before her death.

Following an extensive investigation that lasted for over a month-and-a-half, officers with the Samta Nagar police in Mumbai have arrested a 25-year-old boy in connection with the crime. Identified as a resident of Kandivali (East), the accused was the victim's neighbour and worked as a cobbler. A native of Jaunpur in Uttar Pradesh, Ajay Banvashi admitted to raping and murdering the girl.

In his statement to the police, Banvashi said that he invited the girl to visit his house on the day of her disappearance. He asked her to marry him and she refused. Frustrated, the accused tried to rape her and she started shouting for help. This is when he used a bottle to bludgeon her. He then strangled her to death with his hands and packed her body in a sack. The same afternoon, he transported the sack to Talasari on his motorcycle where he threw it into a nullah before pouring petrol on it and setting it ablaze.

Police caught wind of Banvashi's involvement in the crime after the girl's father lodged a missing person complaint and identified him as a suspect. While he denied any role during the preliminary questioning, investigators found out that Banvashi owned a second cell phone that he used to speak to the victim. He broke down under intense interrogation earlier this week and confessed to the heinous crimes.

The child's body was found and sent for autopsy and the report confirmed that she had been raped and suffered blunt trauma on the head in the minutes leading up to her death. Meanwhile, Banvashi was produced before a magistrate court on Monday and remanded to police custody till November 25. Just this week, another incident came to light from Malad area in Mumbai where a 17-year-old girl was abducted by four men and gang-raped for 12 hours at an under-construction building. Police officers familiar with the case told media outlets that the girl was out for a morning walk with her friends when the accused abducted her at knifepoint. These crimes paint a worrisome picture of law and order in India's economic capital.
