New Zealand woman dies in India; family struggles to repatriate body home

A New Zealand woman on a trip to India was found dead in a hotel in New Delhi on Saturday, November 16.

The woman was identified as 43-year-old Polly Tuialii, who was found in her New Delhi hotel room unresponsive by her friend. Ms Tuialii was rushed to Lady Hardinge Hospital where she was declared dead.

Ms Tuialii is said to have travelled to India on a work-related event, her sister-in-law Sophie Ruka told Stuff.

Investigation revealed that Ms Tuialii died of cardiac arrest.

Ms Tuialii’s husband Graeme Tuialii had died in April earlier this year, she had gone on a presentation for her work in India.

Ms Tuialii is survived by her 25-year-old son and 21-year-old daughter, and the rest of their extended family.

Ms Tuialii is originally from Rangi Point, on the northern part of the Hokianga Harbour in the Far North, she lived in Tasmania at the time of her death, Stuff reported.

Ms Tuialii’s family is now struggling to bring her body back to New Zealand for a tangi, a traditional Maori send-off - at Waiparera and have established a Givealittle page to raise funds for the repatriation.

“My mother in law is trying to figure out how we will bring her home so we can mourn our loss.

“There has been the talk of having her cremated and brought home that way, but if we can raise enough money, we want to bring her body back so her children and of course our family can mourn traditionally,” Sophie Ruka, Ms Tuialii’s sister in law posted on the Givealitttle page.

The page has so far (20 November) raised $6,267 and has a goal of raising $20,000 to cover the cost of repatriation and funeral.

The money raised will be paid towards the cost to bring her mortal soul back to New Zealand for her last rites, and the rest will go towards her funeral, the family said.

“Polly was an amazing woman, so humble and with a heart full of love for everyone! She was a go-getter and has kept a smile on her face through all her tough times.

“She was an amazing mother and best friend to both her son and daughter and they done almost everything together,” Ms Ruka added.

To donate: https://givealittle.co.nz/cause/bring-our-polly-home
