Altaf Hussain Says, 'India Is Our Motherland', Highlights Corruption In Pak Army

Talking exclusively to Republic Media Network’s Editor-in-Chief on Tuesday, Pakistan’s Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) chief Altaf Hussain said that pre-1947 there was just India and for everyone in Pakistan, India is their motherland. "Before 1947, what is now Pakistan was Hindustan and hence the janmabhoomi of all of us in Hindustan." The leader has stated the undeniable fact that the major part of the Indian subcontinent, including present-day Pakistan, was one India before the British colonial regime hacked it into two.

"The father of the current Chief of Army Staff General Qamar Javed Bajwa was also Indian. From where did Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's father come from? I say that all of our ancestries are from India no matter how much ever that objects anyone," said Altaf Hussain. He added that the level of corruption in the Pakistan Army's ranks, as well as its spy agency Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), is higher than that of politicians in the country. "Those above the Major rank (in the army and ISI) are even more corrupt than any politician in the country."

READ | EXPLOSIVE | Should I Go Back To Pak & Get Assassinated?: MQM's Altaf Hussain Exposes ISI

Threat to life

Altaf Hussain revealed that he could not go back to his country due to the threat of assassination by the Pakistani military establishment, ISI, and terrorist groups. He added that he was carrying out a struggle for 27 years living in London. Moreover, Hussain claimed that he was the first target of a suicide bombing in Pakistan.

READ | Amid Threats And Heckling, My Right To Report At JNU: A Reporter's Diary

Hussain's political journey

In 1984, Hussain formed the MQM which became a major political force in 1988 by becoming the third-largest party in Pakistan’s national legislature. However, he faced a major setback after the Pakistani Army ordered a major crackdown on MQM in the early 1990s. Accused in a murder case, Hussain fled Pakistan and requested asylum from the United Kingdom. Years later, he gained citizenship in the UK. Nevertheless, he would address huge rallies in Pakistan via telephone and continued to have a major influence over the politics of Karachi. In 2016, owing to the alleged pressure from the Pakistani military establishment, the MQM was forced to publicly sever its connection from Hussain. In October 2019, Hussain pleaded not guilty after being charged in an incendiary speech case by the Metropolitan Police. Recently, he requested Prime Minister Narendra Modi to grant him asylum in India.

READ | Watch: Pakistan's MQM Party Leader Altaf Hussain Seeks Asylum In India

READ | Can Protect From Bullets, Not Bombs: Pak MQM Boss Altaf Hussain Recounts Followers' Words
