Pune boy with 1 kidney ‘made to do 100 sit-ups’

PUNE: A Standard X student having only one kidney from birth suffered from severe pain in stomach and legs after a school-appointed “bouncer” allegedly made him do 100 sit-ups at the instruction of the subject teacher for failing to bring his Hindi workbook on Monday.The boy’s parents have lodged an FIR with the Swargate police. The teacher and the bouncer have been booked for an offence under Section 75 (cruelty to child) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015.“We shall add more names to the FIR if our investigation reveals that the school management had prior knowledge about the punishment as is alleged to have been meted out to the student,” senior inspector Brahmanand Naikwadi of the Swargate police said.Alakananda Sengupta, the principal of Mahaveer English Medium School at Salisbury Park, where the alleged incident occurred, told TOI, “The student was asked to do just 15 to 20 sit-ups. He was told to stop when he complained about stomach ache.”Asked how she would justify such a punishment, Sengupta maintained, “The action is a part of our measures to maintain discipline. Otherwise, how are we to maintain discipline?”Pune zilla parishad’s education officer for secondary schools Ganpat More told TOI, “Our team of officers will visit the school on Wednesday for conducting an inquiry into the alleged incident.”The student’s mother said, “When he came home, he was in extreme pain. He had forgotten his Hindi workbook at home, for which he was first asked to stand outside the class, and then the bouncer asked him to do 100 sit-ups. My son told me that when he complained of pain in his stomach at the count of 93, the bouncer asked him to start again. Then he was asked to be in the squatting position for 15 minutes.”She said, “I immediately went to meet the principal, but I was asked to come back on Tuesday, which again was insensitive. He is suffering from severe pain in his legs and stomach and can hardly walk out of pain.”She said, “A few months ago, a similar incident had happened with my younger son in the same school when he was beaten up by the bouncer. When we orally complained about the presence of a bouncer in school, we were told that it would be taken care of. But nothing has happened.”Asked about the need for a bouncer in the school, principal Sengupta said, “We have employed the bouncer four months ago to maintain discipline among students and for security purpose. We are thinking of discontinuing his services, but a decision will be taken by the management.”
