19-year-old held for raping 5-year-old in Hyderabad; sent to 14-day judicial custody

The minor survivor was later sent for a medical examination. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A 19-year-old grocery shop worker was arrested for raping the minor Minor's parents are daily wage workers and were not home when the incident happened A case has been registered under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act

Hyderabad: A 19-year-old grocery shop worker was arrested for raping a five-year-old girl on the pretext of giving her sweets. The incident happened in Maheswaram Mandal in Hyderabad.

The accused was arrested from Porandla village after a complaint was lodged by the girl's parents on Monday night. The incident happened on November 17 when the girl's parents - both daily wage workers -were not at home. The accused was the survivor's neighbour and the minor used to come to his shop for buying sweets.

According to a report, an inspector said that during the preliminary investigation in the matter, the accused confessed the crime to police. Reportedly, the victim was alone when the accused sneaked into the house where he raped the minor and fled when she started crying.

Meanwhile, the minor's parents came and found her howling with pain. They reached out to the local police and narrated the ordeal. On Monday night, a police complaint was lodged in the matter under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) section 376 (rape) and under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

The minor survivor was later sent for a medical examination. The police produced the accused before a local court and the accused has been sent to 14-day judicial custody.

In a similar case reported from Mumbai, as many as three accused were arrested in connection with an alleged gang-rape of a 17-year-old girl in Nallasopara area of the commercial capital. The incident happened on November 16 when the victim had left her home for a morning walk with her friends. This is when the prime accused, Amit, stopped the auto near Achole Talao lake and after assaulting victim's friends, they kidnapped the victim and took her to a room.

For 12 hours, the four accused held her captive and took chances to rape her. The victim's friends lodged a complaint at the Tulinj police station and with the help of the victim's mobile number, the police traced her and the accused were arrested. However, a case under the relevant sections of the IPC and POCSO was registered.
