In #WTF News: Rape Victim In Chhattisgarh Fined Rs 5000 By Village Panchayat

In a bizarre case in Chhattisgarh, a 23-year-old gang rape survivor from Jashpur district has been fined Rs 5000 for filing a police complaint against her rapists. According to the village Panchayat that imposed the fine, she had to be taught a lesson for taking the matter “outside the village”.

According to a leading publication, on November 4, the victim had a fight with her brother after which she stormed out of their house and went to spend the night at a relative’s house nearby.

The rape accused, Kishore and Sandeep, were acquaintances of the rape survivor. Realising that she needed to earn money as she was staying away from her own home, they approached her at her relative’s house. They offered her paid labour work to which she agreed.

Pre-planned rape

It is clear from news reports that the rape was planned beforehand. Kishore and Sandeep not only approached the survivor and offered her work, they knew that she was going to accept the offer as she needed the money.

When she arrived at the construction site the next day to report for work, she found that it was abandoned. There was nothing happening there. It had been a ploy all along. The two men then brutally raped her. After the heinous act, they threatened her with dire consequences if she revealed what had happened to anyone.

Village Panchayat gets involved

However, defying the two men, the survivor told her mother that she had been gang raped, after which the two women went and filed a complaint at the police station. But, according to the police, since the victim was in shock after the incident, she only filed a formal, written complaint two days after approaching them.

The accused were promptly arrested and are now behind bars. You’d think that the trial of the two rapists would now start, but it ended up becoming a trial against the survivor.

When news about the rape and the police complaint spread around the village, the village Panchayat--who believes that it has the authority to be the judge in crimes like rape--fined the two rapists Rs. 5000 rupees. In a bizarre twist, they also fined the woman Rs. 5000 for taking the matter “outside the village”.

Since when was reporting a crime to the police equal to committing a crime? Panchayats are well-known for being misogynistic and regressive. A community in Gujarat recently banned women from using cellphones and has imposed a fine on inter-caste marriages. They’ve also been known to order the rape of women who defy social norms.

The village Panchayat who fined the rape survivor should be brought to task for making her life even harder. As we know, rape victims in India are shamed while the justice system takes decades to convict rapists. Let’s not make the survivor’s ordeal any worse.




