The True Story of Bikram Choudhury, The Yoga Instructor Behind the New Netflix Doc

Warning: This article contains spoilers for Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator, a new Netflix documentary.

Perhaps you’ve heard of Bikram Yoga. Celebrities from George Clooney to Lady Gaga have endorsed this cult-like approach to yoga exercise, which involves punishing 90-minute sessions of 26 poses and two breathing exercises in a sweltering hot room of at least 105 degrees. The face behind the ensuing empire of yoga schools is a man named Bikram Choudhury, a celebrity for many years in his own right until he became famous for a different, darker reason: He faced multiple charges of sexual assault from former students and eventually fled the country in 2016.

Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator is a new Netflix documentary now streaming that chronicles Choudhury’s rise and fall. Directed by Eva Orner (Out of Iraq, Chasing Asylum) the film tells a disturbing #MeToo story that unfolded a year before the movement exploded online.

Is Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator based on a true story?

Yes. Through interviews with former Bikram Yoga employees who accused the guru of sexual misconduct and assault—including Sarah Baughn, Larissa Anderson, and Minakshi Jafa-Bodden—Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator tells the true story of Bikram Choudhury.

Who is Bikram Choudhury?

Bikram Choudhury was born in Kolkata, India, and came to the United States in the ’70s. He opened yoga studios in California and Hawi’i. He claims to have developed the signature 26-posture yoga series himself, though this assertion has been challenged. Nonetheless, “Bikram Yoga” became a sensation in America. In 2006, there were over 1500 Bikram Yoga studios worldwide. An official “Bikram Yoga” class must be taught by Bikram-certified teachers, who have completed nine weeks of training endorsed by Choudhury. Becoming a Bikram teacher was like joining a cult—and the cult grew and grew and grew. Choudhury was their leader, and a revered yoga guru.

What was Bikram Choudhury accused of?

As of 2014, Choudhury was being sued by five women accusing him of sexual assault and harassment. Two of those lawsuits accused Choudhury of rape. One anonymous accuser was a then 18-year-old Canadian student who sued Choudhury for sexual assault, gender discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual battery. Another anonymous student accused him of raping her twice and forcing her legs into yoga positions.

In the film, Baughn, Anderson, and Jafa-Bodden all describe instances of sexual misconduct with Choudhury. Baughn, a former yoga teacher, describes an incident in which, after he had propositioned her, Choudhury pressed up into her while ostensibly helping her in class, and then later she describes being assaulted by him in his hotel room. Anderson, a yoga teacher, describes being raped by him in her hotel room.

Jafa-Bodden, his former head of legal affairs, describes a lawsuit from a former Bikram trainee named Pandhora Williams, who accused Choudhury of racial discrimination. Williams said she pushed back on Choudhury’s homophobic rant that gay people should be put on an island and “left to die of AIDS.” Choudhury allegedly told his assistant, ““Get that black bitch out of here. She’s a cancer.” Williams was ejected from the class and not refunded her $10,900 fee. She sued for racial discrimination.

It also came forth that Choudhury lied about his past as a “yoga champion” —a lie that was happily repeated by the many talk show hosts and media personalities that interviewed him. The final accusation put forward in Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator is that the “Bikram Yoga” technique—26 poses and two breathing exercises—was never Bikram’s yoga technique in the first place. In a talking head interview, Yogi Mukul Dutta accuses Choudhury of stealing and slightly modifying that method taught by his master, Bishnu Ghosh, from his “Yoga Cure” booklet.

In 2016, Choudhury fled the country after he lost a $7.5 million civil lawsuit to Jafa-Bodden, who accused him of “severe, ongoing, pervasive and offensive conduct” toward not just women, but gay people and racial minorities. (Shortly after filing the suit, Jafa-Bodden was fired.) To this day, Choudhury has never paid the damages, and he’s never been charged criminally. The women who accused him of sexual misconduct eventually decided to settle.

Some Bikram Yoga studios chose to change their name to disassociate themselves from the now-disgraced guru, but others didn’t. There is no happy ending here: The last assertion of the documentary is that Choudhury opened up a new Bikram Yoga teacher training in Mexico in 2018 and that studios are still sending him young girls to train.

Watch Bikram: Yogi, Guru, Predator on Netflix
