[PICS] Tiger Shroff's sister Krishna sets the internet ablaze in this hot black bikini

Krishna Shroff looks hot in this latest picture

Key Highlights Tiger Shroff's sister Krishna is always taking Instagram by a storm with her hot pictures The stunner went on to share a few more scintillating pictures on social media and fans can't seem to take their eyes off her Dressed in a black bikini, Krishna's picture will surely urge you to hit the gym

It's still just Thursday morning and we can't wait for the coffee machine to begin working so that we can pour ourselves our sixth cup of dark roast coffee to wake up. While we look around for different ways to get off our bed to hit the gym, Tiger Shroff's sister Krishna is undoubtedly one of the hottest women on Instagram today. Although she's not spoken about her interest in films like her dad and brother, Krishna always makes us go wow with her hot and sultry pictures on Instagram.

After sharing a stunning picture from her Dubai getaway with her beau Eban Hyams, Krishna shared a picture in a black bikini and she looks wow. The picture obviously received a lot of love on Instagram. From heart and lovestruck emojis to people dropping "meow" comments, Krishna looks beautiful. Her mom, Ayesha Shroff wrote, "My beeeeeeeeeyoooooooooootiful puddddiiiiiiing!!!!!!!!!!!"

Check out the picture here:

While we love how stunning Krishna looks, she's been news for her relationship with Eban Hyams. Back in September, Eban shared a story on Instagram where he addressed his ladylove as "wifey." Speaking about the relationship, Krishna had earlier revealed to Pune Mirror that her family doesn't interfere much. "They don’t interfere much, they trust my judgement. Familes eventually do get involved but I’d like to take my time and keep it between us for now."

She also went on to speak about being addressed as "wifey." She added, "It’s hilarious, just a term. And it’s crazy how there are so many articles saying we were secretly married. Even my mum (Ayesha Shroff) asked me what was going on. It’s only been four months...We are just living in the moment and enjoying each other’s company."

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on entertainment, fashion, and lifestyle.
