Rajasthan: 30-year-old woman abducted, gang-raped twice by two men

The two men started beating up the survivor's husband, following which, he fled from the spot (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Two men allegedly abducted a woman and gang-raped her twice in Rajasthan's Pratapgarh The accused took the woman's jewellery and thrashed her The police have arrested the two accused

Jaipur: A 30-year-old woman was allegedly gang-raped after being kidnapped in Rajasthan, the police said on Friday. The woman was allegedly kidnapped from a petrol pump in Rajasthan's Pratapgarh. The woman was with her husband when the incident took place.

The accused also threatened the woman with swords and stole her jewellery as well. The two accused were identified as Valji Meena and Omkar Das. The police are trying to locate the swords and bike used by the accused.

How it happened

On November 6, the survivor and her husband stopped at the petrol pump to get fuel. When the survivor's husband was checking his two-wheeler, two bike-borne men approached them. The two men started beating up the survivor's husband, following which, he fled from the spot.

The accused then abducted the survivor and took her to Mahadev Temple which is located around 50 metres away from the petrol pump. The accused threatened the survivor with swords, forcefully took her jewellery and gang-raped her.

Following this, Valji Meena and Omkar Das took the survivor to a forested area and stayed there for around an hour. At around 10 pm at night, the accused stopped a passerby and snatched his mobile phone. The accused then took the survivor to a nearby stream and beat her up. After thrashing the woman, the accused gang-raped her again.

At around 3 am in the morning, the accused took the survivor to the petrol pump and abandoned her. Meanwhile, the woman's family had been looking for her. They found the survivor and approached the police. The police formed a team and started investigating the case. The police team was led by a senior police official, Pooja Awana.

The police used technical assistance and evidence to locate the accused and nabbed them. During interrogation, the two accused confessed to the crime. Mohan Singh Chandrawat, station house officer of Pratapgarh, said that the police are looking for the bike and swords used by the accused.
