Mass bird deaths at Sambhar Lake point to problem within | India Today Insight

A dead bird is seen in the foreground as forest and civic workers collect dead birds in sacks, at the Sambhar Salt Lake in Rajasthan on November 11. (PTI Photo)



Late October, Rajasthan woke up to one of India's worst avian catastrophes. Bird carcasses began appearing on the banks of the Sambhar Lake, a 230 square kilometre saltwater body located 80 kilometres southwest of Jaipur. The numbers surged as the days went by until the lake's banks were carpeted with lifeless heaps of bird feathers. The deaths hit 29 species, including the Northern Shovelers that had flown in from Europe, and Pallas's Gulls, natives of Mongolia and southern Russia.

Naturalists call such events 'die-off'. They happen rarely, but Indian ornithologists say they are yet to see an event where birds have died in such numbers.

The Rajasthan government is groping for answers. The state hosts one of India's largest migratory bird populations. Every October, hundreds of thousands of birds begin to fly in to Rajasthan, leaving by mid-February. Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot has so far held three meetings with top state officials, expressing deep anguish at the deaths. He has ordered that the state wetland authority be made operational. The central government has sent experts from across the country to investigate the avian deaths. On November 20, the Rajasthan High Court took notice of the tragedy and sought a report from amicus curiae Nitin Jain.

Authorities are burying the piling bird carcasses in pits after wrapping them in polythene sheets. This has raised concerns about the risk of contamination of soil, water and salt produced in the area.

Dead birds at the Sambhar Salt Lake in Rajasthan on November 11. (Photo:PTI)

State animal husbandry authorities take the lead in case of any widespread mortality of wild animals and birds since there is a risk of transmission of the prevailing disease/ infection to domestic animals and poultry. Samples of Sambhar's bird carcasses have been sent to the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) in Bareilly, the High Security Animal Disease Laboratory (HSADL) in Bhopal, the Wildlife Institute of India in Dehradun and the Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History (SACON) in Coimbatore. Bird flu has been ruled out.

Mass deaths among migratory birds are not uncommon. In the US, thousands of blackbirds were found dead on roads on January 1, 2011. The tragedy occurred in Beebe, Arkansas. In Gujarat, hundreds of migratory seagulls turned up dead in Jamnagar in 2005. In the case of the Sambhar Lake, it is the high mortality rate that has sparked concern. It ranks on par with the death of an estimated 750,000 migrating Lapland Longspurs in Worthington, Minnesota, as reported by the Quarterly Journal of Ornithology in 1904.

Species Summer Grounds Wintering Grounds Northern Shoveller North Europe & Asia South Europe, Africa, Indian Subcontinent, Central Asia, Central & South America, east coastal USA Pintail Europe, Asia & North America South of equator including Southern Asia, Tufted Duck Temperate & North Eurasia South and West Europe, Asia and UK Common Teal Northern Eurasia Japan, Taiwan, South east Asia Middle east, Africa Gadwall Northern Eurasia and USA Asia, Arabia Brown-headed Gull Tibet, China India - coastal and large water bodies Gull billed Tern Southern Europe, East Asia, Coastal USA Africa, Caribbean, South Asia, New Zealand Pallas's Gull Southern Russia, Mongolia India, Arabia, Mediterranean Pied Avocet Temperate Europe, West & Central Asia Africa, India, Southern Asia Ruff Northern Eurasia Southern and western Europe, Africa, southern Asia and Australia Kentish Plover Africa, Europe Asia Asia, Africa, Europe

Unlike the West, India has no long-term data or eco-toxicological studies. Toxins, pollutants, virus, bacteria and fungus are thought to be the usual suspects in such tragedies. Biochemical investigations are complex and take time. The Swami Keshwanand Rajasthan Agriculture University in Bikaner has said it suspects avian botulism to be the cause of deaths at the Sambhar Lake. However, the symptoms stated by the institution are at best generic.

In laboratories around the world, scientists struggle with botulism given the mutations and sub-types of the bacterium and the sub-types of the toxin. False positives are common. Birds contract botulism from rotting fish or stale food dumped by humans. The death of seagulls in Jamnagar in 2005 was initially attributed to bird flu. Eventually, HSADL concluded the cause to be low-quality 'ganthia', a flour-based savoury, fed to birds by locals in Jamnagar.

Civic workers prepare to bury birds which were found dead at the Sambhar Salt Lake in Rajasthan. (Photo:PTI)

In the case of Sambhar Lake, suspicion has turned towards the lake itself. Under its plan to rejuvenate six wetlands in Rajasthan, the Union ministry of environment, forest and climate change had sought a report on the health of the ecosystems at the Sambhar Lake and five other spots. A report submitted in the last week of October rated Sambhar, Mansagar in Jaipur and Udaipur's Fatehsagar, Pichola and Udaisagar as the worst. The Keoladeo National Park in Bharatpur fared slightly better. Some of the problems in Sambhar were identified as lack of oxygen in the lake's water, high salinity, and high level of invasive living organisms. Experts also suspect poisonous algae and dumping of waste and carcasses in the lake behind the epidemic.

Most of the Sambhar Lake is deemed to be state government revenue land. While about 90 square miles of it is leased to Sambhar Salts Limited, a central government undertaking which produces salt for human consumption, illegal salt production by private players thrives. Most of the area is a 'dark zone', with very low levels of groundwater. However, borewells flourish, drawing groundwater to fill the fields where salt is extracted. The forest department is reluctant to intervene unless it has reason to believe there is violation of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. "You can neither do treatment at the 230 square kilometre-long lake nor chase away the migratory birds," says a state forest officer.

Ironically, the deaths have taken place even as successive governments have looked at the Sambhar Lake as a source of revenue. The lake's banks are being eyed as potential sites for solar power generation. Saving the lake that hosts migratory birds appears to be low priority, at least for the moment.
