Dhandari sexual assault and murder case: four acquitted for lack of Evidence in rape

Ludhiana: Five years after the alleged rape and murder of a minor girl had rocked Dhandari Khurd in Ludhiana, a local court acquitted all the accused in the rape case due to lack of sufficient and reliable evidence. Hearing in the murder case is scheduled for November 23.

The minor girl, a Class XII student of a government school, was allegedly kidnapped and sexual assaulted, following which she was set afire by the miscreants on December 4, 2014. Later she had succumbed to her injuries on December 9, 2014 in Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh.

On October 29, 2014, the Sahnewal police had booked four persons for allegedly kidnapping and sexually abusing 16 years old girl. The accused were booked under Sections 365 (Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine person), 354 (Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty), 376 (rape), 506 (criminal intimidation), 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC. A few weeks later, the girl had died after she was allegedly set afire by six persons including the three accused, involved in the rape case. The case is being heard separtely and is slated to come up on November 23.

As per the prosecution, the girl’s father in his statement to police had alleged that the girl, a Class XII student at a government school, was kidnapped by the four men on October 25, 2014, when she was going to school. According to the complaint, the accused had dragged her inside a car and forced her to inhale something.

Thereafter, they had taken her to some unknown place where they had confined her for two days. They had thrashed her there and dropped her back after two days, the girl’s father had alleged. On October 27, 2014, the accused again threatened her not to talk about the incident or else they would kill her and her family.

According to the father, the girl had revealed that the accused had tried to outrage her modesty.

She had recorded her statement under Section 164 of the CrPC on November 17, 2014 in the court wherein she said the accused had attempted to rape her and thereafter on October 27, 2014, some unknown persons had entered her house and thrashed her and tied her legs and hands and forced her to withdraw her case.

Police later arrested the accused and presented a chargesheet against them in the court. During the trial, the accused pleaded false implication in the case.

Though the additional public prosecutor pleaded for punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence, the court of additional sessions judge Tarn Taran Singh Bindra acquitted the accused after going through the evidence put on record.

Advocate Trilok Sood, the defence counsel said there were several flaws in the case. After the girl was recovered, police had asked her to go for medical examination, but she had refused to undergo the same. But after four days, she gave consent for the examination.

The defence counsel said the victim in her statement recorded under Section 161 of CrPC, had claimed that she was sexually abused, and later in the statement recorded under Section 164 of CrPC she had claimed that they had attempted to rape her. So, there was difference in her statements, the counsel said. He said the complainant had also claimed that on the day of alleged crime, his wife was at home, but didn’t get her statement recorded. Sood said the doctor who conducted her medical examination did not find any evidence of sexual assault. He said the court acquitted the accused for want of sufficient and reliable evidence.

Meanwhile the hearing of murder case is still going in the court of Additional Sessions Judge Arunvir Vashista. The case, which is at the stage of prosecution evidence will come up for hearing on November 23.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
