Bombay HC acquits man awarded 10-yr jail by special court

OVER THREE years after a special court sentenced a 31-year-old man to 10 years’ imprisonment for sexually assaulting a KG student of a prominent school in Mumbai, the Bombay High Court on Thursday acquitted him.

The accused, who worked as a peon in the school, was found guilty under a section of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act by the special court in October 2016, which had observed that since the incident had taken place on the premises of the school, stringent punishment should be given.

On Thursday, Justice Nitin Sambre quashed the special court’s order and set aside the conviction, following the accused’s appeal. The HC also said that the order of compensation under POCSO Act, directing the accused to pay Rs 25,000 to the four-year-old victim, is also set aside, directing that the amount if paid by the accused be refunded to him.

According to the prosecution, the incident had taken place on September 29, 2014, on the school premises, where the victim was studying. The accused had allegedly sexually abused the victim, when she was visiting the toilet.

An FIR was subsequently lodged. The prosecution had claimed that the victim was initially shown photographs of staff members of the school for identification and that she was confused between two photographs — the accused and his brother. Later, when the staff members were shown to her for identification, the victim identified the accused. The victim had also identified the accused at the time of the trial in court.

The accused in his appeal had claimed that there was no evidence to show that he had committed the alleged act. During the trial, among the witnesses examined by the police, were the colleagues of the accused, who had claimed that he was not on duty on the ground floor, where the alleged incident took place.

At the time of the trial, the doctor, who had examined the victim, remained untraceable and hence the medical report remained unproved, the accused claimed. The special court had held that it was proven that the accused was on duty at the school on the day and the evidence of the victim and her mother is sufficient to prove the act of the accused.

The accused in his appeal said the court had failed to consider the factors which showed that the evidence was not enough to prove beyond reasonable doubt that he had committed the offences. He had claimed that he was falsely implicated and the victim’s deposition was ‘tutored”.
