Couple Abducted and Woman Raped by 12 Men in Punjab

They took turns to commit the violent act after the police failed to act.

A couple was abducted on Saturday, February 9, 2019, by several men near Ludhiana, Punjab. The men later gang-raped the woman.

Mullanpur Dakha police have registered a case but the 12 suspects remain at large.

According to the victims, the horrific rape happened after police officers were informed by the man but did not respond.

The unnamed man and woman had been travelling in a car at around 8 pm when a group of five men threw stones at their car. This forced them to stop.

After the car stopped, the couple was dragged out of the vehicle and taken to a nearby farmhouse.

The man was beaten up and was told to bring Rs. 2 Lakh (£2,200). The victim supposedly called his friend and asked him to bring the money, but instead called the police to inform them of the incident.

However, the police did arrive at the scene as they did not act on the complaint.

The five men then called seven others to the farmhouse where all of them raped the woman. They took turns to commit the violent act after the police failed to act on the complaint.

The 12 men stole the couple’s belongings before fleeing the scene.

The couple informed Mullanpur Dakha police about the incident. They registered a case against the 12 men.

However, the men are on the run and remain unidentified. Police are scanning the CCTV footage to identify the men.

The two victims have also demanded action against the on-duty police officers who failed to respond to their call for help.

In another shocking case, a court sentenced four men to 20 years each in prison on Thursday, February 7, 2019, for the gang-rape of a young woman from Rukhala village, Punjab.

The incident happened in July 2017 where the woman had been on night duty at a private hospital in Gidderbaha, Punjab.

Jagjit Singh, who knew the victim, had told her that her mother had fainted and asked her to accompany him to her home.

Singh took the victim to a room near Madhir village, where he and three other men raped her. Singh had filmed a video of the incident.

The victim reported the crime to Kotbhai police and the four men, all of Rukhala village were arrested.

Jagjit, Ramjit, Satnam and Abhijit were each sentenced to 20 years in prison and were each fined Rs. 2 Lakh (£2,200).
