SPG will not guard family members of ex-PMs: Report

Pic courtesy: spg.nic.in

Key Highlights PM Narendra Modi is now the only person being protected by the SPG commandos The SPG cover given to Gandhis was removed on November 8 The SPG was established in 1985 after the assassination of prime minister Indira Gandhi on October 31, 1984

New Delhi: Days after the withdrawal of the Special Protection Group protection given to Congress interim chief Sonia Gandhi, former party chief Rahul Gandhi, general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, and ex-prime minister Manmohan Singh, sources on Friday suggested that even the family members of former PMs will not be guarded by the SPG commandos.

Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Arjun Ram Meghwal informed the Lok Sabha today that the SPG Act (Amendment) Bill had been listed in the government's agenda for the upcoming week.

Highly-trained SPG commandos protect the PM and his/her immediate family members, and former PMs and members of their immediate families.

The SPG cover, the country's highest grade of protection, given to Gandhis was removed on November 8. They are now provided 'Z plus' security by the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF).

The government's decision became a huge political flashpoint, with Congress leaders slamming the move as "sinister" and "vindictive".

The Congress also referred to the Justice JS Verma Commission report which had observed that ex-PM Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated (by LTTE terrorists on May 21, 1991) because of security lapses.

Last night, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra described the removal of SPG cover from her family as a part of politics which keeps happening.

"It's politics and this keeps happening," said Priyanka Gandhi.

Earlier this week, Indian Youth Congress chief BV Srinivas led protests near the Shastri Bhavan against the removal of SPG cover of the Gandhi family.

While burning effigies of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union Home Minister Amit Shah, the youth Congress members demanded the restoration of the SPG security to Gandhis. Notably, PM Modi is now the only person in the country, who is being protected by the elite SPG commandos.

The Gandhis, who were included in the VVIP security list following an amendment in September 1991 in the SPG Act of 1988, are now without SPG protection after 28 years.

The SPG was established in 1985 after the assassination of prime minister Indira Gandhi on October 31, 1984.

The SPG Act was passed by Parliament in 1988, entrusting the Special Protection Group with providing proximate security to the Prime Minister and the members of his immediate family.

When VP Singh assumed power in 1989, his government removed SPG cover to his predecessor Rajiv Gandhi.

In the year 2003, the Vajpayee government amended the SPG Act to bring down the period of automatic protection from 10 years to "a period of one year from the date on which the former prime minister ceased to hold office" and “beyond one year based on the level of threat as decided by the Central Government”.
