Enroute school, minor sisters abducted and gang-raped by five men in Bareilly

Police with the apprehended culprits (Picture Courtesy: @bareillypolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The cousins, aged 14 and 17, were on their way to school when they were abducted on November 17 A video of the heinous crime was uploaded on social media by the accused Bareilly police booked the five boys under relevant sections of the IPC, POCSO Act and IT Act

Lucknow: Within 24 hours of them receiving a complaint in this regard, police in Uttar Pradesh's Bareilly district arrested five men accused of gang-raping two minor girls. They have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act along with the Information Technology (IT) Act.

The matter came to light on Thursday after family members of the girls approached local police and told narrated the incident while telling them that the accused have uploaded a video clip of the heinous act on social media. A case was registered on the basis of an official complaint by the father of one of the girls and teams were formed to nab the culprits. On Friday, Bareilly police told media outlets that all of the accused are in custody.

Police have identified them as Waseem, Savez Khan, Akhlaq Khan, Arif and Amir Khan. An FIR was filed against them under sections 376D of the IPC, 3/4 of the POCSO Act and section 67 of the IT Act. A copy of the viral video has also been attached to the complaint by Bareilly police, a senior official told media outlets.

Senior superintendent of police Shailesh Pandey said that the incident dates back to November 17. The girls, aged 14 and 17, were on their way to school when the five local boys forcefully took them to an abandoned cane field on the outskirts of the village. The boys took turns raping the girls while shooting the act on their camera phones. They threatened to release the clips if the girls were to approach the police or tell anyone about the incident. It was only on Thursday after the video was uploaded on social media that the girls' families registered a complaint.

Earlier this men, two men were arrested in neighbouring Sambhal district for allegedly raping a minor girl. The child was a student of Class IX and resident of a village under Asmauli police station limits. Police officials probing the matter claimed that the accused entered the girl's home when her grandparents had gone to take a dip in the Ganga. Upon finding the child alone, the accused sexually assaulted her and fled the spot.

A complaint by her grandparents led to the arrests of the accused. Meanwhile, a medical report confirmed signs of sexual assault. The accused were produced before a court and sent to jail on the basis of an FIR under section 376D of the IPC among other sections of the POCSO Act.
