Woman gang-raped by three men at Lokmanya Tilak Terminus in Mumbai's Kurla for two days

Lokmanya Tilak Terminus (LTT) in Mumbai's Kurla area (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The survivor is undergoing treatment at the Rajawadi Municipal Hospital Mumbai police have arrested two of the accused while the third is still at large A case under sections of the IPC has been lodged at Tilak Nagar police station

Mumbai: Officers with the Tilak Nagar police station in Mumbai are on the lookout for a man involved in the gang-rape of a 35-year-old woman. Two others accused by the survivor have been taken into custody and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). While an investigation into the matter is underway, details emerging as the result of a preliminary probe only suggest that the woman was subjected to unimaginable horror by the accused.

The matter came to light on Thursday when a passerby spotted a woman lying under a flight of stairs at the Lokmanya Tilak Terminus in Mumbai's Kurla area. Her clothes were torn and she was bleeding at the time, indicate eyewitness accounts. The local police were alerted and the woman was rushed to Rajawadi Municipal Hospital in Ghatkopar.

In her statement to the police, the woman said that she hails from Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh. She further told the cops that she was held hostage, tortured and gang-raped by three men for two whole days (November 20, November 21) at the LTT in Mumbai's Kurla area before they abandoned her and fled.

Two of the accused have reportedly been identified and arrested on the basis of the survivor's statement and a manhunt is underway for the third accused. A case of illegal confinement and gang-rape among other offenses has been registered against them at the Tilak Nagar station. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

This is the second such incident to have come to light from Mumbai just this week. Earlier this week, a 17-year-old girl was abducted and gang-raped by a group of four men in Nalasopara area of the city. Police officials familiar with the case had told media outlets that the girl was abducted by three men while she was out on a morning walk with a group of friends. After abducting her at knifepoint and assaulting her friends, the assailants took her to an under-construction building in an autorickshaw.

There, another man joined them and the four accused gang-raped her for 12 hours before dropping her off at the same spot they had abducted her from. She went to the police and registered a case against the men which led to the arrests of three accused. A search was underway for the fourth accused who was on the run, as per the most recent reports in this regard.
