Mumbai: 35-year-old raped in eastern suburbs, 2 held

Police are also looking for a third person who sexually assaulted the woman Wednesday. (Representational Image)

Tilak Nagar police on Friday arrested two men for allegedly raping a 35-year-old woman in the eastern suburbs of Mumbai. The accused, police said, took the woman to an isolated place on the pretext of helping her and raped her Tuesday. Police are also looking for a third person who sexually assaulted the woman Wednesday.

According to police, the woman is from Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, and has been begging for a living. In her statement to police, she claimed that a few months ago she had a fight with her husband after which she left her residence and has been wandering on trains.

The woman, police said, had been travelling from one state to another and had arrived at Lokmanya Tilak Terminus in Mumbai on Monday.

While she was begging Tuesday, the two accused noticed she was limping and approached her. “The woman claimed that she had a paralytic attack a few months ago for which she had received treatment. When she told the men that she was fine, but not fully fit, the accused reportedly offered to help her get treatment in Mumbai,” a police officer from Tilak Nagar police station said. The men, however, took the woman to an isolated location and raped her. The men reportedly then fled.

On Wednesday night, another man reportedly approached the woman while she was sleeping. The accused also took her to an unknown location on the pretext of helping and sexually assaulted her.

The woman was found at the isolated location Thursday by local residents, who informed Nehru Nagar police. A patrolling van later took her to Rajawadi hospital.

According to police, medical examination has confirmed that she was sexually assaulted by multiple men. After a case on charges of gangrape was registered at Tilak Nagar police station, as the crime spot falls under their jurisdiction, police zeroed in on the suspects while scrutinising CCTV footage from around the spot. A police team was later sent to the spot and the two accused were arrested.

A senior official said they were now looking for the third person who raped the woman the following day. Meanwhile, police have informed Kanpur Police and urged them to locate the woman’s family.
