Conman raped woman after tricking them into believing he was 'second-richest man' in Bengaluru

Jahangir has been arrested and sent to jail pending further investigation into his crimes (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Jahangir used aliases like Karthik Reddy and Kiran Reddy He even told one woman that he was the son of an MLA and a doctor Apart from sexually assaulting them, Jahangir also manipulated the woman into buying him expensive gifts

Bengaluru: Police in Karnataka's state capital have arrested a man in connection with a number of rape cases. Identified as Jahangir, the suspect used aliases and tricked women into believing that he was the 'second-richest person' in Bengaluru. He then took advantage of them and fled, never to be seen again.

Arrested by Halasuru Police, the suspect is reportedly a 30-year-old MBA graduate who originally hails from Srirangam in Tamil Nadu. Officials familiar with the case have revealed that he used Karthik Reddy and Kiran Reddy as aliases to lure women. He would target women waiting outside shopping complexes or cafes, said officers.

Once he struck a conversation with them, Jahangir casually lied to them about owning jewellery shops, restaurants and other businesses. He then gained their trust by guaranteeing a job with one of his 'companies'. He then took them out for drives in high-end cars and urged them to book hotel rooms using their credit cards. On more than one occasion, he raped the women accompanying him to the hotel room and fled. Police told media outlets that he even manipulated the women into buying him expensive clothes and accessories.

Jahangir, on one such occasion, told a woman that his father is an MLA and his mother a doctor. He has been accused by a woman of raping her in Kadubisanahalli while another told investigators that the suspect sexually assaulting her on the pretext of making her an actress. Police officers leading the probe against him have reason to believe that the suspect has been tricking women since 2017.

He has two cases registered against him in Chennai and officers believe that more complaints are likely to emerge in the days to come. Meanwhile, Jahangir has been booked under Sections 376 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) among others. These correspond to charges of rape and cheating. At the time of his arrest, police recovered a car with a Tamil Nadu registration, several mobile phones and other expensive items which he received as gifts from the women.

Similar instances of conmen robbing or sexually assaulting women on the pretext of offering them jobs come to light from across the country each day. In Bengaluru, a man posing as a supermarket supervisor robbed women of their jewellery after luring them with a job offer. Instances such as these were reported from the capital city of Karnataka in August this year.
