Unnao: Witnesses to rape case allegedly tried to be killed off in accident, FIR lodged

In what comes as an alarming piece of news, witnesses in the Unnao rape case were allegedly attempted to be killed as an unidentified truck rammed into their car. Avdhesh Singh, a witness in the case, was travelling in the car. Rajesh, the person who granted bail to the Unnao rape survivor's uncle, was also present in the car.

However, they miraculously escaped the alleged attempt on their lives by jumping out of the car just before the accident. An FIR has been lodged to look into the incident.

Earlier in July, a truck with a blackened number plate rammed into a car in Uttar Pradesh's Raebareli that was carrying the minor girl who had accused former BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar of sexual assault two years ago. While the accident killed her relatives, she sustained critical injuries and was admitted to a Lucknow hospital from where she was later transferred to AIIMS in Delhi.

After outrage, the case was transferred to CBI.

In the FIR filed by the CBI in late July, along with Sengar, 10 other accused were also named. All the accused were booked under the charges of criminal conspiracy, murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation.

Last year, the 17-year-old girl had alleged that she was raped by the MLA at his residence on June 4, 2017, when she had gone with a relative seeking a job.

In February 2018, the girl's family moved court seeking to include Sengar's name in the rape case. After this move, the victim's father was booked by the police under the arms act and put in jail.

Alleging inaction and coercion from powerful people, the victim attempted self-immolation in front of the CM's house on April 8 last and the next day, her father died in jail with post-mortem report suggesting serious injuries on his body.

The UP government had then referred the matter to the Centre for CBI probe.

The CBI had filed a charge sheet against Sengar in July last year and booked him under Sections 120B, 363, 366, 376(1), 506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and also under relevant sections of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO) Act.

CBI later filed another chargesheet in the case of custodial death of the victim's father, naming Sengar's brother.
