RPF team foils gang rape bid

The first-year student was deserted by her friends as a group of men threatened them; the men then took her to secluded place



The timely intervention of a Railway Protection Force (RPF) team prevented a girl from being raped by seveneight men, who had gathered around Alandi railway station on Friday. A complaint was lodged in the Loni Kalbhor police station that falls under Pune rural police’s jurisdiction.



The girl, who is a first-year student at a reputable college in the city, hails from Kolkata. She had ventured on an unplanned night-out with her boyfriend — who is from the same college — and his two friends. According to officials, they collected alcohol and then stationed themselves in an empty area near the Alandi police station. This is when a group of men arrive on bikes at the location.



An official told Mirror, “These men had weapons like swords, iron rods and machete. They deliberately sparked a spat and even threatened the four people. The girl’s friend ran away from the spot, leaving her behind by herself.”



The group of men then took her to the abandoned LC Gate Lodge nearby the station. They had flashlights on them, which attracted the RPF team’s attention. Inspector of RPF, Ghorpadi, PCC Kasar and staffers BG Konde and NR Kumbhar were at the station since 11.30 pm. They had already noticed an abandoned two-wheeler.



When the officials neared the group, one of them escaped through the paddy fields. It affirmed their suspicion. The cops found the girl, who also ran to them for help. The officials then informed the Loni Kalbhor police station. All the accused are absconding as of now.



Suraj Bandgar, senior police inspector of Loni Kalbhor told Mirror, “We are investigating the case and searching for the accused.”



A case has been lodged against the absconders under Indian Penal Code sections 376(d) (gang rape), 511 (offences punishable with imprisonment for life or other imprisonment), 354 (with intent to outrage modesty), 324, 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 363(kidnapping),143 (unlawful assembly), 147, 148 (rioting), ,149 (every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence commit-ted in prosecution of common object), 504 (intentional insult), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 427 (mischief causing damage).




