Woman from Jharkhand alleges rape in Chandigarh, police begins probe

An FIR was registered at the Sector 17 police station following the intimation of Gurugram police, who had initially lodged a zero FIR in connection with the matter, on November 21. (Representational)

Chandigarh police Saturday began investigation in the rape allegations of a Jharkhand woman working as a maid in Gurgaon, and dispatched a police team to Delhi for recording her statement.

An FIR was registered at the Sector 17 police station following the intimation of Gurugram police, who had initially lodged a zero FIR in connection with the matter, on November 21.

According to the victim, who works as a maid in Gurugram, the incident took place a fortnight back and the accused was known to her. Police suspects that the woman was raped on the pretext of providing a job in Chandigarh.

The police said that she was forcefully brought to Chandigarh on a Haryana roadways bus from ISBT-17. From the bus station, the man took her to unknown locations in an auto rickshaw, following which, he raped her for two days.

A police officer said, “The Gurugram police sent a zero FIR to us. Although the telephone number of the victim is mentioned, the FIR does not mention the exact date, when the accused took her to Chandigarh, and the location, where the crime took place. We are talking to the victim, who is currently in Delhi. A team included two women cops have gone to Delhi for recording her statement. We decided to bring her here for recording her statement under the Section 164 of CrPC.”

However, SHO Police Station Sector 50, Gurugram, Inspector Shahid Ahmed said, “The victim came to us and recorded her statement. She was known to the accused. According to her, one of her child was also with the accused. She failed to tell us about the exact date when she was taken to Chandigarh, and the place in Chandigarh, where the crime took place.”

“The identity of the accused was conveyed to the Chandigarh police. She works as a maid in Gurgaon. We registered a Zero FIR and have forwarded it to the Chandigarh police,” added the SHO.
