"Escaped the country": Swami Nithyananda leaves behind a long trail of controversy

Swami Nithyananda has reportedly fled the country. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Police in Rural Ahmedabad filed a First Incident Report (FIR) against the two managers, as well as Nithyananda on charges of kidnapping and illegal confinement and assault In March 2010, a video was made public that showed Nithyananda and prominent South Indian actress, Ranjitha, in compromising positions Based on the allegations of a disciple, the Karnataka Police filed a sexual assault case against Nithyananda

Last Wednesday, self-proclaimed ‘godman’, Swami Nithyananda found himself at the centre of yet another controversy when two female managers at his ashram, Yogini Sarvagyapeetham, were arrested. Police in Rural Ahmedabad filed a First Incident Report (FIR) against the two managers, as well as Nithyananda on charges of kidnapping and illegal confinement and assault, after two children from the ashram alleged they were tortured and forcibly confined to a flat for over ten days. Since then, it has emerged that Nithyananda is believed to have fled the country using, according to some reports, an expired passport.

The incident is not the first time Nithyananda has attracted controversy. We take a look at some other instances where the ‘godman’ has been in the news.

Alleged Sex Scandal

In March 2010, a video was made public that showed Nithyananda and prominent South Indian actress, Ranjitha, in compromising positions. Both parties were quick to issue statements decrying the video, claiming it wasn’t them on film. In 2011, Ranjitha filed a case at a court in Bengaluru, which ordered a CID investigation into the video’s authenticity. The Forensic Sciences Laboratory in Bengaluru confirmed that it was, indeed, Nithyananda and Ranjitha present in the video.

Following the release of the video, it was reported that a close aide of Nithyananda, Karuppan, admitted to making the video. Karuppan had allegedly lost his faith in the 'guru'. However, in 2012, another follower of Nithyananda claimed that it was she who shot the video. She also claimed that Nithyananda raped her on several occasions between 2004 and 2009.





Allegation of Rape

Based on the allegations of the disciple, the Karnataka Police filed a sexual assault case against Nithyananda. What followed was a five-day manhunt for the spiritualist, who eventually surrendered before the Ramanagara district court. The 'godman' was arrested but granted bail in June of 2010.

Seeking to quash the FIR, Nithyananda approached the Supreme Court, claiming impotency. However, on the order of the apex court, a medical test was administered showing his claims to be false. Although originally contesting the results of the medical report, Nithyananda changed stance in March 2018, claiming to have had “consensual sex” with the disciple in question. In August 2018, eight years after the original charge was made, the trial proceedings against Nithyananda began.

Pseudo-scientific claims

In September 2018, the guru released a video making the outlandish claim that he had developed a software that would allow cows, monkeys and lions to communicate in Sanskrit and Tamil.

In the video, that was widely circulated on social media channels, the 'godman' stated, “I will establish it, prove it through a scientific, medical test and researches,” claiming to achieve this by “initiating a superconscious breakthrough.” He said he had already “casually” tested the software, and would “establish” the feat within the year. However, he has not followed up on his claim since.


