Police reforms on cards in J&K Search on to find Police Commissioners for Jammu, Srinagar

NL Exclusive

Jammu Tawi, Nov 24

The Union government is keen to execute police reforms in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir under new dispensations by appointing the Commissioners of Police (CP) in at least two capital cities of Jammu and Srinagar.

Highly placed sources said the administration of the newly carved UT had decided to conduct reforms in the police like other UTs of the country by designating posts of Commissioner, joint commissioners, additional commissioners and deputy commissioners, additional deputy commissioners and assistant deputy commissioners in the hierarchy of the police.

“The Home Department is working to finalise police reforms on the pattern of other UTs,” a source said and added that the new designated posts in the hierarchy of the police would be announced very soon.

Meanwhile, an intense search was going on for two senior professional IPS Officers, preferably from J&K Cadre to be appointed as Police Commissioners for two capital cities of Jammu and Srinagar. Sources said, for the last over two weeks, feedback has been gathered seeking suggestions from some local politicians and right quarters to identify two professional and efficient IPS Officers to be considered for the post of Commissioners for Jammu and Srinagar.

Keeping in view the size of population and area of Jammu and Srinagar Cities, officers of atleast DIG or above Rank are being considered for appointment as Commissioners of these two cities.

From the present erstwhile state cadre strength, the senior most IPS Officer is Mr Navin Aggrawal is of 1987 batch and all officers prior to 1994 batch are non-locals. The senior most two local IPS officers available are only from1994 batch but are already placed as ADGP. While as an informal panel assigned to suggest the names of officers to be considered for Commissioners’ posts from the available IPS officers in scale of IGPs and DIGs, bringing some experienced hands having exposure to Commissionerate system of policing is not ruled out, sources confided.

In Commissionerate system an IPS (SSP/DIGor above) can take the full decision independently for a City district related to security but in other system they have ask for the permission from DM. Despite having some disadvantages, more responsibility vested with the Specialist (IPS) instead of the Generalist (IAS). A Commissioner of Police is directly and totally accountable to the Executive/CS for his performance, contrary to the Range system of policing.

The police commissionerate system is successfully working in 71 big cities of India, out of which 19 have a population of more then 20 lakh.

Meanwhile as reported earlier, the Administration of the UT of J&K has given its nod to carve out a new division comprising erstwhile Doda district and some parts of south Kashmir.

Highly placed sources said initial survey in this regard had already been conducted and the authorities were deliberating on a survey report to give final shape to the proposal.

“Three districts of Jammu province, namely Ramban, Doda and Kishtwar, along with three districts of south Kashmir, namely Anantnag, Shopian and Kulgam will be part of the proposed new division,” a source said.

“The aim of this plan was to ensure better governance and administration to the people living in the remotest and far-flung areas. After going through the survey conducted by a Central agency, the authorities will prepare a roadmap for the proposed new division,” the source said and added that a dedicated team had already been deployed for this project.

Due to the topography, residents of Doda, Kishtwar and Ramban are demanding separate division to ensure equitable and balanced development in this most backward and neglected belt of J&K.

After the bifurcation of the erstwhile state into two UTs, the J&K is left with only two divisions, namely Jammu and Kashmir. In the month of February this year, division status was granted to Ladakh which is now a separate UT.
