77-yr-old in Bibvewadi slaps case of harassment on son, daughter-in-law

Couple issued notice by cops; senior citizen claims he was abused, assaulted and not fed at home for last 8 years



It has been eight years since a senior citizen living in Bibvewadi has struggled against alleged harassment by his own son and daughter-inlaw — but only this month that police have finally slapped a case under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, against the couple.



On November 18, cops at Bibvewadi police station also wielded Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace) and 34 (common intention) against Sunil and Archana Sonawane, while issuing a summons to the son.



The action came after yet another complaint filed by Ramchandra Daulatrao Sonawane (77), alleging that he has not been fed a single meal at home for night on a decade, leaving him subsisting on a tiffin from a local mess. Further, he also claimed his son and daughter-in-law regularly abuse and assault him.



Cops informed that Ramchandra retired from the state cooperative department in 2001. Thereafter, while the family all stayed at a 4BHK in Bibvewadi for six-odd years, he also dabbled in agriculture in his hometown of Bhor. In 2007, his wife died of cancer, after which his travails with his son and the latter’s wife allegedly began, with the elderly man being screamed at over every minor dispute.



According to Ramchandra, he has submitted four or five written complaints to the police before. He said, “I clearly told my son and daughter-inlaw that if they don’t like living with me, they can move elsewhere. But they refused. My son has a tourism business and daughter-in-law is a housewife. She taunts me all the time and does not allow me to watch TV. She shouts at me and throws the remote and mobile if I do. After one such incident last year, I had even complained to Bibvewadi police, who had registered a non-cognisable (NC) complaint.”



The septuagenarian added, “For eight years, she has refused to give me home food, despite cooking for both of them. She threatened that if I tried to argue, she would file a dowry harassment criminal case against me. She even yelled at a relative who used to supply me with a tiffin earlier, till he had to stand up for me and lie that his is a paid service. Around five years ago, my son took Rs 2,20,000 from me to buy gold ornaments for his wife, but never returned the loan. When I asked for it, they both shouted at me and told me to file a court case. I complained in the Bharosa Cell’s senior citizens’ wing and Pune police commissionerate about the mental and physical harassment, and filed a case in the sessions court for them to leave my house.



When I gave a letter to the collectorate about this harassment in 2018, they suggested that as a senior citizen, I could file a case in court, which I did in April 2018. When I submitted a complaint at the senior citizens’ cell last year and cops there counseled my son, he denied everything outright, but continued to harass me.”



Speaking to Mirror, senior police inspector Kumar Ghadge of Bibvewadi PS told Mirror, “We registered a complaint against Sunil and Archana Sonawane and served a notice to both of them. The senior citizen’s condition is very bad. They absolutely do not take care of him.”



When Sunil was contacted, he said, “I don’t want to comment till I speak to my lawyer.”




