Payal Tadvi suicide case: Accused approach HC, seek permission to continue studies

The three doctors booked for allegedly harassing and abetting the suicide of Payal Tadvi in May have approached the Bombay High Court, seeking that the order suspending their licences be relaxed and they be allowed to pursue further studies.

Tadvi was found dead in her hostel room at Nair Hospital on May 22 with a suicide note found subsequently which accused three seniors — Hema Ahuja, Bhakti Mehare and Ankita Khandelwal — of harassing her. The three have been booked under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, Maharashtra Prohibition of Ragging Act as well as IPC sections pertaining to abetment of suicide, destruction of evidence and common intent. The victim’s mother, Abeda, had said in her complaint that she was harassed that since she belonged to the Tadvi Bhil community, a Scheduled Tribe.

The accused were granted bail by the High Court on August 9 with conditions prohibiting them from leaving Mumbai without court permission and requiring them to report to the crime branch every alternate day. The conditions also state that cannot enter the jurisdiction of Agripada police station, particularly BYL Nair Hospital, where the alleged harassment took place. The HC had also said stated their licences, issued by the Medical Council of India and Maharashtra Medical Council, would remain suspended till the trial concludes.

“The applicant submits that she through her hard work and toil has earned her degree and right to practice medicine. The alleged acts do not in any manner affect their competence to practice and administer medicine… (she) can be given the benefit of presumption of innocence pending the trial,” the application filed by Khandewal stated.

It further said that the accused are already facing an inquiry and have received notices from the medical council, and that whether or not their licences can be cancelled will be decided by the council.

The accused further submitted that when they requested Nair Hospital to revoke their suspension, it was denied on October 25 on the grounds that the HC had suspended their licences. The pleas further said that the accused, who are in the final-year of postgraduate sutdies, would be unable to write their exams in May 2020 as they hadn’t attended college for over six months. The pleas state that if the condition to not visit Nair Hospital is not relaxed, they would not be able to attend college even for the next session beginning next month.

“The applicant (Khandewal) states that it is very difficult to live in Mumbai without her family or without education. The applicant being a lady, without any source of income, is finding it very difficult to stay in Mumbai… and is facing a financial crunch. The applicant does not have any place of accommodation of her own in Mumbai and has to bear expenses separately which is also difficult for her,” Khandelwal’s plea further stated.
