All the people convicted at Bristol Magistrates' Court from November 11 to November 16

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest news from Bristol Courts straight to your inbox

Magistrates dealt with cases involving shoplifting, assaults and drugs last week.

Bristol Magistrates' Court imposed a wide range of sentences from Monday, November 11 to Saturday, November 16.

Below is a list of all the people who pleaded guilty or were found guilty at the court in that period.

It includes the defendants' addresses, ages, their offences and the outcomes of the hearings. Victims' names have been withdrawn.

Monday, November 11

Benjamin Shaun Drury, 34, of no fixed address

He assaulted someone by beating her in Tesco Express. He admitted this. He must pay a fine of £270 and comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement.

Michael John James O'Neill, 45, of no fixed address

He assaulted someone by beating them. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for one year and ordered to pay £21.

James Anthony Caswell, 40, of Kildare Road in Knowle

He drove a car in Hengrove Way while unfit to drive through drugs. He admitted this. He was ordered to pay a fine of £235.

Korree Hammond, 26, of Sidford Road in Bedminster

She drove a car in Malago Road while under the influence of alcohol. She admitted this. She was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 17 months and ordered to pay a fine of £411.

Ashley Marcus Peacock, 27, of Wedmore Vale in Bedminster

He assaulted someone by beating them. He admitted this. He was sentenced to 20 weeks imprisonment and ordered to pay £1,200.

Aaron Richard Weeks, 38, of Marksbury Road in Bedminster

He entered a building as a trespasser and attempted to steal contents of a till. He admitted this. He must carry out 140 hours of unpaid work and pay a fine of £275.

Daniel Joseph Brunning, 38, of Ullswater Road in Westbury-on-Trym

He had in his possession 19.4g of amphetamine and 0.4g of cannabis. He was fined £105 and discharged continually for 12 months.

Carl Meredith, 30, of Guildford Road in Doncaster

He drove a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol in Baldwin Street in Bristol. He admitted this. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 12 months and ordered to pay £463.

Mark Pearson, 29, of Weatfield Drive in Weston-super-Mare

He stole alcohol from a number of supermarkets and has in his possession 0.5g of crack cocaine. He was discharged conditionally for two years and ordered to pay £671.

Leo Eddie Sawyers, 44, of Phillip Street in Bedminster

He intentionally touched a woman aged 16 or over when she did not consent. He pleaded not guilty but was found guilty in a trial. He was ordered to pay £200.

Dean Antony James, 33, of Fitzharding Road in Pill

He drove a vehicle in Bedminster Down Road while under the influence of alcohol. He admitted this. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 20 months and ordered to pay a fine of £635.

Tuesday, November 12

Mark Lee Moore, 44, of Alma Street in Weston-super-Mare

He stole mixed meat goods from Marks and Spencer. He was fined £195.

Michael Thompson, 50, of no fixed address

He entered as a trespasser part of dwelling in St Paul's and stole a cup of tea. He also damaged a car windscreen. He admitted this. He was committed to prison for 12 weeks and ordered to pay £500.

Wednesday, November 13

Jason Dale Kennedy, 47, of Stillingfleet Road in Bristol

He failed without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirements of a community order by failing to attend appointments. He admits this. He must comply with a curfew requirement and pay £65.

Akram Ghahghaei, 24, of Dean Crescent in Bedminster

She assaulted an emergency worker by beating him. She must comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement.

Paul Anthony Belston, 53, of Grove Road in Portland

He assaulted someone by beating them. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for two years and ordered to pay £150.

Shannon Brown, 21, of HMP Foston Hall in Derby

She assaulted a prison officer. She admitted this. She was ordered to pay £250 and committed to prison for 26 weeks consecutive to another sentence.

Devon Kelvin Corpe, 24, of Victoria Bridge Road in Westmoreland

He stole a pair of trousers to the value of £65 from JD Sports. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for 12 months and ordered to pay £65.

Randall Edward Reynolds, 25, of The Avenue in Keynsham

He sent a message that was grossly offensive or of an indecent, obscene or menacing character. He also attempted to obstruct, pervert or interfere with the course of justice by texting a witness/victim. He was found guilty of both charges after a trial. He was given an overall prison sentence of 20 weeks, handed a restraining order and ordered to pay £115.

Patrick Gerald Smyth, 40, of Hamble Close in Thornbury

He pursued a course of conduct which amounted to the harassment of a woman and also breached the conditions of a restraining order. He was given an overall prison sentence of 14 weeks, ordered to carry out 150 hours of unpaid work and must pay £615.

Samantha Newnham, 24, of Calne in Wiltshire

She used abusive or insulting words or behaviour or disorderly behaviour in a racially aggravated incident at Bristol Temple Meads Railway Station. She also assaulted a police officer. She admitted this. She must comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement, carry out 60 hours of unpaid work and pay £275.

Michael John Brooks, 56, of Maynard Close in Hartcliffe

He failed to comply with a community protection notice by not stopping an accumulation of building materials and waste at his property. He admitted this. He was fined £979.

Lisa Leaman of Romney Avenue in Lockleaze

She failed to comply with a notice requiring her to edquately control her dogs to ensure their barking does not caused a nuisance. She was ordered to pay £1,360.

Samuel Philip Rowley, 26, of The Coots in Bristol

He threw down, dropped or deposited a cigarette and left it in Caledonia Place, Bristol. He was fined £282.

Thursday, November 14

Yusuf Ulusow, 43, of no fixed address

He assaulted someone by beating her. He admitted this. He was committed to prison for an overall sentence of 24 weeks and fined £307.

Leon Paul Mitchell, 50, of Bellview Terrace in Totterdown

He assaulted someone by beating her. He admitted this. He must comply with a curfew and pay £175.

Andrew Carr, 53, of Holly Close in Speedwell

He used a colour television receiver without a licence. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for six months and ordered to pay £70.

India Cox, 28, in Victoria Square in Bristol

She drove a vehicle while exceeding the speed limit. She admitted this. She was fined £536 and her driving record endorsed with four points.

Sandra Ann Barter, 56, of Park Close in Keynsham

She stole cash from another woman. She was found guilty of this. She must carry out 150 hours of unpaid work and pay £1,105.

Jason Edward Heelis, 43, of Wade Street in Bristol

He stole cosmetic products worth £347 from Boots. He also failed without reasonable excuse to surrender to custody at Bristol Magistrates' Court. He admitted this and was fined £237.

Daniel Lee Pope, 30, of Passage Road in Henbury

He drove a vehicle in Park Street in Bristol while under the influence of alcohol. He also intended to cause someone harassment, alarm or distress by using threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour. He admitted both charges. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 12 months and ordered to pay £357.

Joseph Foster, 29, of North Street in Bedminster

He, without reasonable excuse, sat on the ground begging which he has been prohibited to do by a criminal behaviour order made by Bristol Magistrate Court. He admitted this. He must carry out 50 hours of unpaid work and pay £175.

Friday, November 15

Gavin Richard Bergin, 34, of no fixed address

He, without lawful excuse, threatened a woman that he would smash a window at the Bristol dental hospital and had in his possession a quantity of cannabis. He admitted this. He was fined £82.

Aiden Claridge, 19, of Lambrook Road in Taunton

He assaulted a police constable by beating him. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for 12 months and ordered to pay £156.

Deeto Cory Myles, 26, of St Werburghs Park in St Werburgh

He stole three bottles of spirits worth £64 from Asda Bedminster. He admitted this. He was fined £200.

Paul Michael Williams, 36, of Duckmoor Road in Ashton

He breached the conditions of a restraining order. He admitted this. He was committed to prison for 20 weeks concurrent and fined £122.

Sarah Louise Capaldi, 32, of Greenway Drive in Westbury-on-Trym

She stole items from Sainsbury's including Russian Standard Vodka and eight bottles of whisky. She admitted this. She was fined £321 and must comply with a curfew.

Juris Dnistrjans, 31, of Heathcote Walk in Speedwell

He drove a car in Lodge Causeway while under the influence of alcohol. He admitted this. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 17 months and was fined £440.

Aleya Downie, 25, of Badminton Road in St. Pauls

She stole laundry products from B&M. She admitted this. She was discharged conditionally for 18 months and ordered to pay £106.

Shannawaz Khan, 24, of Banner Road in Montpelier

He drove a vehicle in St Philips Causeway while disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence. He admitted this. He must carry out 180 hours of unpaid work and was fined £175. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 12 months.

Ilulian Nedelcu, 26, of Tenth Avenue in Bristol

He drove a vehicle in St Johns Lane while under the influence of alcohol. He admitted this. He was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence for 20 months and fined £532.

Scott Andrew Mereweather, 29, of Dutton Road in Stockwood

He produced a quantity of cannabis. He also had in his possession cannabis and cannabis resin. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for 12 months and ordered to pay £106.

Max Stamper, 25, of Fishponds Road in Eastville

He assaulted someone. He admitted this and was fined £390.

Norman Peter Brooks, 60, of Gatehouse Avenue in Withywood

He assaulted a police constable. He admitted this. He was discharged conditionally for 12 months and ordered to pay £246.

Matthew Lee Crouch, 38, of Brookfield Road in Patchway

He assaulted a woman by beating her, with two other people. He was ordered to pay £915.

Jakub Junta, 33, of Avonvale Road in Redfield

He had a craft knife with him in Prince Street without good reason or lawful authority. He admitted this. He was sentenced to prison for eight weeks and fined £207.

Ryan Michael Tanner, 33, of Highridge Road in Bishopsworth

He drove a car in Aspect Leisure Park in Bristol while disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence. He was fined £2,355.

Harley Steve Chard, 40, of Station Road in Pilning

He stole six joints of meat to the value of £73.75 from Marks and Spencer. He also failed without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirements of a community order made by Avon and Somerset Magistrates Court by failing to attend initial appointments. He admits both charges. He was committed to prison for 12 weeks and ordered to pay £122.

Mawgan David Nurding, 32, of Wade Street in St Pauls

He assaulted a detention officer at Ashmead Road Police Centre. He admitted this. He must comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement and pay a fine of £250.

Saturday, November 16

James Neil Chaplin, 45, of no fixed address

He stole assorted goods, jointly with Linda Gardiner, to the value of £603 from Boots. He admitted this. He must comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement and was ordered to pay a fine of £90.

Linda Jane Gardiner, 45, of no fixed address

She stole assorted goods to the value of £603 from Boots. She admitted this. She must comply with a Rehabilitation Activity Requirement and pay a fine of £90.

For the latest news in and around Bristol, visit and bookmark Bristol Live's homepage .
