Chennai constable set ablaze by partner for having an affair

An investigation revealed that Venkatesh got married in 2012 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A woman set her partner on fire in Chennai after she learned about his affair Allegedly, the man was in a relationship with his colleague During the interrogation, the woman tried to mislead the police by saying that her partner made an attempt to end his life

Chennai: A constable was allegedly set ablaze by his partner on Sunday in Chennai. The man was allegedly set ablaze after his partner learned that he had an affair with one of his colleagues. The victim has suffered 80 per cent burn injuries in the incident and treatment is being administered to him.

The constable has been identified as Venkatesh. Venkatesh is a resident of Villupuram. He has been admitted to the Kilpauk Medical College and Hospital. The accused has been identified as Asha and she has been arrested.

Initially, Asha told the police that the constable tried to end his own life. However, on further interrogation, the accused confessed to killing the constable. Asha told the police that Venkatesh tried to set her on fire, following which, she snatched kerosene from his hand and set him ablaze.

An investigation revealed that Venkatesh got married in 2012. His wife was identified as Jaya. Jaya was a native of Villupuram. The couple had two children. Jaya separated from Venkatesh in 2015, after she learned that he was in a relationship with Asha.

Asha lives with her son while her daughter stayed with Venkatesh in his police quarters. After Jaya separated from Venkatesh, Asha also left her husband and moved in with the constable. Asha, however, grew suspicious of Venkatesh as he had started texting someone.

Asha told some of her friends about her suspicion. They allegedly told Asha that Venkatesh was having an affair with one of his colleagues. After Asha learned about Venkatesh's affair, she started having arguments with him.

At around 1.30 pm on Sunday, the two had an argument after which, Asha poured kerosene on the constable. Allegedly, Venkatesh was under the influence of alcohol when this happened. After this, the constable ran away from the house. Asha chased Venkatesh and set him ablaze. Venkatesh's neighbours rushed to rescue him and took him to a hospital.
