In Tamil Nadu, Minor Burnt Alive By Mother For Relationship With A Dalit Man

A 17-year-old girl in Nagapattinam, Tamil Nadu was burnt alive by her mother for having a relationship with a Dalit man. Janani, who belonged to the Vishwakarma caste - categorized as a backward class - was in a two-year relationship with Rajkumar, a Dalit from her village, Vazhmangalam in Nagapattinam district.

According to reports, Janani, post her 18th birthday on November 24, had plans to leave her house and marry Rajkumar. Upon further investigation, Janani's sister Janaki revealed how their mother Umamaheshwari punished her sister for having a relationship with a Dalit boy. Janaki narrated how her sister was locked up and starved for days and was constantly abused and assaulted.

Concerned about further backlash and extreme consequences, Rajkumar wanted to put an end to the relationship, but in vain. Janani, who was deeply in love with Rajkumar, insisted on continuing with the affair. On the other hand, Janani’s mother was constantly on the lookout to marry her off to a relative but had to hold on to it, since Janani was a minor. Janani used to constantly threaten her mother that she would leave the house, which apparently led to the crime.

Evidence, an anti-caste NGO reported: “On November 19, Umamaheswari went out to buy kerosene without telling anyone. At 4.30 a.m. in the morning, as she poured the kerosene over Janani, the young girl got up and begged her not to … But she set Janani on fire. She then poured kerosene and immolated herself.”

Recent investigation reports suggest that a case has been registered under section 302 in the Thittacheri police station. Both the mother-daughter duo were rushed to the Nagapattinam government hospital where Janani succumbed to her wounds and her mother is still battling for life with 90 per cent burns.

Unfortunately, this isn’t the first case of a heinous honour killing this year. Plenty of other similar instances of honour killing in India surfaced, leaving us appalled.

Another minor Dalit boy, aged 16, was burnt to death by family members of his sister-in-law in Punjab's Mansa district, yesterday morning. Another couple was hacked to death at their house in Lakkalikatti village of Gadag district on November 6. A 20-year-old was beaten to death in Haryana’s Bhagwatipur village for eloping with a minor. It never ceases to end. It’s sad how living and loving on our own terms is still a matter of pride and honour in this country. Humanity is at major stake where honour is more important than human lives.




