Delhi: Cash van heist solved, less than half of Rs 1.8 crore found

NEW DELHI: The sensational cash van robbery case in Dwarka has been solved by Delhi Police with arrest of the cash van driver and a person named Madan Lal who attempted to rob a van of the same logistics company in Patel Nagar last year.Police have recovered Rs 54 lakh from the two men, and are on the lookout for the other members of the gang who had aided them in pulling off the hiest.Joint CP (western range) Shalini Singh said that the driver Dheeraj Puri had been conniving with the other criminals for more than a fortnight. He passed on the details of the location of the van and the amount they were carrying to the robbers.Puri and the gunman—Vijay Kant Mishra were abducted and attacked by the criminals who escaped with Rs 1.8 crore cash. While Puri’s injury was superficial, Mishra suffered severe stab wounds.“On the day of the incident, the robbers followed the cash van in a Hyundai Verna car throughout the route. Further probe revealed that the car belonged to a person in Meerut, Uttar Pradesh. The car owner claimed that his relative Madan Lal, who had been driving the car, had gone to a relative’s place in Delhi. He was finally nabbed from Vijay Vihar area,” said Singh.Verification of the data of the employees of the logistics company revealed that Puri was also the driver of the cash van in the failed robbery bid at Patel Nagar. During inetrrogation, he broke down and confessed to have plotted the heist with Lal.Lal was earlier involved in Rs 30 lakh robbery in Rohini and two murder cases, apart from the failed robbery attempt. His gang was involved in crimes in Nepal and Kolkata as well.The logistics company had not verified the antecedents of Puri even after his role was found to be suspicious in the Patel Nagar robbery bid, a probe has revealed.Lal and Puri told the police officers that after robbing the cash van they travelled to Jwala Heri and divided the cash among themselves. Puri was paid Rs 30 lakh. Two other members of the gang are on the run.
