Situation remains tense in IOK on 113th day

SRINAGAR/ISLAMABAD: The situation continues to remain tense and far from normal in occupied Kashmir Valley as India-imposed lockdown entered 113th running day.

Restrictions under Section 144 are enforced amid huge presence of Indian troops. Ban on internet across all platforms, SMS and prepaid mobile services remains in place in the Valley.

Showing their anger and defiance against New Delhi’s anti-Kashmir moves residents of the Valley continued to observe silent protest by keeping their shops closed except for few hours during the day and staying away from offices and educational institutions. Public transport also largely remains off the roads.

Indian police have claimed to have arrested dozens of people in Srinagar. Kashmir watchers say that these arrests are being made to give an impression that the people are not protesting on their own but are being forced to do this by some mischief makers.

Police arrested a person Bashir Ahmad Qureshi in Srinagar on the charge to organising anti-India protests particularly in Anchar area of Soura. The police claimed that Qureshi was provoking youth and instigating them to carry out protests against New Delhi.

According to reports some of the so-called mainstream Kashmiri political leaders who have been under detention since August 5 may be released soon with the IOK admin having already eased restrictions on their movement. As many as four such leaders belonging to various political parties were allowed to visit their houses for few hours on Saturday after they requested for it, the report citing sources said.

According to a report thespecial forces of the Indian Army, Navy and Air Force have been deployed in the Kashmir Valley to carry out combined operations. The three special forces are being deployed under the Defence Ministry’s newly-raised Armed Forces Special Operations Division (AFSOD).

The report further said the induction of the joint special troops has already started as some elements have already been inducted into an area considered to be a traditional militancy hotbed near Srinagar. Although special forces have been operating in the valley this is the first time when the three services would be deployed jointly there, the report added.

Meanwhile, Indian troops and police personnel continued their cordon and search operations in Srinagar, Ganderbal, Tulmula, Beehama, Lar, Kangan, Budgam, Pakharpora, Ichgam, Chadoora, Kralpora, Beerwah, Magam, Khag, Pulwama, Pampora, Kakapora, Awantipora, Letpora, Tral, Koil, Kulgam, DamhalhanjiPora, Koimu, Khudwani, Qazigund, Islamabad, Pahalgam, Ashmuqam, Bijbehara, Srigufwara, Khanabal, Shopian, Wachi, Rajpora, Kaprin, Baramulla, Sopore, Brath, Rafiabad, Pattan, Dangiwacha, Bandipora, Papchen, Hanjin, Sumbal, Ajas, Safapora, Kupwara, Lolab, Handwara, Kralpora and other areas.

Meanwhile, a resolution has been moved in the US Congress condemning the human rights violations taking place in Jammu and Kashmir, and supporting the Kashmiris’ right to self-determination.

Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib in her Resolution No. 724 in the House of Representative submitted the resolution which was referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Tlaib, a Democrat from the 13th district of the state of Michigan, is a Palestinian Arab and a leading human rights campaigner. She was among the first US lawmakers to condemn India’s August 5, decision to annex Kashmir, urging India to reconsider its decision, stop human rights violations and respect basic rights of the Kashmir.

The resolution opposed any use of force against civilian populations by governmental and non-governmental actors alike, and also condemned the use of pellet shotguns and rubber bullets as a crowd-control method. It affirmed that any changes to the status of Jammu and Kashmir must be made with the direct consultation of the Kashmiri people, who must play a central role in the determination of their future.

The resolution urged the government of India to immediately lift all remaining elements of the communications blockade imposed in Jammu and Kashmir, including restoring phone and internet access and refraining from any interference with the provision of medical treatment.

The document urged the Department of State to facilitate contact between Kashmiri Americans and their family members in Jammu and Kashmir. The resolution reaffirmed its strongly held belief that freedom of religion is a central and inalienable right of all people as promulgated in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and urges the government of India to ensure compliance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Jammu and Kashmir.

It also urged the government of India to exercise restraint when performing security and policing operations and denounces the widespread use of threats and excessive force against civilians, protestors and detainees. The resolution asked India to immediately release unjustly and indefinitely detained people in Jammu and Kashmir and to cease arbitrary and politically motivated detentions.

It called upon India and Pakistan to engage in dialogue to deescalate tensions and protect human rights. As many as 2,337 women were among 95,469 civilians, martyred during the past 30 years of unabated state terrorism unleashed by India in every nook and corner of the territory, in Indian occupied Kashmir. According to a report released by Research Section of Kashmir Media Service on the occasion of International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, Indian troops molested 11,175 women during the period.

The report maintained that Kashmiri women had been the worst victims of the harrowing conflict, which rendered 22,910 women widowed since 1989. The report deplored that the troops were using molestation as a weapon to suppress the Kashmiris’ just struggle for right to self-determination.

It said that over 100 women were gang-raped by the troops at Kunanposhpora in Kupwara in February 1991 while two women; Aasiya and Neelofar were abducted, raped and subsequently killed in Shopian in May 2009. A 9-year-old girl, Asifa met similar fate in Kathua area of Jammu region, last year.

Around half a dozen women including Aasiya Andrabi, Fahmeeda Sofi and Naheeda Nasreen are languishing in Indian jails. On the other hand, speakers at a seminar organised at the Organisation of the Islamic Cooperation Secretariat in Jeddah expressed grave concern over the plight of Kashmiris in occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

A large number of diplomats and Pakistani and Kashmiri community members attended the event. OIC Secretary General’s representative on Kashmir, Yousaf Bin Muhammad Al-Zabeay said the OIC attaches great importance to the Kashmiri people and their peaceful struggle for right to self-determination in accordance with the UN resolutions.

Besides AJK President Sardar Masood Khan, those who spoke on the occasion included APHC representatives Syed Abdullah Gilani and Syed Faiz Naqshbandi.

A rally was taken out by the students and teachers of a local school in Rawalpindi on Monday to express solidarity with the oppressed people of occupied Kashmir.

Meanwhile, President Dr Arif Alvi on Monday said that the fascist Indian regime was flagrantly violating the human rights of Kashmiris by revoking the special status of Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir (IOJK) and by suspending their civic liberties through the 113-day clampdown.

He said India’s aim of ultimately altering the demography of IOJK was in utter violation of numerous UN resolutions and established human rights principles. The president was talking to Commander Qatar Emiri Guard, Staff Maj General Hazzaa Bin Khalil Bin Mansour Al-Shahwani, who along-with a delegation called on him here at the Aiwan-e-Sadr, a press release issued by the President’s Media Office here said. He said the BJP-led Indian government had adopted a hostile attitude towards all its minorities, adding, in this regard the international community had the responsibility to persuade India to resolve Kashmir dispute in accordance with UN resolutions.

The president urged Qatar to support Pakistan in its endeavours to highlight Indian human rights violations in IOJK before the world as well as to resolve the dispute amicably. The Commander said that Qatar considered it a religious duty to support Pakistan at all levels. The Commander also presented President Dr Arif Alvi a sword.
