5 burglars held, jewellery worth Rs 12 lakh recovered : The Tribune India

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, November 25

Five members of an inter-state gang of burglars, who were allegedly involved in nine house thefts in the city, have been arrested by the crime branch of the UT police. The police have recovered gold jewellery worth around Rs 12 lakh from the miscreants. The suspects were active in neighbouring states and have several cases registered against them.

They were arrested for committing a theft at a house in Sector 51. Complainant Vikas Sharma had reported that a daylight theft was reported from his house on October 9. Cash and jewellery, both worth around Rs 4.50 lakh, were stolen from the house.

SP (Crime) Manoj Kumar said the gang members were nabbed from near the Airport light point while riding a Swift Dzire car, bearing a Delhi number, on November 20. The suspects have been identified as Ishad, alias Sangu (35), Jishan, alias Gopal (32), Mukesh Kumar (35) and Kamal (38), all residents of New Delhi, and Sandeep, alias Monu (31), a resident of Jhajjar, Haryana.

The suspects were produced in a court on November 21 and remanded in police custody till November 25.

The police said with their arrest, two cases registered at the Sector 49 police station and one case each registered at the Sector 39, Mani Majra, Sector 26, Maloya, Sector 34 and Sarangpur police stations had been solved.

During the investigation, gold jewellery, weighing around 300 gm and worth Rs 12 lakh, was recovered from Delhi. It was found that the gang was active in Ludhiana, Lucknow, Delhi, Jaipur and Dehradun. They have several cases registered against them in neighbouring states.

Modus operandi

The suspects used to come from Delhi and target locked houses in Chandigarh, both during daytime and at night. The miscreants used to return to Delhi after committing the crime. The stolen jewellery was deposited at Muthoot Fincorp Ltd and India Infoline Finance Limited in New Delhi and they borrowed cash from there, which was shared by all gang members.

Criminal past
