Five, including juvenile, nabbed after chase, shoot-out

Accused are members of a gang and involved in 2 murder cases

Five members of Neeraj Bawania gang, including a juvenile were arrested after a dramatic chase by the police in Rohini. In the episode which resembled that of a movie, the accused fired six rounds at the police team which hit the bullet proof jackets of two officers. In retaliatory firing, three of the gang members were injured, the police said on Monday.

The five were arrested for their alleged involvement in two recent murders in Outer Delhi. Sophisticated and a country made pistol was recovered from their possession, said the police.

DCP (Special Cell) Sanjeev Kumar Yadav said that the accused have been identified as Sunil alias Bhura (24), Sukhwinder alias Sanju (23), Ravinder (34), Arpit Chillar (20).

The two murders

The Police said one Vikas Chauhan was shot dead in his vehicle outside a private school in Narela on February 1. “The five of them conducted a recce of the place and then Sunil and Sukhwinder shot Vikas,” Mr. Yadav said. On January 20, a victim identified as Mohit was killed in North West Delhi’s Shalimar Bagh allegedly by absconding accused Sonu Chidi and Nishant along with Sukhwinder. “The reason behind the murders were ongoing rivalry between Neeraj Bawania and Rajesh Bawania gang,” Mr. Yadav said.

While investigating the cases, the police received a tip-off that the accused would come to Swarn Jayanti Park in Rohini to meet a few associates . “Around 5 a.m. the police team spotted a black colour car and when they signalled to stop, they tried to drive away. The police team team chased them and the vehicle ran into a divider,” the officer said.

The Police claimed that the accused fired six rounds at the team which hit the bullet proof jackets of two officers. “The team also retaliated and in the crossfire, Sunil, Sukhwinder and Arpit received bullet injuries on their legs,” Mr. Yadav said.

During questioning, accused allegedly told the police that they had come to meet Monu Bajitpur and Sonu Chidi, members of Neeraj Bawania gang.
