Bengaluru man flashes private parts at French woman, complaint registered

On November 23 at around 12:50 am the suspect made a video call when he exposed himself to the woman | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The woman works as a software engineer with a private firm based in Bengaluru On August 28, the suspect sent an abusive message to the woman Preliminary probe revealed that two mobile numbers belonged to the same man from Andhra Pradesh

Bengaluru: A French national lodged a cybercrime complaint with the local police stating that a man made a video call to her and flashed his private parts on Saturday midnight.

The woman works as a software engineer with a private firm and came to the city in July this year. A few months ago the accused began sending her messages on the messaging platform WhatsApp. On August 28, he sent her an abusive message and on October 19 midnight he made a video call to which the complainant did not answer.

Media report stated that on November 11 she began getting abusive messages from another number and on November 23 at around 12:50 am the suspect made a video call when he exposed himself to her. At 1 am, the woman disconnected the call. The police officials told media that they have received a complaint in the matter and further probe in the matter is underway.

Although, preliminary probe in the case revealed that two mobile numbers belonged to the same man from Andhra Pradesh.

In another case reported from Bengaluru, the police arrested a man with a number of rape cases registered against him. The man used to trick women into believing that he was the 'second-richest person' in the city. He then tricked the women into bed and after fled afterwards.

Arrested by the Halasuru police, the suspect is reportedly a 30-year-old MBA graduate who originally hails from Tamil Nadu. However, the accused was booked under Sections 376 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) among others. These correspond to charges of rape and cheating. At the time of his arrest, police recovered a car with a Tamil Nadu registration, several mobile phones and other expensive items which he received as gifts from the women.
