Ratan Tata on 26/11 Mumbai attacks anniversary: ‘Hurt, not knocked out’

Ratan Tata | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: On the 11th anniversary of the 26/11 terror attacks, Ratan Tata, the chairman emeritus of the Tata Group, on Tuesday shared a picture of himself standing with police officials, mentioning that the people of Mumbai “remain proud of the spirit and the sense of unity” of the city.

“A lot has been said about the tragedy of 26/11. The memory of the carnage and loss of life, is still painful. We won't forget the needless suffering caused across the city. But we remain proud of the spirit and the sense of unity of Mumbai. We can be hurt, but not knocked out,” the 81-year-old eminent industrialist tweeted today.

Public memory is short, but the gruesome and chilling images of the iconic Taj Mahal Palace Hotel and Trident in flames are deeply etched in people’s memory. It is worth mentioning here that Taj Hotel was the centre of the deadly 60-hour long terrorist attack on the financial capital of India.

On this day in 2008, around 166 people, including security personnel and foreigners, were killed and over 300 injured when 10 heavily-armed terrorists from Pakistan created mayhem in Mumbai.

Terrorists from Pakistan attacked the Taj hotel, the Oberoi Trident at Nariman Point, Leopold café and Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus. While one terrorist, Ajmal Ahmed Kasab, was captured, tried and hanged, the others were gunned down by security forces during the ghastly attack.

Recalling the memories of the tragic day, Tata said: “11 years later, a lot has been said about the tragedy that commenced on 26/11/2008. The memory of standing outside helpless and of the carnage and loss of life, are still fresh and painful. We will not forget the scars and the needless suffering caused at the hospital, the railway station, the hotels and across the city…”

“But most importantly, we remain proud of the spirit and the sense of unity displayed by Mumbai in all its power on that day. I will say it again: We can be hurt, but not knocked out,” the industrialist mentioned in a heartfelt Instagram post.
