TN school correspondent held for alleged sexual assault of 10-year-old girl

TN school correspondent held for alleged sexual assault of 10-year-old girl

The girl was in his school to participate in a handwriting competition on Sunday when the incident happened.

news Crime

The Hosur police arrested a 61-year-old man who is also the Correspondent of a private school for sexually assaulting a 10-year-old girl inside the school premises on Sunday.

According to the police, the complainant, a class five student, was in the Shantiniketan Matriculation school, Royakotta road, Hosur for an inter-school competition in this school. The girl is a student of another school who had come to Shantiniketan matriculation school to participate in the competition. After the competition, she was told by the supervisor to get her writing sample signed by the Correspondent of the school. Hence, the girl approached Gurudath for his sign, who attempted to sexually assault the girl. Running away from him, the girl narrated the incident to her parents who were also in the school who in turn alerted other parents and also informed the district childline number. The parents then filed a complaint at the All Women’s Police Station in Hosur on Sunday.

“Based on his complaint, we have registered an FIR under sections 9(m) [Sexual assault on a child below 12 years] and 10[Punishment for aggravated sexual assault] of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. He has been arrested and remanded to judicial custody,” a police officer from AWPS Hosur told TNM. According the to police, Gurudath allegedly gave a confession statement and was produced before the district court in Hosur on Monday. (It is to be noted that a confession is not acceptable during trial).

Meanwhile the state government has recently proposed to set up fast track courts to deal with POCSO cases in the state. As per reports, there are over 2,000 POCSO cases pending in the state and Chennai, Kancheepuram and Thoothukudi will be the first three districts in Tamil Nadu to get fast track courts exclusively for POCSO cases. Currently the cases under POCSO act are being tried at the Mahila courts which are present in almost all districts in the state.
