Amit Shah gave a befitting reply on Maharashtra issue

Mumbai: Recently, it has been learned that a new twist was seen in the politics of Maharashtra today. After being CM for 80 hours, Devendra Fadnavis was forced to resign from his post. Just two and a half days after Amit Shah surprised the nation by playing masterstroke on the morning of 24 November, Fadnavis's resignation completely chilled the BJP's enthusiasm. If anyone has emerged as a winner in this entire political development, then that name is Sharad Pawar. Pawar, the biggest player in Maharashtra's politics, said that it is not easy to beat him in this game. From the beginning to the end, he maintained tremendous suspense, but when the matter got worse, he showed his true strength.

Constitution Day celebrated for the first time in Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir

At the time when Pawar was associated with the Shiv Sena-Congress campaign to form a government, many of his statements surprised the political pundits as well. It was a clear message from his many decisions that he also has a soft corner for the BJP. After meeting Sonia Gandhi in the midst of government formation discussions, she said that there was no talk on the issue of forming a government with the Shiv Sena. The Shiv Sena itself was also surprised by this. Even Sanjay Raut had to say that it would take 100 births to understand Sharad Pawar.

Not BJP's Balasaheb Thorat, but this BJP MLA got the post of Protem Speaker

According to information received by Sutron was morning news 24 November Ajit Pawar took a government with the BJP with NCP legislators. He got the post of Deputy CM, Fadnavis became CM. After this, a new storm came in the politics of Maharashtra. The market of speculations became so hot that the finger started pointing towards Sharad Pawar. Unaware of this, Pawar started to unite his party. Sharad Pawar again took the key to form a new government by removing Ajit Pawar from the post of Legislature Party leader, with 90 percent of the MLAs of his party NCP.

Pakistan friendship fine, but won’t let ISI-backed SFJ disturb peace: Punjab CM Amarinder Singh

When a section of NCP led by Ajit Pawar went with BJP, it became a question of prestige for Sharad Pawar. One round of meetings started. The MLAs who were being told along with Ajit Pawar started returning to Sharad Pawar one after the other. In the end, Ajit Pawar was left alone. Despite this, there was a lot of effort to convince them. Many big leaders like the new legislator party Jayant Patil and Praful Patel met him and tried to convince him till the end. These efforts also brought color.
