Banned driver threw gin onto the motorway

A PASSENGER with a string of motoring convictions, hurled a bottle of gin out of a car window onto a motorway.

In November last year Michael Goodridge narrowly avoided an immediate prison sentence after he was caught driving a car, doing donuts in Rumworth Park, as children fled out of his way.

As well as a suspended prison sentence Goodridge was banned from driving for two and a half years.

But Bolton Crown Court heard how, just weeks later, Goodridge, who had been drinking, was behind the wheel again.

Wayne Jackson, prosecuting, told The Honorary Recorder of Bolton, Judge Martin Walsh how, at 11.20pm on January 20, police spotted Goodridge in a Nissan Almera by the Sainsbury's petrol station on Trinity Street, Bolton. "He was seen by one of the officers to get out of the driver's side of the vehicle and stumble round the front of the car. He was clearly drunk."

Keys to the car were found in Goodridge's pocket, he was arrested and at the police station he was found to have drunk twice the legal alcohol limit.

Goodridge was released on bail but on May 4 he committed another offence.

He was a passenger in a car heading northbound on the M6 in Cumbria which collided with the central reservation and then drove off.

Police stopped the car to speak to the driver. "But as they were going through the intoxilyzer procedure with the driver the defendant threw a bottle of Bombay Sapphire gin out of the driver's window onto the carriageway. The bottle hit the tarmac and narrowly missed a passing vehicle."

Goodridge pleaded guilty to causing danger to road users and to driving while banned, drink driving and having no insurance.

Kevin Liston, defending, said his action had been "reckless" in throwing the bottle. "Thankfully no damage was caused," he said.

He added that Goodridge had told him: "I'm getting a bit old for this game and I need to change."

Goodridge, of no fixed address, was sentenced to 16 months in prison and, on his release, will be subject a driving ban for three years.
