Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra says no to Mere Pyaare Prime Minister special screening for PM Modi

Filmmaker Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra, famously known for his commendable directorial skills in Rang De Basanti and Bhaag Milkha Bhaag says that he will not hold a special screening of his upcoming film for PM Narendra Modi.

Rakeysh, who has recently directed Mere Pyaare Prime Minister said that it has become ''fashionable'' now. The director was present at the trailer launch of the film in Mumbai.

When asked if he plans to hold a screening for PM Modi, he said to PTI, "No, not at all. We don't have any such plans, yet. It has become very fashionable, I would rather want to stay away from it."

"It doesn't suit me. But, If he wants to watch the film, it'll be an honour," he said.

"I feel the film is made for the people of the country and somewhere I don't want to dilute that by using such a big office. He is a very busy man and is running the country.To take three hours of his time which he could devote to some national and international interest,'' Rakeysh said in his statement further.

Rang De Basanti director was further asked about whether the film will affect the elections this year.

"It'll not have an effect on the elections and it should not. A film's job should not be to impact elections. My endeavour is to make movies which can be perpetual,'' Bhaag Milkha Bhaag director said to PTI.

''Because all of us, our best novels and films, we don't remember which week we watched or read them in. We don't know when that film or novel released but for us those are our favourite films,'' he added.

Mere Pyaare Prime Minister talks about the story of a young slum kid who travels to the capital with his friends to meet the Prime Minister, after his mother is raped.

It also talks about the need of public sanitation and is scheduled to release on March 15, just before the parliamentary elections. The film stars Anjali Patil, Om Kanujiya and Atul Kulkarni among others.

On the work front, Rakeysh will be working again with Farhan Akhtar for his upcoming film Toofan.

Rakeysh has earlier worked with Farhan in Bhaag Milkha Bhaag which became the sixth highest grossing 2013 Bollywood film worldwide.

Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra has directed films like Rang De Basanti, Bhaag Milkha Bhaag, Aks, Delhi 6, Mirzya among many others.

ALSO READ: Farhan Akhtar to reunite with Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra after six years in Toofan

ALSO READ: PM Modi asks Bollywood How's the Josh. Vicky Kaushal gets Video of the Year for Uri
