Worker sets his neighbour on fire inside shanty

Ludhiana: Following a verbal spat, a man set the shanty of his neighbour on fire in Beela village on Aasi Road on Monday morning. Unfortunately, the neighbour was inside his shanty, and he got burnt alive. Though onlookers doused the fire and rushed the injured man to Civil Hospital, doctors there referred him to Rajindra Hospital in Patiala, where he died at midnight while undergoing treatment.

The deceased has been identified as Buddhu (25), a labourer. Sadar police have registered a case against his neighbour Kishori Kumar, also a labourer, under Section 302 (murder), 436 (mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house), and 427 (mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees) of the IPC.

Buddhu’s mother Purniya (60), in her police complaint, stated she was living with her son and daughter-in-law Kranti in the shanty. Buddhu and his neighbour Kishori Kumar used to consume alcohol together and would often indulge in spats in an inebriated condition. For a couple of times, she intervened in their matters, but as it had became routine, the family stopped bothering about their fights.

He added that on Sunday night, Buddhu and Kishori Kumar consumed liquor again and indulged in a fight, thrashing each other, but nobody knew the reason behind the scuffle. Both families then intervened and resolved the issue, after which they all went inside their shanties.

Purniya alleged that on Monday morning at around 6am, she had gone to work. At 11.30am, Kranti called her and informed that Kishori had set the shanty on fire. Kranti was outside the shanty, while Buddhu was sleeping inside, and as he could not run out, he got burnt alive.

Investigating officer from Sadar police station, ASI Om Parkash, said Buddhu had suffered 80% burns, and he died at midnight. The police have booked Kishori, who is on the run. After questioning the neighbours, police found out that before putting the shanty on fire, Kishori had consumed liquor.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
