Mumbai man held for setting wife ablaze over suspicion of extramarital affair

The police have arrested the accused and he has been booked under Sections of the IPC | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place in front of the couple's three-year-old son in Bandra, Mumbai The accused was identified as Mohammed Akhlaq Nasim Qureshi The accused told police that they had been married for the last five years

Mumbai: A 32-year-old man was arrested for setting his wife ablaze in front of their three-year-old son in Mumbai's Bandra area over a suspected extramarital affair. The police confirmed the arrest on Wednesday.

The accused was identified as Mohammed Akhlaq Nasim Qureshi. The police officials told media outlets that accused's neighbours tried to stop the fight and save the 23-year-old wife Maryam Qureshi on Monday night. But all efforts were in vain when they found Mariyam ablaze. The shocked neighbours immediately informed the police control room.

According to a report, a team of Bandra police officials rushed to spot to save Mariyam. They rushed her to Bhabha hospital where she was declared brought dead by the hospital authorities. Meanwhile, the police officers arrested Akhlaq. During the preliminary investigation in the matter, he informed the police that they had been married for the last five years but the quarrels with his wife started about three months back.

He added that three months back, he had gone to his hometown in Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh for some work leaving his wife and son in Mumbai. Reportedly when he came back, he learned that his wife was having an extramarital affair with a man from the neighbourhood.

Since then the couple often fought on minor issues and Akhlaq suspected Maryam of infidelity. On Monday night, the couple fought on the same matter and in a fit of rage he grabbed a can of kerosene and poured it on her and proceeded to set her ablaze.

However, the police have arrested the accused and he has been booked under Sections 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code. He will be produced in the court for his police custody remand. Further probe in the matter is underway.
