A Time to Give Thanks

With so much division and disruption taking place all around us, it’s important to pause – to reflect – a time to give thanks.

On October 3, 1789, President George Washington issued the first-ever Thanksgiving Proclamation, declaring November 26, 1789 a day of Thanksgiving. While reading the entire declaration (posted below), I couldn’t help but dwell on what I’m thankful for this year.

I’m thankful for a growing family and good friends around the world. I’m thankful for our religious liberty that President Washington spoke of centuries ago. In courts from coast to coast and around the world, the ACLJ continues to fight to secure the God-given rights of every individual to live out their faith in every aspect of their lives.

I’m thankful for ACLJ supporters like you, who enable us to do all the work we do.

Because of your support, we’re able to address issues like these:

Working at the U.S. Supreme Court to stop the abortion-pill mandate’s assault on religious liberty – Americans who object to abortions could be forced to facilitate the provision of abortion-inducing pills against their conscience.

Christians in America are facing increasing harassment and discrimination – we’re fighting back – representing a Christian real estate agent in Virginia who has been targeted because she included “Jesus loves you” in her email signature.

We’re working to stop the gutting of America and our Constitution – pursuing our 5-Point Plan to defeat a dangerous socialist agenda that is detrimental to America and to your children and grandchildren’s future.

We’re advocating for persecuted Christians around the globe – like American Pastor Bryan Nerren – arrested and detained in India – essentially held hostage for his Christian faith.

As you gather with family and friends this Thanksgiving for fellowship and reflect on what we are thankful for and the many blessings that have been bestowed on us as a nation, I encourage you to keep President Washington’s words in mind, to be grateful for the benefits we’ve received from God and to continue onward with the responsibilities God has given us to be His hands and feet to a world in need of Him.

Whereas it is the duty of all Nations to acknowledge the providence of Almighty God, to obey his will, to be grateful for his benefits, and humbly to implore his protection and favor-- and whereas both Houses of Congress have by their joint Committee requested me to recommend to the People of the United States a day of public thanksgiving and prayer to be observed by acknowledging with grateful hearts the many signal favors of Almighty God especially by affording them an opportunity peaceably to establish a form of government for their safety and happiness.

Now therefore I do recommend and assign Thursday the 26th day of November next to be devoted by the People of these States to the service of that great and glorious Being, who is the beneficent Author of all the good that was, that is, or that will be-- That we may then all unite in rendering unto him our sincere and humble thanks--for his kind care and protection of the People of this Country previous to their becoming a Nation--for the signal and manifold mercies, and the favorable interpositions of his Providence which we experienced in the course and conclusion of the late war--for the great degree of tranquility, union, and plenty, which we have since enjoyed--for the peaceable and rational manner, in which we have been enabled to establish constitutions of government for our safety and happiness, and particularly the national One now lately instituted--for the civil and religious liberty with which we are blessed; and the means we have of acquiring and diffusing useful knowledge; and in general for all the great and various favors which he hath been pleased to confer upon us.

And also that we may then unite in most humbly offering our prayers and supplications to the great Lord and Ruler of Nations and beseech him to pardon our national and other transgressions-- to enable us all, whether in public or private stations, to perform our several and relative duties properly and punctually--to render our national government a blessing to all the people, by constantly being a Government of wise, just, and constitutional laws, discreetly and faithfully executed and obeyed--to protect and guide all Sovereigns and Nations (especially such as have shewn kindness unto us) and to bless them with good government, peace, and concord--To promote the knowledge and practice of true religion and virtue, and the encrease of science among them and us--and generally to grant unto all Mankind such a degree of temporal prosperity as he alone knows to be best.
