‘Aap Shaadi Kab Karenge’ & Other Sexist Things We’re Done With Before 2020

As 2019 draws to a close, it’s hard to believe that two entire decades of the 21st century have gone by. How did 20 years fly by in such a flash? We’ve witnessed the USA elect its first African-American President, India legalised same-sex relationships, and the Kardashians rule the roost.

But as far as we have come, there are certain things that have still not changed. Sexism and misogyny still reign supreme in this country. Just yesterday, film director and actor Bhagyaraj blamed women for rape. He said, “Women these days are always on the phone, which is why they are being exploited. There were times when restrictions were imposed on women. No such crimes happened during those times (sic).”

So before 2019 ends, let’s list out a bunch of sexist things women are told that we just won’t accept in 2020. Or ever.

1. Tumse kaun shaadi karega?

Stop right there uncle and aunty. Who and when I’m marrying is my problem, not yours. Just because a woman works, smokes, drinks, and parties, doesn’t mean that she is no longer “marriage material”. If a man refuses to marry a woman because of these things, he’s actually doing her a favour. Who wants to be stuck married to a male chauvinist pig for life anyway?

Weddings are particularly unbearable. Every time someone spots a young woman, they say, “You are next”. What if I started attending funerals and catching old people and telling them, “You are next”? You’re saying that’s insensitive? Well then, I’ll be sensitive to your feelings if you’re sensitive to mine.

2. Girls mature faster than boys

Every time a boy does something that is degrading to women, like evetease or slut shame, women are told to bear them because “girls mature faster”. Apparently, fully grown men can behave like children because women are expected to indulgently pinch their cheeks and say, “Oh, so cute, you are just like a child!”

But when it comes to going out at night, having sex, drinking, partying, and smoking, men are always given more leeway. “He will change once he gets married,” they all say. Well, guess what? Women are not rehab centres for badly behaved men. If we marry, it’s not so that we can babysit our husbands.

3. If he’s mean to you, it means he likes you

No. Just NO. If he’s mean to you, he’s probably just an a**hole. It’s always more accurate to judge a person by his/her actions than by their words. As the famed feminist author Maya Angelou said to Oprah Winfrey, “When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time.”

Women are taught to believe that a man will “change” when he meets the right woman. People change for a lot of things, but very rarely is it because of other people. True change can only happen from within. While you may support someone who is trying to alter their behavioural patterns for the better, it is not your responsibility to make sure they actually succeed. Don’t ever let them disrespect you.

He hasn’t texted you back? He doesn’t want to. He’s ghosted you? He’s done it on purpose. Basically, if a man is mean to you, he probably doesn’t value you that much. Cut your losses and leave.




