On West Bengal by-poll results day, BJP leader alleges TMC workers vandalised her car, house

On West Bengal by-poll results day, BJP leader alleges TMC workers vandalised her car, house | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: On a day when the Trinamool Congress (TMC) swept the by-polls in three constituencies of West Bengal, a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader from North 24 Parganas district alleged that her property was vandalised by TMC workers.

Falguni Patra, the BJP District President of North 24 Parganas, also said that her party workers were beaten up when they tried to intervene.

“TMC workers vandalised my house and cars, today. When stopped by our party workers, they even beat them up,” she was quoted by the news agency ANI as saying. Pathak’s residence is in Barrackpore Constituency Naihati.

The images from her house show smashed windshields of car and broken window panes.

Both BJP and TMC have often accused each other of perpetrating violence especially during elections in the state.

Falguni Patra, BJP District President, North 24 Parganas: TMC workers vandalised my house and cars, today. When stopped by our party workers, they even beat them up. The house is in Barrackpore Constituency Naihati. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/2GNRYzUukL — ANI (@ANI) November 28, 2019

During by-polls in Karimpur, BJP candidate Jayprakash Majumdar claimed that TMC workers beat him and threw him in a bush outside the Ghiyagat Islampur School booth on November 25. TMC denied the allegations. BJP MP from Asansol and MoS (Environment, Forest and Climate Change) Babul Supriyo condemned the incident in a video message.

Majumdar, also the West Bengal BJP vice president, had gone to investigate after receiving information that huge quantity of food was being prepared at a house for a "suspicious" feast around 10 metres from the booth.

When Majumdar reached the spot, he found 10-11 people cooking the food. They alleged that they were preparing the food for the election officials, a claim dismissed by them..

TMC candidate Bimalendu Sinha Roy decimated Majumdar winning the Karimpur Vidhan Sabha seat by a margin of 24,119 seats securing 50.53% of the total votes.

TMC candidates Pradip Sarkar and Tapan Deb Singha bagged Kharagpur Sadar Vidhan Sabha constituency and Kaliaganj seat respectively, with impressive margins.
