Defence Ministry gives clearance for procurement of military equipment worth Rs 22,800 crore

The Defence Ministry on Thursday gave clearance for acquisition of military equipment worth Rs 22,800 crore which includes indigenous systems to boost the Make in India project.

The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC), chaired by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, met on Thursday and approved the procurement for platforms and equipments for the armed forces.

Among the indigenous products are thermal imaging night sights for assault rifles which is used for precision strikes in darkness. These will be manufactured by the Indian private industry and used by troops deployed on the frontline.

"Thermal Imaging Night Sights would enable troops to undertake long range accurate engagements in dark and all weather conditions thereby enhancing the night fighting capabilities," a statement from the Ministry of Defence said.

The Ministry of Defence added that as a follow up of the successful indigenous Airborne Early Warning and Control (AEW&C) programme, the DAC revalidates the acceptance of necessity for the procurement of additional Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) India aircraft.

The mission system and sub-systems for these aircraft would be indigenously designed, developed and integrated onto the main platform by Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO).

These platforms would provide on-board Command & Control and 'Early Warning' which would assist the Indian Air Force (IAF) in achieving effective air space dominance in the least possible time. Induction of these systems would increase the extent of coverage along our borders and greatly enhance both the Air Defence and Offensive capabilities of the IAF.

The DAC also approved procurement of Medium Range Anti-submarine Warfare P8 I aircraft for the Navy. These aircraft would greatly strengthen the Navy's capabilities for maritime coastal surveillance, Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) and Anti-Surface Vessel (ASV) strike.

The DAC approved procurement of Twin Engine Heavy Helicopters (TEHH) for the Indian Coast Guard. These aircraft would enable the Coast Guard to undertake missions to prevent maritime terrorism, infiltration of terrorists by sea routes as well as Search & Rescue operations.
