Four arrested in connection with rape and murder of 25-yr-old Hyderabad vet; Telangana home minister asks why woman 'didn't dial 100 first'-India News , Firstpost

Four people have been arrested in connection with the rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Telangana's Hyderabad.

Four people have been arrested in connection with the rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Telangana's Hyderabad.

On Thursday, the burnt body of a 25-year-old woman veterinary doctor was found on the outskirts of the city.

"We received a complaint in Shamshabad Rural Police Station from her sister. She had gone to a hospital for treatment and while returning her vehicle's tires got punctured. This morning, she was found brutally murdered and burnt at Shadnagar outskirts," ACP of Shadnagar, V Surender said.

Cyberabad Police commissioner VC Sajjanar told New Indian Express that more than 10 teams are working on the case. “The motive behind the crime is not known. We are probing different angles and gathering clues,” said Sajjanar.

The victim's sister said, "Last night I spoke to her and she told me she is scared and later when I called her phone was off. We searched for her but we could not find anything so later we filed a complaint in the police station."

CNN-News18 reported on Friday that Telangana home minister Mohammad Mahmood Ali, seemingly blaming the victim, wondered: "Why didn't she dial 100 first? Had she called the police instead of her sister, she might have been saved."

Deccan Chronicle reported that on Wednesday, the victim had an appointment at a hospital in Gachibowli and left the house at 5.50 pm on her bike. She parked the bike near Thonudpally toll plaza and took private transport to go to Gachibowli. Around 9.22 pm on the same day, the victim called her sister to inform her that her bike had a flat tyre and some stranger had offered her help to get it repaired.

According to the New Indian Express, the victim's sister advised her to wait at the toll plaza, but the victim refused saying it would be awkward to stand at the toll plaza. She said her sister last spoke to her at 9.22 pm and her phone was switched off around 9.44 pm. After waiting for some time, her family rushed to the toll plaza to search for her.

Meanwhile, around 30 kilometres from the toll plaza, a farmer noticed a charred body of a woman and alerted the police. The neighbouring police stations were immediately notified, and the Shadnagar police alerted her family. The victim's family rushed to the spot and were able to identify the body with the help of a partly-burnt scarf and a gold pendant, reported New Indian Express.

Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao's son and Municipal Administration Minister KT Rama Rao said he would "personally monitor the case."

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi expressed shock over the incident, terming it as "terrible, unprovoked violence" beyond imagination.

The Union Home Ministry said it will send an advisory to all states to take precautionary steps to check crime against women in the wake of the murder.

With inputs from agencies
