Charred Remains Of 27-Year-Old Found Near Hyderabad, Police Suspect Rape

New Delhi:

The charred body of a 27-year-old veterinarian was found under a culvert on Thursday, a day after she went missing, police said. Police suspect that she was raped before being murdered and burnt. According News Nation source, two people have been detained in connection with the case. City police has formed 10 teams to investigate the matter.

Police suspect that the victim, working as an assistant veterinarian at a state-run hospital, was killed near Tondupally toll plaza of Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on the outskirts of Hyderabad and her body was dumped and burnt 25 km away at Chatanpally bridge near Shadnagar town in Ranga Reddy district. The body was noticed by some passers-by who alerted police.

Members of victim's family, who had filed a missing complaint after she did not return home by 10.20 pm on Wednesday, identified the body with the help of a locket found near it.

Cops have recovered the victim's footwear, clothes, and a liquor bottle near the toll plaza, where the doctor had parked her scooty. Cyberabad Police Commissioner VC Sajjanar said the police teams were scanning the CCTV footage from the toll plaza.

Police said she had gone to the hospital and returned home on Wednesday evening. She again left around 5.50 pm to go to another clinic and parked her two-wheeler near Shamshabad toll plaza and took a shared cab.

Her younger sister in a complaint lodged with police said she got a call from her sister at 9.22 pm stating that she was still at the plaza as someone told her that her scooter had a flat tyre and offered to help her, taking the two-wheeler.

The complainant said her sister told her that after sometime the person returned saying all shops were closed and he will try to get it repaired in some other place.

She also informed her sister that she was scared as there was a lorry in the vicinity and some people who had offered her help were near the vehicle, the complainant said. The complainant said she called her again at 9.44 pm but the phone was switched off following which they approached police.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
