26-year-old Telangana vet burnt to death: Don’t hang up, am scared, she told sister in last call

It was a typical day for the 26-year-old veterinary doctor when she left her home in Telangana's Shamshabad on Wednesday evening. She was to return home the same night after visiting a skin clinic in Gachibowli (approximately 26 km from her home).

But she didn't.

Around 12 hours after she left her home, the charred body of the 26-year-old was found in an underpass near the Chadanpalli village in Rangareddy district. Police say she was raped.

It's not known yet what excatly happened. The last call she made was to her younger sister from a toll plaza on her way back. She told her sister how a few strangers around her were making her uneasy. "Please talk to me for a while...I am scared," she had told her.

THE FATEFUL NIGHT

The Shamshabad resident, who worked as a veterinary doctor in Nawabpet, frequently travelled to the skin clinic in Gachibowli, her family says.

On Wednesday too, she left her home around 5 pm, The News Minute has reported quoting her family. Around 9.30 pm, she called her younger sister from the toll plaza where she had parked her scooter.

The 26-year-old told her sibling that her scooter had a flat tyre and that a stranger had offered to help her. She told the man she would take her scooter to a tyre repair shop herself, but he insisted on helping her.

As per TNM, the 26-year-old's sister sensed something amiss and asked her to stand near the toll gate, to which she replied, "So that everyone stares at me?"..."So what," her sister asked her.

During her call, the doctor told her sister she was suspicious of the people around her. "You please keep talking until my scooter comes back. They [the strangers] are all waiting outside. You please keep talking to me, I am scared," she was quoted as saying.

The 26-year-old then hung up with a promise to call her sister soon.

WORRIED FAMILY SEARCHES FOR MISSING DAUGHTER

When the 26-year-old failed to call, the doctor's sister dialled her number. This was around 9.44 pm. She called again after 10.30 pm, but her phone was now switched off.

Unable to get in touch with the 26-year-old, the family then drove to the toll plaza. Finding no evidence of the 26-year-old the family then approached police and filed a complaint in the early hours of Thursday morning.

BURNT BODY FOUND, POLICE SAY SHE WAS RAPE

And at 7 am, the police were informed of a charred body found in the underpass. Police reached the spot and identified the body as the 26-year-old's with the help of her clothes. Her family was informed.

Evidence gathered from the crime scene suggests rape, but that has not been confirmed yet as the body is completely charred, sources in the police told India Today TV.

Later in the day, the Cyberabad police arrested four persons in connection with the rape and murder case of the Telangana veterinary doctor.

NAB THE CULPRITS: OUTRAGE POURS ON SOICIAL MEDIA

Soon after details of the shocking case emerged, people took to social media to express their anger and demand urgent action in the case.

Goshamahal MP Raja Singh said, "Sad & angered to read about the young doctor who was raped & burnt alive on the outskirts of Hyderabad I request @TelanganaCMO @TelanganaDGP take action against the culprit immediately."

Malkajgiri MP Revanth Reddy also took to Twitter asking the Telangana Chief Minister to take strict action. "Outraged on hearing about the incident last night! I hope atleast now the @TelanganaCMO takes strict action against those who committed this heinous crime and sets a precedent that this will not be tolerated."

"We are angry, very angry to read about the young doctor who was raped & burnt alive in Hyderabad in Telangana," tweeted All India Mahila Congress as they asked, "Is this the fate women will meet in this country, if they are alone and their vehicle breaks down?"

Beyond stringent punishments & better surveillance, we must ensure that boys grow up respecting women as equals. There must be gender empowerment & sex education at every level of learning, be it at home or at school. Every individual must take initiative to lead this change(2/2) N Chandrababu Naidu (@ncbn) November 29, 2019

Chandrababu Naidu said he was anguished to learn about the gruesome murder of the 26-yr-old veterinarian.

"The perpetrators of this heinous crime must be brought to justice and given strictest punishment. They have no right to remain in civil society," he wrote on Twitter.

He also called for going beyond stringent punishments and better surveillance and instead ensuring that "boys grow up respecting women as equals".

Locals of Shamshabad on Thursday night held a candlelight vigil in memory of the victim and demanded justice.

(With inputs from Ashish Pandey in Hyderabad)

Also read | Telangana doctor burnt alive, charred body found near underpass

Hyderabad Horror | 26-year-old veterinary doctor murdered, charred body found
