Hyderabad doctor death: Vijay Deverakonda, Anushka Shetty, Keerthy Suresh post emotional note

Hyderabad and the rest of India woke up to the tragic news of the death of a 26-year-old veterinarian on November 28. On Wednesday (November 27) night, the doctor was abducted and charred to death. Her mortal remains were found in an underpass near the Chadanpalli village in Rangareddy district.

The police officials have arrested four suspects in connection to the case and the claim that the doctor could have been raped and sexually assaulted. This shocking incident has shaken the entire country and people are taking to social media to question the safety of women in the country.

Tollywood celebrities including Vijay Deverakonda, Anushka Shetty and Keerthy Suresh took to social media to share emotional notes on veterinarian's death and also urged women to dial 100 if they are feeling unsafe.

Vijay Deverakonda shared a note saying that he had been on a call with a friend or a relative when they feel unsafe and stated that it is one of the scariest things to do. He also urged everyone to call the cops and not hesitate when in need.

His post read, "I have had to stay on the phone while a member of the family or friend felt unsafe. How many of us have had to... it's one of the scariest things to have to do. We all need to take the responsibility of the boys/men in our homes, our friends and in our surroundings. Stand up to any wrong behaviour, correct them, make them understand. And those who don't behave like humans deserve no human rights. Give them what they deserve. Please spread this message far and wide. Our lives are most important. Don't hesitate to call the cops at 100/112 for any help."

Here's Vijay Deverakonda's post:

Vijay Deverakonda's note on Hyderabad doctor's death

Anushka Shetty, on her part, said that this incident has shaken her. She wrote, "This is a very tragic incident that shakes humanity. Even wild animals will feel ashamed if these criminals are compared to them...Is it a crime being a woman in our society? Let all of us fight for an immediate punishment to the culprits who are responsible for her death. My deep condolences to her family."

Mahanati actress Keerthy Suresh was devastated and heartbroken to hear the news. "Things are getting fearsome day by day. I am just speechless at this moment not knowing who is to be blamed specially in a city like Hyderabad which I presumed to be a super safe city. When will our country ever become safe for a woman to walk around at any time of the day. All the brutal psychopaths should be hunt down and punished asap! Heartfelt condolences to her family. May god give them the strength and power to overcome the loss and help find the culprits. I believe in Karma, it works 24*7," she posted on her social media account.

The local residents of Shamshabad (outskirts of Hyderabad) on November 28 (Thursday) night held a candlelight vigil in memory of the victim and demanded justice.

ALSO SEE | 26-year-old Hyderabad vet burnt to death: Don’t hang up, am scared, she told sister in last call

ALSO SEE | Telangana vet was educated, why call sister not police? Minister blames murder victim
