Doctor Allegedly Raped & Burnt Alive, Plastic Road In Guwahati + More Top News

In the wee hours of November 28, a 27-year-old government veterinary doctor, who was returning to her residence at Shamshabad from Gachibowli, was murdered and her body set ablaze by assailants at an underpass at Chatanpally in Sahdnagar, about 60 kilometres from the city. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) Indian Army Just Built A Road Completely Out Of Plastic Waste In Guwahati. We Can Just Laud Them

Plastic waste generation in our country remains unabated and if we don't act on it, it might threaten our future. The Indian Army on the other hand is setting a great example in making the most of such plastic pile-up in our country and putting it to greater use. Read more

2) Ranchi Law Student Abducted Near Chief Minister's Residence And Gangraped, 12 Arrested

A group of armed men abducted and gang-raped a student of a prestigious law university in Ranchi late on Tuesday. In raids conducted through Wednesday, police arrested 12 persons who have confessed to the crime. Read more

3) A Bengaluru Woman Created Maps To Highlight Sexual Harassment Zones In The City

A 26-year-old woman, government veterinary doctor, was allegedly raped and burnt alive in Telangana. Just a day ago, a woman was allegedly raped and killed by a migrant labourer in Perumbavoor, rural Ernakulam in Kerala. The victim was in her early 40s and was staying away from her parents. She knew the perpetrator. Read more

4) Onions Worth Rs 20 Lakh Stolen In Madhya Pradesh As Price Soars, Case Registered

Amidst looming onion crisis in the country, a truckload of it has reportedly been stolen in Madhya Pradesh while being transported from Nasik to Gorakhpur. Read more

5) Over 50 Parliamentarians Write To Lok Sabha Speaker For Strict Action Against Pragya Thakur Over Godse Comments

Pragya Thakur's remark in Parliament during the discussion on Special Protection Group (SPG) Bill in which she called Mahatma Gandhi's assassin Nathuram Godse, a patriot has not gone down well with the Member of Parliaments (MPs). Read more
