Telangana veterinary doctor's murder: Cops confirm rape, say four arrested

Request will be made to hand over the case to the fast-track court, said police in the press conference. (ANI photo)

Lawyers of #Rangareddy district court refuse to appear on behalf of the accused in the gangrape and murder of 27-ye… https://t.co/eopyzoHjcP — TOI Hyderabad (@TOIHyderabad) 1575052099000

#HyderabadRape || @cyberabadpolice investigation confirms that the #Shadnagar victim was gang-raped and murdered. R… https://t.co/4Hi91zY7ME — TOI Hyderabad (@TOIHyderabad) 1575035482000

Read Also

Video | T'gana home minister on alleged rape & murder of a woman doctor: We're saddened by the incident, crime happ… https://t.co/G37E8Eev3U — TOI Hyderabad (@TOIHyderabad) 1575027314000

Read Also

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

Hyderabad vet's murder: Police confirm rape, arrest 4 accused

HYDERABAD: Cyberabad Police of Telangana on Friday confirmed that the 27-year-old government veterinary doctor was gang-raped before being killed. All the four accused, who have been arrested, have confessed to the crime, the police added.The police said that a request would be made to hand over the case to the fast-track court in Mahbubnagar to expedite the prosecution for maximum punishment to the accused."After investigation four people were taken into custody at Shadnagar police station. Their names are Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu," police said.During a press conference, Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjanar said that the four accused - Mohammed Areef(26), G Shiva (20), G Naveen (20), C Chennakeshavulu(20), all residents of Narayanapet district -hatched a plan to rape the victim when they saw she was parking her two-wheeler at 6pm on Wednesday at Thondapalli Toll Plaza."As per their plan, they deliberately deflated the tyre. All the accused were drunk. They came to Hyderabad in a lorry to deliver a load of bricks," Sajjanar added.Earlier, police had suspected the victim might have been raped before she was murdered.Meanwhile, state home minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali stoked a controversy with his reported remarks that the victim should have called the police rather than her sister.Chief minister K Chandrashekar Rao's son and municipal administration minister KT Rama Rao said he would "personally monitor the case."Union home ministry said it will send an advisory to all states to take precautionary steps to check crime against women in the wake of the murder.Union minister of state for home, G Kishan Reddy said he has been in regular touch with officials of the Telangana government so that those involved in the woman's murder were punished."On behalf of the central government, I am talking to the state government officials. The Telangana DGP is also coming to Delhi today and he will meet me. Those who were involved in the crime should be socially boycotted and no lawyer should represent them," he added.However, sources close to Ali, who visited the parents of the veterinarian, said he was only trying to say police intervention could have helped her.He expressed anguish over the incident and asserted that the culprits would be handed out tough punishment."This girl is like my daughter. I feel sad over the incident...police are investigating," he said.The woman doctor, who was returning to her residence at Shamshabad from Gachibowli, was murdered and her body was set ablaze by assailants at an underpass at Chatanpally in Shadnagar, about 60 km from Hyderabad, in the early hours of Thursday.Around 6am on Thursday morning, milk vendor S Sathyam found a body burning underneath an underpass of a flyover on NH-44 (Hyderabad-Bengaluru Highway). He immediately called village elders, who informed local police.After confirming that it was a murder, Cyberabad Police verified recent missing complaints. On Wednesday night, the Shamshabad police had received a complaint of a veterinary doctor missing. When her family reached the spot where the fully charred body was found, they established its identity based on a scarf and a Ganesha locket around the victim’s neck.(With inputs from PTI)
