Taxi driver says Halifax police dismissed investigation into alleged racist attack

A full box of tissue wasn’t enough to stop the blood pouring from his nose.

Before that early Saturday morning incident on Jan. 26, it had been five years since Navneet Jaggi had been assaulted by a taxi passenger.

Jaggi had a bad feeling about the four young men he’d picked up at about 2 a.m. on Barrington Street in downtown Halifax. They showed signs of being intoxicated and were aggressive from the start, recalled Jaggi. They wanted to be dropped off at an elementary school in Beaver Bank. He had his nose broken after asking for the fare upfront.

The man in the front seat punched him, then the foursome ran from the vehicle toward the waterfront.

“He said you, ‘f------ immigrant,’ and he punched me in my nose,” said Jaggi.

After reporting the incident to 911 he attempted to wait for the police to arrive. The bleeding didn’t stop so he drove himself to the Queen Elizabeth II Hospital emergency room. The Chronicle Herald obtained a copy of Jaggi’s medical report, showing he was treated for a fractured nose there. He arrived at the hospital at 2:27 a.m. and was released at 8:13 a.m.

Jaggi, who’s from India and has been driving cab in Halifax since 2012, says he’s now frightened to do his job in downtown Halifax on weekends after bars close.

Frustrated by police

Jaggi says he’s often the victim of racial taunts from customers. He also says he’s frustrated by Halifax Regional Police’s handling of his case. Officers arrived at the hospital to take his statement but afterwards no suspects were identified by police and he received a call from the department on Feb. 4 informing him the investigation had been closed.

Over the span of seven years, Jaggi says he’s reported three serious incidents to HRP involving passengers, including two assaults and a theft. None of the subsequent investigations resulted in charges being laid.

“I just don’t think that the police care about taxi drivers, especially immigrant drivers,” said Jaggi, who’s now a Canadian citizen.

Const. John MacLeod, HRP spokesman, said officers did their best to investigate the incident and checked the area promptly but were unable to locate suspects. Officers also canvassed the area for witnesses and video surveillance but there were no witnesses or any video surveillance available, said MacLeod.

A surveillance camera is located across from the CIBC branch on Barrington Street where the alleged assault occurred. The Herald sent a photo of the camera to HRP asking if footage from the camera had been examined, but did not get a response from the department.

“I just don’t think that the police care about taxi drivers, especially immigrant drivers." — Navneet Jaggi

Jaggi said investigators failed to contact fellow taxi driver Rizwan Anees, who had encountered the injured Jaggi shortly after the assault and then spotted the foursome on Lower Water Street within minutes. Jaggi said he told the officers that Anees had also witnessed the young men entering a black Pontiac car at about 3:30 am on Barrington Street. The Herald confirmed these details with Anees who said he was never contacted by the police.

“I was in disbelief that they didn’t check the security camera, didn’t talk to my friend,” said Jaggi. “I told them there’s no point in trying to get your help because you’re not going to help me. It’s very scary to think that the police didn’t seem to even do that much.

“They tell me to put a camera in my car, so that means I have to do everything for my safety, but what are they doing for me?”

Fellow Halifax taxi driver Pardeep Sahni empathizes with Jaggi. Sahni admits to being robbed once in his 14 years driving a cab in the city. He says he and fellow drivers are regularly victims of racial slurs.

“You have to be very careful who you are picking up because you never know who’s in your cab and whether you’re going to get paid,” said Sahni, who’s also from India. “Yes, I hear racist comments, most of the time I ignore it because if I get into that it would give me a bad day.

“Generally, we drivers don’t talk about it because it’s always been like that and you slowly get used to it.”

No surprise

Brian Herman, president of Casino Taxi in Halifax, says none of this comes as a surprise to him. He says his drivers report inappropriate behaviour to company management on a regular basis. He says drivers do report abuse to police but in some cases they aren’t fully investigated because many of the incidents occur in the early morning hours of the weekend, when police are often busiest.

“But it would be good if police would follow up more readily,” said Herman. “We get drivers, to be 100 per cent honest, that are sexually assaulted. They show me a video of people in the front seat groping the driver. They are looking to be covered if someone lodges a complaint against them.

“It’s a societal issue. People need to stand up for the rights of marginalized people to be treated with respect.” — Brian Herman, president of Casino Taxi

Herman also says the company tries to protect their drivers, mainly by banning abusive customers.

Halifax Regional Municipality regulates the city’s taxi industry. Currently Halifax Council is considering a recommendation from municipal staff that will create additional oversight of the city’s 1,000 licensed taxi drivers. They include denying taxi driver’s licences for people convicted of a major criminal offence or major driving offence in the past 10 years and making English language testing mandatory.

Erin DiCarlo, an HRM spokeswoman, says taxi drivers are considered business owners and as a result are responsible for implementing their own safety measures. Options available could include the installation of cameras or the installation of a shield/divider, said DiCarlo. She also says drivers are encouraged to call police if they experience abuse or feel unsafe at any time.

But Jaggi says while drivers are subjected to rigorous review, little concern is placed on their well-being.

“If someone complains about me or any other driver, we’re contacted right away and we have to defend ourselves seriously,” said Jaggi. “We can get in a lot of trouble, but who’s looking out for us?”

Related:

'Ticking time bomb' teen spared jail for attacking taxi driver with a bottle

Woman was passed out, mostly naked in Halifax taxi driver's car: constable
