Ghaziabad: Child rape cases rose 20% in 5 years, most in rural areas

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

GHAZIABAD: Cases of child rape have seen over 20% rise in Ghaziabad district over the past five years. According to data sourced from the police, as many as 116 cases of rape were reported in 2015 and the figure rose to 152 in 2018. Between January and September this year, 141 cases of rape against minors have already been registered in Ghaziabad district.Police pointed out that the increase in numbers also suggested that more and more people were coming out in open to report rape cases, battling the social stigma attached to it and reposing faith in the cops.What’s more interesting is that 60-65% of Pocso cases have been filed by the residents of rural areas and those from urban areas account for the remaining part. Around 30% of the cases have been registered against neighbours while 27% against friends and relatives.According to the officials, the only Pocso court in Ghaziabad has as many as 1,477 such cases pending. Police said that cases under the Pocso Act — which defines a child as any person below 18 years of age and is gender-neutral — are regularly monitored by a special cell and investigation is given precedence.In 487 Pocso cases that were reported between 2015 and 2018, arrests have been made in around 80% of them.In total, 632 cases have reached the court between 2017 and 2018, and 58 of them have resulted in acquittals. Between January and July this year, 226 cases were brought before the Pocso court and eight of nine cases decided so far have ended in acquittals.Asked about the rise in numbers, SP (rural) Neeraj Kumar Jadaun said that people are becoming more aware and coming out to file complaints, instead of reaching a compromise.“The number of Pocso cases is higher in rural areas because the village population is more than that in urban areas,” he said.“Police are also helping people become more aware. They are holding various programmes with help from NGOs in the district. Nukkad natak and door-to-door campaigns are being organised across the district. The police have even asked the schools to educate students about the crime,” added the SP (rural).According to the police officer, in most cases, the accused are either relatives or someone known to the survivor. In such cases, there is a high chance that the two parties might reach a compromise.Varun Pathak, a human rights activist in Delhi, said the rate of rapes against minors is increasing because in most cases, the accused are uneducated and poor. “Porn sites also play a major role in the crime,” he said.“NGOs are doing their best to educate such types of people. We are going around villages and making people aware so that they come out and report such incidents to police. If children can’t go to cops, they should at least tell their parents,” he added.
