India: Woman allegedly raped, murdered, body burned in Hyderabad

The burned body of a woman has been found in India after she was allegedly raped and murdered after a group of men offered to fix her motorbike.

Don't miss out on the headlines from World. Followed categories will be added to My News.

Police in India said they have detained four suspects for questioning on Friday after finding the burned body of a 27-year-old veterinarian who was raped and killed in the south of the country, in yet another instance of violent crime against women in India.

The woman went missing on Wednesday night and her body was found by a passer-by in an underpass on the outskirts of Hyderabad, the capital of Telangana state, Police Commissioner V.C. Sajjanar said.

RELATED: Teen girl gang raped before having her head shaved in India

Police said the suspects allegedly offered to fix a flat tyre on her motorbike and then took her in a truck to a secluded spot where the crime was committed.

She made a last phone call to her sister saying her bike had broken down and she was scared because some people sitting in a truck were staring at her, Sajjanar said.

Indian police officers inspect the site where they found the burned body of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor. Picture: AP

“We lost a lot of time moving from one police station to another,” the victim’s sister told the Times of India.

“Had the police acted without wasting time, at least my sister would have been alive.”

Surendar, another police officer who uses one name, said her body was wrapped in a blanket and set on fire in the underpass.

The veterinarian’s remains were reportedly so badly burnt that her family could only identify her from a locket she was wearing according to reports. Her identity has not been revealed for legal reasons.

“My daughter was very innocent,” the victim’s mother told theTimes of India. “I want the accused burned alive.”

The woman cannot be identified under Indian law. Picture: Twitter.

India has been shaken by a series of sexual assaults in recent years, including the gang rape and murder of a student on a New Delhi bus in 2012. The government has passed a series of laws increasing punishment for rape, but it’s rare for more than a few weeks to pass without another brutal sexual assault being reported.

A woman holds a candle and placard seeking an end to sexual violence against women, which has been on the rise in the country, during a protest last year in Bangalore, India. Picture: AP/Aijaz Rahi.

In 2013, India doubled prison terms for rapists to 20 years and criminalised voyeurism, stalking and the trafficking of women.

Indian politicians also voted to lower the age at which a person can be tried as an adult for heinous crimes from 18 to 16.

According to the most recent available official crime records, 38,947 women were raped in India in 2016, including over 2,000 girls younger than 12. Overall in 2016, 338,954 girls and women were subjected to crimes like molestation, kidnappings and cruelty by husband or relatives.

Originally published as Indian police find burned body of woman in suspected rape
