Woman hawker allegedly gangraped and murdered in Telangana's Asifabad

Woman hawker allegedly gangraped and murdered in Telangana's Asifabad

Police have arrested four persons who have allegedly confessed to the crime.

news Arrest

After the horrific rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian on the outskirts of Hyderabad, another brutal gangrape and killing of a woman in erstwhile Adilabad district has also triggered anger among people in the area. But while the country expresses outrage over the death of the vet, the case in Komaram Bheem Asifabad district has garnered only little attention.

On Monday, November 25th police found the body of a woman who was gang raped before she was killed in between Ramnayaktanda and Ellapatar villages in Lingapur mandal of Komaram Bheem Asifabad.

According to district police officials, the 30 year old woman belonging to Khanapur of Nirmal, had made a living by selling balloons and other supplies in the neighbouring villages of Lingapur and Jainoor mandals.

According to district SP Mallareddy, the woman was dropped near Ellapatur by her husband. Both went to different villages for regular hawking.

The SP said, "At around 2 pm on Sunday, when he came back and saw at the village he hadn’t found her after searching in neighbouring villages and enquiring with relatives as her phone was switched off, he reached out to Lingapur police on same night."

As per the press release, police found her dead body near Ellapatar village.

A special team has nabbed three suspects from the same village at Adilabad X road.

Three persons, Shaik Babu (35), Shaik Shaboddin (30) and Shaik Makdum (40) have allegedly confessed to the rape and murder. Police have booked the accused for murder, rape along with the SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act, and all have been remanded to judicial custody.

Speaking to TNM, Lingapur SI Nalla Venkatesh said, "The accused found her when she was walking alone to another village at an isolated place and committed the crime."

He further added, "Based on our primary investigation, we found it's rape and murder. We are awaiting for FSL reports."

According to sources, police sent evidence to the Hyderabad Forensic Science Laboratory on Friday. Asifabad DySP A Sathyanarayana is supervising the case investigation.

Dalit and Adivasi organisations have begun staging protests in Jainoor and Lingapur demanding justice for the victim.
