Delhi High Court spells out measures to ensure safety of women and children in the capital

The court asked Delhi government and Centre to come up with plans to make the capital crime-free for women and children. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delhi High Court gives direction to ensure safety of women in the city Court questions,'How is the government using Nirbhaya fund'? Court asks police to deploy women cops in plainclothes at vulnerable spots

New Delhi: After Nirbhaya's brutal rape and murder in Delhi in 2012, a similar treatment that was meted out to 26-year-old Telangana veterinary doctor has shocked the nation yet again.

Taking cognisance of such crimes against women, the Delhi High Court has swung into action and issued multiple directions to ensure the safety of women in the city.

According to a report in Times of India, the court has ordered police to deploy the cops at several vulnerable spots in the city. The High Court has been monitoring policing in the city after the Nirbhaya case.

The court has also asked the Delhi chief secretary to finds ways to utilise the vast sums of money accumulated in the Nirbhaya fund. The Nirhaya fund has a corpus of Rs 3,200 crore by 2017.

During the hearing, the High Court asked the government how it is using Nirbhaya fund and what further steps could be taken to ensure the safety of women and children in the city.

A bench of Justices Anup Jairam Bhambhani and GS Sistani heard the matter on Friday and ordered the chief secretary to formulate plans to utilise the Nirbhaya fund to control crimes against women.

The Delhi Police informed the court that Nirbhaya fund had a corpus of Rs 3,200 crore by 2017 and Rs 1,000 crore was used from the fund to fund various projects related to the safety of women and children. However, all such projects are yet to be made operational.

The court also asked the central government to look into augmenting manpower in Delhi Police in view of long duty hours and workload on the cops.

The Delhi Police counsel told the court that the manpower issue is already being looked into and nearly 9,000 cops have been recruited of the 61,000 vacancies.

The court also asked Crime Branch DCP to consider deploying women cops in plainclothes at vulnerable spots in the city.

The court has fixed January 16 as the next date of hearing in the case. The court asked Delhi government and Centre to come up with plans to make the capital crime-free for women and children.
