Four arrested over Hyderabad highway rape horror

Hyderabad: Cyberabad police in Telangana state arrested four people on Friday in connection with the gang rape and murder of a lady veterinary doctor in the outskirts of Hyderabad.

They were identified as lorry driver Naveen, Pasha, Keshavlu and Shiva, all belonging to Narayanpet district. Search was on for the fifth member of the gang,

The broken scooty, reportedly that broke while being driven by Priyanka Reddy.

Cyberabad police commissioner VC Sajjanar had constituted 10 special teams for expeditious probe into the horrifying incident on the intervening night of Wednesday and Thursday.

The initial investigation and post mortem report revealed that the 27-year-old veterinarian, Priyanka Reddy, was subjected to gang rape at an isolated place near the Shamshabad toll plaza on Hyderabad-Bengaluru highway and was later strangulated to death.

The criminals later tried to dispose the body by burning it at an underpass.

Post-mortem

Post mortem suggested that she was gang raped and was murdered around 3-4am. Later kerosene was poured on her body before setting it on fire.

Sajannar said that veterinary doctor had gone missing near the Toll Plaza of Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad in outskirts of Hyderabad and on Thursday morning her body was found burning by a passer-by.

She had gone missing at around 9.20pm on Wednesday after making a last call to her sister Bhavya Reddy informing that her two wheeler had broken down and she was feeling scared as some people sitting in a lorry were staring at her.

Priyanka, who worked at a government veterinary hospital at Kollur village in Mahbubnagar district was a resident of Shamshabad and used to travel daily between the two places.

On Wednesday evening after returning from work she had left her home at 5.30pm to visit a skincare doctor in Hyderabad.

'Scooty developed problem'

As her bike developed some problem she left it near the outer ring road and went in a taxi. At around 9pm she returned to the same spot to find the bike with a flat tyre.

“Priyanka told me a stranger in red shirt had offered to help her and took her bike for repair to a nearby shop. But after some time he returned saying the mechanic shop was closed,” said Bhavya.

After 10 minutes when the family members again tried to contact her phone was switched off. After searching on their own the family sought the police help at 2am.

The family members identified the body with the help of some of the belongings. Her bike was also found lying in bushes some distance away, police said.

“if the victim or her sister had alerted the police over dial 100 immediately police could have saved her as a highway patrol was stationed not far from the spot,” the commissioner said.
