Telangana doctor rape-murder: 4 accused sent to 14 days' judicial custody

A local court in Telangana's Shadnagar has sent all four accused in the gruesome gangrape and murder of a woman veterinarian doctor to judicial custody for 14 days.

The Cyberabad Police had arrested four men on Friday in connection with their involvement in the rape and murder case. The accused have been identified as Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu. Mohammad Areef (25), who works as a driver, is the prime accused in case.

The 26-year-old veterinary doctor was smothered, raped and then burnt by four men on Wednesday night and her body was found the next day under a culvert on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway.

Many leaders have condemned the barbaric act and have demanded severe punishment for the culprits.

Congress MP Rahul Gandhi expressed shock about the rape and murder of the woman in Telangana.

"How anyone could subject another human being to such terrible, unprovoked violence is beyond imagination. My thoughts & prayers are with the victim's family at this time of immense grief," he tweeted.

While, Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy said he has been in regular touch with officials of the Telangana government so that those involved in the woman's murder were punished.

"The Ministry of Home Affairs will send an advisory to all states as a precautionary measure so that no such incident takes place in future," he told reporters outside Parliament in New Delhi.

Meanwhile, The Ranga Reddy district Bar council in Telangana has issued a notice stating that its members would not appear for the accused arrested in the Telangana veterinary doctor's rape-murder case.

The notice issued on Saturday read: "The Executive Committee of Bar Association Ranga Reddy District court condemns the brutal murder... by the accused on 27/11/09 at Thondapally toll plaza. The committee further requests the members not to appear for the accused person for the case."

"The Executive Committee demands the government of Telangana to establish a separate special court for expediting the trial of the case for instant justice," the notice further read.



ALSO READ: Telangana doctor rape-murder: Chilling developments that sent shockwaves across country

ALSO READ: Telangana doctor murder: They raped, smothered, burnt her after hatching crime over drinks

ALSO WATCH: What murdered Telangana doctor's family members have to say
