Punjab: Beaten, humiliated by teachers for wearing ‘tight’ trousers, student commits suicide, CM orders probe

Dhananjay Tiwari committed suicide by hanging himself from a fan at his home in Ludhiana’s Gurmail Nagar, police said Saturday. (Express Photo by Gurmeet Singh)

Allegedly thrashed, humiliated and harassed by his teacher, principal and latter’s husband for wearing “tight trousers”, a Class 11 student committed suicide by hanging himself from a fan at his home in Ludhiana’s Gurmail Nagar, police said Saturday.

Police Saturday registered an FIR against the teacher, principal and the director of SGD Grammar Senior Secondary School on the complaint of father of Dhananjay Tiwari (18). The father said that his son was mentally disturbed, did not eat anything for two days and took the extreme step in the intervening night of Thursday and Friday.

Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh Saturday directed Ludhiana deputy commissioner to probe the incident. “Deeply anguished to hear of a Class 11 student committing suicide after facing humiliation and harassment by teachers at school. Have directed DC Ludhiana to personally look into the matter and report to me. My thoughts are with the family in this time of grief,” the CM said in a tweet.

Dhananjay Tiwari’s father with police officials in Ludhiana. (Express Photo by Gurmeet Singh) Dhananjay Tiwari’s father with police officials in Ludhiana. (Express Photo by Gurmeet Singh)

Earlier, Dhananjay’s father, Brij Raj Tiwari, a factory worker, in his statement to police, said that on November 27, his son had gone to school where his teacher Poonam allegedly slapped her multiple times in front of the class for wearing “narrow and tight trousers”, which according to her “weren’t according to the prescribed uniform pattern”.

He further said that his son was then taken to school principal Saroj Sharma’s room where she also called her husband Prabhu Dutt, who is also the school director. “Dutt tied the hands of my son with the tie he was wearing and then thrashed him with a stick. Dhananjay begged for pardon but to no avail. When he returned home, his face and hands were red. He stopped eating food and did not tell anything to his mother. On November 28, he refused to go school and after we insisted, he told his mother about the incident,” said Tiwari.

He further told police that when his wife told Dhananjay that she will accompany him to school the next day (November 29) and talk to his teachers, he refused and saying “do not come to my school because then the principal and her husband will humiliate you also”.

Tiwari further said that for two days (November 27 and 28), his son did not eat anything. He was mentally disturbed and also stopped speaking to family members.

“In the intervening night of Thursday and Friday, around 4 am, he went to the room on the terrace and hanged himself with the hook of the ceiling fan,” said his father.

Inspector Pavittar Singh, SHO Daba police station, said that Dhananjay was a bright student and had scored 93 per cent marks in Class 10. “He was a bright boy and was obedient. There was never any other complaint against him. According to his parents, his class teacher Poonam, principal Saroj Sharma and her husband Prabhu Dutt allegedly thrashed and humiliated him for wearing tight trousers. The autopsy and cremation were done Saturday,” said SHO.

He added that an FIR against Poonam, Sharma and Dutt was registered under the Sections 306 (abetment to suicide) and 34 (act done by several persons with common intention) of IPC at Daba police station. “All accused are absconding. We are checking CCTV cameras installed at school and conducting raids to arrest them,” said SHO.
