Hyderabad rape and murder case: NCW accuse Cyberabad cops of delay in response

National Commission for Women

Untitled Carousel Hyderabad rape and murder case: People express outrage over the ghastly attack There is extreme anger among people in Hyderabad. Similar anger is exhibited by the people, youngsters and students across Telangana and Andhra Pradesh ever since the disturbing news of the 26-year old veterinary doctor's brutal rape and murder by four truck workers came to light.

Untitled Carousel Hyderabad rape and murder case: Doctors, judge made to come to police station amid protests Enormous tension at the Shadnagar police station on account of the huge gathering forced the system to make many deviations from the set practices.

Hyderabad rape and murder case: Four accused lodged in Cherlapally jail 00:14

The(NCW) found fault with the Cyberabad police for their delayed response to the complaint about the missing veterinary doctor.The Commission said in a release, “Police officials delayed taking action in this case. Victim’s family was shunted between two police stations citing the jurisdiction of the location where the victim was last seen. This was done after hearing out the complaint completely at the first police station for at least half an hour”, the NCW said.The Commission also pointed out that the police came in action only the next day though the victim’s family had reached out to them immediately after her mobile phone got switched off. It also faulted the absence of any woman officer in the investigation team.It rubbished the claims of the police that the CCTV footage was not clear.NCW team headed by Shyamal S Kunder met the victim’s family and also the Cyberabad police officials.The NCW faulted the police inaction on the drivers who parked their vehicles on the roadside and consumed alcohol in the vicinity of the toll plaza. “The police did not bother inquiring the reason for either,” the commission said. The commission representatives directed the Cyberabad police officials to install CCTV cameras at all important places, particularly at the toll plazas.Commission chairperson Rekha Sharma said, “The lackadaisical attitude of the police complicated the case. Had they come into action immediately, the mishap could have been avoided. I don’t see the seriousness yet. They still haven’t been able to recover mobile phone of the victim, which could have answers to so many questions in this case. Justice delayed is justice denied. I demand immediate charge sheet of the miscreants."
