London Bridge Attacker 'Dreamed' of Building Own Terror Training Camp, Killing Boris Johnson

They even found a reliable source of funding. According to wiretap recordings of the group, cited by The Guardian, they saw British social benefits as the easiest way to accumulate the necessary sum without lifting a finger.

"On jobseeker’s allowance we can earn [the money we need for the camp], never mind working for that", Khan said in one of the conversations.

Following their training in Pakistan, the group, including Khan, also hoped to test their newly acquired skills by getting "first hand terrorist experience" in the Jammu and Kashmir region, controlled by India, surveillance showed. The latter has been suffering from terrorist attacks in the area for years.

Plots Against Boris Johnson, the London Stock Exchange, and UK Parliament

But what the members of Khan's group were arrested for was even more ambitious. The MI5 determined that they had planned a series of attacks akin to the multi-day terrorist assaults in Mumbai in 2008, but this time targeting the British Parliament.

Apart from this, the group was intending to send bombs through the post, as well as plant pipe bombs at the London Stock Exchange and US Embassy in the UK. Khan and the group also planned assassinations of prominent politicians and religious leaders. Among them were London's then Mayor and current Prime Minister Boris Johnson, the dean of St Paul’s Cathedral, and two rabbis.

Ties to UK Islamists and Release on Licence

According to information obtained by the Centre on Radicalisation and Terrorism at the Henry Jackson Society, Usman Khan was also on close terms with Anjem Choudary, the notorious Islamist preacher who founded the Al-Muhajiroun group, which has been banned in the UK. The Henry Jackson Society noted that Choudary's mobile number was found in Khan's cell phone. According to the centre, Khan was a student and friend of the preacher.

"Usman Khan was a loyal and integral member of Choudary’s inner-circle and we know him to have been highly regarded by Choudary", the Henry Jackson Society's report said.

Choudary has praised the people behind the 9/11 attack and July 2005 bombings in London, as well as called on people to join Daesh*. The latter led to him being convicted in 2016 and sentenced to five years and six months in prison, but, just as Khan, he was released on licence in October 2018.
