Telangana doctor rape-murder: 3 cops suspended, accused sent to judicial custody | Top developments

Three police personnel were suspended on Saturday for a delay in registering an FIR in the rape and murder case of a woman doctor in Telangana. The cops were suspended after a detailed enquiry was conducted on the alleged "dereliction of duty on delaying the registration of FIR relating to a missing woman".

Speaking with India Today TV, Cyberabad Police Commissioner said, "Based on the findings following an enquiry, the officers were placed under suspension till further orders."

The cops who have been suspended are Sub-inspector M Ravi Kumar, and head constables P Venu Gopal Reddy and A Sathyanarayana Goud. "All the officers of the Cyberabad Police have been once again instructed to register the cases irrespective of jurisdiction whenever a complaint related to cognisable offence is received in the police station," he said.

Commissioner of Police, Cyberabad: Based on the findings, M. Ravi Kumar, SI of Police, Shamshabad PS, P Venu Gopal Reddy, Head Constable, RGIA Airport PS & A. Sathyanarayana Goud, Head Constable, RGIA Airport PS have been placed under suspension till further orders. #Telangana https://t.co/ZFaJRWAF1J ANI (@ANI) November 30, 2019





The accused in the Telangana doctor rape and murder case were on Saturday sent to 14-day judicially custody. A magistrate passed the orders at Shadnagar police station as the accused could not be produced in the fast-track court at Mahabubnagar due to non-availability of the judge and also because of the tense situation outside the police station where a large crowd had gathered.

WILL DO ANYTHING FOR A DAILY BASIS TRIAL: TELANGANA GUV

Meanwhile, Telangana Governor Tamilisai Soundararajan assured the family of the 26-year-old veterinarian that she would do everything "constitutionally and legally" to ensure the victim gets justice with the setting up of a fast-track court and the trial being held on a daily basis.

The police would be asked to conclude the probe and file the chargesheet against the accused at the earliest, Tamilisai Soundararajan said.

PROTESTERS HURL CHAPPALS AT COPS, DEMAND DEATH PENALTY

Angry protesters, who had gathered outside the Shadnagar police station where the accused in the Telangana doctor rape and murder case were lodged, hurled slippers and stones at the police officers after they did not let them enter the police station.

The police officials tried to pacify the agitating protesters but when they did not budge, the cops resorted to lathi-charge to disperse the protestors.

Also Read | 26-year-old Telangana vet burnt to death: Don’t hang up, am scared, she told sister in last call

As the situation outside the Shadnagar police station became tense, all the accused in the Telangana rape and murder case were shifted to Chanchalguda Central Jail. Stones were also hurled at the police vehicle in which the accused were being taken to the jail in Hyderabad.

The students of government schools in Hyderabad also took part in the protests in the Shamshabad area against the alleged rape and murder of the veterinary doctor on Wednesday night.

Also Read | Telangana doctor murder: They raped, smothered, burnt her after hatching crime over drinks

NOTHING LESS THAN DEATH PENALTY: NCW

National Commission for Women team on Saturday reached the residence of the veterinarian who was raped and murdered in Cyberabad. Speaking with ANI, NCW Chairperson Rekha Sharma said the accused should not get less than "hang till death".

"We have a judicial system which will be followed. But it should not be delayed and nothing less than 'hang till death'. They should be hanged and the case should go in fast track court," she said.

She further said the family told the NCW team that the police did not listen to them and kept fighting over jurisdiction of the case.

"Family told that role of police was negative. Police didn't listen to them, they were saying that she must have eloped. They were fighting over jurisdiction, under whose jurisdiction it comes in. This caused a delay. They could have saved a life," Rekha Sharma said.

TELANGANA RAPE-MURDER CASE

A 26-year-old veterinary surgeon was gangraped and murdered in Shamshabad by four men on Wednesday night. According to the Cyberabad Police, the four accused punctured the rear wheel of her scooter, offered to help her, dragged her to a secluded spot close to a toll plaza and gangraped her.

The Cyberabad Police, in a press conference on Friday, said the accused had seen the doctor parking her scooter at the Shamshabad toll plaza and hatched the plan over drinks.

On Saturday, top police sources told India Today TV that the accused had forced the Telangana doctor to consume a liquor-laced cold drink before committing the crime. The doctor died of suffocation after which, the accused brought petrol and burned her body.

The doctor's charred body was found on Thursday morning at around 7 am under a culvert in Chatanpally on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway. The accused were nabbed from their houses on Friday.
