Hyderabad erupts, thousands lay siege to police station

HYDERABAD: Unbridled anger erupted on the streets of Hyderabad on Saturday as people across the city held protests demanding justice for the family of the veterinary doctor who was gang-raped and murdered on the outskirts of the city on Wednesday night.The biggest crowd gathered at the Shadnagar police station where the four accused were being held. Thousands of protestors demanded that the police hand over the accused to them for what they called "instant justice".Officials ordered a lathicharge when the agitating crowed threatened to barge into the police station. Many of the protesters said the accused - Mohammed Areef (26), Jollu Shiva (20), Jollu Naveen (20) and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu (20) - should be publicly lynched and given the same treatment they meted out to the veterinary doctor.The accused have been sent to 14 days of judicial remand. Three police personnel, including an SI, have been suspended for negligence in duty on Saturday. "She was brutally raped and murdered and her body was set on fire. These men have no humanity. They don't deserve jail. They should be shot," said P Yadaiah, a resident of that area."We understand that people are angry…but they are demanding immediate justice, which is not possible. We have deployed over 200 policemen, including special force constables, to control the crowd," said a police officer. The protesters hurled stones at the bus in which the accused were shifted from the police station to Cherlapally jail. "We all are her (the woman's) brothers and now we will get justice for her," said another protester Mohammed Ahmed Khan, holding a placard 'hang the rapists'.Hundreds of Hyderabadis from around the city gathered at various places urging the government to act against the accused. "The rapists need to be punished now so that others with criminal tendencies think twice before doing something terrifying to another woman," Sujata Dantu, faculty member at Hindu College for Women, told TOI while protesting at Indira Park.Deccan Club in East Maredpally saw a candle march by around 150 people. "Government advertisements should display helpline numbers and awareness campaigns to educate girls about staying safe," said Chitra Shenoy, who runs an investigation agency.Multiple online petitions seeking justice for the deceased and a stop to violence against women were also posted, each attracting a large number of signatories."This brutal act was one of many such crimes which are happening on a daily basis in our country. A humble request to all who can make some changes, to please take one step against such heinous crimes," read one that had received over four lakh signatures by late evening. Spontaneous protests erupted at in Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam as well.
