Man arrested for kidnapping and sexually assaulting Class 11 student in Tiruvallur

Man arrested for kidnapping and sexually assaulting Class 11 student in Tiruvallur

The Class 11 student, who was later abandoned by the accused, found her way to the Tiruvallur All Women’s police station and narrated her ordeal.

news Crime

Tiruvallur police on Friday arrested a 25-year-old man from Tiruttani for kidnapping and sexually assaulting a minor for a period of 10 days. The accused has a previous criminal record — he is also a seasoned bike thief who already has a few complaints registered against him in this regard.

Based on a missing complaint filed at Kanakammachathram police station in Tiruvallur by the girl’s father, the police have arrested the man, identified as Dilli. An FIR under Section 366a (inducing any minor girl under the age of eighteen years to go from any place where she may be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse) under the Indian Penal Code of the IPC in addition to Sections 3 and 4 of the POCSO Act have been registered against him.

Speaking to TNM, Tiruvallur SP Aravindhan says, “He already has complaints of bike thefts registered against him in Kanakammachathram police station and also in Tiruttani. When he came to know that the girl’s father had filed a missing complaint, he abandoned her at a spot in Poonamallee and fled. He was then caught by the police at Arcot Kuppam near Kanakammachathram.”

On November 20, after being abandoned by the accused, the minor girl, a class 11 student found her way to Tiruvallur All Women’s Police Station. Following inquiries, she revealed her ordeal which helped the police nab Dilli.

Dilli had befriended the minor and on the pretext of marrying her, took her to Ambur, Vellore and Tiruvannamalai. According to reports, he had sexually assaulted her several times in these areas for a period of ten days. Dilli had also stolen bikes and sold them to make quick money.

Upon inquiry, Dilli confessed that he was alerted by his father Ezhumalai that the girl's parents had filed a police complaint. He, therefore, decided to drop her off and flee. Dilli's father is currently absconding.

On November 26, a minor girl was raped by two men in Coimbatore, while celebrating her birthday with her friend. The Coimbatore city police are currently searching for two men who raped the 17-year-old. Four others, who had sexually assaulted the girl, have already been arrested.
