Priyanka Reddy case: How police cracked ‘Hyderabad Horror’ rape-murder in 24 hours

Hyderabad: Cyberabad police investigating the brutal gang rape and murder of a veterinary doctor has secured some more vital evidence to nail the accused.

The investigating teams have found CCTV footage of a petrol station at Kottur village from where two of the four accused had purchased petrol in a canister to burn the body of the victim.

CCTV footage from different places show two accused Jollu Shiva and Jollu Navin going on the scooter of the victim from one petrol pump to another to buy the lose petrol.

While the first petrol pump suspecting something fishy refusing to give them the petrol in the can, the second petrol pump gave him petrol when he told the salesman that his vehicle had run out of fuel.

The CCTV camera at the petrol bunk caught the accused clearly.

According to the police while the two had travelled on the bike, the other two took the victim’s body to an under pass at Chatanpally, where they burnt it using the diesel from their lorry and the petrol bought from the bunk.

While the Cyberabad police came under flak for failure in quickly responding to the missing complaint of victim’s family, they also earned the praise for fast investigation and cracking the case within in 24 hours.

Major breakthrough

The first major breakthrough came from the tyre puncture repairer near the spot from where the doctor had made last desperate call to her sister informing about vehicle breakdown.

Victim had told her sister that a man had taken her bike for repair. To look for the man police searched for the mechanic around the toll plaza.

The mechanic told the police that a man had brought the red colour bike. Even though he had told him that the tyre was punctured, he only got air filled and returned. He gave a description of the man.

Before the ghastly crime, the gang of four had consumed liquor from a nearby shop and the staff their also provided some vital clues.

Riding victim's bike

Footage of CCTV cameras at different points also helped the police. Footage of factory on the path taken by the criminals showed two of them riding the victim's bike.

They were later identified as Jollu Shiva and Jollu Navin.

The investigators also found from CCTV that the lorry of the accused was parked at the road-side spot near toll plaza for six to seven hours. From the registration number of the truck seen in the footage helped the police zeroing in on its owner who led the cops to the main accused driver Mohammad Arif.
