Five men stab youth to death for staring in Gujarat's Jamnagar

After the altercation, Makwana allegedly called Rafiq Khafi to the spot (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Five men allegedly stabbed a youth to death over staring The youth was stabbed near a petrol pump in Saat Rasta, Jamnagar All of the five accused have been arrested

Rajkot: A man was allegedly stabbed to death by a group of five men for staring in Jamnagar on Friday. The accused were arrested on Saturday. The incident took place near a petrol pump in Saat Rasta area of Jamnagar. One of the accused is a minor. The deceased has been identified as Pradeepsinh Zala.

Four of the accused have been identified as Jitu Makwana, Rafiq Khafi, Altaf Gameti, Asgar Sumra. The name of the juvenile accused has not been disclosed to protect his identity.

How it happened

On Friday, Pradeepsinh and his friend Mahendrasinh Jadeja had gone to a roadside eatery in Saat Rasta to eat an omelette. At this time, Makwana, Sumra and their juvenile friend were also at the eatery.

Allegedly, Pradeepsinh had a fight with Makwana, Sumra and their minor friend as the latter was staring at him. After the altercation, Makwana allegedly called Rafiq Khafi to the spot.

In no time, Rafiq Khafi arrived at the eatery in his car. He was allegedly carrying knives and swords in his four-wheeler. According to Times of India's report, the accused used the swords and knives to attack Pradeepsinh and killed him on the spot.

Pradeepsinh's friend Mahendrasinh Jadeja lodged a complaint in relation to the incident. The police put barricades on all several entry and exits of Jamnagar to prevent the accused from escaping. However, later, the police received information about the accused's hide-out. The cops raided the spot and arrested all of the accused.

Man beaten to death for staring at couple getting intimate in public space

A similar incident came to light from Hyderbad in June this year when a man was allegedly thrashed to death for staring. The man was allegedly staring at a history-sheeter as he got intimate with his girlfriend. The accused history-sheeter was identified as Junaid.

The deceased was identified as Sai. Sai had gone to Tank Bund with his friends Mahesh and Balakrishna to celebrate his birthday. When Sai and his friends were returning from their party, they saw Junaid and his girlfriend. Allegedly, Junaid and his girlfriend were getting intimate with each other. The trio stopped and started staring at the couple. Junaid allegedly abused the three youths when he saw them and attacked Sai with a stone. Sai succumbed to his injuries when treatment was being administered to him.
