Delhi government recommends rejection of mercy petition filed by 2012 gang-rape convict

As the petition has been rejected, it will not go to the Rashtrapati Bhawan for President's consideration. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights On Sunday, the government of Delhi recommended the rejection of a mercy petition filed by Vinay Sharma Vinay Sharma is one of the accused in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case The petition will now be sent to the President for further consideration

New Delhi: The Delhi government has recommended the rejection of the mercy petition filed by Vinay Sharma, one of the accused in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case. Law minister Satyendra Jain said, "This is the most heinous crime of extreme brutality and one where exemplary punishment should be given to the appellant to deter others from committing such atrocious crimes. There is no merit in the mercy petition and I strongly recommend for rejection."

As the petition has been rejected by the government, it will now go to the Rashtrapati Bhavan for the President's consideration. The petition had been forwarded to the Home Department of Delhi government by the authorities of Tihar Jail.

Delhi Minister Satyendar Jain's noting: This is the case where exemplary punishment should be given to deter others from committing such atrocious crimes. There is no merit in mercy petition, strongly recommended for rejection. 2/2 https://t.co/WVkKxA49iP — ANI (@ANI) December 1, 2019

Two other accused, Mukesh and Pawan, have not filed a curative petition yet. On November 4, Vinay filed the mercy petition. Akshay, the fourth accused has also not filed a review petition.

The Ministry of Law had sent the petition to the Ministry of Home Affairs on November 30. As the petition has been rejected, it will now go to the President for consideration. The President's letter will be taken to the Patiala House court for the Black Warrant or execution warrant.

Special Judge of the Patiala House Court has said that the next hearing of the case will take place on December 13. The court has also ordered all of the four convicts to be present during the hearing. After the hearing on December 13, the court can either sign the execution warrant of the three convicts or wait for them to file a plea. The judge has said that the fate of the three accused will be decided in the next hearing.

During the last hearing, the amicus curiae said, "The accused have not exhausted the legal options. The court will have to wait till the mercy petition has been decided on. I have been informed that the accused will be opting for private counsel."

On Saturday, a Delhi court observed that the "human rights of the victims are equally as important as that of the accused". Additional Sessions Judge Satish Arora said, "If we are conscious of the human rights of the accused persons, we should also be concerned about the rights of the victims." Arora gave the statement while hearing a plea filed by the victim's parents. In their plea, the victim's parents requested the court to expedite the procedure of executing the convicts.

On November 4, three of the four convicts in the case had filed their reply to a notice served to them by Tihar Jail. The convicts met their lawyer on the same day and decided to approach the Supreme Court. The convicts took the decision of moving the Supreme Court instead of filing a mercy petition.

In June this year, the parents of the victim moved the Patiala House Court, urging the court to expedite the execution of the four convicts. Initially, three of the four convicts had demanded a review of the death penalty which was awarded to them. However, an SC bench comprising the then Chief Justice of India Dipak Misra, Justices R Banumathi and Ashok Bhushan upheld the death penalty.
