Indian food is varied and delicious

Indian food is varied and delicious People around the world should base their opinions of ‘foreign’ cuisines on authentic preparations

| Published 01.12.19, 07:34 PM

Sir — The Twitter comment made by Tom Nichols, a professor based in the United States of America — he said that ‘Indian food is terrible’ — highlights the deep ignorance in the West, even among ‘scholars’, about South Asian cuisines. Thankfully, the prejudiced comment received widespread criticism. Indian food is varied and delicious, with many regional cuisines having nothing in common. Moreover, I have eaten at a number of ‘Indian’ restaurants in the US: the food items are inauthentic and greatly inferior versions of the original dishes. People around the world should base their opinions of ‘foreign’ cuisines only after having consumed authentic preparations. Farzana Hussain, Calcutta

Advertisement

Dark hour Sir — It was shocking to read about the heinous gang-rape and murder of a young veterinary doctor near Hyderabad. The crime must be condemned unequivocally, and the culprits given the harshest punishment under the law. The manner in which they tricked the victim was especially blood-curdling. Do women in India have no hope of leading lives that are free of danger from men? The number of crimes in India against women is spiking with each passing day. It seems as though laws are no deterrent for those who wish to commit crimes against women. The lackadaisical attitude of law-enforcement agencies and the tardy pace of justice delivery in India are to blame for this. In certain countries, rape and murder trials are completed speedily and the most severe penalties given to the culprits. In India, however, such a trial takes many years. Over a lakh of rape cases are pending in our courts at present. This sparks hope among the guilty that they can escape the clutches of the law. The family of the victim of the gruesome Delhi gang rape case of 2012 is yet to get justice. One of the culprits is a free citizen now as he was a juvenile at the time of the crime. The ward attendant who raped a nurse in Mumbai in 1973 also walks free now; he spent only seven years in jail while she spent 42 years in a coma and passed away thereafter. There is something deeply wrong with our society if its youth, especially the men, are increasingly turning out to be perpetrators of such violent crimes. Strict laws, law enforcement and severe punishment alone can curb crimes against women. Girls perhaps should also be taught martial arts in school and college. Night patrolling along Indian streets should be tighter. Sravana Ramachandran, Chennai
