Bare Your Teeth to Sex Offenders

By Rajyasree Sen

One would have thought that we would have learnt lessons from past mistakes. But the only consolation we can, perhaps, draw after the horrific rape and murder of the 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad last week, was that this time around no one asked what the victim had been wearing, the standard ‘she should have known better’ reaction we have come to be familiar with from many quarters in the aftermath of a sexual attack on a woman.

Following the tragic discovery of the victim’s charred remains by the police, Telangana home minister Mohammed Mahmood Ali reportedly commented that it was ‘unfortunate’ that the victim had called her sister, and not the police, when she had felt unsafe and afraid moments before she went missing.

This belies any lessons that may have been learnt in matters pertaining to sensitivity in the aftermath of a sexual crime. Going by her family’s complaint — that the victim’s sister, who had gone to lodge a complaint with the Cyberabad Police, was told that the case ‘did not fall under their jurisdiction’, and that the police had ‘wasted precious time’ — Ali is also guilty of being seemingly ignorant of how things, for the most part in this country, actually work on the ground.

But Ali and his professional ilk are not the only ones to blame for being apathetic to — or being in the habit of underplaying — such gruesome crimes against women. This illinformed discourse is certainly not limited to our politicians.

Many social media enthusiasts became hyperactive when one of four accused of the rape-murder was later identified by the police as a Muslim man, singling him out and repeating his religious denomination.

This ‘I told you so’ mentality is not communal ‘politics’ on display.

It’s a prevalent communal mindset in society at large that politics merely has to tap into ‘if and when required’. This mob is less interested in women’s safety, or even in bringing the accused to justice, than they are in identifying ‘the bad Muslim’.

The hideous crime brings another very important issue — not really talked about except perhaps in living room gatherings — into focus. After all, this was not a crime ‘gone wrong’.

This was pre-meditated rape and murder. What does it say about men in our country? What does it say about their desperation to have non-consensual sex for which they are willing to commit even murder? Tragically, going by the lack of any strong, systemic ‘disincentive’ against violence being committed against women, this seems to be a land where sexual predators can get away with rape and murder while victims are shamed.

Coming back to our politicians, though, how serious are they — both the men and women among them — about women’s safety in India? In a country like India, where the participation of women in the workforce is abysmally low, state and central governments should ensure that ‘at least’ those of us who have the opportunity to step out of our homes and earn a living —and contribute to the economy — should be able to do so, without fear of being raped or/and killed.

It should ensure that the law and order machinery works towards our safety. Inaction, little action, or delayed response only breeds cynicism, which helps no one and exacerbates an ‘old normal’, a festering ‘it’s unfortunate, but it happens’ kind of response.

The Nirbhaya Fund, created by the Union government in 2013 with the express purpose of supporting initiatives by GoI and NGOs working to ensure the safety of women, has Rs 1,584 crore allocated to ‘safety’. Only Rs 147 crore — 8% of the total allocations — has been utilised till date.

State governments are no better. In Maharashtra, where a photographer was gangraped in Mumbai in 2013 while on assignment, not a paise from the state’s Manodhairya Scheme to assist rape, acid attack and child assault victims has been used. In Delhi, of the Rs 390 crore allocated, only Rs 19 crore has been utilised. In Uttar Pradesh, only 2.6% of the allocated `119 crore has been used. Telangana, the latest state to leave its ugly mark in the litany of grisly news, has used only 3.5% of its quota.

Schemes with catchy titles such as ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’ is all very well. But what we really need are governments that put the taxpayers’ money where the governments’ mouths are. And are tough —and are seen as being tough —on crime against women.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
