KCR's first public reaction on Hyd vet murder, says case will be fast tracked

KCR's first public reaction on Hyd vet murder, says case will be fast tracked

This is KCR’s first public statement since the gangrape and murder case came to light on Wednesday morning.

news Rape

The case of gangrape and murder of a 26-year-old Hyderabad veterinarian would be heard in a fast track court, announced Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao on Sunday. The announcement comes a day after the state witnessed massive protests demanding justice for the victim and her family.

The Chief Minister in his first public statement after the incident that came to light on Wednesday, expressed his deep anguish and described the incident as a ghastly and inhuman act. The Chief Minister has reportedly instructed officials that the probe should also be fast-tracked and culprits be given stringent punishment, reported Telangana Today.

KCR pointed out that in the murder case involving a minor at Warangal, the fast track court was able to deliver justice within 56 days. He has directed the officials to initiate the process for setting up a fast track court and ensure that the culprits get tough punishment, a statement from his office said.

The Chief Minister hopes that the verdict would come quick, he also announced that the state would extend necessary help and support to the victims family, the statement further said.

The 26-year-old veterinary doctor was found dead in Chatanpally village, in the outskirts of Hyderabad on Thursday. After raping and killing her, the four arrested accused—Areef, Shiva, Naveen and Chennakeshavulu — dumped the body at the underpass near Outer Ring Road, Shadnagar on Wednesday and set it on fire. The Shadnagar police found the body on Thursday after a villager alerted them.

Subsequently, using CCTV footage, and the last conversation which the victim had with her sister, police could crack the case. Besides these clues, a petrol bunk employee also said that two of the accused had come in the victim’s scooter and filled petrol in a bottle. Using these pieces of evidence, police tracked down the accused on Friday and arrested them. Amidst tension, they were sent to judicial custody of 14 days by Shadnagar magistrate on Saturday.

(with inputs from PTI)
