Eight-year-old girl’s rapist nabbed, cops say he is drug addict

Rajkot: A 22-year-old man , who had allegedly raped an eight-year-old girl on Bhavnagar Road on Friday night, was arrested by the team of Rajkot detection of crime branch (DCB) on Sunday.The perpetrator, identified as Hardev Mangrolia (22), was nabbed from Bharatnagar lane-8 on Bhavnagar Road, where he was living as a pavement dweller. It also turned out that Mangrolia was a drug addict.Rajkot DCB along with Rajkot special operation group, Thorala police station and Mahila Police Station had formed different teams and had launched a manhunt for the accused.Apart from a team of women cops, the Rajkot police had also sought the help of an NGO, One Stop Centre, whose counsellors along with the women cops gently coaxed the survivor into giving out physical description of Mangrolia. The cops had already had the CCTV footage of Mangrolia which matched with the description of his face given by the survivor.“We had received a tip-off that the accused was one of the pavement dwellers on Bharatnagar lane-8, following which we rounded up several suspects, one of whom was Mangrolia. As his face and physical appearance matched with the description provided by the survivor, we interrogated him. Soon, Mangrolia broke down and confessed to the crime,” said H M Gadhvi, inspector with Rajkot DCB.During his interrogation, Mangrolia confessed that he had wrapped the survivor into the blanket she had put on while she was sleeping with her family members and had abducted her and taken her to a spot under the nearby bridge. Here, he committed the crime at knife point, threatening to kill the survivor, if she shouted.STAINS OF BlOOD, SEMEN FOUND ON MANGROLIA’S CLOTHESDuring the investigation, it was found that Mangrolia had not changed the clothes he had worn at the time of the crime. “He was in the same shirt and a pair of pants on which the stains of the survivor’s blood and Mangrolia’s semen were found. We will send the clothes for forensic examination and keep them as evidences,” said a senior police official from the Rajkot DCB.NO LAWYER WILL DEFEND THE ACCUSEDThe Rajkot Bar Association unanimously decided on Sunday that no advocate would fight the case in defence of the accused. Association president Bakul Rajani said that the association would also make a representation before the legal department, urging it to appoint a woman advocate as a public prosecutor in the case. “We will also demand that the trial of this case be run on day-to-day basis,” said Rajani.
