Delhi reality check: Cop crunch, unlit roads put women at high risk

A veterinary doctor was gang-raped, killed and burnt in Hyderabad on Wednesday night. The horror unfolded on the city's Outer Ring Road next to a toll booth where there were no street lights. The next morning, her charred body was found 25 km away in an underpass.

A terrible truth is that this could have very well happened in the National Capital. Even seven years after the Munirka gang rape, safety of women (or lack of it) continues to be a huge question-mark in Delhi. There are 2,000 dark and desolate stretches in the Capital - identified by Delhi Police - which are considered too dangerous for women to venture out, especially in the evening

hours. Such stretches are located around the airport, Metro and Railway stations, malls and even posh South Delhi localities. Multiple civic agencies have failed to install or repair street lights in these dark zones for years now.

Expressing concern about women's safety in the Capital, 20-year-old Gunjan Goyal, a make-up artist pursuing her B.Sc from Delhi University, says she experiences a persistent fear every time she passes through these dark stretches. "I often ride my scooty to go to nearby places and drive a car too. But still I feel insecure whenever I have to pass an isolated stretch or a dimly lit road lit. I do carry a pepper spray with me, but the fear lives constantly with me," said Goyal.

Twenty-five of these stretches are extremely crime-prone. Fifteen of these lead to Metro Stations such as ITO, Jama Masjid, Govindpuri, Dwarka Mor, Uttam Nagar, Janakpuri West, Janakpuri East, Tilak Nagar, Shadipur, Chandni Chowk, Kashmere Gate, New Delhi, Adarsh Nagar, Vishwavidyalaya and Jahangirpuri. The other stretches on this list include South Delhi's Lajpat Nagar, South Extension, Saket, Vasant Vihar and Dhaula Kuan neighbourhoods.

HC SOUNDS A WARNING

A rude wake-up call concerning the lack of women's safety in Delhi came in 2012 when a 23-year-old physiotherapy intern was gang-raped on a moving bus in a South Delhi neighbourhood. It paved the way for promulgation of new laws and six new fast-track courts to ensure safety of women not just in Delhi but across the country. But as things stand, even the courts are dismayed by the ground reality. In one such observation on Friday, the Delhi High court, which has been monitoring efforts to improve policing in the city since the 2012 case, put the blame on "depleted" police force.

"The root of the matter, be it crime against women, children and aged persons or law and order, is a depleted police force," the court said observing why couldn't Delhi be as safe for citizens as Mumbai is. According to Delhi Police, there are only 10,184 women cops in the department out of a total strength of 87,500 personnel. The vacancies add up to 26,000 - more than double of what the existing strength is.

In its hearing on Friday, the Court gave a raft of directions to make the city safer for women and children, and suggested that women cops in mufti be deputed at vulnerable locations. Lawyer Rahul Mehra, who was representing Delhi Police, informed the bench that four years ago there was a shortage of 61,000 personnel, and now the shortfall stands at 52,000. He also drew the court's attention to the long duty hours, burden of workload and meager salary that police personnel draw. The court then asked the Centre to re-examine the issue of augmenting manpower in Delhi Police and take steps to fill the existing vacancies immediately.

A QUESTION OF GENDER

Human rights activist Kundan Srivastava said the acute shortage of female staff in the police and women-friendly police stations discouraged women from reporting the crime. "Just imagine: there is only one female police for every 3,236 women in India and the strength of women police India is 7.28 percent of the total police. The lack of female police staff is fuelling the rise in crime against women," he said.

The police are aware of this chasm. "Every year more than 800 women will be added to the force as a 33 per cent component of the 2,500-2600 yearly vacancies," a police official said. Staff shortage apart, many women allege they do not see too many police personnel on the patrol in the evening. "Policemen can be spotted near pickets, but when it comes to patrolling, we hardly see them on bikes or PCR vans. Forget about female cops, even the male cops vanish in the night. In the coming days in December, even the strength of policemen on pickets will be depleted," said Taniya Mathur, a HR manager employed with a private firm in Nehru Place.

On their part, the police have countered the charge of inadequate patrolling. A senior officer said PCR vans did intensive patrolling of 325 vulnerable routes frequented by families, working women and night revellers at regular intervals. The police control room (PCR) is the first respondent to any distress call received by the police. "We have an all-women SWAT team in which women commandos have been trained. This is the only such 'All Women SWAT Team' in India. The team is dedicated to tackle hardened criminals and to combat terrorist activities. All women SWAT personnel have been equipped with guns such as AK-47rifles and corner shot devices with enhanced night vision," said Delhi Police spokesperson MS Randhawa, Deputy Commissioner of Police (central). "Teams have been deployed to keep an extra vigil on these dark stretches. Proper patrolling is done in and around these spots to ensure safety. Also, cops have been instructed to accompany women in case they are passing by these stretches alone," Randhawa said.

A senior police official said, whenever during patrolling they find any defunct streetlight or no lighting, they inform the heads of the civic agencies. "Every day, a chart is prepared and mailed to civic authorities for repair and installation. During a recent dark spot analysis, we found that these lights were sometimes switched off," he said.

RESPONSE PREPAREDNESS

The Hyderabad incident has, however, prompted the Delhi Police to shake off its apathy and issue fresh instructions to its personnel in terms of responding to distress calls. PCR vans have been asked to receive calls of women on a priority. "Even dedicated PCR vans like street crime preventive vehicles "Prakhar" and anti-terror operation vehicles are asked to respond to calls of women, especially in night," said Sharat Kumar Sinha, Deputy Commissioner of Police (PCR).

Last week, the North East District's women's patrol unit got a fleet of new colour-coded pink scooters and helmets to fight crime on the streets. "This is to give equal respect to women officers. The patrolling is done from morning 11 am to 1 pm and from 5pm to 7 pm," Deputy Commissioner of Police Ved Prakash Surya said. But women's activists are far from impressed. Delhi Commission of Women chairperson Swati Maliwal accused the Centre of failing to ensure the safety of women in the Capital, "Instead of showing their might against innocent students, the police should try to use the energy to round up anti-social elements so that nobody dares to think of carrying out heinous crime such as these," Maliwal said, referring to the incident in which a woman, in her mid-20s, was detained on Saturday after she was found sitting on a pavement near Parliament protesting about crimes against women.

BELATED REALISATION

The statistics of crimes against women, maintained by Delhi Police and accessed by MAIL TODAY, paint a shameful picture. Six cases of rape and eight cases of molestation were filed every day on an average in the national capital this year till November 15, according to Delhi Police statistics. As many as 1947 rape cases have been registered by Delhi Police till November 15. A total of 2616 women reported molestation cases, 427 filed a case of insult to modesty of women. Plus, 3104 cases of kidnapping of women in Delhi have been registered. On September 23 Chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal announced that his government will install 2.1 lakh streetlights across the national Capital to remove Delhi's dark spots and ensure the safety of women.

"This is a workable solution for removing the dark spots in Delhi," the CM had said then. The work on streetlights to be taken up by power distribution companies has already begun, a Delhi Government official said. Addressing a public meeting in Okhla area on Sunday, Kejriwal expressed concern over the 'poor' law and order situation in Delhi. "We have installed CCTV cameras and are installing street lights in the city. I appeal to the Union Home Minister [Amit Shah] to take stringent steps to streamline the security arrangements of Delhi," the CM said.
