Delhi government recommends rejection of Nirbhaya convict’s mercy plea

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

NEW DELHI: Delhi government on Sunday recommended that the mercy petition of the 2012 Nirbhaya murder case convict, Vinay Sharma, be “rejected” and “exemplary punishment” given to “deter” others from committing such “atrocious” crimes.Senior Delhi government officials said that home minister Satyendar Jain had sent the government’s recommendations in the case to LG Anil Baijal. The LG will now give his own recommendations in the case and place it before the Union ministry of home affairs for consideration.Sharma, one of the four convicts facing the gallows in the gang rape and murder of a 23-year-old paramedic student, had filed a mercy petition. On December 16, 2012, the woman was gang-raped and brutally assaulted on a moving bus in south Delhi by six persons, including a juvenile. After her condition deteriorated, she was airlifted to a Singapore hospital where she passed away on December 29, 2012.While one accused, Ram Singh, hanged himself in jail, the juvenile was convicted of rape and murder and given three years’ imprisonment in a reform facility. The rest are lodged in Tihar.After the four convicts — Sharma, Akshay Kumar Singh, Mukesh and Pawan Gupta — exhausted all “legal remedies”, the Tihar jail authorities had on October 29 given them a seven-day notice to file a mercy petition before the President, adding that if they failed do so, the jail administration would initiate the necessary legal proceedings. Only Sharma chose to file the mercy petition, which was sent to Delhi government for its recommendation.Delhi government, however, recommended that the mercy petition be rejected in view of the extreme brutality committed by the convicts. “This is the most heinous crime of extreme brutality committed by the applicant (Vinay Sharma). This is the case where exemplary punishment should be given to deter others from committing such atrocious crimes,” a source quoted Jain as saying in the file noting. “There is no merit in mercy petition, strongly recommended for rejection,” he added.Sources said that additional chief secretary of Delhi, Satya Gopal, also observed that the case convict did not deserve any mercy. “It is the fittest case to reject mercy petition, keeping in view the heinous and gravest crime of extreme brutality committed by the applicant,” a source quoted him noting on the file.Delhi government also observed that the applicant did not deserve any mercy as his petition had already been rejected by the high court and SC. On 5 May 2017, Supreme Court had rejected the convicts' appeal, saying they had committed “a barbaric crime” that had “shaken society's conscience”. On 9 July 2018, Supreme Court rejected a review petition by three of the convicts.
