Telangana doctor rape-murder: Key accused was caught driving without licence 2 days before crime

The accused- identified as Mohammad Areef (in yellow T-shirt), Jollu Shiva (in white shirt), Jollu Naveen (in blue shirt), and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu (in orange shirt).

The truck driver accused in the chilling gangrape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinary surgeon from Telangana was caught by Road Transport Office (RTO) authorities for not having licence just two days before the crime.

A remand report shared by the police department showed that Mohammed Areef, the key accused who worked as a truck driver, was nabbed earlier by the Telangana Road Transport Office (RTO) in Mahbubnagar town on November 25 for driving without the licence.

The accused was stopped by authorities on the wee hours of November 25 after he set off for Hyderabad on November 24.

The report revealed that Mohammad Areef was caught by authorities when he was driving an overloaded truck to transport bricks from Gangavathi in Karnataka to Hyderabad. RTO officials also found that Areef was driving his truck without a valid document since 2017.

However, the vehicle was never impounded.

RTO authorities initially planned to seize Areef's truck but had to let him go after he tampered with the vehicle, following which it did not start. Areef quickly acted upon receiving instructions from truck owner Srinivas Reddy, a resident of Shamshabad in Hyderabad.

Now, police have also initiated action against the transporter Srinivas Reddy in this regard. Earlier police had arrested Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu. Areef was the truck driver while the others worked as cleaners.

All of them were booked under Section 376D (gangrape), 302 (murder), 201 (destroying evidence) of the Indian Penal Code.

The incident from Wednesday night has left the country in shock as people from different sections on the society have demanded stringent punished for the perpetrators.

Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao had to finally break his silence on the woman doctor's rape and murder case. On Sunday he instructed setting up a fast-track court for expeditious trial in the case. He also assured all necessary help to the victim's family.

All four men, accused of committing the crime, punctured the rear wheel of the victim's two-wheeler and offered to help her. However, they dragged her to a secluded spot close to a Shamshabad toll plaza and gangraped her.

The woman doctor's charred body was found on Thursday at around 7 am under a culvert in Chatanpally on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway. The accused were nabbed from their houses on Friday.
