‘Lynch them publicly’: MPs express outrage over veterinarian’s gruesome rape and murder near Hyderabad

Rajya Sabha discusses Cyberabad rape and murder case | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The issue of rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Telangana’s Cyberabad, near capital Hyderabad, echoed in Parliament on Monday, with the upper house condemning the incident in strongest terms.

Vice President and Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu said a strong political will was required to tackle crimes against women and only change of mindset can bring about a decline in such cases.

“What is required is not a new Bill. What is required is political will, administrative skill, change of mindset and then go for a kill of the social evil,” Naidu said, after the conclusion of the debate in the Rajya Sabha.

During the debate, MP Jaya Bachchan said the people of the country were waiting for a definite answer.

“I think it is time the people now want the government to give a proper and a definite answer. These types of people (the accused in rape) need to be brought out in public and lynched,” she said.

AIADMK MP Vijila Sathyananth stressed on the need to deliver justice fast in such cases of crime. “The country is not safe for children and women. Four people who committed this crime should be hanged till death before December 31. A fast-track court should be set up. Justice delayed is justice denied,” she told the MPs.

Congress' Amee Yajnik said a social transformation was the need of the hour. “I request all the systems - judiciary, legislative, executive and other systems - to come together to see that a social reformation takes place. This should be on an emergency basis,” she stated.

Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad added: “No government or leader would want that such incident occurs in their state. This problem can't be solved by just making laws. To eradicate such acts, there's a need that we take a stand together against such crimes.”

The matter was raised in the Lok Sabha as well and Speaker Om Birla allowed a debate on the matter after the Question Hour. "Desh mein jo ghatnayein ghat rahi hain, uspe Sansad bhi chintit hai. I have given permission for discussion on this after the Question Hour," he told the MPs.

Later, when the debate started, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh assured that the government was ready to make any law which was acceptable to the House.

“To control and eliminate such crimes against women, we are ready to make the kind of law which the entire House agrees to. This act has brought shame to the entire country. It has hurt everyone. The accused must be given the most stringent punishment for their crime,” the minister said.

Congress MP from Nalgonda, UKN Reddy suggested the indiscriminate sale of liquor was among the reasons to blame for such cases.

“A lady doctor was abducted, gang-raped, murdered and burnt in a high-security area. One of the causes of the incident is the indiscriminate sale of liquor. We request a fast-track court be set up and accused hanged till death,” he said.

Later, speaking outside Parliament, Jaya Bachchan said the public should be allowed to deliver justice in such cases of heinous crimes.

“If you have not been able to provide security, then leave it to the public to give judgement. Those who failed to provide security and those who committed the crime should be exposed in public, and then let people decide."

"People who commit this kind of crime should be let out in the public, because they are not fearful of law or law enforcers, so let the public give justice. It happens in some countries - public lynching. You in the media should publish their pictures,” the Samajwadi Party MP told reporters.

Another MP Sonal Mansingh told reporters: “While I'm ashamed and shocked, I'm also disappointed that such incidents are reported from across the country. Why is there a government, police, civil society apathy? Each time there're candle marches and rallies, then why is it continuing?”

The Telangana police have arrested four men, aged between 20 and 24, on charges of raping and killing the young woman veterinarian near Hyderabad.
