‘Are women prisoners for life?’ NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma asks Telangana CM over insensitive tweet

Cyberabad CP VC Sajjana and other senior police officers inspecting the scene of crime at Chatanpally,Sadnagar. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights NCW chairperson on Monday expressed her anger over the insensitive comment of Telangana CM Telangana CMO had tweeted that women should stay at home after 8 pm Rekha Sharma also said that women were not safe in their houses either

New Delhi: Even as cries for speedy justice in the horrible Cyberabad doctor rape-murder case grew, there were certain comments made by politicians and their respective departments that did not go down well with the civil society. Taking to Twitter, Rekha Sharma, chairperson of the National Commission for Women, expressed her displeasure about Telangana CMO releasing a statement.

Sharma on Monday tweeted that she was shocked to hear that the Telangana CM, via his official Twitter CMO handle, had said that women should be home by 8 pm. The NCW chairperson took offence to the above statement and quipped whether women were prisoners for life who had to lock themselves up indoors in order to be safe.

Moreover, Sharma also asked whether crimes were not happening to women inside their homes. The comment comes in the wake of a number of data points that have shown how women are often subjected to heinous crimes in their own homes as well.

The NCW chairperson also said that women had equal rights at public places and this was a lesson that the Telangana CMO had to be taught and sensitised about.

Shocked to hear @TelanganaCMO saying that women should be home by 8 pm.Are women prisoners for life and have to stay in door to keep themselves safe? And are crimes not happening inside the homes?

Women have equal rights at public places and we need to teach this to Honorable CM — Rekha Sharma (@sharmarekha) December 2, 2019

Earlier in the day, both Houses of Parliament had discussed the gruesome rape and murder of the 27-year-old doctor by four men. Member of Parliament Jaya Bachchan said rapists should be brought out in public and lynched. AIADMK MP Vijila Sathyananth too echoed her concerns and said that speedy justice in rape cases was the need of the hour.

Congress' Amee Yajnik had said that social transformation was an extremely crucial step needed to eradicate this monster from society.

The remand copy of Cyberabad police had revealed some chilling details about the accused men and said that two of them, including the first accused, had been nabbed by policemen a few days before the crime for driving a truck without a licence but had managed to evade the cops.
