Telangana CM seeks speedy justice in horrific doctor rape and murder case: How does a fast track court work?

Women participating in candle light protests in Telangana following the gruesome rape of a vet in Cyberabad. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The outrage that the case has caused is reminiscent of the 2012 Delhi gang rape case where a group of six men sexually assaulted a young woman on a charter bus before disposing of her body The primary objective of fast track courts is to dispense justice across a large number of pending cases over a specified period of time In July this year, the government announced plans to set up over 1000 new fast track courts dedicated to tackling cases relating to sexual offences against women and children

On Sunday, Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao ordered the establishment of a special fast track court to deal expeditiously with the brutal rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary surgeon that took place in Cyberabad on November 27. The four accused in the case were believed to have gang-raped the vet, before suffocating her, and burning her body. The outrage that the case has caused is reminiscent of the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case where a group of six men sexually assaulted a young woman on a charter bus before disposing of her body.

Fast track courts were set up in 2000 to address the huge backlog of cases across the country, and to accelerate the dispensation of justice. According to some reports, these courts were successful in reducing case backlogs, and despite some courts receiving term extensions, 1,734 such courts across the country had more or less ended operations by 2011.

However, following the rape and murder of a physiotherapist, later referred as ‘Nirbhaya’, in 2012, and the mass protests that followed across the country, the Centre further extended the terms of some fast track courts. However, in July 2019, it was reported that there were only 664 fast track courts operating across the country.





The primary objective of fast track courts is to dispense justice across a large number of pending cases (typically relating to sexual assault and child abuse) over a specified period of time. Judges are appointed to cases at these courts on an ad hoc basis, and even retired judges may be selected. As of July 2019, India had approximately 2.8 lakh people in custody awaiting trials, and with this number only rising, fast track courts offer a means to reduce the burden on district and high courts.

Although fast track courts have the highest case disposal rates in the country, the criticism often levelled against them is that, in some cases, the need to resolve a case speedily outweighs the proper examination of evidence leading to improper convictions.

In July this year, the government announced plans to set up over 1,000 new fast track courts dedicated to tackling cases relating to sexual offences against women and children. As per the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POSCO) Act implemented in 2012, at least one such court must be set up in every district.



The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
