Death Penalty For Rape Makes Rapists Murder Victims. It Doesn’t Stop Rape

The rape and murder of a 27-year-old Hyderabad veterenarian has sparked another round of outrage in the country. Cries of, “Hang the rapists!” are echoing across India as many want revenge and justice to come on swift wings for those who committed such a heinous crime.

The details of this case are particularly brutal since it was completely premeditated. One of the four accused deliberately punctured the tyre of the vet’s scooter so that she would have no choice but to seek help to fix it. They then approached her and instead of “helping” her, they gang raped her, poured alcohol down her throat, and then killed her by blocking her mouth and nose. They then burned her body and dumped it.

Considering all of this, it’s only natural that people would be baying for the blood of these rapists. Even the mother of one of the accused, finding herself at the centre of a media and outrage storm, said, “Hang him, kill him, or shoot him dead. Will you listen if I say I want my son back? Won't the others say that if you [his mother] have so much pain, would not the burnt woman’s mother have the same pain?”

Will the death penalty help?

Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan all hand out the death penalty for rape. Many social media posts portray these countries as shining examples of countries that “don’t tolerate rape”. While it is true that India seems to let rapists get away with their crimes, it does not necessarily mean Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan have been successful at preventing rape. If anything, it has led to a lower conviction rate for rape in these three countries.

Speaking to an international media house, Zainab Malik, of the Lahore-based not-for-profit legal rights firm Justice Project Pakistan, said, "Even though under the law, rape is treated on a par with terror, nothing has changed. Rape and gang rape cases are progressively increasing while conviction rates remain abysmally low.”

This is the main flaw with India’s justice system as well: extremely low conviction rates. According to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 2017 report, the conviction rate for crimes against women was 24.5% in 2017, of which 35% were in Delhi. Gujarat (3.1%) and West Bengal (3.2%) were among the poor performers with their low conviction rates.

Most crimes against women committed in their home

Another worrying statistic is the fact that 93% of rapes in India are committed by persons known to the women. According to the NCRB, out of a total of 32,559 cases of rape reported across the country in 2017, in about 1/3rd of the cases (10, 553), the accused were “friends, online friends, live-in partners, or separated husbands” of the victims. In another 16,591 rape cases, the accused were family friends, employers, neighbours, or other known persons.

If rape is automatically met with the death sentence, how many women are going to report it being aware that they are sending someone they know to the gallows? Would they send their father, brother, or uncle to potential death?

Then, of course, there is the delay in actually hanging a rapist once they’ve been convicted. The Nirbhaya rapists, despite having been tried in a “fast track” court, have still not been hanged. It’s been seven years since the rape.

The most chilling observation by activists and experts is that a rapist will just kill the woman after raping her if there was a certain death penalty for rape. The logic is that if the woman is dead, it will be harder to find them or prove them guilty even if they were found, arrested, and put on trial.

What India needs is a complete overhaul of the justice system, where trials for rape are completed within a year, and where victims are not made to relive their horror every time they appear in court, and where the conviction rates are higher. And for the few cases, like the Nirbhaya one, where the death sentence has been given, it should be carried out swiftly.

Unless Indian society stops giving men the leeway to delay justice while punishing the victim in the process, rape will continue unababted with very few men being properly punished for their crimes.
