Lynching to castration: MPs come up with controversial punishments for rapists

Members of Parliament (MP) in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha unanimously condemned the rape and murder a 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad and demanded stringent laws to punish the guilty.

In Rajya Sabha, MPs suggested controversial ways to deal with rapists. Samajwadi Party (SP) MP Jaya Bachchan said that rapists should be lynched. "People now want the government to give a definite answer. These people (accused in rape case) need to be brought out in public and lynched," she said.

#WATCH "People now want Govt to give a definite answer. These type of people (the accused in rape case) need to be brought out in public and lynched," Rajya Sabha MP Jaya Bachchan on rape & murder of woman veterinary doctor in Telangana pic.twitter.com/HFNjUHtSHB ANI (@ANI) December 2, 2019

The Leader of the Opposition, Ghulam Nabi Azad of the Congress, said the problem couldn't be solved through legislation alone. Azad said that there was a need to "take a stand together against such crimes".

Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu said, "These men do not deserve mercy. Why should they be given appeal by state and central government?"

"What is required is not a new bill. What is required is political will, administrative skill, change of mindset and then go for kill of the social evil," Venkaiah Naidu said.



Meanwhile, Vijila Sathyananth, AIADMK MP, demanded death penalty for the accused in rape-murder case of the Telangana doctor. He said: "The country is not safe for children and women. Four people who committed this crime should be hanged to death before December 31. A fast track court should be set up. Justice delayed is justice denied."

Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao has ordered the establishment of a fast-track court for the trial of the gang rape-murder case. He has pledged to provide the victim's family with all necessary help.

Castration was another way suggested by MPs to punish rape accused. DMK leader P Wilson said that courts should be empowered to surgically and chemically castrate convicted rapists before they are released from jails.

He further said that the cost of such a procedure should be recovered from the accused by selling their assets. He went on to say that a list of sexual offenders should be made public.

In Lok Sabha, Congress MP from Nalgonda UKN Reddy said that the "indiscriminate sale of liquor" is one of the reasons the gruesome incident happened. "A lady doctor was abducted, gang-raped, murdered and burnt in a high-security area. One of the causes of the incident is the indiscriminate sale of liquor. We request a fast track court be set up and hang the accused," he said.

Minister of State for Home Affairs G Kishan Reddy said that government is willing to bring amendments to laws pertaining to the safety of women and children.

While addressing Lok Sabha, Kishan Reddy said, "There is zero tolerance towards crimes against women and children. Our government will soon bring requisite amendments to CrPC and IPC." He said that the government will try and bring in the changes in this winter session of Parliament if possible.

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh took over the mantle in Lok Sabha and said that the government is ready for discussion on crime against women and to explore strongest provisions in laws. Referring to the Telangana rape-murder case, he said, "This act has brought shame to the entire country. It has hurt everyone. The accused must be given the most stringent punishment for their crime."

Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D), which is mandated to find solutions to challenges being faced by police forces among other responsibilities, has also submitted suggestions to change IPC and CrPC rules, which during the British rule were made to secure its empire.

After the Nirbhaya rape case that happened on December 16, 2012, Parliament had passed the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 to amend the IPC to allow death penalty only in rape cases where the accompanying brutality leads to death or leaves the victim in a persistent vegetative state, and in cases of repeat offenders.

There were widespread protests across the country before the bill was passed. The then UPA government had appointed a judicial committee headed by JS Verma, a former Judge of Supreme Court, to suggest amendments to criminal law to sternly deal with sexual assault cases.

The committee had then delved into 80,000 suggestions and petitions received during the same period from the public in general and particularly from jurists, lawyers, NGOs and women's groups. The report indicated that failures on the part of the government and police were the root cause for crimes against women.
