Bengalurur CP Bhaskar Rao assures 100% safety for Bengalureans post Vet’s rape, murder

Can you score more than the total marks: Yes, it happened in Bangalore University

Bengalurur CP Bhaskar Rao assures 100% safety for Bengalureans post Vet’s rape, murder

India

oi-Mousumi Dash

Bengaluru, Dec 02: In the wake of the gruesome gangrape and murder of the 26 years old veterinarian in Hyderabad. The Bengaluru Police Commissioner, Bhaskar Rao, on Monday assured safeguard of Bengalureans and visitors in the Silicon city.

Rao said to news agency ANI, "After Telangana rape and murder case, we assure all Bengalureans and anyone who visits Bengaluru that they will be very much safeguarded."

The CP Bengaluru aslo added, "We give 100% assurance about your safety. Any call will be replied within 7 seconds. We also send SMSs."

K'taka Assembly by-polls: Sec 144 to be imposed in Bengaluru from Dec 3 to 6

Reportedly, on Sunday 'Nirbhaya' helpline number was circulated on WhatsApp and other social media platforms like Instagram, to ensure women safety so that if anyone is in any need they can call or SMS in that helpline number and police will be able to track the location of the woman in distress and can rescue her.

NEWS AT 3 PM, DECEMBER 2nd

Earlier, Centre also directed to send send an advisory to all states to take precautionary steps to check crime against women in the wake of the murder of a veterinarian in Hyderabad.

'Justice for women’ sloganeering nationwide, RS condemns Hyderabad Vet's rape, murder

On November 27, a 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad was gang raped and brutally killed. Her charred body was discovered on the next day under a under-construction flyover. The gruesome incident has yet again raised question at the safety of women in India. A nationwide protest has been started across the nation demanding stringent punishment for the culprits and delivering justice to the women who are victims of heinous crime like this.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Monday, December 2, 2019, 15:24 [IST]
