Sangrur: Court convicts bus conductor for rape of 4-year-old girl, sends him to jail for life

PATIALA: Ensuring speedy justice in the rape case of a 4-year-old girl of a private school of Dhuri , the court of the Sangrur District and Sessions judge BS Sandhu on Monday sentenced main accused, Kamal , to imprisonment for the remainder of his natural life without any remission. The sentence came almost within 6 months after the Sangrur police filed the challan against Kamal, who worked as a conductor of the school bus of the private school on charges of rape.An FIR number 95 had been registered in this regard on May 26, this year at city police station Dhuri under Sections 363, 376, 376AB, 201IPC, 6,21(2) POCSO Act 2012 and Under Section 75 of the Juvenile Justice Act 2015 against the main accused Kamal and two members of the school management- Tarsem Chand and Jiwan Kumar Jain- along with incharge of the school Babita Rani. Sections 376AB and 21(2) POCSO Act 2012 were later added to the FIR. Kamal was arrested on May 26.A Special Investigation Team (SIT) headed by SP (PBI) Gurmeet Singh P.P.S with members DSP (SD Dhuri) Mohit Kumar Agarwal PPS, INSP. Gurmeet Kaur (Incharge Police Training School, Police Line Sangrur), SHO PS City Dhuri and SHO PS SDR Dhuri had also been formed under the supervision of SSP Sangrur, which during the investigation had added offences under Sections 201 of the IPC, 75 Juvenile Justice ACT 2015 to the FIR.While Kamal had been held guilty by the court under Section 376, 363 and 376 AB of the IPC, the members of the school management-Tarsem Lal and Jeevan Kumar Jain and Babita Rani, who had been booked for failures to provide information to the authorities were acquitted of the charges. The guilty orders were pronounced on November 28 and the sentence was awarded on Monday.The Dhuri Police had on June 4 filed the challan against the four accused immediately after the DNA test report on accused Kamal Kumar was received from FSL Mohali in the case which was within ten days of the crime.The 4-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a Kamal, the 27-year-old helper cum conductors of the school bus. He had raped the girl on the Parent-Teacher Meeting held in the school on May 25. He allegedly took the girl to the washroom of the school on the pretext of playing when the parents were busy in meeting the school's teachers.The matter came to light the next day morning when the girl complained of pain in her abdomen. She told her mother about the incident the previous day. According to the family, the rape survivor had first complained of a stomach ache but her parents gave her some medication for temporary relief. But she again complained of pain the next morning. She was taken to the local government hospital where the doctors observed signs of sexually assaulted, which were later confirmed in the medical examination.Following this, the residents had held protests against the police demanding immediate arrest of the accused.Acting quickly, Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh had ordered the police to initiate quick action in the case.While contenting the case in the court the police produced a site map and DVR of the school’s CCTV cameras and various documents that had been taken into custody, along with the victim’s clothes, birth record, admission record and the parent-teacher meeting record. The mobile phone of the accused was also taken into custody which was examined by the forensic experts along with the DVR to prepare a watertight case against the accused.
