Telangana rape case I TMC MP Mimi Chakraborty agrees with Jaya Bachchan's lynching remark, says no need to take rapists to court

Mimi Chakraborty says she agrees with Jaya Bachchan's lynching remark | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: As citizens stand enraged over the brutal rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Telangana, Trinamool Congress (TMC) Member of Parliament (MP) Mimi Chakraborty seconded Samajwadi Party (SP) Rajya Sabha MP Jaya Bachchan’s controversial statement that “rapists should be lynched”.

Mimi Chakraborty, the Lok Sabha MP from Jadavpur, on Monday, said she does not believe that rapists should be given a free trial and called for an immediate punishment for such criminals.

“I agree with her (Jaya Bachchan). I don't think we need to take rapists to courts with protection and then wait for justice. Immediate punishment is needed,” she told the news agency ANI.

TMC MP Mimi Chakraborty on Jaya Bachchan's statement in Rajya Sabha "rapists should be lynched" after rape & murder of veterinarian: I agree with her. I don't think we need to take rapists to courts with protection and then wait for justice. Immediate punishment is needed. https://t.co/e4aMx2MJSs pic.twitter.com/Jzn9QYl5yI — ANI (@ANI) December 2, 2019

Condemning the horrific rape and murder, the TMC MP urged the parliamentarians to make a strong legislation to deter the miscreants from even thinking of committing sexual offences.

“I request to all the concerned ministers that please make a law so strong that a person thinks 100 times before let alone rape, but even before looking at a woman with ill intentions,” the actor-turned-politician from West Bengal told the news agency ANI.

Earlier in the day, while addressing the members of the Upper House of the Parliament, SP MP Bachchan condemned the horrific rape and murder near Hyderabad which occurred last week said rapists should be brought out in public and lynched.

#WATCH "People now want Govt to give a definite answer. These type of people (the accused in rape case) need to be brought out in public and lynched," Rajya Sabha MP Jaya Bachchan on rape & murder of woman veterinary doctor in Telangana pic.twitter.com/HFNjUHtSHB — ANI (@ANI) December 2, 2019

"People now want the government to give a proper and definite answer. These types of people [the accused in rape case] need to be brought in public and lynched," Bachchan said.

A 27-year-old veterinary doctor was gang-raped, murdered and burnt near the Outer Ring Road on the outskirts of Hyderabad on Wednesday. The charred body of the victim was found next morning. The Cyberabad Police have arrested the four accused in the case who confess.

The fault is of those who could not provide security to the woman and upbringing of the accused. They must be brought out in public and let the public decide their fate. It is happening in a lot of countries. What is done to people who commit such crimes? Public lynching. That will be the best justice," Bachchan added.

Her comments caused controversy as other parliamentarians argued that while justice is important, barbarism is no solution for such acts.
