Students, activists protest at Jantar Mantar against Telangana doctor rape-murder case

The civil society and students came out in numbers at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi on Monday to protest against the Telangana doctor rape-murder incident demanding justice for the victim. Several women activists and organisations expressed their anguish and anger against the horrific incident.

Left-wing students tried to march to Parliament from Parliament Street, however, heavy security arrangements by the Delhi Police did not allow protesters to cross beyond the area permitted for the protest.

Social activist Suhasini Ali led the protest at Parliament Street with many other women organisations. While speaking to India Today TV, Suhasini Ali said, "The government has failed to protect the women and despite the December 16 Nirbhaya case, the crime like rape against women is not being contained. The implementation of stringent laws is the need of the hour."

Many woman protesters particularly the college-goers shared their fear. Anu, a Delhi University student protesting against the Telangana incident told India Today TV, "My family remains concerned when I don't reach back home on time. I am scared to travel alone even in a city like Delhi but our government has only made hollow promises to ensure our safety. Nothing has been done on ground for us."



Many protesters held placards saying, "There are cow vigilantes to protect cows but no one to protect women."

Pooja, another student said, "The prime minister [Narendra Modi] talks about "beti bachao, beti padhao", but when it comes to protect them, no action is being taken."

Protesters were also anguished over the statement made by the Telangana Home Minister Mohammad Mahmood Ali on the brutal incident. Mohammad Mahmood Ali had earlier said that the "doctor was educated" and it was "unfortunate" that the deceased veterinary doctor dialled her family and not the police.

"We are saddened by the incident; police are alert and controlling crime. It is unfortunate that she called her sister and not '100', had she called '100' she could have been saved," news agency ANI had quoted Mohammad Mahmood Ali as saying.

Meanwhile, Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chairperson Swati Maliwal demanded the resignation of Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao and Mohammad Mahmood Ali over their conduct and remark.

She has also announced an indefinite strike from Tuesday at Jantar Mantar demanding implementation of death punishment to the rapist of minors.
