Police seek 10-day custody of accused in Hyderabad vet gangrape and murder

Police seek 10-day custody of accused in Hyderabad vet gangrape and murder

The petition for custody was filed a day after the Telangana Chief Minister said the case would be fast-tracked.

news Court

The Cyberabad police on Monday sought 10-day police custody of the four arrested in the gangrape and murder of Madhuri (name changed), a veterinary doctor in Hyderabad. The police filed a petition with the Mahabubnagar court seeking custody for interrogation as part of further investigation, reported PTI.

Police on November 29 arrested four people for the gruesome crime that shocked the country and evoked public outrage. Protesters on November 30 attempted to storm the Shadnagar police station where the four accused were held. A magistrate in Shadnagar town had to visit the police station as the protesters had blocked the way for the four accused to be taken to court. They were remanded to judicial custody for 14 days and shifted to Cherlapally jail in Hyderabad. Protests also took place across several parts of the state and country demanding death penalty for the accused.

The move by the Cyberabad police seeking for 10-day custody for interrogation comes close on the heels of the announcement of fast tracking of the case by Chief Minister K Chandhrasekhar Rao. The Chief Minister made the announcement on December 1, in his first public statement after the incident that came to light on November 27. He expressed his deep anguish and described the incident as a ghastly and inhuman act.

The crime took place in the outskirts of Hyderabad, near the Todupally toll gate around 9:44 pm on November 27. The accused trapped Madhuri by deflating one of the tyres of her scooter and offering to help her fix it. She desperately called her sister stating that she was scared of the situation she found herself in. At 9.44 pm, her phone was switched off. She was gang-raped and killed, and her body was dumped in an underpass near Shadnagar and set on fire.
