As nation boils over Telangana rape case, CM KCR snubs victim’s family, reaches Delhi for wedding

KCR in Delhi for wedding | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: At a time when the entire country is outraged over the brutal rape and murder of a 27-year-old woman in Cyberabad in Telangana, Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao, on Monday night, reached Delhi to attend a high-profile wedding.

Upon arriving at Delhi airport, when the chief minister was confronted by Times Now over his Delhi visit for the wedding ceremony, he refrained from commenting on it.

"Sir you are here in Delhi to attend a wedding but you have no time to visit the Cyberabad victim's family," Times Now reporter asked only to get no response from the CM. Rao remained tight-lipped and walked away.

Rao's visit, which has come at a time when the brazen rape and murder of the young woman in Cyberabad - which was hitherto considered a safe city - has taken the country by the storm, will definitely raise many eyebrows as he reportedly hasn't visited the family of the rape victim as yet.

The chief minister had on Sunday directed setting up of a fast-track court to deal with the rape and murder case of the veterinarian that has sparked nationwide outrage and protests across the country.

Condemning the gruesome incident, the chief minister instructed officials that the accused should be inquired on a fast track and the culprits given the stringent punishment.

“CM has instructed officials that the accused in the woman veterinary doctor's ghastly murder should be inquired on a fast track, & culprits should be given stringent punishment. CM also decided to set up a fast track court to deal with the case,” Telangana Chief Minister's Office stated.

On November 27, the woman was allegedly gang-raped and murdered near Tondupally toll plaza of Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on the outskirts of Hyderabad while returning home from work. The charred body of the veterinarian was found near Ranga Reddy district’s Shadnagar town on Hyderabad-Bengaluru highway.

Four men, all lorry workers, aged between 20 and 24, were arrested in connection with the incident on Friday and remanded to judicial custody by a court for 14 days on Saturday. A team comprising ten police are probing the incident.

The incident drew huge flak with thousands of people public staging protests seeking stern action against the accused. On Friday, when the four accused were escorted to the prison from a police station, some people hurled stones at a police vehicle.
