Will see what Sonia Sena's Uddhav Thackeray would do: BJP after NCP MLA asks CM to free Bhima Koregaon accused

BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights NCP MLA requested Uddhav Thackeray to withdraw cases against those arrested in Bhima-Koregaon case BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao today said that the BJP would see what “Sonia Sena's Uddhav Thackeray would do” The BJP has recently been launching verbal attacks at its old ally on several issues

New Delhi: Days after an NCP MLA requested Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray to release those arrested in Bhima-Koregaon case, the BJP, on Monday, said that it was waiting for the response of the CM, who once called them "a threat to democracy".

Earlier this week, NCP MLA Jitendra Awhad urged Thackeray to free those arrested in the Bhima Koregaon case, shortly after the CM ordered to take back the cases filed against environmentalists who carried out Aarey protests in October.

“Those arrested in Aarey agitation have been freed, now this government should free those arrested in the Bhima Koregaon case on trumped-up charges by the previous government @OfficeofUT @Jayant_R_Patil Yes... This is our government,” he had tweeted in Marathi.

Last year, 10 activists were arrested after an inquiry into the caste violence at Bhima Koregaon that happened on January 1, 2018. They were arrested on the charges of instigating the violence and of having links with the banned Communist Party of India (Maoist).

Responding to NCP legislator's tweet, BJP spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao today said that they would see what “Sonia Sena's Uddhav Thackeray would do" regarding the request.

“NCP MLA asks Uddhav Thackeray to release Bhima-Koregaon accused urban naxals who plotted assassination of PM Shri @narendramodi. Shiv Sena's Uddhav then called them a threat to democracy.We will see what Sonia Sena's Uddhav Thackeray would do,” he wrote on Twitter.

NCP MLA asks Uddhav Thackeray to release Bhima-Koregaon accused urban naxals who plotted assassination of PM Shri @narendramodi. Shiv Sena's Uddhav then called them a threat to democracy.We will see what Sonia Sena's Uddhav Thackeray would do #UrbanNaxalshttps://t.co/RUrCZRcYZl — GVL Narasimha Rao (@GVLNRAO) December 2, 2019

Thackeray, on Sunday, ordered to take back the cases filed against environmentalists for agitating against the felling of trees for the work.

“I have ordered to take back the cases filed against many environmentalists, during the agitation against Aarey metro car shed,” the chief minister was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

In October, scores of environmental activists gathered in Aarey Colony and staged huge protest after Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Limited (MMRCL) authorities started hacking trees for the construction of car shed for Mumbai Metro trains.

The BJP that recently failed to form government in the state after Shiv Sena walked out of the 30-year-old alliance and joined hands with Congress-NCP combine, has recently been launching verbal attacks at its old ally over several issues.
