After Delhi govt, L-G recommends rejection of mercy plea filed by 2012 Delhi gangrape case convict

Vinay Sharma is one of the four convicts of 2012 Delhi gang-rape case (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights After the Delhi government, the L-G of Delhi has also recommended the rejection of Vinay Sharma's mercy petition Vinay Sharma is one of the four men who have been convicted for the rape and murder of a medical student in Delhi

New Delhi: The Lieutenant Governor of Delhi, Anil Baijal, has recommended the rejection of the mercy petition filed by Delhi 2012 gangrape case convict. The L-G recommended the rejection of the mercy petition filed by Vinay Sharma after the government of the national capital suggested the same.

The victim's mother spoke out against the delay in the court's judgement and said that this is an "endless wait for justice". Vinay Sharma is one of the four convicts of 2012 Delhi gangrape case. The family of the victim has demanded that the trial of the case is expedited.

"Today, we have received the L-G's approval to reject the mercy petition (of Vinay Sharma) and today we will send our recommendations to the President," the chief minister said in the Delhi Assembly.

On Sunday, the Delhi government had recommended the rejection of Vinay Sharma's mercy petition. Law Minister Satyendra Jain said on Sunday, "This is the most heinous crime of extreme brutality and one where exemplary punishment should be given to the appellant to deter others from committing such atrocious crimes. There is no merit in the mercy petition and I strongly recommend for rejection."

The petition had been forwarded for consideration to the Delhi government by Tihar Jail authorities. On November 30, the petition had been sent to the Minister of Home Affairs by the Ministry of Law. The President's letter on the petition will be forwarded to the Patiala House Court in Delhi for the issue of the Black Warrant or the execution warrant.

Last week, a Delhi court observed that the human rights of the victims and the human rights of the accused persons are equally important. During the hearing, Additional Sessions Judge Satish Arora said, "If we are conscious of the human rights of the accused persons, we should also be concerned about the rights of the victims."
