Don’t Believe Politicians. Locking Women Up At Night Is Not A Solution For Rape

In yet another incident of a politician being tone deaf about the issue of women’s safety, K Chandrashekhar Rao, Chief Minister of Telangana--where the horrific rape of a veterinarian took place in its capital of Hyderabad--has said something eye-roll worthy.

The CM has called for an 8 pm curfew for women in Telangana’s transport department. He also wants to bring an end to women working night shifts in order to prevent them from getting raped. To add insult to injury, the police department has issued a 14-point “guideline” teaching women how to “prevent” getting raped.

It’s a bit rich considering that it was the police refusing to file a complaint when the family of the vet appeared at the police station is what many see to have been a crucial factor in the rape and murder case. The police also did not impound the truck of one of the accused for not having a valid license, allowing for the accused to roam free.

But that is a secondary point. Let’s get back to the idea that locking women up will prevent rape.

Only 7% of rapes are committed by total strangers

According to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), out of a total of 32, 559 cases of rape reported across the country in 2017, in about 1/3rd of the cases (10, 553), the accused were “friends, online friends, live-in partners, or separated husbands” of the victims. In another 16, 591 rape cases, the accused were family friends, employers, neighbours, or other known persons. In more than 93% of the cases, the rape was committed by known persons.

Here’s the clinching statistic: the accused were members of the victim’s family in 3155 cases. You must remember that these are only reported cases. Many women do not report rape when it is committed by a family member for fear of social repercussions.

So the big question is, how does locking women up post 8 pm ensure their safety when they are being raped right inside their homes? Should we just lock ourselves up in our rooms then and never come out?

Our leaders are a part of the problem

According to the Association for Democratic Reforms, 43% of the current Lok Sabha MPs have criminal charges against them. Nearly 29% of the cases are related to rape, murder, attempt to murder, or crimes against women.

Basically, a little less than one-third of our parliamentarians are facing court charges related to hurting and violating women.

Perhaps it is time our lawmakers focus less on what women should do to not get raped and instead focus more on sensitising the police, fixing the messed up legal system, and teaching men not to rape. Oh, and it would help if they themselves stopped assaulting women.




