Cyberabad police arrest 22-year-old for vulgar Facebook comments about rape, murder victim

Cyberabad crime police escorting the boy | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights A case was filed after police took suo moto cognizance of the questionable comments The 22-year-old accused has been identified as Chhavan Prakash Several such instances of objectionable posts and pictures have been reported to the police

Hyderabad: After multiple reports of social media users posting vulgar comments about the Cyberabad rape and murder victim on Facebook, police in Telangana have started cracking down on such offenders. A 22-year-old resident of Fakirabad in Navipet area of Nizamabad, Chhavan Prakash has been arrested by the Cyber Crime Police for posting vulgar comments about the victim on his timeline.

In a press release, the police said that a number of unknown people posted objectionable pictures of the victim and even made vulgar comments about her using their Facebook profiles. A case was registered in this regard at the cybercrime police station (CCPS) after taking suo-moto cognizance of the matter.

Earlier this week, reports in the media had highlighted how rape culture is so prevalent in India that a number of social media users were making accusations at the girl who was the victim of a horrific crime on November 28. Complaints in this regard were also sent to all three commissionerates in Hyderabad, namely Hyderabad police, Rachakonda police and Cyberabad police.

Some of the comments which were highlighted and reported read, "If girls go out at night, should we not rape them?" and "all girls should be raped like this". A senior officer with the cybercrime police station had told mediapersons that officials at Facebook have been contacted and asked to share information about the users who are engaging in such offensive behaviour.

The charred body of the 27-year-old victim who was being mocked in these facebook posts was found under a bridge. She was abducted, gang-raped and burnt alive by two men who are now in police custody. They will be tried before a fast track court, said Telangana chief minister K Chandrashekhar Rao. The incident has since sparked outrage across the country with women demanding safety and protection.
