Hyderabad rape-murder sparks nationwide protests

The rape and murder of a young veterinary doctor in Hyderabad has sparked anger, spotlighting women's safety in yet another Indian city.

For a second consecutive day, protests continued in in Delhi's Jantar Mantar.

On Monday, members of civil society had gathered in the nation's capital, demanding justice for the Hyderabad victim.

Delhi Commission for Women chairperson Swati Maliwal sits on indefinite hunger strike against the Hyderabad rape-murder case and growing incidents of crime against women at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi. Photograph: Shahbaz Khan/PTI Photo

Members of Delhi Commission for Women during a protest against the Hyderabad rape-murder case. Earlier in the day, DCW chairperson had written a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi asking that all rapists should be hanged within six months of being convicted. Photograph: Shahbaz Khan/PTI Photo

A demonstrator holds a sword as she attends a protest against the Hyderabad rape and murder. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

Demonstrators used placards to ask for speedy justice and for better policing and laws during the protest. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

Women organisations and students hold placards during a protest demanding justice. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

The message on this woman's head band is simple and clear. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

Demonstrators shout slogans as they take part in the protest. Photograph: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters

Students of Maharani college hold placards during a protest in Bengaluru. Photograph: Shailendra Bhojak/ PTI Photo

Protests in Bengaluru. Photograph: Shailendra Bhojak/ PTI Photo

Students take part in a candle light protest at Khanapara in Guwahati. Photograph: PTI Photo

Students from a veterinary college take out a candlelight march in Mumbai. Photograph: Shashank Parade/PTI Photo

Doctors of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) take part in a candle-light march in New Delhi. Photograph: Manvender Vashist /PTI Photo
