Five men gang-rape class 9 girl in Chennai, arrested

Police arrested Anbazhagan and four others on the basis of the statement of the girl. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Class 9 girl raped by five men in Chennai The girl was rescued by Childline volunteers from Chennai railway station Accused are identified as Anbazhagan, Pushpraj, Anand, Kottachi and Vicky

Chennai: In a shocking incident, a minor girl was sexually assaulted by an electrician and four other men in Chennai, Tamil Nadu.

Police have arrested all the accused who are identified as Anbazhagan, Pushpraj, Anand, Kottachi and Vicky.

According to a report in Times of India, the crime took place when the class 9 girl was visiting Marina beach on Sunday (December 1).

The 22-year-old accused Anbazhagan befriended the victim and took her to his shop where he worked as an electrician and raped her.

According to the police investigation, the victim was also sexually assaulted by four other men on different occasions.

The victim was rescued by Childline activists from Chennai Egmore railway station when she was going to Virudhachalam with Anbazhagan. The accused electrician is a resident of Virudhachalam. Police arrested Anbazhagan and four others on the basis of the statement of the girl.

In a similar incident in April this year, an 8-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a man in Chennai. The incident took place near Kalavan gate in Kancheepuram.

The accused worked at a roadside eatery near the Kavalan gate area. The victim was allegedly playing near her house when the incident took place. The accused allegedly noticed the girl while she was playing outside her residence and asked her to accompany him. When the victim refused, the man allegedly forced the victim on his bike. Later, the accused took the girl to his house and raped her.

The girl's mother noticed that she was feeling pained and exhausted the next day. Though the mother saw some bite marks and bruises on her body, she did not suspect rape.

When the mother tried to talk to the victim, she did not say anything. The mother then took the victim to a doctor and was told that her daughter had been sexually assaulted. Following this, the victim narrated her ordeal to her mother.




