Man admits killing couple and their baby before having sex with mum's dead body

WARNING: DISTRESSING CONTENT The killer, named as Nasiruddin, also raped the couple's 10-year-old daughter and attacked her younger brother after breaking into their home in Azamgarh in India

Man admits killing couple and their baby before having sex with mum's dead body

A sick monster has admitted murdering a couple and their young baby before having sex with the mum's body.

The perverted killer, named as Nasiruddin, also raped the dead couple's 10-year-old daughter and attacked her younger brother.

The 38-year-old, who has been described as a "sex maniac" and a "necrophile", broke into the family home in Azamgarh, India, to carry out the sickening crimes on November 24.

He beat the 35-year-old dad to death with a heavy stone before killing the 30-year-old woman and their four-month-old son

The beast had sex with the mother's body for three hours before he went on to rape and injure the little daughter and attack her four-year-old sibling.

Image: Reuters) Reuters)

The victims naked bodied were found by police.

He was arrested on Monday and confessed to the police he had carried out the brutal murder and sex attacks.

Azamgarh Triveni Singh, police investigator, told Times of India: "Nasiruddin was arrested from his house on the basis of circumstantial evidence and has confessed to his crime.

"He also admitted to taking a stimulating drug and carried condoms for perpetrating the crime."

Image: X90204) X90204)

Police say Nasiruddin recorded himself having sex with the mum and has also committed similar depraved crimes in Haryana, Delhi and West Bengal, north India.

He is claimed to have shown footage of him having sex with the dead mum to his sister-in-law, according to police.

It is not known if she turned him in to police.

Last month two teachers in Gujarat were accused of raping a 15-year-old blind girl over a two month period in a school for children with disabilities in Ambaji, west India.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

A month earlier in India, a woman was gang-raped by her nephews and forced by her ex-husband to drink acid in front of her young daughter

Protests to end what has been described as a "rape culture" have taken place in India lately.

Demonstrators have held placards in support of rape victims across the country.

The number of rapes recorded in India is almost 40,000 each year, according to official figures.

But campaigners say the real number is higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma and a lack of faith in investigators.
