Hyderabad vet gangrape: Police ask media to stop publishing photos of accused

The Cyberabad police which is probing the gang-rape and murder of the 26-year-old veterinary doctor, on Monday, appealed media houses to refrain from publishing the photos and videos of the arrested accused, and documents pertaining to the crime, as it could hamper the investigation.

“It is requested to stop forthwith further telecasting of video clippings, photographs of the accused persons and investigative documents in electronic/print/social media in order to avoid damage and hampering in collection of evidence during the course of investigation and also prevent any cognizable offence in the interest of justice (sic),” Shadnagar Assistant Commissioner of police who is the investigating officer in the case, V Surender, said in a press release.

The ACP said that publishing photos, videos and documents is ‘diminishing the value of crucial evidence’ which is vital to prove the accused as guilty.

Police said that they would use Section 149 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to prevent the broadcast.

On Wednesday, Disha, a resident of Shamshabad in Telangana, was raped and killed by a gang of four members. Disha had parked her scooter at Thondupally toll-gate which is just 3 km away from her home, and visited a skin clinic in Gachibowli on November 27. While returning from the clinic, she found the vehicle’s tyre deflated. Under the pretext of help, the accused forcibly took her to the bushes near the Outer Ring Road (ORR), raped and killed her. They later disposed of the body in Chatanpally village by burning it, at the underpass of the ORR.

The crime came to light the next morning. After police confirmed that the woman was gang-raped before being set on fire, protests erupted across the country demanding justice for the victim.

The issue was discussed in the Parliament on Monday, with some political representatives like Jaya Bachchan and DMK Rajya Sabha MP P Wilson arguing for lynching and castration of rape accused. Both these leaders, along with Vice President Venkaiah Naidu, received flak for their thoughtless suggestions.

Presently, the four accused in the crime- Areef, Shiva, Naveen and Chennakeshavulu--are imprisoned at Cherlapally jail. The Shadnagar magistrate sent them to 14-day judicial custody. The investigating officers have now appealed for a 10-day police custody to interrogate the accused.
