Rape-accused Nithyananda buys island, sets up own nation Kailaasa near Ecuador

As the police continue to look for rape-accused self-styled godman Nithyananda who is suspected to have fled the country dodging the security agencies, we found out that he has formed a new country - Kailaasa.

According to the website of Kailasaa, it's a 'nation without borders created by dispossessed Hindus from around the world who lost the right to practice Hinduism authentically in their own countries.'

The location of Kailaasa remains a mystery although a news report revelaed the country is suspectedly located on a private island that he has allegedly bought from Ecuador, near Trinidad and Tobago.

Sources had earlier told India Today that Nithyananda has escaped to Ecuador via Nepal.

The website - kailaasa.org - heaps praises on Nithyananda. It even has its own wikipedia page called Nithyanandapedia which mentions, "Nithyanandapedia is an effort to capture all the knowledge and expressions shared by His Divine Holiness Bhagavan Sri Nithyananda Paramashivam - to have a one-stop shop combining all His teachings in form of videos, audio, text, books, etc - combined with photographs that try and capture all the services He has offered and continues to offer to the world."

The official languages followed in Kailaasa are English, Sanskrit and Tamil. It claims to have a population of 100 million Adi Shaivites; 2 billion practicing Hindus. It also claims it has 56 original Vedic nations in South Asia as well as a global Hindu Diaspora.

Kailasaa, as many will be shocked, has its own passport and flag. Apparently a passport will be issued, 'by the grace of Paramashiva, the holder of this passport is allowed free entry in all eleven dimensions and fourteen lokas, including Kailaasa.'

The website boasts of Kailasaa having it's own cabinet, which includes Department of Health, Department of State, Department of Technology, Department of Enlightened Civilization, Department of Education, Department of Human Services, Department of Housing, Department of Commerce, Department of Treasury.

The website claims the Department of Enlightened Civilization is for the revival of Sanatana Hindu Dharma by preserving Hindu libraries & knowledge centers, facilitating research & training in Yogic sciences & manifestation of powers, running the Nithyanandeshwara Paramashiva Devalayam which follows the Veda-Agama Sampradaya in the most authentic way.

The national flower of Kailasaa is lotus. The Kailaasa claims it stands for universal free healthcare, free education, free food, and revival of temple based lifestyle.

Rishabha Dhvaja - the flag of Kailaasa features Nithyananda, along with Nandi. The website encourages users to dowload the flag.

The website mentions that Kailasaa's was created with the determination to not just preserve and protect Sanatana Hindu Dharma and share it with the entire world, but also to share the story of persecution that is yet unknown to the world.

Kailasaa's national animal is Nandi (sacred bull).

The national bird of Kailasaa is Sharabam - bird with golden colour, with two uplifted wings, two red eyes, four legs in the form of a lion touching the ground, four legs with claws upwards, and with an animal tail.

The state emblem is Paramshiva, Parashakti, Nithyananda and Nandi. Kailasaa also claims to have a Hindu Investment, Reserve Bank, where cryptocurrency will be accepted, and a 'Dharmic Economy' in the future.

The vision of Kailasaa, according to the website is, "enlightened living for all of humanity which is rooted in the fundamental principle of Advaita or Oneness the idea that all beings can live in peace and harmony, and that all human beings are equal and divine, and can reach their highest potential irrespective of their color, nationality, religion, gender, sexual orientation, caste, creed or race.

"Kailasaa's national tree is the Banyan tree.

And like every nation state, the website claims to have a University, Gurukul and it's own TV channel and a Nithyananda Times.

Nithyananda is being probed in criminal cases involving a rape case in Karnataka, and kidnapping and torture case in Gujarat. According to sources in the know of related developments, Nithyananda has not appeared in the court in more than 40 hearings of the cases against him.

The Gujarat matter came to light after the police arrested three persons including the principal of the Delhi Public School in Ahmedabad in the past few days. Nithyananda was booked in a criminal case related to his ashram in Ahmedabad. The Gujarat police are working to gather concrete evidence against him after taking two of his disciples in remand.

(All images in the story used from kailaasa.org)
