Puri gang-rape of minor sparks public outrage in Odisha

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

BHUBANESWAR: As sensational Hyderabad gang rape and murder sparked nationwide furore, the gang rape of a minor in Puri on Monday has triggered massive public outcry with opposition political parties, women activists and students demanding stringent action against the accused. BJP and Congress on Tuesday demanded chief minister Naveen Patnaik ’s resignation over a spate of instances related to crime against women and minor girls.Involvement of a dismissed police constable in the Puri gang rape case and commission of the heinous in a government quarter at Puri police line drew more criticism for the police and government. Police arrested the dismissed constable, namely Jitendra Sethi and his associate Rajesh Sethi on Tuesday.“We doubt whether the minor victim will get justice as the heinous crime was committed by a dismissed constable. How can the same police department conduct a fair probe? Odisha has been witnessing increasing cases of crime against women, mostly minor girls. Naveen, who heads home department, should step down on moral ground,” BJP MLA and leader of opposition Pradipta Kumar Naik said.BJP state Mahila wing said they want to meet Naveen and seek an explanation from him about rise in cases related to atrocities against women and minors. BJP state women wing president Pravati Parida also targetted the state police in the wake of suspension of two cops in Mayurbhanj for their failure to arrest a rape accused. The rape survivor, a lecturer at Rairangpur, allegedly hanged herself to death on November 30 due to delayed justice. Parida also slammed the government over death of Smitarani Biswal, a Panchayat executive officer in Jajpur district, in October. Biswal’s body was found hanging from a guest house, owned by husband of a local Sarapanch. While police claimed she committed suicide, her family alleged she was murdered.Congress workers, who had attempted to gherao Naveen’s residence here on Monday night in protest against the Puri gang rape case, made another try on Tuesday. Hundreds of Congress supporters were intercepted by police at Sishu Bhawan during their march towards Naveen Niwas. “We want Naveen’s resignation,” Congress leader Bijaylaxmi Sahoo said. Congress, BJP and civil society organisations also staged protests in Puri, Bhubaneswar and several other cities condemning the gang rape and demanded stringent action against the culprits.BJD reiterated Naveen’s recent appeal that any form of crime against women should not be politicized. “It is not time to be indulged in blame game. Everyone should come together to fight the social evil,” BJD leader Srimayee Mishra said.Recently, the BJP and Congress hounded the ruling BJD in assembly over spurt in rape cases. Minister of state for home Dibya Shankar Mishra told the assembly that total 604 number of minor rape cases were registered in the state between January and June this year. According to the minister’s reply, during this period the total rape cases registered in the state was 1149. In 2018, the state had registered 2502 rape cases, including 1430 cases of rape of minors. Government sources said the conviction rate in rape cases stood at a poor 18.35 percent. Of the 1073 rape cases disposed in 2018, the accused were convicted in only 197 cases.
