Noida: Anguished over the Hyderabad gang-rape, woman takes to solitary protest, removed from spot

NOIDA: Four days after the Delhi Police detained a girl for staging a solitary protest near the Parliament House in the wake of the gruesome gang-rape of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Hyderabad, a woman who similarly sat on a protest demanding “security for women” was removed from near the busy TGIP mall area on Tuesday afternoon by Sector 39 police.The woman identified as Diksha Gaur, was spotted sitting on a footpath near the mall on around 2 pm on Tuesday and was protesting against the incident which has again brought to fore the memories of the brutal Nirbhaya gangrape.Gaur, who works as a development executive director in a Delhi-based private company, was seen holding a placard in her hand, as she cried.The placard read: “I am a daughter of police administration. I am not safe. Make the daughter safe. We need security, not justice.”According to Diksha, her father was a policeman but is no more now and her brother is serving with the UP police at Shahjahanpur area.Asked about her solitary protest, the woman told mediapersons that she was upset due to the gangrape and murder of the 27-year-old veterinarian.“I have left my job and came here only for protesting against this incident. When I go to my office, my seniors ask me why till when I will remain in depression. It is because…it can happen with again, with you…with me…there have been so many marches but nothing happened. The Modi government has promised to act on black money, etc. Why can’t they act for women security? Why can't laws be changed,” she said.Remembering the brutal Nirbhaya case, she demanded the action against juveniles who commit heinous crimes.“The juveniles who are involved… small boys who kill girls. At the time of perpetrating this kind of incident, they don’t think they are kids, small kids know everything. They know how to kill but are let out thinking that they are juvenile. They are sent to observation homes, they are not so small not to know anything,” she rued.She demanded that juveniles be held first so that “more kids don’t get spoilt.”Diksha was however upset as she rued that she was ignored by almost everybody who passed by, especially girls.“I think nobody cares about someone’s life. When it happens to them….I am taking a stand today for a girl who she is nobody to me. I will keep taking stand for them too. Or someone like me... but at least girls should support. Everybody knows, but all are listening and moving ahead. Nobody takes a stand for anyone,” she said, as she continued to cry.Meanwhile, as the mediapersons spotted the girl and passersby stopped to see what was happening, a PCR number 8 and a team of Sector 39 police arrived at the spot and asked the girl to leave the spot.The girl was taken to the Sector 39 police station in the PCR van.Two female constables and a male constable from the police station could be seen arriving at the spot.One of the female constables asked the passersby and mediapersons to move from the spot.“Move from here, what are you watching?,” she can heard saying in a video.The female constables took the woman to the police station in the PCR van.Asked what was happening, Diksha started crying again and said, “they are taking me along.”When contacted, circle officer I Swetabh Pandey told TOI that the woman was asked to leave the spot a lot of crowd had gathered at the spot.“Police simply asked her to move somewhere to protest as a lot of crowd had gathered near the spot. She has given in writing that she would not protest here,” he said.
