Parents demand action, FIR with additional charges against school staff

LUDHIANA: Demanding justice for Dhananjay Tiwari, a Class XI student who committed suicide after allegedly being tortured at school, the Ludhiana School Parents Association on Tuesday submitted a memorandum to the additional deputy commissioner and commissioner of police against SGD Grammar Senior Secondary School.The parents’ body has called for immediate action against the school authorities along with additional FIR charges under sections 75 and 82 of the Juvenile Justice Act Moreover, taking suo motu cognizance of the matter, Punjab State Commission for Protection of Child Rights (PSCPCR) has told Ludhiana police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal to submit a report on December 5 – with versions of station house officer (SHO) Dhandhari Pavittar Singh and education department officials – to Rajinder Singh, PSCPCR chairman.Five days after 17-year-old Dhananjay’s death, the school director, principal and teacher are untraceable. In the video he made before the suicide, he blamed the school authorities for torturing him by tying his hands, threatening and slapping him repeatedly.The parents’ body members said, “As a first step, the state government should take over the school immediately. Police should also register FIR under sections 75 and 82 of the Juvenile Justice Act in addition to Section 306. The culprits should be arrested without delay.”Claiming that the administration was not acting properly, the association members said if parent-teacher meetings would be held regularly, many such issues could be sorted out. Proper directions should be issued to all the schools to avoid any untoward incidents in the future, they demanded.Some of the students who staged a protest on Monday told TOI that they were also being harassed by the school authorities.When asked about the accused school staff, SHO Pavittar Singh said, “Three of them are untraceable. We have raided the houses of their relatives too, but all in vain. Dhananjay’s parents have gone to Uttar Pradesh to perform his last rites.”Meanwhile, the tragic incident has exposed the chinks in the school’s functioning and its adverse atmosphere, triggering flak from parent associations.Criticizing the school’s “ill-handling of a non-issue”, parents’ body member Gurpreet Grewal, whose child studies in Class VIII at Baba Ishewar Singh School in BRS Nagar, said the dress and books mafia have started dominating private schools. “It is normal for schoolkids to grow out of their uniform. If the school felt the boy’s pants were short, they should have intimated his parents. Besides, teachers should not use offensive language against their students,” Grewal added.Ludhiana parents’ association secretary Swaran Singh said harassment happens because the school wants parents to buy dresses from particular vendors to earn commission. “Due to schools’ money-minting approach, parents are forced to shell out hefty sums every year on new uniforms. To end this, parent-teacher associations should be formed, and regular meetings should be held to redress such issues,” he said.Association vice-president Swaroop Singh said, “Most parents fear coming forward to raise such issues, and those who do, face harassment from the school authorities. Their students are also humiliated. The state education department should cancel SGD Grammar School’s NOC and affiliation.”Blaming the administration, parents’ body president Manjeet Singh said, “It is sheer negligence of the police and education department that they are unable to trace the culprits. They are mentally torturing students and parents and if the latter raise issues, they are victimised. Child commission and state governance need to interfere in this matter.”
