Ludhiana gang-rape: Police suspect involvement of 15-16 people, launch manhunt leading to two arrests so far

A candle march in Ludhiana in protest against the heinous crime | Photo Credit: ANI

Ludhiana: Shocking developments have emerged in the case of a 21-year-old college student who was held captive and gang-raped around Isewal village in Punjab's Ludhiana district. A preliminary investigation into the matter has revealed that the incident took place on Saturday night when more than a dozen men intercepted a car with the woman and a friend onboard.

The accused then reportedly dragged the two out of the vehicle and took turns to rape the woman. Both the woman and her friend were held captive till Sunday. Upon being released, the two lodged an official police complaint following which they were taken to the Civil Hospital. A medical examination of the woman confirmed gang-rape, said officials familiar with the matter.

#Ludhiana- DIG Ranbir Singh Khatra on alleged gang-rape of a woman: We have arrested two people, further investigation is underway. 6 suspects have been identified. pic.twitter.com/twaxzlWfPx — ANI (@ANI) February 12, 2019

However, Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Ranbir Singh Khatra on Tuesday told news agency ANI that investigators suspect the involvement of 15-16 people in the heinous crime. He said that Punjab police has released sketches of the suspects and have arrested two people accused of the crime. He also said that another six of the suspects have been identified and a search operation has been launched to nab them and bring them to justice.

Punjab police has released sketches of suspects in the case of gang-rape of a 21-year-old college student in Ludhiana yesterday. DIG Ranbir Singh Khatra (pic 1) says, "15-16 people are suspected to be involved in the crime. We are screening many people. " pic.twitter.com/h7jQRuuaT7 — ANI (@ANI) February 12, 2019

Meanwhile, the National Commission for Women (NCW) has taken suo moto cognizance of the incident and has initiated a three-member fact-finding team to probe the matter. Chairperson of the Punjab State Women Commission, M Gulati also told media outlets that the body has sought a report from senior police officers in Ludhiana by tomorrow concerning the investigation into the matter.

Punjab: A candlelight march was organised by Shiromani Akali Dal in Ludhiana today, against the incident where a woman was dragged out of a car and allegedly gang-raped in the city yesterday. pic.twitter.com/4oFtF86J5C — ANI (@ANI) February 12, 2019

Must Read: Coimbatore: Father rapes minor daughter over a period of 3 years, arrested after she gets pregnant
