Public lynching won’t fix ‘Rapistaan’

If you think she’s looking “like a slut”, the reality is that you’re thinking like a rapist. | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights The demand for swift death penalty and public lynching of rapists has intensified. Parliamentarians expressed their outrage in the case of rape-murder of doctor in Telangana. Some politicians came out with bizarre statements about how women should follow some 'rules' to ensure their safety.

It is that time of the year again when we hit fists on tables, fill our eyes with blood and feel that hole being drilled in our hearts. Yes, I’m talking about the time when our usually dormant conscience is shaken to life by a monstrous incident that reeks of pure devilry. It is that time of the year when another girl has been brutalised by a pack of hungry men who saw her as nothing more than inviting meat. And yes, we are outraged, triggered and disgusted.

This time it was the charred body of a veterinary doctor who was lured by men with a promise to fix her two-wheeler’s flat tyre. She had even called her family and told them about the “helpful” people before sending her last communication that said, “I am scared”.

Yes, she was scared. She lived in India. We are a country of hypocrites who worship idols of women and objectify them in the most perverted manner at the same time.

The last time we were so outraged was in 2012 when a girl was ravaged in the most brutal manner in Delhi. The ‘Nirbhaya’ case shook the collective consciousness of the country and the protests even caught the attention of international media. We marched on the streets with a prayer on our lips and a candle in our hands.

This time, the narrative has changed slightly. Keeping in tune with the ‘lynching’ trend, we are more open to the idea of publically lynching rapists and the same has been suggested in Parliament as well. If we can’t fix our psyche, let’s at least cater to the sadistic nature of our design?

Now one might want to lynch me for saying that Jaya Bachchan is wrong in asking for rapists to be publically lynched but before such an action is taken, can we ask whether we have even tried to fix the root cause of the problem?

What about the ‘entitled’ male psyche with a distorted power trip in the form of machismo that has permeated the very fabric of our society? What have we done to teach our boys about the equality of all genders and the significance of non-violence in thought and action (I’m sorry ‘Sadhvi’ Pragya ji, but Godse was wrong and the Mahatma is still right).

If we really want change, the discourse on gender studies and equality needs to be seriously looked into. We as citizens must make it our duty to inculcate equality at home and the world. We must teach ourselves and our children about the horrors of violence and the power of standing up to what is wrong.

We must teach our men not to stare. If you think she’s looking “like a slut”, the reality is that you’re thinking like a rapist.

Another disconcerting facet to the issue is the presence of politicians who either use such tragedies as platforms to push their agenda or worse yet, pass insensitive comments on the entire female sex as if women were at fault for being born in the first place.

We have come across chauvinist police ‘guidelines’ on women's safety, heard comments about how the victim could have ‘averted’ the crime if she had conformed to certain ‘norms’ and whatnot. We are the ones who elect these leaders and with a pinch of salt, it must be understood that their misogynistic comments are a mere reflection of the electorate that votes them to power time and again.

In the days that followed the Cyberabad rape case, there have been hundreds of sexual assaults across the country but sadly, we will not be ‘outraged’ till the ‘trend’ is hot.

What needs to be done is a painstaking paradigm shift in how we think and conduct ourselves in private and in the public. Time for uttering words is gone; it is time for taking actions now else history will judge us all as the ones who simply did nothing when civilisation turned barbaric with silent spectators fanning the violence.


