Ghaziabad mass murder-suicide - Timeline of horror

A spine-chilling suicide note was found on the living room wall | Photo Credit: People

Key Highlights Gulshan Vasudev, the victim - in his suicide note found scribbled on the wall, has blamed his brother-in-law for forcing him to take this extreme step A day before the incident, Gulshan Vasudev's family visited a mall for a family dinner Gulshan's daughter Ritika was a 17-year-old schoolgirl. One of her friends stated that her social media account was deactivated on Monday The case involves the murder of two children and alleged suicides of three adults. The police is probing case through all angles

Ghaziabad: Another case of mass suicide and murder has shaken the Indirapuram area of Ghaziabad after a man, his wife and his business manager Sanjana - jumped to death from the eighth floor of a high-rise on Tuesday at 5 am. Before committing suicide, the couple killed their teenage son and daughter and scribbled a spine-chilling suicide note on their living room wall.

The deceased persons were identified as 45-year-old Gulshan Vasudeva, 43-year-old wife Praveen and 26-year-old manager Sanjana, 14-year-old son Hritik and 17-year-old daughter Ritika. Gulshan also killed his pet rabbit the same day. The incident took place in Krishna Apra housing society in Indirapuram.

Here is a timeline of the events that unfolded, leading right up to the tragic deaths

December 2

At around 5 pm Gulshan Vasudev's family visited the Cross River Mall in East Delhi and ate dinner with the families of his two brothers. They returned to their residence at around 11:30 pm.

December 3

At 3:38 am

Gulshan made a video call to his 70-year-old friend Ramesh and showed him the dead bodies of his daughter and son. The call left Ramesh shocked. He immediately realised that something was wrong and he called Gulshan's brothers to alert them. But by then the couple had already committed suicide.

At 5:15 am

Gulshan, his wife and business partner jumped to death. The housing society's guard heard a loud thud and spotted these three people lying on the ground. He immediately informed the police, his managers and neighbours about the suicide.

At 5:25 am

The police officials rushed them to a nearby hospital where the couple was declared brought in dead by the staff and Sanjana briefly survived the jump. Later the police reached the crime spot and found the bodies of the children lying in the house. The pet rabbit was found dead but their guinea pig was found alive.

A spine-chilling suicide note was found on the wall which stated that "This is the money for our last rites. Our last wish is that we should all be cremated together. Rakesh Verma is responsible for our death."

At 6:15 am

Sanjana succumbed to her injuries and the hospital staff informed the police.

According to a Times of India report, Ritika's friend stated that her social media account had been deactivated on Monday night. Meanwhile, Sanjana's brothers, Firoz and Shameem had reached police station in the evening and claimed that Gulshan had married their sister around one and a half years ago.

As per the suicide note, Gulshan blamed his brother-in-law Rakesh Verma for taking this extreme step. Reportedly, he had a monetary dispute with his brother-in-law Rakesh allegedly owed Gulshan an amount of Rs 1.5 crore. Police suspected that a monetary dispute could also be the reason behind the incident. Also, the officials claimed that Sanjana lived with the couple and a possibility of a quarrel over an extramarital affair cannot be ruled out.

However, the police are now probing whether the children were strangled to death or was some poisonous substance injected into them? The cause of their deaths would be ascertained only after the autopsy report is ready. However further probe in the case is underway and the police are interrogating Rakesh's family in the matter.




