Jaipur: 4-year-old tests HIV+ after rape; cops clueless about perpetrator’s medical status

The accused is currently undergoing treatment for HIV | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The four-year-old has now been tested positive for HIV in Rajasthan's Jaipur The minor's mother claimed that her daughter has to take retroviral medicines for a lifetime now to stay alive. There is no known cure for HIV nor for AIDS The family added that girl is regularly attending her school and is doing fine now

Jaipur: Months after a minor was raped, the four-year-old has now been tested positive for HIV in Rajasthan's Jaipur. While the investigating police officers are giving contradictory statements in the case, the minor's family reveals an affirmative medical report in the matter. It stated that days after the assault, the minor girl had tested positive for HIV.

As per a report by the Times of India, the minor's mother claimed that her daughter has to take medicines for a lifetime to battle the disease. They go to the hospital every month to take prescribed medicines and the doctors have clearly stated that the minor has to take medication for the rest of her life, she added.

Emphasising the seriousness of the situation, minor's mother told a media person, it is possible that the accused has also infected several other survivors. Reportedly, the minor's medical report has declared the specimen positive for HIV-1 antibodies.

Meanwhile, months after the heinous act, the family added that girl is regularly attending her school and is doing fine now. Currently, she is not facing any health issues, the mother added. Reportedly, the accused who has a long history of criminal records, is currently in jail.

Responding to the allegations levelled at the police officials, Jaipur Police Commissioner Anand Shrivastav said that the accused was not tested at the time of his arrest and the medical report of one of his rape survivors tested negative for HIV.

However, later the Commissioner revised his statement and claimed that the accused has now been tested and he was found to be HIV positive. The cops have checked with the jail authorities and he is currently undergoing treatment. The case highlights the loopholes in the system as the cops were clueless about the medical history of the perpetrator.




