Delhi: Iranian nationals rob foreign tourists by posing as cops, arrested

The arrest of the accused came following a series of robberies near Delhi cantonment and roads leading to the airport. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delhi Police bust gang of robbers posing as police officers Two of the accused are Iranian nationals Gang used to 'detain' tourists and rob them at an isolated place

New Delhi: In a major breakthrough, the Delhi Police have busted a gang of robbers by arresting four people, including two Iranian nationals, who use to rob tourists posing as cops.

Two other robbers are locals. The Iranian accused have been identified as 35-year-old Nasir Salim, 51-year-old Nasir Sayah, while the two locals are identified as 24-year-old Akbar and 35-year-old Jafar Saifullah.

According to a report in Times of India, the gang used to 'detain' the tourists, take them to an isolated place on the pretext of investigation and rob them. Akbar is a resident of Lakshmi Nagar in East Delhi, while Jafar belongs to Thane in Maharashtra.

The arrest of the accused came following a series of robberies near Delhi cantonment and roads leading to the airport. A number of foreign nationals were cheated and robbed by the gang.

"We identified some hotspots after analysing the trend and modus operandi of the gang and deployed our personnel in plainclothes. We were able to identify the suspects and their motorbikes with the help of CCTV cameras," said Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Southwest, Devender Arya.

The policemen, who were dressed as tourists, kept a close eye on the stretches and managed to nab the accused on motorcycles near Mehram Nagar Police Colony.

According to police, Akbar used to manage accommodation and other logistics for the gang. The other accused Jafar was in the business of cheating since 2010. He had earlier committed various crimes in Gujarat. Police have recovered 2 countrymade pistols, 10 live cartridges, two bikes, police uniforms and forged ID cards from the possession of the accused.


