61-year-old man held for raping minor in Mumbai's Kurla; booked under POCSO

The medical examination of the minor confirmed sexual assault. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The family registered FIR at the Vinoba Bhave Police Station The medical examination of the minor confirmed sexual assault The police arrested the accused on Tuesday and he has been booked under relevant sections of the IPC and POCSO Act

Mumbai: A 61-year-old man has been arrested for allegedly raping a six-year-old girl living in his neighbourhood in Kurla suburb of the commercial capital. The incident took place on December 1 when the minor went out to play with her friends in the evening.

The police officials told a media person that from Sunday to Tuesday, the accused assaulted the minor. He kept luring the victim with the promise of giving her a bar of chocolate. The incident came to light on December 3, Tuesday when the minor informed her family and complained about pain.

The family then registered a First Information Report at the Vinoba Bhave Police Station under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The medical examination of the minor confirmed sexual assault. However, the police arrested the accused on the same day. Further probe in the matter is underway.

Man gets life imprisonment for raping 14-year-old

A Rajasthan court has sentenced a man to life imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs 40,000 for raping a 14-year-old girl in 2017. The order was pronounced by the Judge Jagendra Kumar Agrawal, who termed the crime as "most heinous" and held the accused- Kanhaya Lal, who is in his early twenties, guilty.

He was punished under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and sections 363 (kidnapping), 366 (abduction) of the Indian Penal Code. The court also found Lal's accomplice guilty under sections 363 and 366 of the IPC.

Reportedly, the complaint in the matter was lodged by the minor's mother on November 23, 2017. Lal was accused of abducting her at knifepoint. Later he drove her to an isolated spot and raped her.
