Hyderabad doctor rape-murder case to be heard in a fast-track court in Mahbubnagar

Follow us on Protests across India against the brutal rape and murder of Hyderabad doctor

The gang-rape and murder case of Hyderabad veterinarian will go in a fast-track court for trial, the Telangana High Court gave its approval on Wednesday. The high court cleared the way for setting up the court after proposal was sent by Law Secretary. The fast-track court will be set up in Mahbubnagar.

The brutal gang-rape and murder of the 27-year-old veterinarian shook the nation. She was gang-raped and murdered by four persons near Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on the outskirts of Hyderabad on the night of November 27. They later dumped the body near Shadnagar town and set afire. Later on November 29, all four accused -- two truck drivers and two cleaners -- were arrested by the Cyberabad Police. The four trapped the victim by deflating a tyre of her scooty and committed the heinous crime when she reached a toll gate to pick her parked vehicle and return home.

From Hyderabad to Delhi, there have been widespread protests ever since the case came to light. People from all walks of life have been protesting and demanding death for the four accused in the horrific rape and murder case. Parliamentarians too are in favour of stricter laws.

Samajwadi Party's Jaya Bachchan is of the view that the rapists should be "brought out in public and lynched." DMK's P Wilson said courts should be empowered to surgically and chemically castrate convicted rapists before they are released from jails so as to check repeat offenders. Union Minister Rajnath Singh said the government is ready for discussions in the House so that stringent provisions in laws could be explored to give punishment to those involved in ghastly crimes against women.

ALSO READ | Lynch the rapists, Jaya Bachchan demands in Parliament. Do you agree?

ALSO READ | 'My didi was so badly burnt that my mother did not bid her final adieu'

Latest India News
