UP Law Student Who Accused Chinmayanand Of Rape Gets Bail Two Months After She Was Arrested

A 23-year-old law student who was arrested on charges of extortion and blackmail after she accused the former union minister Swami Chinmayanand of rape, has been granted bail on Wednesday. The Allahabad High Court granted bail to her two months after she was arrested on the complaint of Chinmayanand.

The BJP leader had alleged that the girl was trying to extort Rs 5 crore from the former BJP leader. It all began in August when the 23-year-old law student posted a video accusing Chinmayanand who runs several ashrams and educational institutions of sexually abusing her.

The girl was a student at Chinmayanand's Swami Shukdevanand Law College in Shahjahanpur. She had then mysteriously vanished, triggering fears that she was killed. However, she was traced in Rajasthan and was brought back.

"Swami Chinmayanand raped me and even exploited me physically for one year," she had alleged while speaking at a press conference in September.

Days later a video was leaked online, which showed an elderly man who resembles Chinmayanand lying naked on a bed, as a young woman massages his body. Chinmayanand, however, continued to deny the allegations and in turn accused the law student of extortion.

After coming under heavy criticism for not acting on the rape complaint, the UP police finally arrested Chinmayanand on September 20 but was soon shifted to a state-run hospital after he complained of uneasiness.

Despite the victim's statement, Chinmayanand was charged with rape, instead, he was accused of “misusing authority for sexual intercourse” or “sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape”, criminal intimidation, stalking and wrongful confinement.

Days later, on September 24, the 23-year-old girl who had made the rape complaint was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh police in a case of extortion.

Last month, a university in Bareilly had refused to allow the law student to write her third-semester examination citing the lack of attendance. This was despite the local CJM court granting her permission to appear for her exams and instructing the jail superintendent to send the woman to Bareilly in police custody.

The Supreme Court had earlier allowed the transfer of the student to some other college saying that her “future was important”. The apex court had also directed the administration to admit the law student and her brother to any other college affiliated to Bareilly university.

Ever since the complaint against the 72-year-old BJP leader surfaced, there have been allegations that the victim and her family are facing threats and many also had accused the UP government of trying to shield him. Chinmayanand was the minister of state for internal affairs in the Vajpayee government.
