Who Is Responsible For Rapes In India, A Country Of Over 1.3 Billion People?

When one of the four men sentenced to death in the 2012 Nirbhaya gangrape case was quoted in a documentary by BBC’s Leslee Udwin as saying: “A girl is far more responsible for rape than a boy,” he repeated something that is arguably deep-rooted in the minds of the people of India -- A woman is responsible for rape.

"A decent girl won't roam around at 9 o'clock at night. ... Housework and housekeeping is for girls, not roaming in discos and bars at night doing wrong things, wearing the wrong clothes," Mukesh Singh said in the documentary, India's Daughter, which was banned in India. The documentary was outlawed by the Indian authorities on the grounds of "objectionable content".

Meanwhile, there is Manohar Lal Khattar, chief minister of Haryana, who shares believes in rape accused Mukesh Singh's vision.

"If a girl is dressed decently, a boy will not look at her in the wrong way," Khattar once told reporters, "Freedom has to be limited. These short clothes are Western influences. Our country's tradition asks girls to dress decently."

Largely, men are following the precedent set by their country’s leaders and beliefs of the society that they live in.

Following the gut-wrenching rape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinary doctor in Telangana --one that sent the country into collective turmoil reminding people of the horrific 2012 Nirbhaya case-- Hyderabad Police launched a 14-tip advisory for women or girls on how to be safe while travelling.

In fact, one of the points asks women to “talk loud and shout.”

Of course, none of the points told men to not rape.

And this clarifies the stance of the society when it comes to rape – a woman is responsible for getting raped. And it is her responsibility to keep herself safe at all times.

We are yet to see an advisory for men to not rape women.

A woman raped every 15 minutes

A fundamental question arises here: Has the average Indian man changed at all in his attitude towards women?

In a country of more than 1.3 billion people, on an average, there were at least 16 cases of crimes against women every hour and 986 crimes every day in 2017, per the latest NCRB data. Up to 33,658 women were raped in 2017. That means one woman was raped every 15 minutes.

Conviction numbers, too, tell a dismal story.

Rape is rampant in India. According to a June 2018 poll by the Thomson Reuters Foundation, India is the most dangerous country in the world for women.

However, even these figures only represent a fraction of the problem. An estimated 99 per cent of rape cases in India go unreported.

The stigma attached to rape creates innumerable hurdles in seeking justice. Often, this process traumatises the victims again, dissuading many from reporting the crime in the first place.

So, who is responsible for rapes?

It is men who rape and men who can collectively have the power to end rape…

This will only begin to happen when men cease blaming women for rape.

- Timothy Beneke wrote in Men on Rape: What They Have To Say About Sexual Violence (1983)

Over the years in the history of violence against women, women are just as vulnerable as before. Their daily lives are ruled by fear. There is nothing wrong or politically incorrect in saying that a woman who has not been molested, groped, stared at or has to go through the horror of being raped, is just lucky, especially in a country where rape cases rule the news every day.

When a woman is told to return home on time, it is the underlying fear of men and the fear of getting molested or rape. No curfew timing for men explains the reality.

The onus, as sad and unfair, lies on women to change their day-to-day behaviour to remain safe.

Still, men aren’t told to not rape.

And if they raise their voice against rape culture and fear of men, most men are quick to resort to #NotAllMen and whataboutery, completely undermining the fact that it is the social conditioning of men because of which this problem exists, and women have a fair share of their contribution to this.

Men who feel women should not be free to live as they wish aren’t abnormal or monsters, but a by-product of our own society. They are also well-educated, decent men trying to do their best for their families.

Most men, and also women, are of the view that a woman must be covered, look respectable, must not smoke or drink and under any circumstances, should not show flesh because it will only lead a man to have “bad thoughts” about her.

Going by these beliefs and logic, what was the fault of the eight-month-old infant who was raped by her teenage neighbour? Was she dressed inappropriately? Was she drinking or smoking? Or she wasn’t looking respectable enough?

The day society realises the truth behind the answers to these questions, there is hope. Otherwise, Indian women will continue to live in a world ‘of the men, by the men, for the men.’
