[NEWSWRAP] India Top News, December 4, 2019: From P Chidambaram’s bail to Virat Kohli’s latest feat

Indian skipper Virat Kohli on Wednesday dethroned Steve Smith as No. 1 batsman in the latest ICC Test Rankings. | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Scroll down for the biggest news events in India and more.

New Delhi: The middle of the week saw some major news events as Congress leader P Chidambaram was finally granted bail after being in custody for 106 days, Virat Kohli became the No. 1 Test batsmen in the world and Sundar Pichai was named as CEO of Alphabet. Here are the day’s biggest headlines:

P Chidambaram finally gets bail; Rahul Gandhi says ‘106-day incarceration was vengeful’

In a major relief to P Chidambaram, the former finance minister was on Wednesday granted bail by the Supreme Court in the INX media money laundering case. The SC has, however, imposed conditions on his bail: the ex-Union minister’s passport will remain seized, he will not be allowed to leave the country without permission, he will not give any interview to the media, and he will present himself for questioning in the case. Former party chief Rahul Gandhi has called Chidambaram's 106-day incarceration as vengeful and vindictive. Read More

ICC Test Rankings: Virat Kohli displaces Steve Smith as No. 1 batsman

Indian skipper Virat Kohli on Wednesday dethroned Steve Smith as No. 1 batsman in the latest ICC Test Rankings. Kohli, who smashed a memorable century in the historic pink-ball Test surpassed Smith in the list, who had a torrid two-match Test series against Pakistan while registering scores of four and 36 in the Brisbane and Adelaide Test respectively. Kohli now has 928 points under his belt whereas Smith’s points tally slipped to 923. Also entering the top 5 is David Warner following his thunderous 335 not-out, versus Pakistan, in the Adelaide Test. Read More

Sundar Pichai is new Alphabet CEO: Here’s a look at his net worth and journey so far

Google’s India-born chief executive officer (CEO) Sundar Pichai will become the head of Alphabet — the internet giant’s parent company. Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin stepped down and ceding management control to Pichai who will take over as CEO of both. However, Page and Brin will continue as members of the Alphabet’s board of directors and still together control a majority of voting power over company decisions. Read More

Cyberabad doctor rape-murder case: Special court being set up to fast track hearings

A special court is now being set up at Mahbubnagar District Court to hear the case. A special investigative team (SIT) formed at the direction of the Cyberabad Commissioner of Police managed to arrest four accused on suspicion. They later admitted to laying a trap for the victim. Read More

SHOCKING! Filmmaker Daniel Shravan advises women to 'carry condoms', 'cooperate with rapists'

At a time when the nation is shocked with horrifying rape and murder cases, filmmaker Daniel Shravan's remarks have angered the netizens to no end. The filmmaker recently took to social media and expressed his opinion on the rape cases that have concerned the entire nation. In a detailed post, that has now been deleted, the filmmaker said that instead of calling for help or dialling the police, "women should carry condoms for protection and cooperate with rapists, so as to avoid being murdered". In the same post, Shravan also wrote that the government should "legalise rape without violence scheme" and educate girls on rape. Read More

Chandrayaan-2 orbiter had found Vikram lander in September: ISRO Chief

After NASA released images of what could be potentially debris of the Vikram lander, ISRO chief tweeted as well. The tweet said, “Vikram lander has been located by the orbiter of Chandrayaan-2, but no communication with it yet.” On December 3, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had in a tweet said, “The Chandrayaan2 Vikram lander has been found by our NASA Moon mission.” Read More

The best weight loss drink to burn belly fat in winters is…

Drinking fresh juices can help speed up your weight loss and provide your body with numerous benefits. For instance, carrot juice is chock-full of nutrients and antioxidants that can prevent disease and help you drop pounds faster, particularly that stubborn belly fat. Carrots are also a great source of carotenoids that can help enhance your immune system and protect your body from disease. Here are some incredible reasons to add carrot juice to your winter diet, especially if you’re looking for a fast weight loss cleanse. Read More




