Hyderabad Gang Rape And Murder: US, UK Issues Travel Advisory On Women Safety In India

The United Kingdom has issued an advisory to its citizens who are planning to travel to India or are living in the country to be wary about their safety, especially of women.

The travel advisory which was issued on 19 November said that women travellers should exercise caution when travelling in India even if travelling in a group.

Reported cases of sexual assault against women and young girls are increasing; recent sexual attacks against female visitors in tourist areas and cities show that foreign women are also at risk.

"If you’re a woman travelling in India you should respect local dress codes and customs and avoid isolated areas, including beaches, when alone at any time of day," the advisory further said.

British citizens have also asked to “insist” on a police report in the case of rape or sexual assault while they are in India. The police are not bound to provide an English translation, but the survivor could get the statement read and explained in English before signing, it added.

The advisory also has listed several recent cases of sexual assaults on British citizens in India in recent times. "British women have been the victims of sexual assault in Goa, Delhi and Rajasthan and women travellers often receive unwanted attention in the form of verbal and physical harassment by individuals or groups of men. Serious sexual attacks involving foreign nationals have been reported. In April 2018, a Latvian woman was sexually assaulted and strangled in Thiruvallam, Kerala. More recently, in December 2018 a British woman was raped in Goa," it said.

It also has asked British travellers to avoid travelling alone on public transport, or in taxis or auto-rickshaws, especially at night. "If you’re the victim of abuse call 100 for police assistance or 1091 or 1096 if you’re the victim of sexual harassment," it added.

However, the latest travel advisory by the UK has nothing to do with the recent case of the gang-rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in the outskirts of Hyderabad. The advisory was posted on the British Government's website on 19th November, nearly a week before the shocking crime in Hyderabad happened.

Earlier, in March 2019, the US government’s India travel advisory- which places India at ‘level 2’ security that requires travelers to “exercise increased caution” – said, “Indian authorities report rape is one of the fastest growing crimes in India. Violent crime, such as sexual assault, has occurred at tourist sites and in other locations.”
