SAD to approach PM following Amit Shah’s remarks on Rajoana

Ludhiana: Hurt by home minister Amit Shah’s denial to the reports about commuting the death sentence to Balwant Singh Rajoana, a convict in assassination of former chief minister Beant Singh, Shiromani Akali Dal SAD will now be taking up the issue with Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

SAD spokesperson Daljit Singh Cheema, who was in city on Wednesday to attend the meeting of district Akali Dal leaders for deciding the names of delegates at district level.

While addressing the media persons Dr Cheema said the home minister’s statement in the Parliament was unfortunate as it was already announced that the death penalty of Balwant Singh Rajoana would be converted to life imprisonment. “On the occasion of 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Devji, name of Rajoana was also included in that list of prisoners who were being released.

“We have condemned the statement of Shah and will will take up the issue with Prime Minister Narendra Modi,” he said.

Cheema pointed out that Rajoana has been in jail for more than 30 years, whereas the cops who were involved in many killings were freed in less that two years. during the tenure.

He also advised the Congress MP Ravneet Bittu to give preference to the public issues.

Dr Cheema also condemned the announcement of Captain Amarinder Singh to distribute the smart phones to students of class XII on January 26, 2020. “In his tenure of more than 2 years, the Chief Minister could do nothing for the betterment of society and now he was trying to please masses with smart phones,” he said.

Meanwhile the district Akali Dal leaders conducted a meeting of workers. Recently party had conducted induction programme in state. The party claimed to have inducted as many as 2.71 lakh new members in the party. In the meeting the Akali Dal leaders also condemned the recent murder of former sarpanch and akali leader Dalbir Singh Dhilwan and announced to become part of state level protest in Batala.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
