Why justice to rape victims is still a far cry

The country witnessed unprecedented protests in December 2012 when a 23-year-old physiotherapy intern was brutally gang-raped and killed on a moving bus in South Delhi. The government was forced to enact new laws and announce systemic changes to ensure perpetrators get swifter and more stringent punishment, thereby creating a strong deterrence against such crimes.

Seven years on, little has changed. Thousands of cases await trial - and the numbers are spiralling by the day - because of gaping loopholes in India's criminal justice system like massive shortages of forensic labs, fast-track courts and investigators, despite tall promises made by the government, a Mail Today deep-dive has found. The revelation comes at a time there's a nationwide outrage after four men gang-raped and burnt alive a 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad last week.

SHOCKING NUMBERS

According to the latest National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) report, there were 33,658 reported cases of rape and sexual assault in India in 2017. About half of victims were from the 18-30 age group. Also, in 2017, the police in all states and UTs were investigating a total of 46,984 cases of rape. This indicates that several thousand cases were pending investigation from the previous years. In 2017, there were 331 cases across the country of rape and gang rape victims also being murdered.

The NCRB data also shows that 93.1% of all rape and sexual assault victims were attacked by known people, including family members, neighbours, friends, employers and romantic partners. In 2017, "strangers" were accused in 2,289 cases. However, the same NCRB report shows that only 43,197 persons were arrested for rape/sexual assault in 2017, and only 38,534 charge-sheeted and made to face trial.

As of March 2018, there were 1,66,882 cases of rape and those lodged under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act-2012 pending trial across the country. As of August 2019, POCSO cases alone stood at 1,60,989. Conviction rates remain low across the country due to the huge pendency of cases and delays in investigation and prosecution.

THE REASONS

According to Meera Bhatia, Amicus Curiae in the Delhi High Court, issues such as inadequate streetlights and policing, besides deserted road stretches, are as important as the need for social mindset change. "Mindset of people has to change. There is a need to educate people so that women can be safe. We need more fast-track courts. The investigation needs to be fast-tracked. They have to get the infrastructure in order."

"While I welcome harsher punishment for assault and rape, what we need is speedy justice and better investigation and prosecution," she said. DELHI-POST DEC 2012 After the 2012 case, the Delhi High Court had ordered setting up of more forensic labs as it was informed that reports, particularly DNA analysis, take two-to-three years. In addition, reports showed that mortuaries maintained by the government were in bad shape, with viscera and other evidence getting damaged due to improper maintenance.

Maalkhanas (evidence stores) in police stations were also found to be in a dilapidated condition. The court found that in several cases, DNA evidence, clothing and blood samples were contaminated by the time they reached forensic labs. Directions were issued by the court to the MHA, the Delhi Police and the Delhi government to improve the situation, but reports from various departments on steps taken show little movement beyond shuffling of files for "proposals" and "approvals".

The court was informed in 2014 that labs which have the necessary equipment are not there in Delhi, and only exist in Gujarat, Hyderabad and Maharashtra. As of November 2019, the Delhi government is still "setting up" an updated forensic lab in Rohini, though DNA analysis machines and other up-to-date technical equipment have been purchased.

On November 11, the High Court once again issued directions to the Delhi government, MCDs, and other departments to ensure there is monitoring of

'dark spots' and speedy replacement of streetlights. However, the basic issue remains policing, as a long-standing proposal to separate crime investigation teams from law and order work is still pending. Proposals have been sent to the MHA for recruitment of over 66,000 police personnel since 2011, but the files remain stalled, with only about 4,200 posts sanctioned in 2016-17 by the Centre.

COURTING TROUBLE

Despite multiple directions from the Supreme Court and High Courts, a scheme to set up 1,023 dedicated special fast-track courts to handle rape and POCSO cases is "under implementation", with most states having taken no steps. Information submitted to the Supreme Court by the Registry in November this year shows that Central funds have been released to only eight states: MP, Tripura, Rajasthan, Nagaland, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra and Odisha. However, information regarding "actual establishment" of these courts is "not available", even though the report has been compiled by direct orders to senior officials of High Courts.

There are 14 districts in India with more than 1,000 pending POCSO cases, according to the data submitted to the SC, with 10 in Uttar Pradesh alone. One district each in Delhi, West Bengal, Karnataka and Kerala hold the same dubious distinction of having 1,000+ POCSO cases pending. A total of 414 districts across the country have 100 to 1,000 pending POCSO cases.

According to the National Judicial Data Grid, more than 48% of all criminal cases get delayed because accused or witnesses do not show up for hearings, leading to repeated adjournments. Trials then remain stalled at the stage of examination of evidence. Insufficient forensic evidence and botched-up investigations due to poor training have also been seen by courts as reasons for trial delays.

Often, courts are forced to acquit accused due to lack of adequate evidence or witnesses, since viscera, blood, DNA samples and other evidence get damaged/destroyed due to improper handling and storage. With a huge number of assault cases having "known persons" as perpetrators, many end up in acquittals due to social or family pressure on victims or witnesses, who turn hostile during trials and change their statements.

NIRBHAYA FUND

According to information released by the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) in July 2019, less than 20% of funds earmarked for projects relating to women's safety, from the massive Rs 3,200-crore corpus of "Nirbhaya Fund", have been utilised since 2013. Several elaborate schemes like victim compensation, medical aid, one-stop crisis centers, emergency response, increasing police personnel, CCTV cameras and forensic labs have been introduced but very little work has actually gotten off the ground.

According to data, 18 out of the 36 states and UTs have given no information regarding use of funds sanctioned to set up an emergency response system. They include Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, UP, Maharashtra and West Bengal, all of whom see high numbers of sexual assault cases. Gujarat, which received Rs 1,187 crore in 2016-17, has also not shown any utilisation of the money.

The time taken by the states to set up victim compensation schemes and distribute funds has been very slow. Madhya Pradesh, which received Rs 2,180 crore in 2016-17, has distributed only Rs 483 crore. The state had come under harsh criticism from the apex court in February 2018, after it reported distribution of only Rs 1 crore to 1,951 victims.

Apart from the monitoring by the apex court, various High Courts, including Delhi, Bombay and Bangalore, have had to step in and pass orders to ensure that victims who manage to reach the doors of the judiciary are given necessary compensation and funding.

The situation is similar when it comes to one-stop crisis centers in states. MWCD data shows very few states have set up the required infrastructure. Four, including Maharashtra and Bihar, have shown zero expenditure to set up crisis centers.
