Unnao gang rape survivor set ablaze, in critical condition with 90% burns; all 5 accused arrested

The three accused men first poured kerosene on her and then set her ablaze. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The 23-year-old gang rape survivor was on her way to the court. She had been raped by the accused men in March this year. The accused were out on bail since the chargesheet in the case had been filed.

Lucknow: Even as protests across the country intensified seeking swift justice for the rape victim who was charred to death in Cyberabad, another tale of horror was reported from Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao. In a brazen attack on a gang rape survivor, the accused attacked her when she was on her way for the court hearing.

The accused set her on fire in broad daylight in order to take ‘revenge’ on the survivor for reporting the crime to the police. The five accused men first poured kerosene on her and then set her ablaze.

The 23-year-old survivor has been admitted to a hospital and doctors said that her condition remained critical due to 90 per cent burns.

Vikrant Veer, SP Unnao, said that the survivor had named five men and based on her statement, they had arrested three of the accused and were hunting down the remaining two. Later in the day, the two remaining accused were nabbed as well. The survivor had approached the court in March after she was gang-raped by the accused.

The accused intercepted her early in the morning. Two of the accused who had been jailed were out on bail as the charesheet in the case was filed. The rape survivor has been referred to the district hospital

The 23-year-old survivor could name the perpetrators of the crime to the police and the manhunt to nab the remaining culprits has been intensified.

The emboldened criminals had no regard for the law and took the horrendous step to take ‘revenge’ on the girl. They managed to flee the scene of crime despite it being early in the morning when there were other people on the road as well.

The incident again brings forth the issue of women’s safety being in tatters across the country and how little is being done to improve the situation.
