Unnao rape survivor set on fire by accused out on bail, shifted to Lucknow with 90% burns

A 20-year-old woman, who survived a brutal rape some time ago, was on Thursday set ablaze in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao by a group of men. The five men who had raped her in March this year, are suspected to be behind the latest attempt to kill her.

The rape accused and his friends took the woman outside her village and into the fields and doused her in petrol before setting her on fire. She was raped by the five men in March while police could manage to arrest only three of them and two others were still on the run.

Police rushed to the spot later and took the woman to a nearby government hospital where she has been admitted in a critical condition. She was later referred to a Lucknow hospital as her condition was grave.

The incident occurred at Sindupur village under Bihar police station area and has caused tension in the area.

Police said, "The victim has been referred to a hospital in Lucknow for better treatment. The victim had earlier filed a rape case and one of the accused in that case has also been rounded up".

Police have arrested all five men involved in the crime including the main accused Shivam Trivedi.

According to sources one of these five men is the son of the village pradhan against whom the woman had lodged a rape complaint. An FIR was lodged on March 4 by the woman who was set on fire on Thursday.

The woman was walking to the nearby railway station under when the group accosted her and took her to a field outside the village and poured petrol on her.

When police reached the spot they found her in a severely burnt condition while the accused men had fled by then.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has hit out at the UP government and accused it of lying about the law and order situation in the state.

In a tweet on the Unnao incident, Gandhi said, "Yesterday the Union home minister and the chief minister of UP lied about the law and order situation in the state. Seeing such incidents every day makes one angry. BJP leaders should also stop with the fake propaganda now."
