Rape survivor set ablaze in UP

Rape survivor set ablaze in UP



Unnao: A gang rape victim was set ablaze in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao district on Thursday allegedly by the same group of accused, who had attacked her in nine months back.

The minor rape survivor was admitted to a trauma centre in Lucknow with over 80 per cent burns.

The girl was set on fire by two of the rape accused, out on bail, along with their three associates. The two rape accused were released on bail just a day ago.

The incident took place in Hindu Nagar village under Bihar police station of Unnao where the minor had been gang raped in March.

The rape survivor was on her way to the hearing in her court case when she was accosted by the accused.

They took her to a secluded spot, poured kerosene and set her ablaze.

Seeing the girl go up in flames, panic stricken villagers informed the police who first took the rape survivor to the district hospital from where she was referred to the Trauma Centre of King Goerge Medical University in Lucknow.

In her statement the rape survivor has again named the two accused.

The police have arrested three persons, namely, Hari Shankar Dwiwedi, Shubham Dwiwedi and Shivam Dwiwedi. Two others are absconding.

DGP O.P. Singh described the incident as unfortunate and said that every effort would be made to save the victim.

Reacting to this fresh case of rape Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra hit out at Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath for lying through their teeth regarding the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh.

In a tweet, she said: “Seeing such incidents occur on a daily basis saddens ones heart. BJP leaders should now come out of their false propaganda.”

It may be recalled that last year, another Unnao minor rape case had hit national headlines.

A minor had been gang raped in 2017 reportedly by the BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his associates. The case was not registered. The rape survivor’s father was implicated in a false case and died of beating in police custody.

Following public outcry the Allahabad High Court had ordered a CBI probe and the BJP MLA Sengar was arrested.

In July this year the rape survivor’s car was mysterious hit by a truck, killing two of her aunts and seriously injuring her and her lawyer. Both were airlifted to AIIMS on court orders.

Following this the Supreme Court transferred the case to Delhi and ordered for a safe home for the rape survivor and her family. Sengar is now lodged in Tihar jail.
