Charred body of young girl found in West Bengal's Malda district, rape suspected

The spot where locals found the body | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights At the time it was found, the body was charred Locals spotted the body and alerted police Investigators are yet to confirm whether the girl was raped before her death

Kolkata: The charred body of a young girl was found this morning in a mango orchard in Malda district of West Bengal. Locals spotted the body and immediately alerted police officials who arrived at the spot and launched an investigation into the matter. The body has been sent for post-mortem and more details are awaited as this is a developing story.

Going by preliminary inputs, the charred body was recovered from Dhantala Kotwali which falls under the jurisdiction of Engrej Bazar police station. Within minutes of local spotting the body, a team of police personnel arrived at the spot and cordoned off the spot while collecting forensic evidence and sending the body for medical examination.

Reports also suggest that the girl may have been raped before her body was burnt but the police are yet to issue a clarification or statement in this regard. It is also unclear whether the girl was a local or was she murdered someplace else and her body brought to the spot in order to burn it. Malda deputy superintendent of police Prasanta Debnath said that the body was burnt with kerosene. He added that injury marks were also found on the body.

This is the second such case to have come to light from across the country within a fortnight. Just last week, the charred body of a 27-year-old veterinarian was found on the outskirts of Hyderabad city under the jurisdiction of Cyberabad police commissionerate. Four people were arrested and admitted to committing the heinous crime.

According to statements issued by investigators, the four men punctured a tire of the victim's scooter and offered to help. They then abducted her and took her to an isolated spot where they took turns raping her before wrapping her in a blanket and setting it ablaze. The charred body was recovered the next morning under a bridge by locals who immediately alerted the police. Another instance of similar brutality was reported from Buxar in Bihar earlier this week.
