Unnao rape survivor set afire, NCW seeks report, Yogi promises to bear medical expenses

A woman who was raped earlier this year, was set on fire by the same men out on bail on Thursday.

As outrage over the Unnao rape and attempt to murder started pouring in, Uttar Pradesh Police swung into action and arrested all five men who set the woman on fire. UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath has said the government will bear all expenses for treatment of the woman who has suffered 90 per cent burns.

Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath has taken note of the Unnao incident in which the 20-year-old woman was set ablaze in Bihar area of Unnao on Thursday by the same group of men who had raped her in March.

The chief minister has said treatment of the victim will be carried out on government expenses and strict action will be taken against the accused.

All five men, who were earlier booked for rape, have been arrested after they set the woman on fire on Thursday. Two of them were out on bail in the rape case that she lodged in March.

National Commission for Women (NCW) has taken suo motu cognizance of the case and wrote to Uttar Pradesh DGP, OP Singh, seeking a report on action taken at the earliest.

The woman, who survived the sexual assault a year ago, said in her statement on Thursday that she was on her way from her village in Unnao district to Rae Bareli, where the trial is going on in the rape case, when she was attacked and set ablaze.

Recalling the horrific incident while lying on a hospital bed in Lucknow, the woman told Sub Divisional Magistrate Dayashankar Pathak in a statement that she was going to Rae Bareli to pursue her case.

When she reached the Gaura turn near her home, Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam Trivedi and Shubham Trivedi attacked her and set her afire.

She alleged that Shivam and Shubham Trivedi had abducted and raped her in December 2018. However, the FIR was registered in March.

Aflame, she ran for a while before eyewitnesses saw her and informed police, which sent her to the Community Health Centre from where she was sent to the district hospital before being referred to Lucknow.
