Idiot claims women should 'accept rape' and carry condoms just in case

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

India is not a good place to be a woman, as evidenced by comments made by a film-maker.

A US government travel advisory published at the end of November warned “Indian authorities report rape is one of the fastest growing crimes in India and went on to say violent crime, including sexual assault, is rife in numerous tourist hotspots".

Just this week, a woman was gang-raped and then murdered by four men who then set her body on fire.

That is just the latest in a series of horrifying crimes against women and young girls in India that have made headlines around the world over the past few years .

(Image: Twitter)

It’s against that background a little-known Indian filmmaker named Daniel Shravan has posted an ill-judged comment on Facebook that has sparked anger across the globe.

In a now-deleted post he wrote: “The society as well as the government is frightening rapists. This is not the way. The girls above the age of 18 should be educated about rape.

“The girls should never deny sexual desires of men. Especially Indian girls should be aware of sex education like carrying condoms and dental dams after the age of 18,” he said.

The self-styled filmmaker – who has no IMDB or Wikipedia listings – reckons instead of objecting to rape, women should “readily” accept the situation.

“The rapists are not finding a way to fulfil their bodily desires and therefore, they get these killing thoughts. An evil thought provokes crime like murder. Better women should accept rape and not fight it,” he said.

(Image: Twitter)

He went on to say that it was foolish of the government to assume that laws against rape could deter the shocking prevalence of sexual crimes in India.

“It is foolishness of the government to think that killing Veerappan will control smuggling, killing Osama Bin Laden will control terrorism."

(Image: SIPA USA/PA Images)

“In the same way, the laws against rape can’t control rapes,” he concluded.

It’s no surprise that social media erupted in condemnation of Shravan’s victim-blaming philosophy.

(Image: Twitter)

Some people couldn’t believe that Shravan could genuinely hold these views, saying “Isn't it sarcasm?” and “I am hoping and assuming that no one can write this seriously.”

Meanwhile, numerous others slammed his outburst as a cheap publicity stunt from a no-name film director.

(Image: Twitter)

Others were more straightforward, with one shocked social media user simply replying “Is he absolutely, completely out of his mind? Or is he genuinely this horrible, horrible man? This is plain barbaric.”

(Image: Twitter)

A report from the Thomson Reuters Foundation earlier this year cited India as the most dangerous nation for sexual violence against women, as well as noting problems around human trafficking for domestic work, forced labor, forced marriage and sexual slavery, as well as numerous other issues.
