Unnao rape case victim walked over a km with 90% burns to seek help, call police

The Unnao rape victim who was burnt by five men on Thursday walked for over one kilometre after the crime and sought help from a person. Villagers in Sindupur, where she was burnt, told Aaj Tak that she walked up to a person who was working outside a house and sought help. The victim then herself called 112 and informed the police about the incident. The PRV and ambulance arrived only after the victim's call.

The victim has also given her statement to the magistrate. In her statement, the Unnao rape victim named five persons who burnt her. According to the victim's statement, the Unnao rape victim said she was beaten up by the five men who then stabbed her and burned her alive.

The incident occurred at Sindupur village under Bihar police station area in Unnao district. After the police reached the spot, the victim was shifted to a government hospital in Lucknow and is in a critical condition, the police said. Out of the five persons, including two who were accused in the rape case, the Unnao rape survivor has named, two have been arrested.

The woman was allegedly raped in March and the accused had later been granted bail, the police said. The woman was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli for a hearing in the rape case when she was attacked early Thursday. In March, the woman had filed a complaint against two men accusing them of raping her and also filming the act.

Meanwhile, the woman's family members have reached the civil hospital where the victim has been admitted. She was first admitted to a local hospital and later referred to a civil hospital in Lucknow where she has been admitted in a plastic surgery burn unit. The victim was admitted with 90 per cent burns, the doctors said.

Also Read | Woman's charred body found in Malda mango orchard, police suspect rape

PRIYANKA GANDHI TARGETS YOGI ADITYANATH GOVT

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra targeted the Uttar Pradesh government after the Unnao rape victim was burned alive by five men in Sindupur village. She also questioned the claims of Home Minister Amit Shah and Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on the law and order situation after a rape victim was set on fire in Unnao.

"Yesterday the home minister of the country and the Uttar Pradesh chief minister clearly lied that law and order in Uttar Pradesh has become better. Seeing such incidents everyday angers the mind. BJP leaders should now come out of false propaganda," Priyanka Gandhi said in a tweet.

ADITYANATH DIRECTS STATE OFFICIALS TO SUBMIT REPORT

Taking note of the incident where a rape survivor was set on file by five men outside her village, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath asked the state administration officials to visit the spot and submit a report by Thursday evening.

The chief minister also told officials that the woman, who suffered 90 per cent burns and is battling for life, should be given the best possible treatment. He also asked the police to ensure strict action against the guilty and ensure their conviction in court, officials said.

"The CM has directed the divisional commissioner and IG, Lucknow zone, to visit the spot and submit a report to him by the evening," said Additional Chief Secretary, Information and Home Department, Awanish Awasthi.
