Assaulted PMC officer demands action against Cong workers

Civic staff organise daylong strike even as attackers named in FIR are booked; leader Arvind Shinde gets anticipatory bail



A day after the attack on him, Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) additional commissioner Rajendra Nimbalkar has demanded that action should be taken against the Congress workers who assaulted him. While Congress leader Arvind Shinde and Ravindra Dhangekar and their aides have been booked by the cops for the attack, Shinde has been granted anticipatory bail. Demanding action against these leaders, PMC employees observed a daylong strike on Tuesday. Meanwhile, PMC commissioner Saurabh Rao has submitted a report on the controversial tender of water hyacinths to the Mayor.



Nimbalkar was attacked by the leaders of Opposition parties after an argument broke out among them. Following the attack, Nimbalkar filed a police complaint late in the night and the leaders have been booked under section 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) along with other sections. Condemning the attack, the employees of PMC chose to observe a daylong strike. The employees started a sit-in protest in the PMC premises which continued for almost 2.5 hours. It was only after the PMC commissioner requested them to return to work that the employees left the place. While they returned to their respective offices, the protest continued and the officials did not sign a single document through the day.



Speaking about their stand, Sunil Kadam, secretary, PMC Engineers’ Association said, “We have decided that we will not sign any document through the day. No official work will be done.”



The PMC additional commissioner said, “They’ve abused and hit me. So I have chosen to file an FIR. I hope that they are arrested. I want them to tender an apology publicly.”



PMC commissioner Saurabh Rao, however, claimed that the tender for water hyacinths, due to which the argument happened, was never approved. Stating that he is tabling the report in front of the Mayor regarding the issue, he said that “FIR has been filed and cops are investigating the case. I am in contact with Commissioner of Police and am taking follow up. Also as far as the issue of tender is concerned, while it is true that the tender bid is more than estimate, we have not accepted or have not given work order too. So the tender process has been cancelled. But we are still conducting an inquiry about this tendering process.”



Congress leader Arvind Shinde was granted anticipatory bail. Stating that the investigation is on, police inspector Appasaheb Waghmale said, “We have booked Congress leader Arvind Shinde, Ravindra Dhangekar and their 7 to 8 aides for the offence. The investigation is on and they will be arrested soon.”



^^67957035^^

Citizens suffer



Meanwhile, the citizens who visited the PMC office for their work had to suffer due to the strike. While the officers chose to allow only the emergency services to run, small work like accepting applications, complaints and the process for payments continued. Senior citizens who visited to file their complaints had to suffer due to the strike. Pramod Joshi, who had come to PMC around 11am had to wait for almost two hours for submitting his complaint.



He said “I didn’t know that there was a strike. So I came in the morning. I am waiting here since last two hours but no one has turned up to accept my application.Being a senior citizen it has become difficult for me to wait any longer.”



Another citizen, who too had come to lodge a complaint, said ,“They should’ve put up a board or should’ve given clarity on whether the officers would be working or not. We were initially told that the protest was only for few hours but later came to know that this is a day long strike.”


