Tasked with responsibility of Social Justice and Empowerment, Rajasthan’s minister blames TV, mobile for rape

People participate in a candlelight vigil to express solidarity with the veterinarian who was gang-raped and murdered near Hyderabad | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Rajasthan’s Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment Bhanwar Lal Meghwal blamed advent of mobile and TV for rape incidents Courts must give the verdict in rape cases within three months, said Bhanwar Lal Meghwal There is anger across the country over a rape incident in Telangana in which a 27-year-old veterinary doctor was gang-raped and killed

New Delhi: As India boils in anger over rape incidents, Rajasthan’s Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment Bhanwar Lal Meghwal on Thursday blamed television and mobile for the rise in ghastly crime.

While talking to reporters, Meghwal described rape as a heinous crime. However, he added that there are many reasons behind the crime, one of which is the advent of mobile and TV. “When there was no TV or mobile, there were no such incidents,” said the Congress MLA.

“The youth are committing the crime due to the influence of TV,” added Meghwal.

The minister added that courts must give the verdict in rape cases within three months and culprits should be hanged publicly.

The bizarre statement by Meghwal came amid protests across the nation over a rape incident in Telangana in which a 27-year-old veterinary doctor was gang-raped and killed near Outer Ring Road at Shamshabad on the outskirts of Hyderabad on November 27. Her charred body was found near Shadnagar town a day after she went missing.

The Cyberabad Police on November 29 arrested all the four accused.

As there was no let up in protests over Telangana incident, news came today that a rape survivor has been allegedly set on fire in Unnao (Uttar Pradesh) by five men.

The victim was admitted to a hospital in Lucknow with more than 90 per cent burns. She is being airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital in New Delhi.

The girl was set ablaze by the two rape accused, who were out on bail, along with their three aides when she was en route to Rae Bareli district for the hearing of her case.

All the accused are in custody.

Delhi Commission For Women chief Swati Maliwal has written a letter to Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, demanding death penalty to the accused within 30 days.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, meanwhile, lashed out at the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh over the law and order situation in the state.

"Yesterday the home minister of the country and the Uttar Pradesh chief minister clearly lied that law and order in Uttar Pradesh has become better. Seeing such incidents everyday angers the mind. BJP leaders should now come out of false propaganda," she tweeted.
