Unnao rape survivor set ablaze: The case so far

Today's incident

Survivor admitted to hospital

The case so far

National Commission for Women seeks report

CM

assures strict action

Why is Unnao in spotlight

(With agency inputs)

NEW DELHI: A 23-year-old rape survivor from Unnao in Uttar Pradesh was allegedly set ablaze early on Thursday morning by five men, including one who was accused in the crime, police said. The incident has once again sent shock waves across the country and questions are being raised about the safety and security of women. Here are the details of the case so far:The incident occurred at Sindupur village under Bihar police station area today. The woman was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli when she was attacked. They took her to a secluded spot, doused her with kerosene and set her ablaze. Seeing the girl in flames, panic stricken villagers informed the police who first took the rape survivor to the district hospital from where she was referred to the trauma centre of King Goerge Medical University in Lucknow. The five men arrested on charges of the assault on her life are Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi.The doctors said the condition of the woman, who was set on fire is very serious. "She has 90 per cent burn injuries and we are taking utmost care. A team of doctors are observing her," Dr Ashutosh Dubey, medical superintendent of the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Hospital, said. Asked about the possibility of shifting her to another hospital outside Lucknow, he said. "I can't say about this. Our doctors are on the job. It appears she was set afire after the five men, who have been arrested, allegedly sprinkled an inflammable substance on her," the doctor added.The woman was allegedly raped in March and the accused had later been granted bail, the police said. The victim had been gang-raped by the accused in December last year but the FIR was registered in Rae Bareli only in March this year on the intervention of a local court. Of the five, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi are accused in the case and are out on bail.The NCW has sought a detailed action taken report from the Uttar Pradesh police after the rape survivor was set ablaze today. In a letter to DGP O P Singh, NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma also sought a detailed report regarding the number of reported heinous crimes committed against women and bail granted in such cases in the last three years. Sharma said the commission is "disturbed" by the rise in crimes against women in the state despite the enactment of several laws to safeguard the rights of women.Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath has directed senior police and state administration officials to visit the spot and submit a report by the evening. The chief minister also told officials that the woman should be given the best possible treatment. He also asked police to ensure strict action against the guilty and ensure their conviction in court, officials said.Unnao has been in the spotlight already after a young woman alleged that she had been raped in 2017, when she was 17 years old. The main accused in the case is former BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar.Another similar case was recently reported from Sambhal district of the state. The woman later succumbed in a hospital in Delhi.
