When It Takes A Brutal Rape For Police To Amp Up Security For Women

The brutal gangrape of a 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad threw the nation into a vortex of debates when it came to women's safety. From our living rooms, coffee shops to roadside stalls, conversations have been revolving around just one thing.



Yet again, candle-light vigils were held, people started drawing parallels with the 2012 Delhi rape case, and anger spewed over the culprits from all quarters.

Many demanded that the accused be lynched and hanged in public. It's the sort of public outrage that the country has, sadly, seen one too many times.

From blame-games to ridiculous solutions and victim-shaming, it all comes to the fore with the death of a woman at the hands of monsters.

Not to forget, police across the country amped up their security strategies for women's safety. Really? Does it always have to take a woman to be raped, beaten and burnt alive for the police to come up with a 'quick response service'?

Recently, Ludhiana police decided to offer rides to women between 10 PM to 6 AM to ensure they safely return home at night Following their footsteps, Nagpur Police decided to to do the same, offer free rides to women between 9 PM to 5 AM.

Well, great job police force!

But, given the rate at which rapes are reported in our country, doesn't this have to be a default facility for women? Why does it have to make headlines?

Let's take a moment here and review the way police force responded to the incidents from the Hyderabad rape to the more recent rape in Odisha.

PTI/Picture For Representation

After the veterinarian's rape in Hyderabad, the police actually refused to take immediate action when approached by the girl's distraught family. The police, in fact, said that she might have 'eloped'.

How did they have the gall to even say that?

The girl's family had to run from pillar to post in order to lodge a complaint. Why? Because the cops took time to determine if the case was within their jurisdiction. As if that was a priority...

What's worse is that Hyderabad Police launched a 14-tip advisory for women or girls on how to be safe while travelling. The steps, titled "a very important message to all women and girls", was released by Commissioner of Police and IPS, Anjani Kumar was filled with multiple loopholes.

Hold up, that's not all. A woman was allegedly gang-raped by two persons including a policeman inside a police quarter in Odisha's temple town of Puri. The victim, during the sexual assault, could grab the wallet of one of the accused and the photo-identity card and his Aadhaar card was recovered from it, police said.

Shutterstock/Picture For Representation

So far, the police identified one of the accused whose cards were found. He is a police constable and has been arrested and suspended.

While on the one hand, police are coming up with amazing solutions to safeguard women, on the other they themselves are the perpetrators.

Instead of illogical responses from lawmakers and police officers, the focus must be on laid on eradicating rotten misogyny that's rooted in society. None of the security strategies to prevent sexual violence will work unless mindsets change. That's the need of the hour!
