After Ludhiana, Nagpur Police Offers Women Safe Ride Home In Police Vehicles From 9 PM To 5 AM

Yet another shocking incident has shaken the entire country to its core. Hearing about how brutally the 26-year-old Hyderabad girl was raped and burnt to death has sent shivers down our spine. After Nirbhaya, certain amendments were made to improve safety for women but after almost seven years, another act of brutality negated any and every change that was made.

A vet by profession, she was trying to make her way back home when she realised her scooter's tyre was flat. It was later found out that the perpetrators deflated it on purpose, which gave them the opportunity to grab her and rape her, where even her screams weren't audible.

© Thinkstock Getty Images

While, a lot of women are demanding justice for such a serious crime, many are even demanding safer spaces so they can carry forth their lives in a normal manner, even while sexual predators are out lurking around different cities. Recently Ludhiana police decided to offer free rides to women between 10pm to 6am, if they are working late or out of the house at wee hours in the morning. The rides offered will ensure they safely return back to their homes. And now, Nagpur police too has made provisions to ensure women are dropped home safely from 9pm to 5 am, if they're out of their houses for work or any other commitment.

© Twitter

The way to approach the cops is simple. As per directive, the woman has to dial '100' and ask for a ride back home, between the allotted timings and if she doesn't have adequate and safe transport to return home. The news reports suggest that a beat cop will show up and escort the woman home safely. For some extra added safety measures, a female police officer will also be present in the vehicle to escort the lady home.

Police Commissioner Bhushan Kumar told a popular publication that this initiative will help build the shaken confidence of a lot of women, after the terrible Hyderabad incident.

© Twitter

With Nagpur second in row in assisting women get to their destinations safely at night, we feel more cities should follow suit.

Women are scared and relentlessly hopeless where their safety is concerned. Their confidence is shaken and the only way to build it is to have responsible watchdogs in society which will help overcome the fear that has gravely settled deep within the psyche of each and every woman.
