Safety @ 24x7

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Manpriya Singh

When it comes to women’s safety, where do we begin from? The dark alleys, the criminals, the victims, the society or the system itself? It’s a tough one. We can start with the sixth sense, as powerful a preventive tool as overlooked. On a date, at a party, at work, on the streets, heck, even in the car, or while stopping at traffic lights, every point entails a different set of safety measures. We didn’t need another rap on our shoulders, but unfortunately it came in the form of recent Ludhiana gang-rape case, to take a 360-degree perspective of women’s safety.

Be wary Nilambari Jagadale, SSP, Chandigarh

For a girl who has been a regular with karate since the age of 12, Senior Superintendent of Police, UT Chandigarh, Nilambari Jagadale certainly practices before she preaches self-defence to all the girls out there. But when it comes to women’s safety, she believes all the possible and even imaginable angles must be taken into consideration. “Let’s start with preventive measures. One needs to sometimes step out at odd hours, which places all the more emphasis on preventive measures. Avoid secluded places, isolated routes; instead find alternate routes even if they are long. Avoid taking a cab or an auto, which is already occupied by two or three men. However, if you must then immediately before hiring take a picture of the driver and the number plate and send it to your near and dear ones. Pretend to be talking loudly on the phone that you’ve sent the picture and details.”

She adds, “Next are the measures when you feel you might get into trouble. Every girl must learn self-defence techniques. That increases your confidence. The offender also has apprehensions before committing the crime. The moment they sense resistance from the girl, half of them flee the spot.” The responsibility just doesn’t end at averting the crime. “God forbid, just in the case the crime has happened. Then don’t ever stay silent. Do report the crime. Because if you stay quiet out of societal pressure then that gives confidence to the accused to further commit that crime on 10 other women. There is no shame on reporting it and the identity of the victim is kept strictly confidential.”

She adds, ‘Last but not the very least, always rely on your sixth sense.”

Overpower the criminal Bharti, sub-inspector, Punjab police

To nab a criminal is one thing, to weed out a crime quite another. Bharti believes that women must be given compulsory self-defence classes. If a woman is accompanied all the time, then one odd time she has to step out alone, which is when she will feel, look and appear vulnerable. “Which is why it is very important to be strong; both mentally and physically. This mindset will help you overpower the culprits at the spot of crime. Keep the helpline numbers handy and seek help the first instance you sense danger.”

Online web Shweta Ahluwalia, entrepreneur

Driving back home from her workshop at 1.30 am is a given for city-based Shweta B. S Ahluwalia, who runs her own design company Saffron Designs. Odd hours, night shifts, traveling alone, you name it and she has done it. “There are a few things I always ensure. I always take premium cab services with the same driver, whenever travelling out of station; it costs a little extra but is worth it. Then, the moment I set off from the workshop at night, I always make a call to my brother and sister abroad, and stay on the phone with them till the time I have moved my car inside the house and shut the gate. I also don’t befriend acquaintances or strangers on Facebook or social media and post check-ins. Never take the same route twice; never go for a jog or anywhere at the same time if possible. All these things collectively help.”

Rely on technology Rashmita Kanojia, student, Bachelor’s of Fine Arts

For a girl who always carries a pepper spray in her bag, she must be taking her safety quite seriously. And that is something that all the girls need to do. Opines Rashmita Kanojia, “That’s’ not it, I also carry a multi-purpose Swiss knife. I don’t know how much it will actually be instrumental in protecting me, but it gives me confidence and that really matters. And if I am driving alone by car, then I also carry a big stick with me.”

She adds, “But these days, once can safely rely on technology for safety. The mobile location services are a boon and so are the several apps that ensure women’s safety.”

Be Smart

For the uninitiated, there is a pan-India helpline number for women in distress; one specifically for children, students and senior citizens, and one on anti-stalking and obscene calls, apart from of course the Police Control Room. That’s not where the assistance ends. Personal safety apps that ensure live streaming like bsafe (wherein your friends can watch you on the map when walking back home) or the one that updates your friends and family about your location, like Women Safety, there are many safety tools available. Most of the apps come with a few primary features, starting with one that sends out location to chosen numbers, with an SOS button.

manpriya@tribunemail.com
