Unnao rape victim thrashed, stabbed, burnt alive: Haunting details of the case

The Unnao rape survivor, who has suffered 90 per cent burns in the incident, being shifted to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. (Photo: PTI)

The Unnao rape victim, who has been battling for life with 90 per cent burns, was beaten up, stabbed and then set ablaze by five men on Thursday. The incident happened when the 23-year-old Unnao rape victim was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli to attend a hearing in the rape case. The five men also included the two who were accused of raping the woman in December.

All the five accused - Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi - involved in the attack on the Unnao rape case victim were arrested hours after the incident. The prime accused has been identified as Shubham Trivedi.

Meanwhile, the Unnao rape victim, who has suffered 90 per cent burns in the incident, has been airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi for her treatment. She was earlier admitted to the plastic surgery burn unit in Lucknow.

THE CASE

In her statement to the magistrate, the Unnao rape survivor alleged that Shivam and Shubham Trivedi had abducted and raped her in December 2018. She had filed a case against the two in March this year. Shubham, who was in jail in connection with the rape case, was released on bail on November 30, 2019.

Immediately after securing bail, Shubham started following and threatening her. The victim and her family visited the Bihar police station close to the Sindupur village in Unnao several times but the police turned a deaf ear to the complaints.

AFLAME, VICTIM RAN FOR OVER 1 KM FOR HELP

The victim was on her way to a Rae Bareli court when she was abducted by the five men. Villagers in the Sindupur village told Aaj Tak that they saw the victim running towards the village while she was still ablaze.

Aflame, the victim ran for over a kilometre for help before eyewitnesses saw her. The woman was helped by a man who was working outside a house in the village. The victim also called 112 from someone's mobile phone and informed the police about the incident.

The PRV and ambulance arrived only after the victim's call. The woman was first taken to a local hospital but later shifted to Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (Civil) Hospital in Lucknow with 90 per cent burn injuries.

Ravindra, who sitting by the roadside in the village, told reporters that he was so frightened when he saw the woman running towards him that he actually went to pick up his stick.

"It was only when she came nearer that I found out she was severely burnt," he said. She had been calling out for help," he added.

Also Read | Unnao rape victim set on fire: Eyewitness recalls horrific sight

The victim has also given her statement to the magistrate. In her statement, the Unnao rape victim named five persons who burnt her. She told the magistrate that she was beaten up by the five persons, stabbed and then burned alive by them.

Investigating police team in Unnao arrested four accused from their homes in the same village where they were sleeping and the fifth accused surrendered at the Bihar police station.

ADITYANATH DIRECTS DGP TO CLOSELY INVESTIGATE MATTER

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has directed Director General of Police (DGP) to closely investigate the matter. Yogi Adityanath also directed senior police and state administration officials to visit the spot and submit a report by the evening.

He also asked the police to ensure strict action against the guilty and ensure their conviction in court.

"The CM has directed the divisional commissioner and IG, Lucknow zone, to visit the spot and submit a report to him by the evening," Additional Chief Secretary, Information and Home Department, Awanish Awasthi said.

UNNAO RAPE VICTIM IN SERIOUS CONDITION

The Unnao rape survivor who was set on fire by five men on Thursday morning has 90 per cent burn injuries and her condition is "very serious", doctors attending on her said.

"The condition of the girl who was set on fire and bought here at 10 AM is very serious. She has 90 per cent burn injuries and we are taking utmost care. A team of doctors are observing her," Ashutosh Dubey, medical superintendent of the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Hospital, said.

(With inputs from Himashu Mishra in Delhi)
