Unnao case: Thrashed, stabbed, set ablaze, rape survivor runs for help in a ball of fire

The spot where the rape survivor was set abalze

The spot where the rape survivor was set ablaze

Shocker! Unnao gangrape survivor set ablaze by accused who was out on bail

UNNAO: In a rerun of the Hyderabad horror, a 23-year-old gang-rape survivor was stabbed multiple times, doused in petrol and set ablaze by five men, including two of her alleged rapists, in her village in Unnao district early Thursday morning while she was on her way to meet her lawyer.The girl, who was thrashed with sticks before she was stabbed brutally, ran through the morning mist in a ball of fire, screaming for help before an eyewitness called up the police. She suffered 90% burns and was shuttled from a primary health centre to Unnao district hospital and then to a government hospital in Kanpur, before being rushed to Civil Hospital, Lucknow. Later, she was airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi.The horrific crime comes a week after two truck drivers and their helpers gang-raped a veterinary doctor on the outskirts of Hyderabad and killed her before setting her body on fire. Unnao had hit national headlines earlier this year when another gang-rape survivor from the district met with an accident near Rae Bareli when she was travelling with her lawyer and aunts. MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar is the main accused in that case.Amid outrage sweeping the nation, with MPs in Rajya Sabha expressing anguish at the horrific crime, the girl was air-lifted in the evening to Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital after her condition worsened. In a statement before a magistrate, she identified all the five attackers, including the two men who had allegedly raped her in December last year. Among the attackers were the fathers of the two men.The survivor, who is from a backward caste, was on her way to take a train to Rae Bareli to meet her lawyers when she was intercepted by the five accused at 4.15am. The girl was just 300 metres from the railway station when she was brutally attacked. One of the rapists who attacked her, Shivam Trivedi, was released on bail in the rape case just five days ago.Shivam and his neighbour Shubham had allegedly gangraped the girl on December 12 last year, but police filed an FIR after nearly four months despite the survivor approaching them a day after the crime. Hours after the horror unfolded on Thursday, all the five accused were arrested from their homes. The woman identified her assailants as Shivam, his father Harishankar, Shubham, his father Kishore Trivedi and their accomplice Umesh Bajpai. A case against them has been lodged at a police station in Rae Bareli.A guard working with a gas agency who saw the girl engulfed in flames told TOI: “Despite the fire, she was conscious and identified herself. Then I dialled 112, put the phone on speaker mode and made her talk to police control room staff.”When questioned by mediapersons on how Shivam had got bail in the rape case, UP DGP O P Singh said: “It’s a systemic failure.”
