UP gang rape: Unnao gang rape survivor in hospital with 90% burns

National commission for women takes cognisance of #Unnao incident https://t.co/kaWm6FmWji — TOI Lucknow News (@TOILucknow) 1575535046000

(With inputs from ANI)

Shocker! Unnao gangrape survivor set ablaze by accused who was out on bail

LUCKNOW: The 23-year-old rape survivor from Unnao who was set ablaze on Thursday morning has sustained 90% burns. The survivor is currently undergoing treatment at Lucknow's SPM Civil Hospital in its 'plastic surgery burn unit'. She has been shifted to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi.Additional superintendent of police (traffic) Purnendu Singh had confirmed that air ambulance from Delhi would arrive at 6.30pm. The route of green corridor was also prepared.Meanwhile, Praveen Kumar, IG law & order told ANI, "All the five accused have been arrested. The case is being handled under Inspector-General of police (Lucknow range). Strict action will be ensured through fast track investigation and prosecution.""She has sustained 90% burn injuries all over her body. The next 48-72 hours are critical for the survivor as she has to be saved from a state of shock," an official said."She is in a restless and irritate state at the moment due to pain and her burn injuries. We are trying our best to manage the pain with antibiotics and sedatives. This is a crucial time for her survival," said Dr Pradeep Tiwari, under whose case she has been put at the hospital.Hospital director also told TOI that the girl though in immense pain and restlessness is not unconscious."When she was brought in, I asked her how she was and she replied to me. She said she was in pain which was a little better at that time because of the pain medication," said Dr Negi.Dr Negi also informed that the first 72 hours are critical for a burn patient due to a state of shock. After this, there are chances of contracting infection and septicemia against which a burn patient has to be saved.The rape survivor was set ablaze after being doused in kerosene in a village in Unnao. The victim was rushed to district hospital and then referred to Lucknow. She has told the police that she was set on fire by two accused who had raped her a year ago and were presently on bail. They were accompanied by three of their associates.The victim was going to Raebareli with her parents to pursue the rape case at 4am on Thursday when she was attacked. The victim side had got the case transferred to Raebareli.
