Panipat Twitter review: Fans hail Sanjay Dutt and Arjun Kapoor's performance, but film gets mixed response

Here's how the audience is reacting to Arjun Kapoor's Panipat

Key Highlights Ashutosh Gowariker's ambitious project, Panipat finally releases today The film stars Sanjay Dutt, Arjun Kapoor and Kriti Sanon in pivotal roles The film has been receiving mixed reviews from the audience

The internet was set ablaze with Ashutosh Gowariker released the trailer of his ambitious project, Panipat. Headlined by Sanjay Dutt, Arjun Kapoor, Kriti Sanon, Mohnish Bahl, and Kunal Kapoor, the film instantly created a stir for its historical premise. But above it all, fans were excited to see yesteryear divas Zeenat Aman and Padmini Kohlapure back on the silver screen. The stars have been going all out with the promotions of the film that has finally released today.

The film dates back to the 18th century with the Marathas emerging as the most powerful empire. But with Afghan ruler Ahmad Shah Abdali wanting to take over India, it's Sadashiv Rao Bhau who is ordered to stop the invasion leading to the Third Battle of Panipat.

Cine-goers have already been taking to social media to share their reviews and thoughts on the film. While some have loved the film, the others only went on to appreciate the performances.

Check out all the Twitter reactions to Panipat here:

It's fab!!!!

Such an amazing movie. The first part is bit lengthy but the second part covers that . @kritisanon you're fantastic, you're a gem. Congratulations! #PanipatReview — Ashwin Harikrishnan (@ashwin_k_hari) December 5, 2019

Never Judge a Book by It's cover...Amazing Arjun#PanipatReview — _Shubham_thakur_ (@Shubham94458590) December 5, 2019

#PanipatReview :

One Word- Average.

Why- Momentum is the biggest strength of any War film and #Panipat lacks it.

Last 40 mins take you on a ride of Biggest On Screen Spectacle of the year but the Negative Climax is damn too predictable. Ashutosh could have made it better.

5/10* pic.twitter.com/9ATSRJERlF — $@M (@SAMTHEBESTEST) December 5, 2019

RECOMMENDED

GO, HAVE A LOOK AT PROUD HISTORY !!

Scaled Drama, Fantastic Performances & Direction of @AshGowariker Sir @duttsanjay MIND-BLOWING @arjunk26 SURPRISINGLY SUPERB.

Decently done VFX makes it even more Watchable

Rating's (4/5) #PanipatReview ! pic.twitter.com/3f5mvrjC2A — REAL BOXOFFICE (@teamrb_) December 5, 2019

Just watched #Panipat

And my #panipatreview

Is CRAP

Don't watch this crap movie in dreams also!!

WASTE of TIME, WASTE of MONEY#ArjunKapoor wahiyat acting — Ranu Mondal (@imRanuMondal) December 5, 2019

In a recent interaction with ETimes, Sanjay went on to speak about his role in the film. He revealed that he had to let go off his trademark style of walking and only credits the director of the film for helping him prepare for this role. He goes on to add, "The turmoil within his tribe, his entry into India and the realisation that he was fighting a battle he shouldn't be, were interesting to depict."

Sanjay Dutt will next be teaming up with on-screen Sanju, Ranbir Kapoor for Shamshera. Also starring Vaani Kapoor, the film is helmed by Karan Malhotra. He will also be teaming up with Yash for the sequel of hit Kannada film, KGF. Sanjay will also be seen in Bhuj: The Pride of India.

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on entertainment.
