'My daughter's soul at peace', says Telangana doctor's father; girl students applaud police move

Police at the spot in Chetanapally | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights All of the four accused were shot dead about 100 metres from the spot where police found the victim's body "I thank Telangana government and police for this encounter," said the victim's father A bus full of young girls can be seen applauding the police while passing by the spot in Chatanpally

Hyderabad: Earlier this morning, the Cyberabad commissioner of police VC Sajjanar confirmed that all of the four accused in the horrific rape-murder of a veterinarian, were shot dead during a failed escape bid. The 27-year-old victim's charred body was found in Chatanpally near Shadnagar in Telangana on November 28.

Following the incident, the girl's father expressed his gratitude towards the Telangana government and police department for "speedy justice". He further told a news agency, "My daughter's soul must be at peace now." Her sister also reacted to the police shooting the four accused dead by saying this "justice in record-time will set an example."

The bodies of the four accused have been taken to the Mahbubnagar district hospital for post-mortem. Preliminary inputs suggest that the police who got custody of the accused of seven-days starting Thursday took them from the high-security Cherlapally jail to Tondupally toll plaza in Ranga Reddy district which is where they had abducted the victim from. The purpose of this was to recreate the events of the night of November 27 when she was gang-raped and murdered.

A police official familiar with the incident has told media outlets that the four accused were trying to escape. One of them signalled to the others and reached for a policeman's weapon when the cops shot all four dead at Chatanpally near Shadnagar town. This happened sometime between 3 AM and 6 AM in the wee hours of Friday.

#WATCH Hyderabad: Reaction of girl students when news of encounter of the accused in murder and rape of woman veterinarian broke out pic.twitter.com/z238VVDsiC — ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

Meanwhile, some residents and students from Hyderabad were seen rejoicing while passing the spot in Chatanpally where the police encounter took place. A bus of young female students passing the spot can be seen shouting in joy as a gesture of appreciation for Telangana police.

The mother of Nirbhaya, the young woman who was gang-raped in Delhi in 2012 also reacted to the developments and applauded Telangana police for their actions. Her father also congratulated Telangana police for killing the four accused in the rape-murder case that has left the country outraged.

On the night of November 27, the doctor was abducted and taken to a secluded spot by the four accused where they took turns raping her. They then murdered her and wrapped her body in a blanket before setting it ablaze. The matter came to light the next morning when locals spotted her charred body under a bridge and alerted police. All of the accused were arrested within 24 hours.
