Day after being airlifted to Delhi, Unnao rape survivor's condition 'extremely critical'

The survivor is being treated at Delhi's Safdarjung hospital (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The accused were out on bail when they attacked the survivor She was airlifted to Delhi with 90% burns on Thursday A dedicated ICU unit has been set up at Safdarjung hospital for the survivor

New Delhi: Doctors at the Safdarjung Hospital in the national capital have said that the condition of the rape survivor under their care is 'extremely critical'. The 23-year-old survivor was airlifted to Delhi from Unnao in Uttar Pradesh after she was thrashed and set ablaze by the accused rapists while on her way to the court on Thursday. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

She was airlifted to Delhi with 90 per cent burns on Thursday evening after doctors at the district hospital in Unnao referred her to the national capital. The sister of one of the accused, in a statement to media outlets today, has demanded a CBI probe into the matter at a time when repeated instances of sexual assault against women are being perpetrated in broad daylight across the country.

The incident reportedly took place on Thursday morning when the survivor was on her way to the courthouse. She was intercepted by the five accused who poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze. Inspector general of police (law and order) Praveen Kumar said that all of the five accused were arrested on the same day and that the matter is being investigated on a fast-track basis.

A fresh special investigation team (SIT) was constituted to probe the incident with an assistant superintendent of police level officer leading it, Lucknow divisional commissioner Mukesh Meshram had added. The accused were able to attack the survivor since they were out on bail because of a delay on the part of the police to file a chargesheet in the rape case.

After she was airlifted to Delhi, a green corridor was made by Delhi police to allow her ambulance to reach Safdarjung hospital from the airport, a distance of 13 kilometres in merely 18 minutes. Head of the Burn and Plastic Surgery at Safdarjung Hospital, Dr Shalab Kumar had told media outlets that a dedicated ICU centre is being set up at the facility to treat the survivor.
