Russian malware suspects charged

WASHINGTON – The U.S. Justice Department unsealed charges Thursday against two Russian men in what authorities say was one of the worst computer hacking and bank fraud schemes of the past decade.

Maksim V. Yakubets, 32, of Moscow and Igor Turashev, 38, of Yoshkar-Ola, Russia, were charged in the 10-count indictment filed in federal court in Pittsburgh. The charges include conspiracy, computer hacking, wire fraud and bank fraud. The two men have not been arrested and their whereabouts are unknown.

Prosecutors say the charges stem from the creation of malware known as “Bugat,” which was designed to automate the theft of confidential personal and financial information, including online banking logins, from infected computers. The malware, they say, was specifically designed to defeat antivirus software.

58 migrants drown in Atlantic Ocean

At least 58 migrants drowned in the Atlantic Ocean off Mauritania after their boat capsized Wednesday.

At least 83 survivors swam through rough seas to shore, most of them from Gambia. They had been trying to reach Spain's Canary Islands but diverted toward Mauritania as fuel and food ran low, the U.N. migration agency said.

The boat, which was carrying an estimated 150 migrants from West Africa, including children, had tossed on the Atlantic Ocean for a week.

Death toll at 28 in Burundi landslides

At least 28 people have died in landslides in Burundi and that toll could grow with many people missing, local authorities said Thursday, as East Africa continued to struggle with weeks of unusually heavy rains.

Several countries in East Africa, including Somalia, Kenya, Uganda and Djibouti, have reported deadly flooding and landslides in recent weeks of heavy rains, with more in the forecast for the region.

North Korea calls Trump 'dotard'

North Korea threatened Thursday to resume insults of U.S. President Donald Trump and consider him a “dotard” if he keeps using provocative language, such as referring to its leader as “rocket man.”

Choe Son Hui, the first vice foreign minister, issued the warning on state media days after Trump spoke of possible military action toward North Korea and revived his “rocket man” nickname for North Korean ruler Kim Jong Un.

Choe said Trump's remarks “prompted the waves of hatred of our people against the U.S.” because they showed “no courtesy when referring to the supreme leadership of dignity” of North Korea.

Woman set afire on way to court

Five men poured fuel on a woman, lit her on fire and left her to burn early Thursday on a desolate road in the Indian district of Unnao, police said. She was traveling to a court hearing in her rape case when she was attacked.

Police arrested five men, including the two men who allegedly raped and exploited her last year. The Indian Express reported the woman, 23, is in critical condition at a hospital in Lucknow.
