Tanushree Dutta seeks ACB enquiry against police officers who filed B Summary in her case

Actor Tanushree Dutta lodged a protest petition before the Andheri magistrate court against the B Summary report filed by Mumbai police in her case.

The police had registered a sexual assault but in June, the police filed a B Summary report in court. A B summary report is filed by police when they do not find any evidence against the accused to go ahead and file charge sheet or conduct a trial in the case.

In the petition filed by advocate Nitin Satpute on behalf of Dutta, it is mentioned that there are many witnesses who have given statements in support of Dutta's case but all of it have been ignored. The petition states, "Shyney Shetty, Assistant Director of film HORN OK Please" was called to the police station for the investigation purpose. Police had recorded her statement partly, told her to leave the police station as they do not have time to complete her statement, due to bandobast. Thereafter IO (investigating officer) has not taken any pain to recall and complete her statement."

The protest petition states that there were names of many people given to police to record their statements but the police never called them. On such case was that of journalist Wasim who according to Satpute had given many interviews to media about what had happened on that unfateful film shoot but was never called by police. The police according to Satpute has prepared "fake and false statement" of these two witnesses - a hairdresser and a spot boy who are "not aware police has prepared their statement," says the petition about the two "eyewitnesses" to the incident in 2008.

Satpute added that Dutta wanted to give more information about the case; she wanted to record her further supplementary statement. For this Satpute himself had tried to touch base with the police officers bit got no response from investigating officer or even his senior.

Satpute also alleged that many of the witness statement recorded by police "appears to be stereotyped or cyclostyled statement, word to word and time to time similar contents appears from non-supporting witness."

With this, the protest petition says that "it appears that there is big gratification and corruption has taken place for not investigating the crime. Therefore direction for registration of FIR and investigation against Investigation officer is required to be done by the Anti-Corruption Bureau."

With this, the petition seeks that the B Summary report of Mumbai police be rejected and that the investigation officer be changed.

Actor Tanushree Dutta had alleged that she had been sexually assaulted by actor Nana Patekar in 2008 on the sets of film Horn Ok Please. During the #metoo movement, a case was registered by her at Oshiwara police station in Mumbai.

ALSO READ | Tanushree Dutta vs Nana Patekar sexual harassment case: Two witnesses say actors were several feet apart

ALSO READ | Nana Patekar on Tanushree Dutta's allegations: Will see what I can do legally

ALSO READ | Tanushree Dutta calls Ajay Devgn show-off and hypocrite for working with Alok Nath in De De Pyaar De
