4 Hyderabad rape-murder accused killed, chorus of support for cops: 10 points

One of India's most gruesome rape cases in recent memory reached a stunning and unexpected denouement this morning, when it emerged that the four young men arrested last week had been killed by police in the Hyderabad area.

The police said the accused -- all lorry workers in their early twenties -- were killed in an encounter when they tried to flee a crime scene reconstruction. But a number of public figures have questioned the circumstances of the operation, which took place at dawn on Friday more than a week after the crime.

India erupted in fury last week as details of the gang rape and murder of a young woman, a diligent young veterinarian working in a remote village near Hyderabad. Family members say they are happy her alleged rapists have been killed.

Here's the story so far, in 10 points.

1. Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu were accused of dragging the young veterinarian, known now as Disha, out of public view before raping and murdering her. This happened last Wednesday. The accused were arrested and kept in judicial custody in a Hyderabad jail.

2. On Friday, news broke that all four men had been killed in what the police said was an encounter. Many civilians and public figures reacted with jubilation, claiming, for example, that fear of such police action could be a deterrent. "Der aaye, durust aaye [It took time, but it happened in the end]," said Samajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan. Earlier this week, she had said in Parliament that people like the accused in the Hyderabad rape case should be lynched in public.

#WATCH Samajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan on accused in the rape and murder of the woman veterinarian in Telangana killed in an encounter: Der aaye, durust aaye...der aaye, bohot der aaye.. pic.twitter.com/sWj43eNCud ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

3. But there were also dissenting voices. Former Union Minister Maneka Gandhis described the morning's incidents as "horrible". Supreme Court lawyer Karuna Nundy wondered in a tweet-thread what the police were investigating "at 3.30 am all this time later?"

4. Cyberabad's Commissioner of Police said the accused were killed in an encounter between 3 and 6 am.

5. A DCP said the police fired in self-defence; he said the accused snatched a weapon and opened fire first.

6. Disha's family welcomed news that her alleged rapists had been killed. Her father said her soul must now be at peace.

7. Asha Devi and Badrinath Singh, the parents of Nirbhaya (the victim in the 2012 Delhi gang rape case) also welcomed the police action. Asha Devi said no action should be taken against the police.

8. Locals who gathered at the site where the accused are said to have made their escape attempt showed flower petals on police officials. People could be heard shouting slogans like "Hyderabad Police zindabad!"

9. One video, obtained by ANI, shows a delighted crowd lifting policemen off the ground at the site.

#WATCH Hyderabad: People celebrate and cheer for police at the encounter site where the four accused were killed in an encounter earlier today. #Telangana pic.twitter.com/WZjPi0Y3nw ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

10. As joyful messages fill up social media timelines, some public figures, like Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, have also bemoaned the loss of public faith in the criminal justice system.
