Businessman’s twins kidnapped from MP schoolbus at gunpoint within campus

Kidnapping caught on CCTV camera as 5-yr-old twins get snatched from school bus

BHOPAL: Five-year-old twins of a businessman were kidnapped at gunpoint from their schoolbus within their campus in Chitrakoot, Madhya Pradesh , on Tuesday. Spine-chilling CCTV footage shows two masked men barging into the bus, one of them holding a pistol to a woman attendant's head and the other storming into the rear towards the two kids as the other children flinch in horror.This is the second child kidnapping in MP in three days after a 6-year-old was abducted in Indore Sunday and rescued in Sagar a day later.The twins' father, Brajesh Rawat, is one of the biggest names in the region. Police said Rawat's family hadn't got any ransom call till late evening. The UP border has been sealed and senior cops from the neighbouring state have come to Satna to aid in the investigation. Police have launched such an intensive search that it triggered traffic jams in Chitrakoot and nearby towns, sparking protests.Police have tracked the kidnappers' movement on CCTV cameras at various locations on the campus. The duo seemed to know the exact routine of the bus and took a dusty track to cut it off. They parked their bikes across the road, and as soon as the bus stopped, the two barged in, pistols in hand.A CCTV clip shows the kids chatting and having fun when it all stops in an instant - at the sight of the gunmen. A conductor standing near the door is beaten up. One of the goons points a gun at a woman attendant's head. She and some other kids flinch in terror. Just as the second gunman heads to the rear of the bus to abduct the twins, the other one throws a cloth on the CCTV camera and blacks it out. Witnesses say the duo took away the kids on their motorcycle.Police are struggling for clues. They are also investigating the possibility of the kidnappers being a snatch-gang - hired only to abduct the kids and hand them over to a bigger gang.
