'No action should be taken against Telangana police, they did great job', says Nirbhaya's mother

The spot where bodies of the four accused are scattered | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The four accused were shot dead during a failed escape bid on Friday morning Cyberabad police had taken them to the scene of the crime for a re-construction of events Residents of Hyderabad and neighbouring cities have welcomed the action by poice

New Delhi: Parents of Nirbhaya, the 2012 Delhi gang-rape victim, have urged the government not to take any action against Telangana police officers who fired at the four accused in the rape-murder case of a veterinary doctor in the early hours of Friday morning. A senior police official claimed that cops opened fire after one of the accused signalled the others and snatched a policeman's weapon while re-counting the timeline of events on the night of November 27 at Chatanpally near Shadnagar.

Speaking to mediapersons on Friday, Asha Devi said that Telangana police "did a great job" by shooting down the four accused while they were allegedly trying to escape. The mother of a 23-year-old paramedical student who succumbed to injuries after gang-raped in a moving bus in 2012, also demanded that no action be taken against Telangana police.

She further said that she is extremely happy with this punishment. Talking about her own struggle to seek justice for her daughter, Asha Devi says that she has been running from pillar to post for the last seven years. The mother of the victim also appealed to the government to hang Nirbhaya's culprits to death as soon as possible.

The 2012 gang-rape victim's father also welcomed the move and congratulated Telangana police for killing the four accused. While stating that the police have done "the right thing", her father said that the quest for justice for the veterinary doctor's family ended early with the deaths of the accused.

Meanwhile, the wife of one of the accused, Chinnakeshavalu, has requested the police to take her to Chatanpally near Shadnagar where the encounter took place in the early hours of Friday morning. The couple reportedly got married about a year ago and she is pregnant. In a video that is being circulated on social media, she can be seen asking police either to take her to the encounter spot or kill her as well.
