Jo hua hai bohot bhayanak hua hai: BJP MP Maneka Gandhi condemns encounter of Hyderabad rape accused

Maneka Gandhi on Hyderabad rape accused encounter | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Speaking to reporters outside the Parliament House, Gandhi said that the police cannot take law in their hands Citizens should have faith that culprits will meet an end through the judicial system — said Congress' Kumari Selja

New Delhi: BJP MP Maneka Gandhi, on Friday, criticised the police action of killing the Hyderabad rape accused in an encounter and said that the police 'cannot' take law in their hands. Gandhi said that the accused would have been hanged by the court 'anyhow'.

"Jo hua hai bohot bhayanak hua hai desh ke liye. (This is horrific for the country) You can't take law in your hands, they (accused) would've been hanged by the court anyhow. If you're going to shoot them before due process of law has been followed, then what's the point of having courts, law and the police?" Gandhi said while speaking to reports outside the Parliament.

Gandhi is the latest to join the voices of dissent against the police action against the accused. "Citizens should have faith that culprits will meet an end through the judicial system," said Congress leader Kumari Selja.

#WATCH Maneka Gandhi:Jo hua hai bohot bhayanak hua hai desh ke liye. You can't take law in your hands,they(accused) would've been hanged by Court anyhow. If you're going to shoot them before due process of law has been followed, then what's the point of having courts,law&police? pic.twitter.com/w3Fe2whr31 — ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

Speaking in the Parliament, Arvind Sawant of Shiv Sena called for the setting up of a committee to discuss the judicial process in rape cases. Speaking in Lok Sabha said that 'a law needs to be constituted through which such(crimes against women) cases are heard directly in Supreme Court, currently procedure starts from lower courts, the process goes on and on. I appeal to you(Speaker)to set up a committee to discuss this," he said.

Four accused in the case were killed by Cyberabad police in the early hours of Friday when they allegedly tried to escape while being taken to the crime spot. "The accused Mohammed Arif, Naveen, Shiva and Chennakeshavulu were killed in a police encounter at Chatanpally, Shadnagar today in the wee hours, between 3 am and 6 am. I have reached the spot and further details will be revealed," Cyberabad Police Commissioner V C Sajjanar was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.
