After Telangana Encounter, There's Demand For Same Justice For Unnao Rape Accused. Is It Right?

More than a week after brutal gang rape and murder of a young veterinarian in Hyderabad, police shot dead all the four accused in an alleged 'encounter' near Shadnagar town of Telangana's Ranga Reddy district.

While the whole episode has opened a floodgate of reactions both in favour and against of such brutal killings, people now want the same treatment to be meted to out to the accused in the Unnao gang rape case.

These accused should meet the same fate as the accused got in #HyderabadHorror !! — Raj Singal (@RSingal007) December 6, 2019

The rapist is alive and well fed. Who is responsible for this poor girls sufferings the second time, now more painful which could take her away from us and how many are responsible for letting this Rapist monster outside. Will they all be punished for negligence? — Anon2468 (@Anon246802468) December 6, 2019

Most human rights activists always support terrorists, rapists & other such criminals who commit heinous crimes they never fight for the human rights of the victims which is totally shameful. — Suraj (@Suraj_Phoenix25) December 6, 2019

Murder their victims like Haidarawad ! It's psudo-democratic rule undertaken by police. — subhash nidhi (@NidhiSubhash) December 6, 2019

Jitne bhi log rape krte h sab k encounter kro chahe politician ho chahe actor chahe kisi bhi cost k ho sab ke liye ek hi Kanoon hona chahiye. — Parvez Khan (@ParvejK14140045) December 6, 2019

The 23-year-old woman was set on fire when she was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli in connection with a gang-rape case which she had filed a year ago. The incident happened on the wee hours of Thursday when the rape victim and her family were on their way to catch an early morning train.

On the way, they were confronted by six men including two of her rapists who attacked her with a knife before they poured kerosene and set her on fire. The woman was rescued and rushed to a nearby hospital by some local residents who rushed to the spot hearing her cry.

The woman who had suffered major burns was first admitted to district hospital Unnao, but after her condition deteriorated she was shifted to Lucknow civil hospital. "The survivor has sustained 90 percent burns," said chief medical officer of Civil Hospital in Lucknow, DS Negi.

The condition of the rape survivor from Unnao, who was airlifted from Lucknow to the national capital on Thursday and put on a ventilator is critical and there are minimal chances of her survival, doctors attending to her at Safdarjung Hospital said.

"The Unnao rape victim is in very serious condition. There are minimal chances of survival. Now, we have put her on a ventilator," Sunil Gupta, Medical Superintendent of Safdarjung Hospital said.

The woman had filed a rape case in March this year, which is under trial at a local court in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao.

On Thursday, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had taken cognizance of the incident and said that the treatment of the victim will be carried out on government expenses and strict action will be taken against the accused.

In a statement to the police from the hospital, the woman said that she was attacked by the two accused who had raped her a year ago and were presently out on bail. Based on her statement, police have arrested four men including the two rapists, identified as Hari Shankar Trivedi and Shubham Trivedi.

According to the police, the two men had raped her in March this year. One of them was arrested while the second was on the run. He was granted bail in the case recently.

Confirming the arrests, DGP OP Singh said the case was transferred to Rae Bareli following court orders a few months ago.

The attack on the rape complaint is reminiscent to a similar incident in Unnao a few months ago, where the family of a girl who had complained about sexual assault by now expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar survived an attempt on her life.


