India rape: Four men shot dead after raping, suffocating and setting fire to vet

Protestors have welcomed the news that four rape suspects have been shot dead by police

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Officials said the suspects were gunned down when they tried to snatch weapons from their police guards in a failed escape bid. N. Prakash Reddy, a deputy commissioner of police in Shamshabad, near Hyderabad, said that the four men - two truck drivers and two truck cleaners, aged between 20 and 26 years - had been taken to the spot to re-construct the crime.

There was a cross-fire. In this, all the four accused have died. Two policemen have been injured N. Prakash Reddy

He said: “There was a cross-fire. In this, all the four accused have died. Two policemen have been injured." No details were immediately available about how many police had escorted the four accused and whether they were handcuffed or roped together as is usually the case. Thousands of Indians have protested in several cities following the rape and murder of the veterinarian.

Police chiefs examine the scene where four rape suspects were shot dead by officers

Police said the rape suspects were shot dead trying to escape

The woman had left home for an appointment on her motor-scooter and later called her sister to say she had a flat tyre. She said a lorry driver had offered to help and that she was waiting near a toll plaza. Police said she was abducted, raped and asphyxiated and her dead body then set alight on the outskirts of Hyderabad. READ MORE: India horror as mother and daughter who fought off rapists shamed

A police can carrying the four rape suspects after their arrest

Her family welcomed the news of the killings of the alleged attackers. Her father said: “It has been 10 days to the day my daughter died. I express my gratitude towards the police and government for this. My daughter's soul must be at peace now.” A crowd gathered at the site of the shooting and threw flower petals at police vans in support of the action. Some shouted "Long live police" while others hoisted police officials onto their shoulders.

Thousands have taken to the streets across India to march against violent crime

Horrendous crimes against women have continued unabated in India despite tough new laws introduced after the 2012 gang rape and murder of a woman in a Delhi bus that led to an outpouring of anger across the country. Fast track courts were set up but cases move slowly because of a of witnesses and the inability of many families to go through the long legal process. Some victims and their families have ever ended up being attacked for pursuing cases against powerful men, often local politicians.

Violent crime against women has continued unabted despite tough new laws

Many Indians applauded the killings today’s shootings, taking to social media to support the police. Indian badminton star and former world number one Saina Nehwal posted: “Great work Hyderabad Police. We salute you.” In Uttar Pradesh state, where a rape victim was set ablaze as she walked to court to testify, opposition politician Mayawati said the police there should take "inspiration" from what happened in Hyderabad.

Trending
