You Are Making Temple For Lord Ram And Sita Maiya Is Being Burnt Alive: Adhir Ranjan Chaudhary's Zinger At BJP

New Delhi:

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chaudhary on Friday launched a scathing attack against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) over Unnao rape case. During his speech in Lok Sabha today Ranjan said, “The Unnao victim has 95 per cent burns, what is going on in the country? On one hand there is a Lord Ram temple being built and on the other hand Sita Maiya is being set ablaze. How are criminals feeling so emboldened?”

The Unnao rape survivor who was set on fire by five men on Thursday morning has 90 per cent burn injuries and her condition is “very serious”, doctors attending on her said. The woman, who was raped in December last year, was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli when she was attacked early Thursday.

“The condition of the girl who was set on fire and bought here at 10 am is very serious. She has 90 per cent burn injuries and we are taking utmost care. A team of doctors are observing her,” Dr Ashutosh Dubey, medical superintendent of the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Hospital, told PTI.

Asked about the possibility of shifting her to another hospital outside Lucknow, he said, “I can’t say about this. Our doctors are on the job.”

It appears she was set afire after the five men, who have been arrested, allegedly sprinkled an inflammable substance on her.

Aflame, she ran for a while before eyewitnesses saw her and informed police, which sent her to the Community Health Centre from where she was sent to the district hospital before being referred to Lucknow, police said.

The five men arrested on charges of the assault on her life while she was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli on Thursday are Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi, Circle Officer Gaurav Tripathi said in Unnao.

Of the five, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi are accused in the case and are out on bail.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
