Cops shoot dead four gang-rapists after taking them to field to re-enact female vet’s horrific murder – The Sun

FOUR men accused of gang raping and killing a woman vet then setting fire to her corpse have been shot dead by Indian police.

The men had been taken to a field near Hyderabad where they re-enacting the crime when they tried to grab weapons of the officers with them, police have said.

6 Police at the scene where four men suspected of raping and killing a woman were shot dead# Credit: AP:Associated Press

6 Women setting off firecrackers to celebrate the four men's deaths Credit: EPA

The 27-year-old's rape and murder had led to large protests and the news of the four men's deaths was greeted with jubilation across India, including by the victim’s mother who said: “Justice has been done.”

Neighbours could be seen celebrating by setting off firecrackers and distributing sweets, the BBC reports.

A large crowd gathered at the spot where the men were shot to cheer the police with many offering them sweets as a mark of respect.

"I can't put it into words. I felt happiness but also grief because my daughter will never come home," said the victim’s mother.

"My daughter's soul is at peace now. I never thought we would get justice. No other girl should experience what my daughter did."

She also said she wants the law on sexual assault and rape to be "stricter".

"Men should be scared to even stare at women - because they will be punished,” she said.

The victim’s sister added: “I was expecting court trials and the court to deliver justice. This will not bring my sister back, but it is a great relief.

I felt happiness but also grief because my daughter will never come home Victim's mother

“Because of the police action, people will think twice before they do something like this again."

The victim's charred remains were found underneath a bridge in the town of Shadnagar, on the outskirts of Hyderabad, on Thursday.

The woman had left home for an appointment on her motor-scooter and later called her sister to say she had a flat tyre.

She said a lorry driver had offered to help and that she was waiting near a road toll station.

Police said she was then abducted, raped and asphyxiated by the four men.

The four - two truck drivers and two truck cleaners, aged between 20 and 26 years - had been taken to the spot to re-construct the crime around 6am.

Prakash Reddy, a deputy commissioner of police in Shamshabad, near Hyderabad said the suspects were killed in “cross fire”.

“In this, all the four accused have died. Two policemen have been injured," he said.

The victim has not been named due to India’s strict laws on sex crime victims.

Thousands took to the streets to protest against the murder, many comparing it to the rape and murder of a woman on a bus in Delhi in 2012.

Some in India, including Kavita Krishnan, secretary of the All India Progressive Women's Association have, however, questioned the police action.

"The killings are a ploy to shut down our demand of accountability from governments, judiciary and police, and dignity and justice for women," she said.

6 A police officer points to where the woman's charred remains were discovered

6 A large crowd gathered at the scene to cheer on the police Credit: EPA

6 Flowers have been placed where the 27-year-old woman's body was found Credit: AP:Associated Press

6 The rape and murder has prompted protests in India Credit: Getty - Contributor
