Mercy petition by accused in Nirbhaya case sent to President Ram Nath Kovind

President Ram Nath Kovind (File Photo) | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Sharma's mercy petition was rejected by the Delhi government and MHA Four of the remaining accused have been sentenced to die The incident took place on the night of December 16, 2012

New Delhi: Vinay Sharma, one of the accused in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case that shook the nation in its wake, has sent a mercy petition to President Ram Nath Kovind. This comes on the day that the President while speaking at an event by the Brahmakumaris said, "incidents of demonic attacks on women have shaken the conscience of the country."

Officials with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) rejected the mercy plea earlier this week after which it was sent to the President. It was first sent to the Delhi Lieutenant Governor Anil Baijal who turned it down by citing the brutality of the crime and referred it to the MHA. If President Kovind turns the mercy plea down, all of the four accused will be hanged in the coming days. The MHA has reportedly recommended the President to reject the mercy plea.

Following their conviction, five of the accused men were lodged at Tihar Jail in Delhi while a sixth accused was sent to the juvenile centre because he was a minor. One of the accused, Ram Singh, took his own life while inside Tihar in March 2013. Authorities at Tihar Jail on October 29 of this year told three of the four remaining convicts that they have exhausted all legal remedies and will not be allowed to file a mercy petition. Out of them, Vinay Sharma was the only one who decided to seek mercy and filed a petition in this regard.

The incident in question dates back to December 16, 2012, when a 23-year-old paramedical student was returning home after watching a movie. She was accompanied by a friend and the two took a bus around 8 PM. The only other passengers onboard the bus were the accused. Along with the driver, they thrashed the boy and threw him out of the moving bus. They then gang-raped and mutilated the girl and later pushed her out of the moving bus. She was found by Delhi police and admitted to a hospital where she succumbed to injuries a couple of days later.
