Movie director slammed after calling for rape 'without violence' to be legalised

The director made the outrageous comment on an Instragram post following the rape and murder of 27-year-old vet Priyanka Reddy by four men in Hyderbad

Movie director slammed after calling for rape 'without violence' to be legalised

A filmmaker claims rape "without violence" should be legalised in India and women should carry condoms with them.

Daniel Shravan also said if men had their sexual desire fulfilled they wouldn't kill women in an outrageous Instagram post which has been widely condemned on social media.

The Bollywood director posted his views after Priyanka Reddy was raped and murdered by four men in Hyderbad last week.

The charred body of the 27-year-old vet, who was attacked after her scooter broke down, was found under a motorway overpass.

Shravan said in his now deleted post that "the government should legalise rape without violence for the safety of women".

He added that women should carry condoms and dental dams with them, saying: "If you are about to get raped, hand over a condom to the rapist and cooperate with him while he fulfils his sexual desire. That way he will not try to harm you.

"Simple logic...when the sexual desire is fulfilled men wouldn't kill women."

He also attacked the Indian government for planning to toughen up on laws to protect the safety of women.

"'It is foolishness of the government to think that killing Veerappan will control smuggling, killing Osama Bin Laden will control terrorism. In the same way, the laws against rape can't control rapes," he said.

His opinion has been condemned online by critics.

@NeetuVirk tweeted: "I don’t know who you are. But I can tell you’re a total piece of sh*t. Your mother must be so proud of you. Try advising this filth to her, or your sister or your daughter."

@trisshamani commented: " Daniel Shavran’s comments about how “rape without violence” should be legalized physically makes me sick. no woman should ever have to live in fear of something like this. #india , lmao daniel shravan ur disgusting."

@Notty_Neha said he was a "potential rapist" and @Deep_Debgan called him "the biggest bastard in the world."

Four men who confessed to raping and murdering Ms Reddy before setting her on fire were shot dead by police when they allegedly tried to escape.

It is claimed the suspects tried to snatch officers' guns as they were taken to reconstruct the crime scene.

Two officers were injured in the "crossfire" and the killing of the suspects, who were in police custody, drew applause from the woman's family and locals angered by crimes against women, but a rep for a local women's association said: "This is not justice."

Protests to end what has been described as a "rape culture" have taken place in India lately.

Demonstrators have held placards in support of rape victims across the country.

The number of rapes recorded in India is almost 40,000 each year, according to official figures.

But campaigners say the real number is higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma and a lack of faith in investigators.
