If they were trying to escape, then I stand with the police: BJP MP Gautam Gambhir on Hyderabad encounter

Gautam Gambhir on Hyderabad rape accused encounter | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Earlier today, President Ram Nath Kovind sought a review of mercy petition The four accused in the rape and murder of veterinarian in Hyderabad were killed in a police encounter on Friday

New Delhi: BJP MP Gautam Gambhir, on Friday said that he 'stood with the police' in the encounter of accused in Hyderabad rape and murder case. Speaking outside Parliament, Gambhir also called for judicial reforms and said that the verdict of fast track court should be final.

"Judicial system needs to be reformed. The verdict of fast track court should be final & there should be no further appeals or mercy petitions for the death penalty. If they (accused in veterinarian rape &murder case) were trying to escape, then I stand with police," Gambhir was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

Gambhir's remarks come on the backdrop of the encounter of the four accused in the rape and murder of a veterinarian in Hyderabad, Talangana. The four accused were killed when they tried to escape when they were being taken to the crime site for recreation of the crime scene. The rape and murder of the 27-year-old triggered massive protests over the safety of women in the country.

While the encounter was received with cheers by many, the act was criticised by some who expressed concern over the lack of a judicial process in the matter.

Earlier today, President Ram Nath Kovind called for a review of mercy petitions and said that rape convicts under POCSO should not have the right to file mercy petitions. "Women safety is a serious issue. Rape convicts under POCSO Act should not have the right to file mercy petition. Parliament should review mercy petitions," he said at an event in Mount Abu. This, when the mercy petition of the four convicts in the Nirbhaya rape case was rejected by the Ministry of Home Affairs and sent to the President with a recommendation that he rejects it.

If the President rejects the mercy petition of the four convicts, they will be hanged to death in the coming days.
