India rape: Four men accused of raping and killing vet shot dead after 'trying to escape'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get daily headlines and breaking news alerts for FREE by signing up to our newsletter

Four men accused of raping and murdering a female veterinarian in India were shot dead by police when they allegedly stole officers' guns in a bid to escape.

It is claimed the suspects snatched the guns and opened fire when they were taken to reconstruct the crime scene in Shadnagar, where the 27-year-old woman was set on fire after she was killed.

Two officers were injured in the alleged shootout as the suspects were gunned down just days after their arrest in a case that has sparked outrage and protests.

The killing of the suspects, who were in police custody, drew cheers from the woman's family and locals angered by crimes against women, but a rep for a local women's association said: "This is not justice."

At the scene, people in a large crowd hoisted officers onto their shoulders, threw flower petals at police vans, shouted "long live police" and burst crackers as the men lay dead nearby.

(Image: REUTERS)

A Reuters reporter saw the bodies in an open field, two of them face up, clothes stained with blood and barefoot, surrounded by policemen.

N Prakash Reddy, a deputy commissioner of police in the region, told Reuters: "In the morning, at around 6-6.30, our persons have come to reconstruct the scene of crime and the accused have tried to snatch their weapons, and there was a crossfire.

"In this, all the four accused have died. Two policemen have been injured."

The rape and murder victim, who cannot be named under Indian law, was attacked by a group of men who offered to help her after her motorbike blew a tyre on her way to an appointment, said police.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

Her charred body was found under a flyover in Shadnagar, near Hyderabad, on November 28.

It had been wrapped in a blanket and doused with kerosene.

The woman had gone missing the night before.

Before she was killed, she had called her sister to say a lorry driver had offered to help and that she was waiting near a toll plaza.

Local media said she was taken behind a line of trucks, raped and asphyxiated.

Four men aged between 20 and 28 years were arrested and held at a police station on the outskirts of Hyderabad in southern India, where protesters gathered last Saturday and demanded that the suspects be handed over to them.

Demonstrations have been held in a number of cities.

The woman's family welcomed the news of the killings of the alleged perpetrators.

Her father told ANI: "It has been 10 days to the day my daughter died.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

"I express my gratitude towards the police and government for this.

"My daughter's soul must be at peace now."

No details were immediately available about how many police had escorted the four accused and whether they were handcuffed or roped together as is usually the case.

Earlier, a local police official had put the time of the deaths at around 3:30am local time on Friday. But Mr Reddy said the incident happened around 6am.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

There was no immediate explanation for the discrepancy.

A police official told Al Jazeera: "They attacked the police party and tried to run away following which police fired and the men were killed."

In a separate interview with AFP, Mr Reddy said: "We called an ambulance but they died before any medical help could reach them."

Amid public protests and calls for public lynchings, the state's chief minister had vowed to fast-track the case.

In the aftermath, Kavita Krishnan, secretary of the All India Progressive Women's Association, criticised the killing of the suspects, telling Al Jazeera:"This is not justice. This is custodial killing."

She said she had doubts about the official account from police.

Indian police have frequently been accused of extra-judicial killings, called "encounters", especially in gangland wars in Mumbai and insurrections in Punjab and Kashmir.

Top police officers involved in such killings were called "encounter specialists" and were the subject of several movies.

Crimes against women in India have been unabated despite tough new laws that were enacted following the 2012 rape and murder of a woman in a Delhi bus that led to an outpouring of anger across the country.

Despite the setting up of fast track courts, cases have moved slowly, for lack of witnesses and the inability of many families to go through the long legal process.

(Image: REUTERS)

In another case that sparked outrage, a 23-year-old rape victim was left fighting for her life after she was set on fire on her way to court in the northern Unnao district on Thursday.

Five men, including two of her alleged rapists, are accused of assaulting her, dragging her to a field and setting her on fire.

The woman suffered burns to 90 per cent of her body and was in a critical condition in hospital.

Opposition politician Mayawati said on Friday that the police in Unnao should take "inspiration" from what happened to the four suspects in Shadnagar.

(Image: REUTERS)

Indian police registered more than 32,500 cases of rape in 2017, according to the most recent government data.

But courts disposed off only about 18,300 cases related to rape that year, leaving more than 127,800 cases pending at the end of 2017.

But some people said the lack of progress in the courts did not mean the police had a free hand to dispense justice.

Rukmini S, an Indian columnist, tweeted: "This isn't instant justice - this is the absence of justice.

"We're not going to make women safer by abandoning the rule of law - is that so hard to understand?"

Supreme Court lawyer Vrinda Grover said the police who were involved in Friday's incident should face an inquiry, but in all likelihood would be rewarded with medals.

The solicitor said: "Killing accused like this is a short cut, but in the long run this won't work, it will carry its own consequences."
