Cyberabad gang-rape: Activists write to NHRC, demand autopsy out of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

The petition has also requested that the autopsy is conducted by surgeons from New Delhi or from states other than Telangana and Andhra Pradesh (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights On Thursday, the commissioner of Cyberabad confirmed that the four accused in the veterinary doctor's gang-rape and murder case have been killed A development states that a petition seeking permission for the preservation of the four bodies has been submitted to the NHRC The petition also mentions that the autopsy must be conducted by surgeons who are not from Telangana and Andhra Pradesh

Cyberabad: According to a recent development, the four accused in the gang-rape and murder of veterinarian doctor in Cyberabad were killed in an exchange of gunfire. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has been approached for the immediate post-mortem of the four men. A petition has been submitted to the NHRC, requesting it to ensure that the post-mortem is conducted by a team of autopsy surgeons outside Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

Maja Daruwala, senior advisor, Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) and Henri Tiphagne, executive director, People's Watch wrote the petition addressed to the NHRC.

While on one side, the NHRC directed its investigation team to conduct an on-the-spot examination of the bodies, the aforementioned petition has sought permission for the preservation of the bodies. The petition has also requested that the autopsy is conducted by surgeons from New Delhi or from states other than Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

Henri Tiphagne spoke to Mirror Now and said that it is crucial for the post-mortem to be conducted out of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. The petition stated that "this holds extreme significance in the absence of any independent eye-witness in the case".

During a press conference on Friday, the Cyberabad commissioner of police VC Sajjanar said that the four accused were killed during an exchange of gunfire. Two police officers also sustained head injuries during the incident. The commissioner also confirmed that the police officers were not injured with gunshots.

The four accused had allegedly gang-raped and murdered a veterinary doctor in Cyberabad. They had deflated a tyre of the doctor's two-wheeler and one of them had even offered to help her. The accused gang-raped the doctor, dragged her into the bushes and set her ablaze.
