#MeToo: Aziz Ansari felt terrible that the woman wasn't comfortable; it gave his life a perspective

Hollywood's Walk Of Shame It all started with Harvey Weinstein in 2017 and four months in to 2018 and now with Bill Cosby's conviction, things are certainly looking up for the #MeToo movement. The number of cases of sexual harassment in Hollywood that have come to light since 2017 has been outstanding. It could also be called the 'Weinstein Effect'. Many of the women who spoke out against Weinstein -- Gwyneth Paltrow, Ashley Judd, Rose McGowan -- are famous names.



2018 has been no different and in a breakthrough trial, after decades of whispers, lawsuits, investigations and close calls - and a multitude of women who lost hope anyone would ever believe their word against that of America's Dad - Bill Cosby could be headed to prison at age 80 for the remainder of his life. Cosby's conviction will only bolster the #MeToo movement.



But they weren't alone, it was almost like a Pandora's Box was opened and a lot of names came out. Let's look at all the accused men:

Harvey Weinstein: Producer, Co-founder of Weinstein Company October 5, 2017

With three women accusing him of rape and multiple high-profile Hollywood actresses accusing him of sexual assault, Weinsntein has been fired and expelled from the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences, Emmys and BAFTA. He has also been ousted from his own company.



Ben Affleck: Actor, Producer, Director October 10, 2017

Actress Hilarie Burton accused him of groping her in 2003. Affleck apologised to Burton on Twitter, "I acted inappropriately towards Ms. Burton and I sincerely apologize." Affleck has pledged to donate future profits made from Harvey Weinstein or Miramax projects to independent filmmakers and victims of sexual assault.



Roy Price: Amazon executive October 12, 2017

Isa Hackett, an executive producer on an Amazon series 'The Man in the High Castle', accused Price of sexual harassment. There has been no official statement from Price. Following the incident, he resigned from Amazon. Not just that, Price was set to marry TV writer and playwright Lila Feinberg in New York. Feinberg called off the wedding because of the accusation.
