Rights groups slam 'extra-judicial killing' of rape accused

Hyderabad, Dec 6 : Slamming Telangana Police for the "extra-judicial killings" of four accused in gang-rape and murder of a woman veterinarian, human rights groups on Friday demanded that the policemen involved be booked on charges of murder.

People's Union For Civil Liberties (PUCL) termed the "encounter" killings a "planned murder" and called for registering an FIR against the policemen involved.

"This is pure murder with impunity. The killer policemen have to be tried," Kavita Srivastava of PUCL said in a statement.

Appealing to people not to celebrate the gunning down of four accused by the Cyberabad police, PUCL said this "will not stop or even make a dent to the rape culture".

"Please do not glorify these policemen. The Hyderabad police have committed murder. A planned murder, it is a lynching for a blood-baying public to glorify the murder," she said.

She wondered why 50 or more policemen were recreating the crime scene at 3 a.m. The accused were in custody for seven days and they were taken handcuffed and with face covered.

The Prgatisheel Mahila Sangathan, Delhi, the Progressive Organization of Women (Telengana & Andhra Pradesh) and Sthe tree Jagruti Manch, Punjab, issued a joint statement demanded arrest of Telangana Chief Minister and police chief for the killings.

They alleged that custodial murder was carried out on the direction of the Telengana government.

"First an incompetent police force forces the family of a missing girl to do rounds of the police stations in order to register a missing complaint. Then politicians and police, both totally complacent about their misgovernance and refusing to place the responsibility for rising violence against women at door of governance and policing, fuel displaced hysterical responses for street punishment," said the statement.

The organisations said Telangana Chief Minister opened his mouth after days, not to promise better governance but to fan hysteria, and deflect the public anger towards immediate hanging. "And now Telengana Police have done what they have been skilled to do to perfection. Rape the legal processes, daringly disregard rights and murder in uniform." S Jeevan Kumar, co-ordination committee member of Human Rights Forum, condemned the arbitrary and extrajudicial killings carried out by Telangana government. "The judicial process should have been completed and punishment could have been given according to Indian law. The government has taken advantage of emotional public outcry. The State should have adhered to the due procedure in delivering justice. We are compelled to believe that the government has no faith in judiciary and its own law," he said.

He demanded that the police personnel involved in "encounter" should be booked under murder charges as per the Supreme Court's guidelines, and be tried in a court of law. "We also appeal to public not get carried away by instant emotions which could give license to the state to trample upon rights of the people."
