BJP's Babul Supriyo sacks staffer for posting 'human rights not for cannibals' tweet from his handle

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Babul Supriyo on Friday sacked one of his social media members for tweeting an "objectionable" comment on his Twitter handle. The social media member, Avinash Pandey was sacked after he tweeted on the killings of four accused in the Hyderabad veterinary surgeon's rape and murder case from Babul Supriyo's Twitter handle.

The BJP MP's social media member had written: "#HumanRights are for human beings, not for 'Cannibals' like the 4 killed in the encounter."

Babul Supriyo sacked him and later clarified that the tweet on the killings of Hyderabad doctor's rape and murder case accused was not posted by him.

"This is not a tweet written by me. My team did it (Avinash Pandey) and he has been immediately sacked," Babul Supriyo said in a tweet. The BJP MP also said he condemns the tweet which was posted on his Twitter handle by one of his social media members.

Babul Supriyo said, "I strongly condemn this and this is one of the reason why I never wanted to 'employ' any social media team (most have it) handle my social media. I did it myself !!! My mistake."

This is not a tweet written by me.. My team did it (Avinash Pandey) & he has been immediately sacked.. I strongly condemn this & this is one of the reason why I never wanted to 'employ' any Social Media team (Most have it) handle my social media - I did it myself !!! My mistake https://t.co/kpw6zPFC42 Babul Supriyo (@SuPriyoBabul) December 6, 2019





All the four accused in the rape and murder case of the 26-year-old woman were killed in Cyberabad on Friday morning at around 3 am. The police had taken all the accused to the crime area to recreate the scene of the crime.

Addressing a press conference, Cyberabad police chief VC Sajjanar said the accused in the Telangana rape and murder case ganged up and attacked the police. "Accused ganged up and attacked us. Two of the accused snatched our weapons and fired on us."

"The police warned them and asked them to surrender but they continued to fire. Then we opened fire and they were killed in the encounter. During encounter, two police men have been injured and they have been shifted to the local hospital," he said.

Cyberabad CP, VC Sajjanar: The police warned them and asked them to surrender but they continued to fire. Then we opened fire and they were killed in the encounter. During encounter, two police men have been injured and they have been shifted to the local hospital. https://t.co/CaVAXikdjo ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019




