6 Indian Politicians Whose Outrageous Statements On Rape Left Us Dumbfounded

In the wake of Hyderabad's brutal, inhuman rape case, there's been no shortage of discussion on the crime and its outcome - ranging from family debates to statements by politcial leaders. Unfortunately for us, the latter has resulted in a barrage of unasked-for 'wisdom' that's got several Indians questioning the sanity of not just its male population, but its leaders as well.

Here are some of the most outrageous things our politicians have said about rape in recent times.

1. Jaya Bachchan - MP, Samajwadi Party

© Twitter

In large quotes: “In some countries, when such things happen, the public delivers justice. This is my suggestion – I know it's a little harsh – I think these kind of people (rapists) should be brought out in public and lynched properly.”

2. Pushpanathan Wilson - MP, DMK

© Twitter

In large quotes: “The culprits, besides being imposed with punishments available under any other provisions of law, should be either chemically or surgically castrated for heinous rape. Otherwise, they are released from prison in a few years into the community. Sir, both chemical and surgical castration undoubtedly would prevent the culprit from committing sexual assault again.”

3. Bhanwarlal Meghwal, Minister of Social Welfare of Rajasthan, Congress

© Twitter

In large quotes: "The youth nowadays moving towards the wrong direction by consuming everything that is available on television and the internet, which is why there is an increase in the crimes. Earlier, before these were invented, there was hardly any crime."

4. Mohan Bhagwat, Chief, RSS

© Twitter

In large quotes: "You go to villages and forests of the country and there will be no such incidents of gang-rape or sex crimes. They are prevalent in some urban belts. Besides new legislation, Indian ethos and attitude towards women should be revisited in the context of ancient Indian values."

5. Mulayam Singh Yadav, MP, Samajwadi Party

© Twitter

In large quotes: "Should rape cases be punished with hanging? They are boys, they make mistakes,"

6. Manohar Lal Khattar, Haryana CM, BJP

© Twitter

In large quotes: "If a girl is dressed decently, a boy will not look at her in the wrong way. If you want freedom, why don't they just roam around naked? Freedom has to be limited. These short clothes are western influences. Our country's tradition asks girls to dress decently."

While the majority of these opinions were near-universally condemned even by fellow party members, there is something to be said for Mrs. Bachchan and Mr. Wilson's suggestions of harsh and public punishment.

The bottom line with publicly lynching rapists is that it's an attempt to punish a phenomenon of fear and depravity with further fear and depravity - and if the history of capital punishment is anything to go by, fear is a weak and extremely short-lived deterrent to violent crimes.

© Reuters

Perhaps one day we'll see politicians with a focus on improving the socio-cultural circumstances that create rapists. And until progressive values and education reaches the masses, this cycle of sexual violence and violent retalitation is bound to continue ad infinitum.
