Indian rape victim set on fire by her alleged attacker describes the attack from her hospital bed

One of the alleged rapists had only been released on bail five days previously

A 23-year-old Indian rape victim set on fire by her alleged attacker on her way to his trial has described how she was stabbed in the neck, had petrol poured over her and was turned into a human fireball.

The woman, who has burns covering 90 per cent of her body, gave her testimony to police while in New Delhi's Safdarjung hospital, where she was flown to by the emergency services and is now in critical care.

She said she was on her way to court near her village in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh for a hearing about her own rape complaint when she was surrounded by five men, including two of her accused rapists.

Students hold placards and shout slogans to protest against the alleged rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinary doctor in Hyderabad on Tuesday. A rape victim on her way to court was set ablaze Thursday by a group of five men, including the man who allegedly assaulted her

The burns casualty ward of a hospital in New Delhi where the 23-year-old rape victim is being treated. 'They surrounded me and first hit me on the leg with a stick and also stabbed me in the neck with a knife. After that they poured petrol on me and set me on fire,' the woman told the police from her hospital bed

'They surrounded me and first hit me on the leg with a stick and also stabbed me in the neck with a knife.

'After that they poured petrol on me and set me on fire,' the woman told the police from her hospital bed in Unnao.

'When I started shouting, a crowd collected and the police was called,' she said.

A witness said the woman was running in a ball of fire, screaming for help.

Demonstrators hold 'Hang the Rapists' placards at protests in Hyderabad on Tuesday. '#HangRapists' has been trending on this week after demonstrators took to the streets of the country

Shivam Trivedi and his neighbour Shubham Trivedi, the woman's alleged rapists, were part of the attack. Shivam had been released on bail only five days previously.

There are ongoing investigations into why he was received bail.

Police documents showed the woman had filed a complaint with Unnao police in March alleging that she had been raped at gunpoint on December 12, 2018.

All five men have been detained, Uttar Pradesh police said in a tweet.

During the past week, thousands of Indians have protested in several cities following the alleged rape and murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian doctor named Priyanka Reddy near the southern city of Hyderabad.

Protesters and parliamentarians are pressing for courts to fast-track rape cases and demanding tougher penalties.

Thousands of protesters faced off with police, demanding the suspected rapists - who were in police custody - be handed over to them to face mob justice.

Since protests began, the 'Hangrapists' hashtag has been trending on Twitter in India.

A few days after Reddy's body was discovered, a 'sex maniac' was arrested in Uttar Pradesh for breaking into a family's home at night, bludgeoning the father with a 'heavy stone', and slaying the mother and her baby.

He then had sex with the mother's corpse for three hours and raped the still alive 10-year-old daughter before he left.

Some of the protesters Tuesday called for violent and instant reprisals. 'If women chop off the heads of a few of these rapists, then automatically we'll see the society change for the better,' said protester Kanchan Giri (pictured) who was carrying a sword

Uttar Pradesh is India's most populous state and has become notorious for its poor record regarding crimes against women, with more than 4,200 cases of rape reported there in 2017 - the highest in the country.

The Uttar Pradesh state government, currently controlled by Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), came under fire in July from opposition groups accusing it of protecting a lawmaker accused of rape

The horrific crimes have triggered protests across India, recalling the civil unrest after woman was raped and murdered on Delhi bus in 2012.

More than 33,000 women were raped in India in 2017, according to the latest official figures, but experts say that vast numbers of assaults go unreported.
