VC Sajjanar: Accused attacked cops with stones, snatched weapons; fired in self defence

VC Sajjanar

Hyderabad encounter

Cyberabad police Commissionersaid that the police were left with no option but to fire in self-defence. The police commissioner was answering questions from the media on details related to thein which all the four accused were shot dead this morning. The accused were arrested on November 29 for the alleged rape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinarian.10 police officials were involved in the encounter. The commissioner said that the accused had reportedly confessed to the crime and were being taken to the location to retrieve the victim's phone and other evidence from the crime scene. As soon as they reached the spot, the accused reportedly attacked the police party with stones and snatched their weapons and tried to fire."Two policemen were injured in the cross-fire, " said VC Sajjanar. The commissioner said that within 5-10 mins the firing stopped and the police found that the accused had got bullet injuries and had died. "The cross-firing happened between 5:45 am and 6:15 am. Arif started the firing and then others followed. The accused were not handcuffed. All four accused succumbed to the injuries." He said that they did not heed to the suggestion of the police to surrender. "Even though our officers maintained restraint and asked them to surrender, without listening to us, they continued to fire and attack...our people started retaliation. And in that retaliation four accused got killed."He also said that the two injured policemen ( Nandigama sub-inspector Venkateshwarlu and constable Aravind Goud) have received head injuries but do not have bullet injuries and are currently undergoing treatment.Sajjanar said the police were collecting data from other parts of the state, including Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka to ascertain if the four had any involvement in several cases of missing women in these states. The police will register a case against the four accused under provisions of Arms Act and also attempt to murder (Indian Penal Code section 307) for attacking the police with weapons. The commissioner said the ‘facts’ would be submitted to the National Human Rights Commission and all other agencies concerned.
