Govt proposes setting up of 1,023 Fast Track Special Courts to deal with rape, sexual offence cases

Union Minster Smriti Irani | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: In the aftermath of Hyderabad rape and murder case and Unnao rape case, the government has proposed setting up of over 1,000 fast track cases for quick resolution of rape and sexual offences cases.

For the expeditious resolution of rape cases, the Justice Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice has proposed a scheme to set up 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSCs). The Special Courts will be dedicated to the quick resolution of rape cases and other cases under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO).

Out of these 1023 fast track courts, as many as 218 FTSCs are proposed to be set up in Uttar Pradesh alone. The Department of Justice under the Ministry of Law and Justice has proposed the scheme to be set up on the lines of other centrally sponsored schemes. The proposed scheme to set up fast track courts will cost the exchequer a total of Rs 767.25 crore out of which Rs 474 crore will potentially be borne by the Centre.

The same was communicated by Smriti Zubin Irani, the Minister of Women and Child Development, in a written reply in the Lower House of the Parliament on Friday.

The move follows a massive public uproar after multiple cases of rape and murder were reported in the past few days. The most horrific of these are the Hyderabad rape and murder case and the Unnao case wherein a rape victim was set on fire by the accused.

All four accused in Hyderabad case in which a 27-year-old veterinarian was raped and burnt to death, were killed in an encounter with the police at Chatanpally area of Shadnagar, which lies 50-Kms from Hyderabad.

The Hyderabad police said they gunned down the four accused in the case Mohammed Arif (26), lorry driver Jollu Naveen Kumar, Jollu Shiva and Chintakunta Chenna Keshavulu after they tried to attack the police in a bid to escape.

The Hyderabad police had taken the four accused to the scene of the crime for the reconstruction of events on the ill-fated night when they raped the Hyderabad doctor when the incident occurred.

Meanwhile, in another case, a rape victim was set on fire in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao by two accused in the case who were out on bail. The victim suffered more than 95% burns and authorities at the Safdarjung Hospital reportedly said she is critically ill.
