‘This is worrisome’: Many politicians question Hyderabad encounter of rape accused

‘This is worrisome’: Many politicians question Hyderabad encounter of rape accused

While many have hailed the police action, several people have questioned the extra-judicial killings of the accused.

news Crime

The Hyderabad police’s reported encounter of all the four accused in the gangrape and murder case of the 26-year-old veterinarian has elicited a mixed response from political leaders. While many have hailed the police action, several people have questioned the extra-judicial killings of the accused.

Legal experts have opined that as per the law, a probe should be immediately conducted into the reported encounter since their deaths have come while they were in the custody of the police.

Questioning the reported encounter

Hyderabad based politician Jayaprakash Narayan of the LokSatta wrote, "The perpetrators of such heinous crimes deserve the harshest punishment, but by swift due process in a court of law. The police were obviously under unbearable pressure; but extra-Judicial killings will only make innocent people victims over time. Due process protects all of us. There are no shortcuts to strengthening rule of law - investigation, forensics, police capacity, prosecution, judicial procedure, trials. Weak, ineffective, arbitrary/selective rule of law will endanger the whole society. The first task of state is speedy and efficient justice."

Congress MP Shashi Tharoor also sounded a word of caution, saying extra-judicial killings were not acceptable. "[...] We need to know more, for instance if the criminals were armed, the police may have been justified in opening fire preemptively. Until details emerge we should not rush to condemn. But extra-judicial killings are otherwise unacceptable in a society of laws," the former Union minister said in a tweet.

Karti Chidambaram called “encounter killings” a blot on the system. "Rape is a heinous crime. It must be dealt with strictly under the provisions of law. While I hold no brief for the alleged perpetrators of this dastardly act, "encounter" killings are a blot to our system. While I understand the urge for instant justice, this is not the way,” he tweeted.

Loss of faith in judicial system

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal said that while the people of the country are rejoicing the encounter deaths of the four accused in the gang rape and murder case of the Hyderabad veterinarian, it is also worrisome that they have lost faith in the justice system.

"It is also something to be worried about, the way people have lost their faith in the criminal justice system. Together all the governments will have to take action on how to strengthen the criminal justice system," he told reporters.

Kavita Krishnan, Secretary of the All India Progressive Women's Association, also questioned the reported encounter. She said that this is not justice, but a "ploy" to shut down demands for accountability from the police, judiciary, governments, and justice and dignity for women.

"Instead of being accountable to his job and answering our questions about his government's failures to safeguard women's rights, the Telangana CM and his police have acted as leaders of a lynch mob," she said.

Kavita also accused Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao of deflecting the whole issue.

Follow due process

Condemning the police action, Former Women and Child Development Maneka Gandhi said, “Whatever happened in Hyderabad is very dangerous for this country. You cannot kill people because you want to. The accused would have been hanged after a court order anyway, you cannot take law in your hands. If justice will be served through a gun’s trigger, then what is the need of courts and police in this country?”

Senior advocate Vikas Singh, former President of Supreme Court Bar Association, told IANS, “Rule of law should prevail in the country, there should be an immediate inquiry into the encounter of the accused.”

Singh emphasised that there should be balanced between justice delivery system and human rights of the citizens. "The authorities should immediately begin an inquiry into this encounter, and this probe should be completed as soon as possible. The authorities should ascertain whether it was a genuine encounter or it was stage managed by the police," added Singh.

National Commission of Women Chairperson Rekha Sharma said though they wanted death penalty for the accused, it should have come through proper judicial channel.

"We wanted death penalty but it should have been through judicial channel. I do not know under what circumstances they were shot and this has to come out after the inquiry. So only the police can tell the truth or after the inquiry it would come out," the NCW chief told PTI over phone.

Haryana Congress President Kumari Selja told ANI that every citizen should have faith that such culprits will meet an end but through a proper judicial process. “The issue here is that this is the end that should meet these kinds of culprits who have perpetrated this kind of crime. The other issue is also there that every citizen should have faith in the judicial system that these kinds of culprits will meet such an end but through a proper judicial process,” said Selja. "Swift action needs to be taken in every case and this end should be me through a proper judicial process.”

Support for Hyderabad police

Meanwhile, speaking to ANI, Kanumuru Raghu Rama Krishna Raju of the YSR Congress Party, said, “They deserved to be shot dead. God has been kind that they were shot dead, this is a good lesson. They tried to run away and they were killed. No NGO should oppose it and if they do so, they are anti-national.”

Goa Congress Women’s Wing, Goa Pradesh Mahila Congress Chief Pratima Coutinho also welcomed the reported encounter. "My salute to the Hyderabad police. Justice is done," she said in a statement. Now the soul of the victim will be at peace, she added.

Both Pratima and BSP President Mayawati said that police forces in other parts of the country should take “inspiration” from the Hyderabad police.

"The action that has been taken by the Hyderabad Police is praiseworthy," Mayawati said. "In UP, this is happening every day not just in one district but in every district. Be it young girls or aged women, nobody is being spared. There is jungle raj in UP," she said, adding that when she was chief minister she had acted even against members of her own party. "Uttar Pradesh and Delhi police will have to change," she added.

Reacting to the reported encounter, Baba Ramdev said, “What police has done is very courageous, and I must say that justice has been delivered. Legal questions over it are a different matter, but I am sure that people of the country are at peace now.”

Baba Ramdev on Telangana encounter: What police has done is very courageous and I must say that justice has been delivered. Legal questions over it are a different matter, but I am sure people of the country are at peace now. pic.twitter.com/7WJcCoIM8z December 6, 2019

Olympic medallist Badminton star Saina Nehwal also supported the Hyderabad police. “We salute you,” she tweeted.

Great work #hyderabadpolice ..we salute u — Saina Nehwal (@NSaina) December 6, 2019

With PTI and IANS inputs
