Cyberabad rape case: Telangana HC takes cognizance, orders preservation of bodies

The HC has directed the Telangana Police to preserve the bodies until 8 pm on December 9 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The bodies of the four men who were killed in an exchange of gunfire in Cyberabad will be handed over to their families on December 9 The Telangana High Court has also taken cognizance of the killing of the four accused in Cyberabad gang-rape and murder case

Cyberabad: The bodies of the four accused in Cyberabad gang-rape and murder case will be handed over to their families. The Telangana High Court has taken cognisance of the exchange of gunfire that killed the four accused.

The HC has directed the Telangana Police to preserve the bodies until 8 pm on December 9. After this, the bodies will be handed over to the families of the deceased.

The HC took cognisance of the matter hours after two lawyers from Mumbai wrote to key authorities of Telangana and the Chief Justice of India, demanding strict action against the police personnel involved in the alleged killing of the four men who gang-raped and murdered a veterinary doctor in Cyberabad.

The accused were taken to the spot of the incident on Friday after they told the police that they had dumped the doctor's mobile phone, wallet and power bank. The accused were being accompanied by ten police personnel. When the police and the accused reached the spot, the latter attacked them with sticks and stones.

The accused then snatched two unlocked pistols from the cops and started firing in their direction. The police responded to this and fired at the accused. In an exchange of gunfire that lasted for around 15 minutes, the police gunned down the four accused.

After the Cyberabad commissioner confirmed the killing of the four accused, a video of the wife of one of the accused surfaced on social media. The woman said that four lives were sacrificed for the sake of one life. She staged a protest in her village and condemned the incident.

While on one side, the accused's wife showed her disapproval of the incident, women in other parts of Andhra Pradesh took to the streets and celebrate the incident.
