This is why Vikas Gupta gets disqualified from Khatron Ke Khiladi - Painkillers and their side effects

Vikas Gupta gets disqualified from Khatron Ke Khiladi - Painkillers and their side effects | Photo Credit: Instagram

New Delhi: Vikas Gupta, who rose to fame as the 'mastermind' in Big Boss Season 11 was disqualified from the latest season, season 9 of Khatron ke Khiladi hosted by director Rohit Shetty for hiding a shoulder injury. The TV producer and reality show star told TOI that it was stupid of him to hide the injury. He added that painkillers that he was taking for the pain caused due to the injury could have had some serious health risks he did not realise.

Vikas Gupta had to be disqualified from the show for hiding the injury and lying about it. The producer got an earful from the host of the show, and with the telecast is getting a similar reprimanding from his mother. A lot of people do not take injuries seriously and take painkillers to keep the pain away, without realizing that the painkillers are not treating the injury, and may, in fact, have some serious side effects and health risks. READ - Sonu Nigam suffers allergy after eating seafood, shares picture from the ICU- How dangerous can allergies be?

Why should you take injuries seriously?

Any trouble with your body should be taken seriously. Sonu Nigam, when had an allergic reaction advised a similar thing to all his fans. Injuries can leave you immobile, and if they are not taken seriously, they can cause permanent muscle and bone damage. Treating them properly and at the earliest, eating right, exercising right, and taking proper rest is the best way to make sure the injury heals properly before you stress that part of the body again.

What are the side effects of painkillers?

Vikas Gupta told TOI that he took painkillers to keep the pain that rose from stunts and tasks at the show under control. This led to an increased heart rate which rose further during tasks due to adrenaline. He did not realise the repercussions this could have. Here is why you should be careful when it comes to the consumption of painkillers. READ - Taking the pill could affect how well women recognise complex emotions

Painkillers can cause a feeling of high, and also delay your reactions. Driving or doing anything that requires a quick action may not be a good idea if you are taking painkillers. Overdose or regular doses of painkillers can cause diarrhoea, vomiting, nausea, etc.

Painkillers can also be addictive and the dependence on them can be very harmful. One may even need rehab to break away from such an addiction.
