Madhya Pradesh: Two men steal INSAS rifles, ammunitions from Army cantonment; cops on high-alert

Representational Image

Key Highlights The duo arrived at a check post in the early hours of Friday posing as Army men They seized two INSAS assault rifles and 20 live cartridges from the check post and fled Military Police is investigating the matter

Madhya Pradesh: Two unknown people posing as Army officers fled away with two INSAS assault rifles and ammunition belonging to the sentries from the Army cantonment in Pachmarhi.

After the incident prompted the police to sound high alert and a manhunt has been launched across the state to nab the accused.

The duo arrived at a check post in the early hours of Friday posing as Army men after which they asked the sentries on duty to call someone from inside the cantonment.

After engaging the sentries in conversation the duo suddenly seized two INSAS assault rifles and 20 live cartridges from the check post and fled.

Preliminary investigation has revealed that the duo had got down at Piparia station, 55 km away, around midnight and taken a taxi for Pachmarhi, PTI quoted a senior police official as saying.

"We received information about the incident around 5 am, and have cordoned off the road network and railway stations in the area to nab the accused, one of whom sported a beard," said Hoshangabad district superintendent of police ML Chhari.

He further said that after stealing the rifles the culprits might have returned to the station and boarded a train to escape.

Meanwhile, the Military Police is investigating the matter after which a formal complaint will be lodged with the MP Police.

The additional director general of police (intelligence) Dr SW Naqvi has said that cops across the state have been instructed to remain alert and keep a close watch at all the important places.

The rifle is manufactured by the Ordnance Factories Board at Ordnance Factory Tiruchirappalli, Small Arms Factory Kanpur and Ishapore Arsenal and is the standard infantry weapon of the Indian Armed Forces.

Meanwhile, the Indian government has signed a contract to buy around 72,400 rifles for the Indian Army to replace the ageing INSAS. The rifles will cost around Rs 700 crore and US arms maker Sig Sauer will supply SIG716 7.62x51 mm assault rifles.

The rifles are expected to be supplied within a year.
