Telangana doctor rape-murder accused shot dead in police chase: Some hail cops, others cry foul

All the four accused (L-R) - Jollu Naveen, Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu, Jollu Shiva, and Mohammad Areef - were shot dead on Friday morning. (Photo: India Today)

The four men who were accused in the Telangana veterinary surgeon's rape and murder case were shot dead by police on Friday morning. As the news broke, the dramatic turn of events evoked praises from all corners of the country and also invited concerns over the alleged extra-judicial killings.

The accused were killed by the Cyberabad Police a few days after they raped and killed a 26-year-old woman. The Telangana doctor's charred body was found on Thursday morning (November 28) under a culvert in Chatanpally on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway.

The rape and murder of the Telangana doctor had sparked nationwide protests. All the four accused - Mohammad Areef, Jollu Shiva, Jollu Naveen, and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu - were arrested from their homes on Friday.

Within a week of their arrest, all the four accused were shot dead. While the police have maintained that the accused had tried to flee when they were taken to the crime spot to recreate the crime scene, some have refused to buy the story.

Meanwhile, the Telangana High Court has directed the state government to preserve the bodies of four accused in the rape and murder of a young veterinarian till 8 PM on December 9.

ALL FOUR ACCUSED IN TELANGANA RAPE-MURDER CASE SHOT DEAD

In a pre-dawn event on Friday, all four accused in the rape and murder of the veterinarian were shot dead by police.

The shooting took place between 5:45 AM and 6:15 AM when they were taken by a 10-member team to the scene of the crime at Chattanpalli for a reconstruction of events as part of the investigation.

According to the police, the accused were killed when they allegedly snatched weapons from the police and tried to escape. Soon after the event took place, Cyberabad Police Commissioner VC Sajjanar and other senior officials rushed to the scene.

Police at the site where the four accused in the Telangana doctor's rape and murder case were shot dead on Friday morning. (Photo: PTI)

As the news of the killing of the four Telangana rape and murder accused spread, people gathered near the scene on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway.

ACCUSED SNATCHED WEAPONS, POLICE ACTION IN RETALIATION: CYBERABAD CP

Police said the accused, all lorry workers aged between 20 and 25, were killed during an exchange of fire with the police after they snatched weapons from the police and tried to escape. The accused were not handcuffed when the firing took place, he said.

Addressing a press conference hours after the accused were shot dead, Cyberabad police commissioner said his men resorted to "retaliatory" firing after two of the accused opened fire at the police personnel after snatching weapons from them and tried to escape.

He said Mohammad Areef, the prime accused in the Telangana rape and murder case, was the first to open fire followed by Chennakeshavulu, even as the police team was attacked with stones and sticks. The accused did not stop attacking the police even after they were asked to surrender, the Cyberabad CP said.

A police sub-inspector and a constable suffered head injuries and were undergoing treatment, he said, adding they did not suffer bullet injuries.

"Even though our officers maintained restraint and asked them to surrender, without listening to us, they continued to fire and attack... our people started retaliation. And in that retaliation four accused got killed," The Cyberabad CP said.

Responding to the criticism on the handing of the situation by the police, the Cyberabad CP said, "Law has done its duty and that's what I can say."

When asked why the four men were taken to the crime scene in the early hours of Friday, VC Sajjanar said the accused were facing a lot of threat from an angry public and hence brought at that time of the day.

FAMILIES OF ACCUSED IN SHOCK

Renuka, the wife of one of the four accused, Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu, said the police should take her to the spot where her husband was killed and should kill her as well.

"I was told nothing will happen to my husband and he would come back soon. Now, I don't know what to do. Please take me to the place where my husband was killed and kill me also," she told reporters.

The prime accused, Mohammed Areef's mother was at a loss for words and could only say "my son is gone".

Jollu Ramappa father of Jollu Shiva said his son might have committed the crime but didn't deserve such an end.

"Many people commit rapes and murders. But they were not killed like this. Why they were not meted out such a treatment," Ramappa said.

WE ARE HAPPY: VICTIM'S FAMILY

The Telangana doctor's family thanked the state government and the police and said they were happy about the killings of the rape and murder accused.

"We watched on TV that they were killed in an encounter. We are very happy. Even people are happy. I thank the Telangana government and police for the encounter. I thank everyone who stood by us," the father told the media.

The young woman's sister hoped the killings would be a deterrent for others. "With this incident, people should be scared to commit such crimes," she said.

EVENT EVOKES PRAISES, CONCERNS

While the news of the killings of the four accused in the Telangana rape and murder case were welcomed by many, some have expressed concern over the police's interference in the law. People showered flower petals and paid homage to the veterinarian and raised slogans that justice had been served.

Some even raised the "Telangana Police zindabad" slogans, hailing the cops. In Hyderabad, men and women were seen distributing sweets to police personnel while some expressed their happiness by bursting firecrackers near the encounter site and in other parts of the city.

The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) took cognisance of the killings and ordered an inquiry, saying the encounter was a matter of concern and needed to be probed carefully. Several rights activists spoke out to express their outrage and said the police cannot act like a lynch mob under any circumstance.

Former Finance Minister P Chidambaram said an enquiry should be conducted to determine if the "encounter" was genuine. "As a responsible person," he said, the police's actions must be thoroughly enquired into to find out if the accused were trying to flee and if the encounter was genuine.

In fact, many public figures have raised questions on the circumstances of the pre-dawn killings of the Telangana rape and murder accused.

Bihar's Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Modi said that Hyderabad police's version of how the alleged rapists and murders were killed in a pre-dawn "encounter" sounded "funny".

Addressing the audiences at the India Today Conclave East, Sushil Modi said that he was against lynchings and 'this kind of encounters'.

"I am personally against lynching and this kind of encounter. People are celebrating this, but they [the four rape accused] should have been punished under the law. The cops' version of the story sounds funny," Sushil Modi said.

The early morning encounter of Hyderabad rape accused by the Telangana Police also echoed in Parliament hours later. Women leaders cutting across the political spectrum from Jaya Bachchan to Mayawati to Meenakshi Lekhi, all lauded the police action.

On the other hand, BJP's Maneka Gandhi slammed the police and termed the "encounter" as a dangerous precedent. AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said that there can be "instant coffee but there is nothing like instant justice and the rule of law must take its own course".

THE TELANGANA RAPE-MURDER CASE

The woman was smothered, raped and then burnt by four men in Shamshabad of Ranga Reddy district in Telangana on Wednesday night. The body of the Hyderabad-based veterinary surgeon was found the next day under a culvert in Chatanpally on the Hyderabad-Bengaluru national highway, just a few hours after the crime.

At a press conference, the Cyberabad police revealed that the accused had hatched the plan over drinks. As soon as the doctor left after parking her scooter near the Shamshabad toll plaza, one of them, Jollu Naveen, went and punctured the rear wheel of the scooter. Mohammad Areef, prime accused, offered to help her fix the scooter when she came back.

Also Read | Telangana: Cops said she has eloped, murdered doctor's family alleges police apathy

Even as she refused to accept the "help", Jollu Shiva took her scooter on the pretext of getting it repaired, came back after some time and told her that all the repair shops were closed.

"They [the accused] raped the girl. She died because of accused had covered her mouth and nose during the crime," the Cyberabad police commissioner said. The accused then purchased petrol and burnt the victim's body.

(With inputs from Mausami Singh in New Delhi)
