Transgenders Assaulted at Talapady, Ahinda Demands Arrest of Culprits

Transgenders Assaulted at Talapady, Ahinda Demands Arrest of Culprits

Mangaluru: Ahinda State President Shobha on February 9 demanded the Ullal police to arrest members of the local LGBT group for assaulting three transgenders on February 6 and 7 at Talapady.

The Karnataka Ahinda Vedike State President Women’s wing Shobha speaking to mangalorean.com said, “The Karnataka Ahinda Vedike is involved in helping the helpless people in the society. Today we have come from Bengaluru in support of the transgenders who were assaulted by some members of the local LGBT group. We should understand that Transgenders are also humans and need to be respected. Assaulting the helpless transgenders will not be tolerated. We are here in the Ullal police station to demand justice to the victims. No one has the right to assault anyone. We want the culprits to be arrested and justice is done to the victims.”

Speaking to mangalorean.com State vice president of Karnataka Ahinda Vedike Narasimappa said, “It is condemnable that transgenders have been assaulted. We are here to support them and we will demand the concerned authorities to take action against the culprits who had barged into their house and assaulted them with beer bottles.”

Vice President of Parivarthan Charitable Trust Ramya Gowda said, “On February 6, about 10 members barged into the house of transgender Nisha and assaulted three of the transgenders namely Anushree, Shama and Madhura. They stripped them, forced them to wear men’s attire, clicked their photographs and threatened of serious consequences. In this connection, a case was filed in the Ullal police station”.

Ramya Gowda further said, “On February 7, at around 8:00 am, Arundhati along with Mouni and others barged into Nisha’s house and assaulted them with beer bottles. They also threatened them of serious consequences if they filed any case against them or informed the police. We have no safety for our lives. Now, the Ahinda Vedike has come forward to support us. We hope that we will get justice and those involved in the assault are arrested and dealt according to the law so that they will not repeat such crimes in the future.”

An FIR has been filed against Arundhati, Mouna, Khushi and Krithika under section 143, 147, 148, 448, 504, 506, 323, 324, R/W 149 IPC in the Ullal Police station.
