Delhi: Unnao rape survivor passes away at Safdarjung Hospital

In a tragic development of events, the Unnao rape survivor passed away at 11:40 PM on Friday after suffering a cardiac arrest, Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital confirmed. She was on Thursday airlifted to the hospital where she was undergoing urgent medical treatment for the burns on her body.

Dr Shalabh Kumar, Head of Department (burns and plastic) at the Safdarjung Hospital confirmed that the Unnao rape survivor suffered a cardiac arrest at 11:10 PM. The doctors tried to resuscitate her, he said, but she could not survive and at 11:40 PM she died.

Earlier in the day, she had been put on the ventilator at the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. A doctor at the hospital had informed that she was "unconscious" but her "vitals" were fine.

On Thursday, the rape survivor in Unnao, some 60 kilometres from state capital Lucknow, was set ablaze by those accused who are out on bail.

The attack on the rape survivor has created a massive outrage in the country with demands for strict punishment to the culprits. The incident resonated in the Parliament, with Rajya Sabha chairman Venkaiah Naidu assuring the House that he has spoken to UP chief secretary on the matter.

The five men who raped her in March this year are suspected to be behind the incident. All of them have been arrested, the police said. Out of them, two are accused of raping her.

According to reports, the culprits took the woman to fields outside the village and doused her in kerosene before setting her on fire. The arrests were made on the basis of the victim's statement. While the key accused surrendered himself to the police after the incident, police raided the homes of others as they fled the spot after setting her ablaze.

In March, the victim had filed an FIR against two men from her paternal village in Unnao, accusing them of raping her.

One of the accused was later arrested by the UP Police but he had got out on bail last week. The other accused was on the run.

Taking cognizance of the incident, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had said that the treatment of the victim will be carried out on government expenses and strict action will be taken against the accused.
