Unnao rape victim, set on fire a year after being brutalised, dies

Forensic experts investigate the site where the Unnao rape victim was set ablaze by five men on Thursday. (Photo: PTI)

The Unnao rape victim, who was burned alive by five men on Thursday died at the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi on Friday. The woman was admitted to a Lucknow hospital on Thursday with 90 per cent burns and was later airlifted to Delhi for further treatment. She died at 11:40 pm, the Sardurjung Hospital spokesperson confirmed.

"She [the Unnao rape victim] suffered a cardiac arrest at 11:10 pm and we tried to resuscitate her, but she could not survive and at 11:40 pm, she died," Shalabh Kumar, HOD (burns and plastic), Safdarjung Hospital was quoted as saying by ANI.

The 23-year-old woman was attacked outside the Sindupur village in Unnao district when she was on her way to a court in Rae Bareli to attend a hearing in the rape case. The five men, who burnt her on Thursday, also included the two who were accused of raping the woman in December.

On Thursday, the victim had given her statement to the magistrate. In her statement, the Unnao rape victim had named five persons who burnt her. The woman had said that she was beaten up by the five men who then stabbed her and burned her alive.

Delhi: Visuals from outside Safdarjung Hospital where Unnao rape victim died due to a cardiac arrest, earlier tonight. She was set ablaze in Bihar area of Unnao on December 5 and was later airlifted to Delhi, to be admitted here at the hospital. pic.twitter.com/I2qMo5EGWm ANI (@ANI) December 6, 2019

Ablaze, the Unnao rape victim had to run for over 1 kilometre before she received help. Villagers in Sindupur, where she was burnt, told Aaj Tak that she walked up to a person who was working outside a house and sought help.

The victim then herself called 112 and informed the police about the incident. The PRV and ambulance arrived only after the victim's call. She was taken to a local hospital in Lucknow with 90 per cent and was later shifted to Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (Civil) Hospital.

DON'T WANT TO DIE: UNNAO RAPE VICTIM TO FAMILY

The Unnao rape victim had on Friday told her family that she doesn't want to die and wants to see the accused sentenced to death.

"Usne kaha ki bhahiya mujhe bacha lo, mujhe marna nahi hai. Jinhonne mere sath ye kiya hai, unhe mai maut ki saza paatey dekhna chahti hu [she told me that brother, please save me, I don't want to die. Those who have done this to me, I want to see them getting a death sentence]" the brother of the Unnao rape victim told India Today TV.

Safdarjung Hospital had said the next 24-48 hours are really critical for her. She was on a ventilator.

Her family had alleged that their relatives have been getting death threats for pursuing this case.

CONDOLENCES POUR IN

NCP leader Supriya Sule extended her condolences saying, "We need to ensure she gets justice as well as all other rape victims."

She tweeted: "Another innocent life lost to rape. Extremely saddened to hear about the demise of the Unnao Rape Victim. My heartfelt condolences. May she rest in Peace. We need to ensure she gets justice as well as all other rape victims...enough is enough...."

Another innnocent life lost to rape. Extremely Saddened to hear about the demise of the Unnao Rape Victim. My heartfelt condolences. May she rest in Peace. We need to ensure she gets justice as well as all other rape victims...enough is enough.... Supriya Sule (@supriya_sule) December 6, 2019

Meanwhile, Lok Janshakti Party leader Chirag Paswan appealed Prime Minister Narendra Modi to ensure strict and quick justice for the victim.

He tweeted: "Saddened by the demise of Unnao rape victim. If the justice system had the law to deliver quick justice, the accused would not have committed such heinous crime. @PMOIndia I urge that a provision should be made to ensure strict and speedy justice by improving the law so that no such untoward incident happens in the future."

All India Mahila Congress took a dig at the Uttar Pradesh government while condoling the death of the Unnao rape survivor. "As the UP government goes to sleep another of 'India's daughter' succumbs to a system that failed to protect her Unnao rape victim who was set ablaze in Unnao and airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital yesterday, died at 11:40 pm. RIP you brave girl. You fought hard," it said in a tweet.

As the UP govt goes to sleep another of 'India's daughter' succumbs to a system that failed to protect her#Unnao rape victim who was set ablaze in Unnao and airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital yesterday, died at 11:40 pm.



RIP you brave girl. You fought hard. — All India Mahila Congress (@MahilaCongress) December 6, 2019

THE UNNAO RAPE

The Unnao rape victim was battling for life with 90 per cent burns. She was beaten up, stabbed and then set ablaze by five men on Thursday. All the five accused - Harishankar Trivedi, Ram Kishore Trivedi, Umesh Bajpai, Shivam and Shubham Trivedi - involved in the attack on the Unnao rape victim were arrested hours after the incident.

The prime accused has been identified as Shubham Trivedi.

In her statement, the Unnao rape survivor had alleged that Shivam and Shubham Trivedi had abducted and raped her in December 2018. She had filed a case against the two in March this year.

Shubham, who was in jail in connection with the rape case, was released on bail on November 30, 2019.

Immediately after securing bail, Shubham started following and threatening her.

The victim and her family visited the Bihar police station close to the Sindupur village in Unnao several times but the police turned a deaf ear to the complaints. The victim was on her way to a Rae Bareli court when she was abducted by the five men.
