Unnao gang rape victim set on fire on Thursday, dies at Delhi hospital

The Unnao rape victim, who was set on fire on Thursday by five men including the two accused of gang raping her last December, died at Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital around midnight on Friday, said sources at the hospital.

The 24-year-old woman was assaulted on Thursday in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao when on the way to a court to appear in the hearing of the rape case she had filed. She suffered 95% burns and was briefly treated at two state government hospitals before being airlifted to New Delhi late Thursday night.

The victim, who was on ventilator support, suffered cardiac arrest at 10 minutes past 11 pm on Friday night and was declared dead 30 minutes later at 11:40 pm, said hospital sources.

“Doctors tried to resuscitate her for almost 30 minutes but to no avail. She was declared dead at around 11.40 pm,” said hospital sources.

Her death follows her father expressing the fear the same day that she may not survive.

“My daughter’s condition is extremely critical, only God can save her now,” he had said and demanded that all the five men accused of burning her alive be killed in an encounter to serve her justice.

His daughter was on the way to a local railway station in Unnao to catch an early morning train to Rae Bareli for the court hearing when she was accosted by the accused at 4.30 am on Thursday and set afire.

In her statement given to subdivisional magistrate (SDM) Daya Shankar Pathak at the Unnao district hospital, the rape survivor said the men first hit her on the head and attacked her with a knife. As she fell, they poured petrol and set her on fire.

Covered in flames, she ran for a kilometre, begging for help from the locals. Some of them informed the police.

All the five men named by the victim--Shivam Trivedi, his cousin Shubham, Shivam’s father Hari Shankar Trivedi, uncle Ram Kishore Trivedi and Umesh Bajpai-- were arrested after the incident and sent to 14 days’ judicial custody on Friday. Shivam Trivedi and Shubham Trivedi are accused of gang raping the victim in December 2018.

The Uncle of the rape survivor told police on Friday that he was being threatened by the relatives of the arrested accused.
