City police steps up initiatives to ensure women’s safety

Mysuru: The gang rape and murder of a woman in Hyderabad has prompted city police to reinforce women’s safety measures in Mysuru. The police have decided to launch special drives on the lines of the one aimed at curbing chain-snatching and also decided to educate girl students about safety.

Since December is observed as crime prevention month, cops are focusing on safety of women.

Commissioner of police KT Balakrishna told TOI that the city police had come out with various initiatives to ensure safety of women. “After the incident in Telangana, we don’t want to take any chances with regard to their safety. We would review the initiatives besides launching drives in mornings and evenings on the lines of special efforts taken up to curb chain-snatching. Our general advice to women is to avoid taking secluded and poorly-lit roads. Always prefer main roads to commute and keep one’s trusted people in the loop on travels and schedules. In case any women feel troubled by anyone, they can knock on the doors of police without any hesitation,” he said.

Five years after two initiatives were introduced by city police to facilitate college-going girls, the police are reviewing them. The police had launched an all-women patrol team – Chamundi vehicle— and installed ‘Pink complaint boxes’ in colleges to receive any complaint of harassment. The initiatives were taken after the Delhi gang rape and murder in 2012. An all-women patrol vehicle named Chamundi vehicle has been patrolling near colleges to ensure that girls aren’t troubled by Road Romeos and it was a successful initiative. Subsequently, the police increased the number of vehicles to four to cover all parts of Mysuru city. The presence of vehicles literally came helpful as the number of youths roaming around bus stops came down.

The second initiative was to install complaint boxes in colleges. This was to help girls lodge complaint without disclosing their identities. In the initial stages, cops received complaints and attended to them.

Deputy commissioner of police (crime) B T Kavitha said the complaint box initiative was introduced when she was assistant commissioner of police in Mysuru. The DCP said she would verify how many complaints have been received from each complaint boxes.

-----

Crime Prevention Month

City police is observing December as ‘crime prevention month’ and are reaching out to public to educate them about preventing crimes. Metagalli police on Thursday conducted an awareness at government pre-university college at Metagalli wherein they stressed on the safety of women.

-------

No streetlights on ORR

Despite incidents of murderous attacks on women on the outskirts bordering outer ring road, authorities seem to be silent on ensuring adequate lighting all along the outer ring road (ORR) in Mysuru. The total length of ring road is 42 km.

Police officers feel that lack of streetlights on ORR could pose a threat to women.

After ORR was handed over to national highways, both Mysuru City Corporation and Mysuru Urban Development Authority have washed off their hands on providing streetlights. Both of them have shirked their responsibilities citing jurisdiction but following the complaint, the MCC have sought government permission in this regard.

District incharge minister V Somanna too had in October assured to provide lighting within a month but it is yet to come true.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
