Vadodara: Rs 7 lakh interim compensation given to survivor

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

VADODARA: The District Legal Services Authority (DLSA) on Friday granted an interim compensation of Rs 7lakh to the 14-year-old Navlakhi ground gang-rape survivour under the Gujarat Victim Compensation Scheme, 2019. The compensation cheque was given to the girl’s mother in the office of chairman, DLSA in the court premises.The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board held a meeting on Wednesday and decided to grant an interim relief to the rape survivor. Minister of state for home, Pradipsinh Jadeja had on Thursday said that the girl will be compensated as early as possible. The cheque was given in presence of city police commissioner Anupam Singh Gahlaut and other district officials. However, the cops haven’t been able to nab the culprits or get any major clue even after eight days of the incident.Senior police officials said that the sketches that they had got prepared and circulated were not of much help now as the girl hasn’t been able to recognize the suspects from the sketches and photos. The investigators are now relying on the intelligence inputs. One of the citizens who is helping the cops in tracking the suspects, said that the accused may be of the nomadic tribe from some part of Rajasthan.“The girl said that the suspects were talking in some different language similar to Marwadi. There is a possibility that the suspects may have even fled the city,” he said. The detection of crime branch (DCB) has picked up 20 persons and are collecting their DNA samples.“We are questioning and collecting samples of the suspects who were in that area on the night of gang-rape. The cops are also working on two different theories now,” a police official said. The girl was hanging out with her 16-year-old male friend at an isolated spot on the night of November 28 when the accused thrashed the boy and dragged the girl in a dark spot and took turns to rape her.
