Rights activists concerned over Hyderabad killings

shalender@tribune.com

Naveen S Garewal

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, December 6

The encounter of the four suspects, accused of gang-raping and murdering a vet, has been largely hailed across the nation, but rights organisations have expressed concern, terming the move extra-judicial killings.

People distributed sweets and showered flower petals at the encounter site.

Tripti Desai of the Bhumata Brigade, who had staged a protest outside the CM’s house, justified the police action. She said she was satisfied.

Meanwhile, people on social media doubted the veracity of the police claims. Several rights activists said the police could not act like a lynch mob. The encounter is an attempt by authorities to distract people from the government’s failure to safeguard women’s rights, activists said.

National Commission for Women (NCW) chairperson Rekha Sharma said though the NCW wanted death penalty for the accused, it should have come through proper judicial channel.

According to Kavita Krishnan, secretary of the All India Progressive Women’s Association, this is not justice but a ploy to silence demands for accountability from the police, judiciary and governments. She accused Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao of deflecting the whole issue.

Lawyer and rights activist Vrinda Grover termed the incident “absolutely unacceptable”. She asked for an independent judicial inquiry into the incident.

The victim’s family has welcomed the encounter. Her father said his daughter’s soul would be at peace. Her sister said though the victim wouldn’t return, the encounter would serve as a deterrent for others.

Preserve bodies till Dec 9, HC tells state

Hyderabad: The Telangana High Court on Friday directed the state government to preserve the bodies of the four rape accused till 8 pm on December 9. The HC gave the order on a representation received in the office of the Chief Justice, requesting judicial intervention into the incident, alleging it was an extra-judicial killing. The HC directed that the video of the postmortem in compact disc form or pen drive be handed over to the Principal District Judge, Mahabubnagar. PTI

Injured cops have no bullet wounds

Hyderabad, December 6

A private hospital in Hyderabad has released a medical bulletin on the two cops injured during the encounter with the gangrape accused today. Though the police commissioner clarified later that unlike presumed the two had not suffered any bullet injuries, the medical report suggests that the two only suffered some blunt injuries.

As per the report released by Dr Gopal Krishna, head, medical administration, one policeman Venkateswaralu (35) had some abrasions over the frontal region of the head, but the patient is neurologically and hemodynamically stable and is being treated.

Similarly, other cop Arvindh Goud (35) had a blunt injury on left hand and shoulder and is neurologically and hemodynamically stable and is also being treated. — TNS
