Rohini murders: Delhi: Man stabs wife, daughter-in-law to death on suspicion of 'extramarital' affairs

The 35-year-old victim and the daughter-in-law of the accused worked as an air hostess with a private airline. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man stabs wife, daughter-in-law, who worked as airhostess Murders took place in Rohini area of Delhi Accused worked as a private tutor

New Delhi: In a tragic and shocking incident, a man stabbed his wife and daughter-in-law to death on suspicion of having 'extramarital' affairs in Rohini area of Delhi. The victims are aged 62and 35.

The accused has been identified as 64-year-old Satish Chaudhary, who killed the two women while they were sleeping in the early hour of Friday.

According to a report in Times of India, Chaudhary's grandchildren aged one and 3-year-old were sleeping in the same room where the murders took place. The accused works as a private tutor.

Police said Saurabh, the elder son of the accused, suffered injuries as he intervened to save his mother from the attack. Later, Saurabh managed to overpower Chaudhary, snatched a large knife and then locked him in a room before calling the police.

The 35-year-old victim and the daughter-in-law of the accused worked as an air hostess with a private airline. The victim's husband is a software professional currently working in Singapore.

According to neighbours, the children, who were rescued from the house by Saurabh had bloodstains on their clothes. Saurabh was bleeding profusely when he came out of the house.

"The accused identified as Satish Chaudhary stabbed the victims with a large kitchen knife. A case of murder (Section 302) has been registered against him after he was arrested by the police," said SD Mishra, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Rohini).

Saurabh suffered two stab wounds in the hands. His mother was conscious while she was taken to the hospital, but later succumbed to her injuries during treatment. The 35-year-old victim was declared brought dead at the hospital.

Saurabh's mother retired as a clerk from the Delhi Development Authority (DDA). Saurabh also works at an IT firm in Bengaluru.

Quoting a police source, the report said that the accused had no remorse for what he did and was relaxed during interrogation.
