Tanushree Dutta seeks an enquiry against police officers who filed the B Summary in her case

Tanushree Dutta seeks ACB enquiry against police officers

Former Miss India Tanushree Dutta took the world by a storm with her explosive interview with Zoom Tv where she spoke about being intimidated by National Award-winning actor Nana Patekar. Tanushree narrated an incident that took place on the sets of Horn Ok Please back in 2008 where Tanushree was shooting for a song sequence. She went on to file a complaint at the Oshiwara Police Station. But her lawyer on her behalf is now seeking an enquiry against the police officers who filed the B Summary in her case.

As per a recent report, the police had registered a sexual assault case in June with a B Summary report filed in court. A report in PTI reveals, "The petition demanded that the court initiate a contempt proceeding against the investigating officer for filing a 'false' report, and that a case should be registered against him by the Anti Corruption Bureau. It also demanded narco-analysis of all the accused and the investigating officer."

Another report in IndiaToday states, "Shyney Shetty, Assistant Director of film HORN OK Please" was called to the police station for the investigation purpose. Police had recorded her statement partly, told her to leave the police station as they do not have time to complete her statement, due to bandobast. Thereafter IO (investigating officer) has not taken any pain to recall and complete her statement."

In the interview given, Tanushree goes on to say that Nana Patekar has a history of assaulting women. She said that the actress is known to be rude to women on the sets and has also beaten them. She goes on to add, "Everyone knows about Nana Patekar that he has always been disrespectful towards women. People in the industry know about this and that he has beaten actresses, he has molested them, his behaviour with women has always been crude but no publication has printed anything about it. "

Stay tuned for all the latest updates on entertainment.
