In search for justice, Unnao rape survivor's family wants 'encounter killing' of accused

She died of a cardiac arrest on Friday night (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights She died of a cardiac arrest on Friday night, said doctors at Safdarjung hospital Her post-mortem began at 10 am this morning Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath has assured 'speedy justice' for the victim

Lucknow: Less than 24 hours have passed since the tragic demise of the Unnao rape survivor who was set ablaze by the same men she had accused of rape. Now, her family members in Uttar Pradesh are demanding that the culprits be killed in an act of 'encounter killing' and how it is the only way their sister can get justice. The survivor died around 11:40 pm on Friday night at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital.

Visuals of her mortal remains being taken to an ambulance for them to be returned to Unnao are being shared by eyewitnesses on social media. Her mother and sister can be seen sitting inside the ambulance along with her remains which will be taken to her hometown in Uttar Pradesh by road. A woman reportedly poured inflammable liquid on her minor daughter in a demonstration to demand justice for the victim outside the Safdarjung hospital. Both the mother and child were rescued by the Delhi police.

She was airlifted from Unnao in Uttar Pradesh to the national capital on Thursday after being briefly for burns suffered during the attack that morning. Preliminary reports indicate that she was on her way to the court for the hearing of her case when the five accused surrounded her and thrashed her before pouring kerosene on her and setting her ablaze.

She was rushed to the district hospital in Unnao but later airlifted to the Safdarjung hospital in Delhi. A green corridor was created for her to be moved from Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) to Safdarjung hospital, a distance of 13 kilometres which was covered in a mere 18 minutes. Head of Safdarjung hospital's Burns and Plastic Department Dr Shalab Kumar said that she died of a cardiac arrest on Friday night after being treated for 90 per cent burns in a dedicated ICU set up to treat her.

Her post-mortem began at the Safdarjung Hospital at 10 am this morning under the supervision of Dr MK Wahi, the head of the forensic department. The Medical Superintendent of Safdarjung Hospital, Dr Sunil Gupta said that neither Uttar Pradesh nor Delhi police will be part of the forensic procedure. Preliminary reports suggest that she died of a cardiac arrest. In her statement to a magistrate, the girl said that she was thrashed and stabbed in the neck by the accused who later set her ablaze in broad daylight without any fear of the law.

Family members of the girl have also alleged that relatives of the accused are threatening them. Her uncle claimed someone had told him that his shop will be burnt and he would not be allowed to live anymore. Meanwhile, one of the accused's sisters demanding a CBI inquiry into the matter, claiming that her brother is innocent. "We want our sister's last wish to be fulfilled. She named those five people and said they should not live and I said that wouldn't. That's all we wish for," said the victim's brother. Her father said that the accused should either be hanged or killed by the police in an encounter similar to the one that took place in Telangana on Thursday.
