Unnao: BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj, two other leaders heckled in rape victim’s village

Uttar Pradesh BJP ministers Swami Prasad Maurya and Kamal Rani Varun, along with BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj, were heckled by protesters on Saturday as they reached the village of the Unnao rape victim to meet her family.

The UP Police used force to disperse the crowd, which consisted of several local Congress leaders. The protesters, who were shouting ‘Vaapas Jao, Vaapas Jao’ (Go Back) and raising slogans against the state government, sustained injuries.

Earlier in the day, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said the death of the Unnao rape victim was ‘extremely sad’ and announced that the case would be tried in a fast-track court. In an official statement today, Adityanath said, “All the accused persons have been arrested. The case will be taken to a fast-track court, and punishment will be given.”

Also read | Demanding justice for victim, woman pours inflammable liquid on daughter outside Delhi hospital

The 23-year-old woman was set on fire by five men, including two who were accused of raping her. The victim, who died at 11.40 pm on Friday following a cardiac arrest, had suffered more than 90 per cent burns, most of which were facial and inhalation injuries.

Congress workers protest against the Unnao rape case in Lucknow on Saturday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastav) Congress workers protest against the Unnao rape case in Lucknow on Saturday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastav)

She was brought to Delhi in an air ambulance Thursday evening, after she was waylaid and set ablaze while on her way to Rae Bareli in connection with the rape case.

The body of the victim reached her home at around 9:00 pm on Saturday evening.

This is the second such case from Unnao to make national headlines after a woman accused former BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar of rape in 2017 when she was just 17.

Want to see accused shot dead or hanged: Victim’s father

Back in Unnao, the victim’s father demanded justice akin to the Hyderabad case.

“I want to see the accused persons being chased and shot dead. I do not want money or any other kind of help. I want to see that the accused are chased and shot dead like the Hyderabad encounter or hanged to death,” he said.

UP Police lathicharge protesting Congress workers outside the state Assembly in Lucknow on Saturday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastav) UP Police lathicharge protesting Congress workers outside the state Assembly in Lucknow on Saturday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastav)

When asked if anyone had come forward to ensure them justice, he said neither any MLA nor official has tried to help them. “The accused persons had used money power to deny justice to us. My case was not lodged and it was only after the court’s directive that it was registered,” he said.

The victim’s brother said she will get justice when all those accused of brutalising her will go to the place “where she has gone”. “She asked me to save her. I am very sad that I could not save her,” he told reporters in the national capital.

Why was no security given to Unnao victim? asks Priyanka

Reacting to the incident, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra questioned the Uttar Pradesh government on why the victim was not given security keeping in mind a similar incident that took place earlier in the same district.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra is also expected to arrive at Unnao today.

Earlier in the day, she tweeted, “Why the victim of Unnao gangrape case was not given security keeping in mind an earlier incident of Unnao? What action has been taken on the police official who refused to register an FIR? What steps are being taken by the government to stop crime against the women, which take place on a daily basis?”

In another tweet, Priyanka Gandhi said: “I pray to God to give courage to the family members of Unnao victim.”

Akhilesh Yadav stages dharna outside UP Assembly

Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav sat on a dharna outside the state Assembly in Lucknow to protest against the rape case.

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav stages a dharna outside the Uttar Pradesh Assembly in Lucknow on Saturday. (Express photo/Vishal Srivastav)

“Her last words were that she wanted to stay alive. Despite all efforts, doctors could not save her. Today is a black day for us. This is not the first case under the BJP government. The chief minister had said in this very assembly, ‘apradhiyon ko thok diya jayega‘ (the culprits will be punished), they could not save a woman’s life. No daughter is safe under this government,” he told reporters.

Unnao case accused should be hanged within a month: Swati Maliwal

Delhi Commission For Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal today demanded that the accused in the Unnao case be hanged within a month. “I appeal to the UP government and the Centre to fast track this case and ensure that the perpetrators are hanged within a month,” said Maliwal, who begun an indefinite hunger strike on December 3 to press her demand that rapists be hanged within six months of their conviction.

National Commission for Women chief Rekha Sharma also visited the Delhi hospital to meet the victim’s family.

UP govt announces compensation of Rs 25 lakh for family

The Uttar Pradesh government on Saturday announced an ex gratia of Rs 25 lakh for the family of the victim, a senior official said. Besides the ex gratia, the family will also be given a government house, said UP minister Swami Prasad Maurya.

“The Chief Minister is very much with the family of the deceased in this hour of crisis. The culprits will be dealt with sternly and punished. A fast track court will be set up with this view in mind,” Maurya said.

Earlier in the day, Maurya, along with Kamal Rani Varun and local BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj met the victim’s family in Unnao.
