Priyanka Gandhi's angry says- "We are all guilty socially, but this is hollow in Uttar Pradesh..."

After the death of the daughter of Unnao who was burnt by putting kerosene on Friday night, there is both grief and anger among the leaders along with the common people. In Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital, the woman kept on a ventilator had burnt up to 95 percent. Expressing sorrow over the death of the rape victim, the leaders of various political parties have also expressed their grief and demanded immediate justice from the government.

US special envoy Khalilzad suddenly reached Afghanistan

According to the media report, the brother of the rape victim has demanded the death penalty to the five accused. He says that he does not want anything less than this. He is currently in Delhi. The post-mortem of the rape victim is going on there. After this, his body will be brought to Unnao. The last rites will be performed here. At the same time, Priyanka Vadra has left for Unnao to meet the family of the rape victim.

Most victims of Sudan fire tragedy belonged to Tamil Nadu, Bihar

In her statement, Bahujan Samaj Party President Mayawati tweeted that 'the painful death of the Unnao rape victim, who died in Delhi last night, is very painful. BSP is with the victim's family in this hour of grief. The UP government should take special initiative soon to provide proper justice to the aggrieved family, this is the demand for justice and public demand. Also, to prevent such traumatic incidents across the country, including UP, the state governments should create fear of law among the people and keeping in mind such incidents, the law to punish the culprits within the stipulated time.

Iran Nuclear Deal becomes reason for terrible situation

Apart from this, Priyanka Vadra said that 'I pray to God that Unnao gives courage to the victim's family in this hour of grief. It is a failure of all of us that we could not give him justice. Socially, we are all guilty, but it also shows the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh. The house of the rape victim's burnt in Unnao is in Lalganj area of Rae Bareli. Priyanka Vadra also took information about this on Friday night.
