Rapists will not be spared, says UP Deputy CM after Unnao victim’s death

Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya on Saturday expressed his condolences to the family of the Unnao rape victim, who succumbed to her burn injuries at a Delhi hospital.

Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya assured the family of the rape victim that those behind the crime will not be spared and punishment will be given to them at the earliest.

"This is an extremely unfortunate incident, I can't even imagine what the family of the victim is going through. I assure them that we will not spare the culprits, will get them punished at the earliest," Uttar Pradesh deputy CM said.

Keshav Prasad Maurya,UP Deputy Chief Minister on Unnao rape victim passes away:This is an extremely unfortunate incident, I can't even imagine what the family of the victim is going through. I assure them that we will not spare the culprits, will get them punished at the earliest pic.twitter.com/w5J9Ac1QMR ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

Keshav Prasad Maurya also took to Twitter to pay his final tributes to the Unnao rape victim and said that the state government tried its best to save her life, but she lost the battle.

"The mind is deeply distressed at the sad news of the daughter's death in the inhuman incident in Safdarjung Hospital. The state government tried its best to save the daughter's life, but the courageous daughter lost the battle of life," Deputy CM Keshav Prasad Maurya tweeted in Hindi.

"Pray to God to give peace to the departed soul and the family to bear this infinite grief. The government will do everything possible to get such misdemeanors the harshest punishment as soon as possible!" he added.

l ! (2/2) Keshav Prasad Maurya (@kpmaurya1) December 7, 2019

After days of fighting, the rape victim from Uttar Pradesh's Unnao district, airlifted to Delhi and admitted to the Safdarjung Hospital after she was set on fire allegedly by five persons, died on Friday night.

"She [the Unnao rape victim] suffered a cardiac arrest at 11:10 pm and we tried to resuscitate her, but she could not survive and at 11:40 pm, she died," the Sardurjung Hospital spokesperson confirmed.

The 23-year-old woman was admitted to a Lucknow hospital on Thursday with 90 per cent burns and was later airlifted to Delhi for further treatment.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Saturday termed the death of Unnao gangrape victim "extremely sad" and conveyed his condolences to the aggrieved family.

"All the accused persons have been arrested. The case will be taken to a fast-track court, and punishment will be given," he said in a statement.
