Murdered in cold blood, teacher from Punjab had cited threat to life in police complaint

She had written to the Mohali SSP (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights She had alleged Sandhu of raping, torturing and assaulting her on multiple occasions They moved back from France and settled down in Mohali in September of last year Police is attempting to capture the accused travel agent from Barnala

Chandigarh: Two days have passed since a 29-year-old teacher was murdered in cold blood in plain sight of her 5-year-old daughter in Punjab's Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar district. Developments coming to light now reveal that the victim had approached police with a complaint citing a threat to life from the father of her child.

At this point, the main suspect in the case is one Harwinder Singh Sandhu, a resident of Alkara village in Barnala. Sandhu met the victim for the first time in 2009 while the two were at the same interview for a call centre. They grew closer and he helped find her a better job before asking her to marry him.

In her complaint, the victim said that the first instance where Sandhu sexually assaulted her took place in 2010. He apologised and promised to marry her again but did not keep his word. She cited another incident from 2012 when he raped her but maintained that he was going to marry her. The two later moved to Malaysia and then to Paris in 2013. About a year into their stay in France, the victim delivered a baby girl but the two did not get married.

The victim told the Mohali senior superintendent of police (SSP) in September that they returned to India in June 2018 and settled in Mohali in September, according to a report by Hindustan Times. A year later, she found out that he was already married and the father of two daughters. When she confronted him, he threatened to kill her and their daughter at the victim's parents' home.

Police have launched a search for Sandhu who has been booked in a case under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and sections 25, 54 and 59 of the Arms Act. It is still unclear whether it was Sandhu, the Barnala-based travel agent or someone else he contracted for the job who fired three bullets at the victim on Thursday morning that led to her death. Video captured by CCTV footage shows a man wearing a shawl opening fire at the victim in front of her daughter as she parks her scooter outside the private school in Kharar where she had been teaching French and Punjabi since April of this year.
