Akhilesh sits on dharna, seeks UP govt's removal over Unnao victim's death

president and former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister sat on a dharna outside the Vidhan Bhavan here on Saturday, accusing the government of failing the Unnao gangrape victim who was set on fire and died at a hospital in Delhi. Terming the day a "Black Day", he demanded that the BJP government in the state be removed.

Accompanied by senior party leaders, Yadav squatted before the main entrance of the Vidhan Sabha and said his party will agitate against the government in all district headquarters. "What help you have given to the family of the girl? Will you run your government in this manner?" Yadav asked.



"A government which is giving sorrow and creating difficulties. Our demand is that this government should be removed. The party will agitate for people, and in this regard the will hold 'shok sabha' (condolence meetings) in all district headquarters. It will be in memory of all the daughters, who had lost their lives," he told reporters.

The 23-year-old woman was set on fire by five people, including two men accused of raping her, on Thursday morning when she was going to Rae Bareli to attend a court hearing. She suffered 90% burn injuries and was airlifted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital for treatment but died late Friday night. Her body was taken to her village by road on Saturday.

CM Adityanath has termed her death "extremely sad". He said in a statement that all the accused have been arrested and the case will be tried in a fast-track court and punishment will be served. But Yadav said the victim could not be saved despite efforts.

"We will continue to fight for the honour of the daughters. Despite efforts, the victim could not be saved. A daughter who is demanding justice, is unable to get it. This is a Black Day for us," he said.

Attacking the Adityanath government, he referred to a previous rape case in Unnao in which BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar was made an accused. The victim in the 2017 case tried to immolate herself outside the residence of the chief minister, alleging police inaction in the matter. In July this year, the car she was travelling in was hit by a truck and two of her aunts died.

"This is not the first case under this government. Try to remember the day, when a daughter after failing to get justice tried to end her life outside the Chief Minister's residence in Lucknow. A daughter of Unnao lost her entire family, for which the BJP government is responsible. The government is also responsible for the death of a daughter, who lost her life today," the SP chief.

He said the girl, who was burnt in Unnao, was brave and wanted to live, adding that such girls "inspire us to fight for justice".

"The chief minister in the House said that criminals will be shot dead. Those who had committed crimes have left Uttar Pradesh. But what's the reason that criminals are still living in UP. The government had promised to give security to girls but they have been unable to provide justice to them," he said.



Meanwhile, angry locals from the victim's native village have staged massive protests as two ministers - Kamal Rani Varun and Swami Prasad Maurya from the Adityanath's government arrived this evening to visit the woman's family, according to ANI. Maurya after visiting the family members assured that 'No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics.'
