Unnao rape case: Akhilesh Yadav sits on dharna, demands UP CM's resignation

Samajwadi Party (SP) leader and former Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav has upped the ante against Uttar Pradesh government demanding resignations of chief minister Yogi Adityanath and other leaders in wake of the death of the Unnao rape victim who was set on ablaze by those accused who are out on bail.

Akhilesh Yadav is sitting on a 'dharna' outside Vidhan Sabha in Lucknow.

"Till the day Chief Minister, state Home Secretary and DGP don't resign, justice will not be done. Tomorrow we will conduct a shokh sabha in all districts of the state over Unnao rape case," Akhilesh Yadav said.

"This is an extremely condemnable incident. This is a black day. It is not the first such incident under this BJP government. CM had said in this very assembly, 'apradhiyon ko thok diya jayega', they could not save the life of a daughter," Akhilesh Yadav added.

Akhilesh Yadav,Samajwadi Party: Till the day Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, state Home Secretary and DGP don't resign, justice will not be done. Tomorrow we will conduct a shokh sabha in all districts of the state over Unnao rape case. https://t.co/Fzs93kW08W pic.twitter.com/HZkGIDCVLn — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

Earlier, mortal remains of Unnao rape victim were taken to her village in Unnao, from Safdarjung hospital in Delhi. She had passed away last night during treatment.

Meanwhile, Yogi Adityanath has expressed grief over the death of Unnao rape victim saying that all the accused have been arrested and the case will be taken to a fast-track court.

The Unnao rape survivor passed away at 11:40 pm on Friday after suffering a cardiac arrest, Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital confirmed. She was on Thursday airlifted to the hospital where she was undergoing urgent medical treatment for the burns on her body.

"This is an extremely unfortunate incident, I can't even imagine what the family of the victim is going through. I assure them that we will not spare the culprits, will get them punished at the earliest," Keshav Prasad Maurya, UP Deputy Chief Minister said.

On Thursday, the rape survivor in Unnao, some 60 km from state capital Lucknow, was set ablaze by those accused who are out on bail.

The attack on the rape survivor has created a massive outrage in the country with demands for strict punishment to the culprits. The incident resonated in the Parliament, with Rajya Sabha chairman Venkaiah Naidu assuring the House that he has spoken to UP chief secretary on the matter.
