‘Hatred is being spread...’: Rahul Gandhi attacks government

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi attacked the Centre on Saturday for the “rise in violence and breakdown of institutional structures” in the country.

“You have seen the increase in violence across the country, lawlessness and atrocities against women. Everyday we read about some woman being raped, molested, thrashed. There is violence against minority communities, hatred is being spread against them. There are reports of violence against Dalits, of thrashing them, cutting off their arms. We also hear about atrocities against tribals, and snatching of their land,” ANI quoted him as saying.

Watch | ‘Ideology of violence, division’: Rahul Gandhi attacks government

“There is a reason for this breakdown of our institutional structures, a reason that people are taking law into their own hands. It is because the man who is running this country believes in violence and indiscriminate power,” Gandhi added.

He was speaking at an event in Sultan Batheray during his three day visit to Wayanad, his parliamentary constituency.

He hit out at the prime minister over a rape case in which he said a BJP MLA is involved.

“India is known as the rape capital of the world. Foreign nations are asking the question why India is unable to look after its daughters and sisters. A UP MLA of BJP is involved in rape of a woman and the Prime Minister doesn’t say a single word,” the Congress MP said in his constituency Wayanad in Kerala, reports news agency ANI.

#WATCH Rahul Gandhi in Wayanad,Kerala: India is known as the rape capital of the world. Foreign nations are asking the question why India is unable to look after its daughters & sisters. A UP MLA of BJP is involved in rape of a woman & the Prime Minister doesn't say a single word pic.twitter.com/FOE35sflGT — ANI (@ANI) 7 December 2019

Rahul Gandhi’s remarks came amidst nationwide outrage over rape and murder of a veterinary doctor in Telangana and a 24-year-old in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao. Four men accused of raping and murdering the veterinarian were killed in an encounter on the outskirts of Hyderabad. While the encounter was widely hailed by the people, some politicians tread a cautious line and advised the police to exercise restraint.

The UP government, meanwhile, is facing flak from the Opposition over the death of Unnao rape victim, who was set on fire by five men, including those who raped her. She was air-lifted to Delhi after the attack on Thursday and died of a cardiac arrest while being treated in a city hospital.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Saturday rushed to Unnao to meet the family of the victim.

Attacking the state government, she questioned the lack of security measures to keep the victim safe. “Keeping in view the past incident why the victim was not given security? What action was taken against the officer who did not lodge her FIR? Atrocity on women is an everyday affair in Uttar Pradesh. What action is the government taking?” she said on Twitter.

Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister and Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav demanded that the state’s BJP government should resign.

Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said the Unao incident is “extremely sad”. He also said that the case will be taken to a fast-track court, and strict punishment will be given.
