Justice loses its character if it becomes revenge: CJI, a day after encounter of Telangana rape accused

Chief Justice of India Sharad Arvind Bobde | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Justice loses its character as justice if it becomes revenge: CJI Earlier today, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad urged CJI to ensure a mechanism for quick disposal of rape cases RS Prasad said that the women of the country are under pain and distress and crying for justice

Jodhpur: Chief Justice of India Sharad Arvind Bobde, on Saturday, said that justice loses its character as justice if it becomes revenge, a day after all the four accused in Telangana rape and murder case were killed in police encounter.

"Recent events in country have sparked off the old debate with new vigour. There is no doubt that criminal justice system must reconsider its position and attitude towards laxity and eventual time it takes to dispose off criminal matters," the CJI was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

"I don't think justice can ever be or ought to be instant. And justice must never ever take the form of revenge. I believe justice loses its character of justice if it becomes a revenge," he added.

#WATCH: Chief Justice of India (CJI) Sharad Arvind Bobde: I don't think justice can ever be or ought to be instant. And justice must never ever take the form of revenge. I believe justice loses its character of justice if it becomes a revenge. pic.twitter.com/oKIHKecHqt — ANI (@ANI) December 7, 2019

Earlier today, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad appealed to the CJI and other senior judges to ensure that there is a mechanism to monitor quick disposal of rape cases.

Expressing concern over rising incidents of crime against women, the minister said that the women of the country are under pain and distress and crying for justice.

"I would urge the CJI and other senior judge that now there must be a mechanism to monitor the disposal of these cases so that India's stature as a proud country governed by rule of law must be restored at the earliest," Prasad said, assuring government funding for it, PTI reported.

"The women of the country are under pain and distress. They are crying for justice," he said, adding that the government is in the process of setting up 1,123 dedicated courts for POCSO and rape offences. He also said there are 704 fast-track courts for heinous offences and others.

"In the law relating to women violence, we have already laid down capital punishment and other severe punishment including completion of trial in two months time," he added.

The Law Minister's appeal comes amid public rage over the brutal murder and rape of woman in Telangana's Cyberabad where a 26-year-old woman was raped by four men and charred to death.

The incident that sparked a nationwide outrage also drew attention on Friday when all the four accused were shot dead in police encounter after they allegedly tried to escape while the crime scene was being reconstructed.


