In an attempt to evade gallows, convict in Nirbhaya case cries conspiracy over 'faulty mercy plea'

Nirbhaya's mother who is demanding that the convicts be executed at the earliest (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The brutality of the 2012 gang-rape in Delhi had sent waves of shock across not just India but the world as well Vinay Sharma's lawyer now attempts to file a mercy plea Four of the remaining convict are lodged in Tihar jail while one had committed suicide in 2013 and the sixth was a juvenile

New Delhi: In what is being perceived as another tactic to buy more time, the lawyer for Vinay Sharma has withdrawn the mercy plea sent to the President of India. He claims that the plea was sent without the approval and even the signature of Sharma, one of the convicts in the horrific 2012 Delhi gang-rape case.

According to reports, the lawyer sent a letter addressed to President Ram Nath Kovind on Friday, claiming that the earlier mercy plea sent to him by the Ministry of Home Affairs did not carry the signature of his client. Sharma is one of the four convicted in the gang-rape of a 23-year-old paramedical student who succumbed to her injuries despite best efforts by doctors to revive her. All the four convicted in this case are currently lodged at Tihar jail and await execution.

Now, the lawyer of Vinay Sharma seeks to replace the earlier-filed mercy plea by a fresh one. He wants to file a fresh mercy plea which would apparently help his client to stay away from the gallows for some more time. He went further to allege that this is a conspiracy since the involved parties have not even filed a curative petition until now. Six men had allegedly gang-raped Nirbhaya (name changed) in a Delhi bus and inflicted grievous injuries to her internal organs. One of them was never put through the trial as he was said to have been a juvenile and another killed himself in jail. The rest (surviving 4) faced trial, were convicted and now face death sentences.

The parents of the victim of the 2012-gang-rape victim, have been demanding that all of the four remaining convicts be executed as per the death penalty awarded to them at the earliest. They have already exhausted all legal remedies and sent mercy pleas to the Delhi LG and the MHA, both of whom while rejecting the pleas, have recommended to the President to do the same. Nirbhaya's mother spoke to media outlets on Friday and said that she has been running from pillar to post for the past seven years in search of justice for her daughter. It is yet to be seen whether the President accepts the conditions mentioned in the letter and allows Sharma's lawyer to file a fresh mercy plea.
