Hyderabad encounters 'a right act of humanity', justice has been served hot: Nayanthara

Nayanthara lauds Telangana rape case encounters

Key Highlights Taking to the social media, Nayanthara shared her official statement on the Telangana rape case encounters that happened yesterday In her statement, Nayanthara has called the encounters, "a right act of humanity" Yesterday, many celebs and netizens hailed the encounters however there were few who questioned the failure of judicial system

After several celebs like Rishi Kapoor, Vivek Oberoi, Ram Charan, Nagarjuna, Samantha, Jr NTR, Rakul Preet Singh, Nayanthara has also lauded the Telangana rape case encounters that took place yesterday. Releasing an official statement on her Twitter account, Nayanthara called it "a right act of humanity". She stated that women of India should mark this date as the "day of true justice". She, however, added that more than rejoicing, we should be enlighting and educating the children, especially boys.

Her statement read,

Justice is good when served hot. What's been a cinematic phrase so far has become the reality today and the real heroes - Telangana Police have proved it with their action. I would call this "A RIGHT ACT OF HUMANITY". Every woman of this country can mark this date in the calendar as a day of true justice. Speaking about humanity, it's all about respecting, showing love and compassion towards all with equality. More than rejoicing over the justice served, it is a moment to enlighten and educate the children, especially boys at our homes imparting them the message that men become the hero, when they make this planet a safe place for women. R.I.P

Check out her statement below:

Earlier, Vivek Oberoi, in an exclusive interview with Zoom Digital had stated, "If you ask me am I pro extrajudicial killings in the novel sense? No. I believe the system should be strong and the law should be followed. But do I believe that this was the right thing to do? I do believe it." You can read his full statement here.

For the uninitiated, on Friday, December 6, the nation woke up to the news of the killings of the four main accused in Disha (name changed) rape case in Telangana. According to the cops, the four accused attacked them, snatched their weapons and tried to flee as a result of which they were shot down. While it was initially reported that the four rape-accused were killed in an encounter, Cyberabad Commissioner of Police VC Sajjanar revealed in a press conference that the suspects were killed in the exchange of gunfire with the police.
