UP ministers, MP Sakshi Maharaj face protest as they visit Unnao victim's family

Two Uttar Pradesh ministers and local MP faced a massive protest on Saturday when they went to visit the family of Unnao gangrape survivor who passed away in Delhi on Friday, a day after being set on fire by the accused.

Cabinet ministers Swami Prasad Maurya and Kamal Rani Varun were accompanied by Unnao BJP MP Sakshi Maharaj when they were faced with a crowd, which included members of National Students' Union of India (NSUI).

The NSUI workers were pushed back by the Police as the cars carrying the BJP politicians entered the village.

Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath had instructed the two ministers to visit the family of the woman who died late last night at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital. Adityanath expressed grief over the death of Unnao rape victim and said that all the accused have been arrested and the case will be taken to a fast-track court.

Unnao: National Students' Union of India (NSUI) members protest against the visit of Ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj to Unnao rape victim's residence. pic.twitter.com/wykuZiQzRD — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

Speaking to reporters, Sakshi Maharaj said, "I along with my party are in support of the victim's family. I have been vocal about it in the Parliament as well. Culprits will be arrested. None will be spared. Unnao's name has been maligned."

Maurya said no culprit will be spared.

"Whatever investigation the victim's family wants, we will do it. The names that have been taken by the victim, action will be taken against them. No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics," he said.

Opposition parties have slammed Yogi government over the rape cases with Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav demanding the chief minister's resignation.

#WATCH Unnao: National Students' Union of India (NSUI) members being detained by police, while they were protesting against the visit of Ministers Kamal Rani Varun, Swami Prasad Maurya and MP Sakshi Maharaj to Unnao rape victim's residence. pic.twitter.com/mkDZo5lUeA — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati said that women are not safe under the current BJP government and urged the state government to take timebound action against such "criminal elements."

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi who visited the family said, "Chief Minister is saying there is no place for criminals in the state but what he has turned the state into, I think there is no place for women here."

The Unnao rape survivor passed away at 11:40 pm on Friday. She was on Thursday airlifted to the hospital where she was undergoing urgent medical treatment for the burns on her body.

On Thursday, the rape survivor in Unnao, some 60 km from state capital Lucknow, was set ablaze by those accused who are out on bail.

According to reports, the culprits took the woman to fields outside the village and doused her in kerosene before setting her on fire. The arrests were made on the basis of the victim's statement. While the key accused surrendered himself to the police after the incident, police raided the homes of others as they fled the spot after setting her ablaze.
