Karnataka: BJP MLA Preethan Gowda's house pelted with stones after derogatory comments on Deve Gowda

Stones pelted at the residence of BJP MLA from Hassan, Preetham Gowda, allegedly by JD(S) workers reportedly over a remark he made against former PM HD Deve Gowda. One BJP worker was injured in the incident I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: The house of Preethan Gowda, a BJP MLA from Hassan, was pelted with stones allegedly by Janata Dal(Secular) workers on Wednesday. One BJP was injured in the incident. The incident occurred after JD(S) workers gathered outside Preethan's house to protest his comments on HD Deve Gowda.

Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy said BJP workers outside Peethan's house provoked the protesters which led to the stone pelting incident. An investigation has been ordered into the matter and strict action will be taken against the miscreants, he said.

The incident follows the incident of 'leaked' audio tapes in which the BJP MLA was purportedly heard making derogatory comments about the former Prime Minister his son HD Kumaraswamy. In the clip, Preetham is heard saying that "JD(S) will soon be history as Deve Gowda will die soon and his son Kumaraswamy is unwell".

Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy: Mysore IG & Hassan SP briefed me on it. As per info, some followers of Deve Gowda were holding protest over statements made against him. Some BJP workers provoked them & the incident happened. I've asked police to probe the matter & take strict action https://t.co/x8bywCxqtj — ANI (@ANI) February 13, 2019

“As per info, some followers of Deve Gowda were holding a protest over statements made against him. Some BJP workers provoked them & the incident happened. I've asked the police to probe the matter & take strict action,” Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy said quoting Mysore IG & Hassan SP.

Earlier, Kumaraswamy had alleged that Preethan is helping BJP State Chief BS Yeddyurappa to poach JD(S) lawmakers as part of the saffron party's alleged 'operation Kamala'.

Last week, JD(S) released two audio clips of a purported conversation between Yeddyurappa and JD(S) MLA Naganagowda Kandkur’s son. JD(S) alleged that Yeddyurappa tried to topple the JD(S)-Congress government in the state by offering bribes to the MLAs. The allegation was refuted as bogus and “concocted” by Yeddy.

The Congress-JD(S) coalition government in Karnataka has been accusing the BJP of attempting to topple the state government by luring their ministers through bribe in cash and ministerial berths, an allegation the saffron party has refuted.




