Jab rape hoga tab dekhenge: UP cops refuse to act on woman's harassment complaint

Administration and police officials at Sindupur village where the Unnao rape victim was set ablaze by five men. (Photo: ANI)

A woman in Sindupur village in Unnao district of Uttar Pradesh alleged on Saturday that the police refused to file her complaint after some men had attempted to rape her.

The police allegedly asked the woman to come with her complaint after the rape has happened.

"Rape toh hua nahi, jab hoga tab dekhenge [Rape has not happened, we will see when it happens]" is what, according to the woman, a cop at the Bihar police station in Unnao told the woman when she approached them for help.

This is the same village where the Unnao rape victim was set ablaze by five men on Thursday. The woman, who suffered 90 per cent burns, died at Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi on Friday.

POLICE APATHY AND RAPES

Speaking to India Today TV, the woman, whose complaint was not registered, said that five men from the village attempted to rape her some months ago when she was on her way to buy medicines.

She also identified the accused as Ram Milan, Guddu, Ram Babu.

When she approached the police with her complaint the cops threw her out and asked her to come after the rape has happened.

"I was going to take my medicines. They [the three men she has named] stopped me and started pulling my clothes. They also attempted to rape me," the woman told India Today TV.

"Kehte hain ki balatkaar karne ka prayaas kiya hai, hua toh nahi hai. Jab balatkaar kar denge phir nyay milega toh kya hi nyay milega [They tell me the men have attempted to rape me, they haven't raped me yet. If I get justice after rape, what justice would I get]" she said.

The woman said she has been visiting the Unnao police station and the Bihar police station for over three months but no one has heard her case.

"After the incident, I called 1090, they asked me to call 100. I called 100. I reported the matter in Unnao, they [the cops] asked me to report it to the area where the incident happened," the woman said.

She alleged that the three men, who have attempted to rape her, have been threatening to kill her as well. "They come to my house every day and threaten us against filing a complaint," the woman said.

When she was asked what the police said to her, the woman said that the police asked her to leave.

"They tell me I would not be able to do anything. I met an officer in Unnao, he asked me to report the matter to the Bihar police station. This is what is happening for the last three months," the woman said.

When India Today TV spoke with IG SK Bhagat of Unnao, he said, "No one has come to me, I have been sitting here since morning."
