Trans Bill is regressive, undermines rights: Transgender activists

COIMBATORE: Members of the transgender community and representatives of LGBTIQA+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, queer, asexual) groups on Saturday said the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, 2019, which was passed in the Rajya Sabha on November 26, severely undermined their rights. They appealed to the President of India not to sign the bill.Speaking to reporters, members of the transgender community said the bill requires individuals who change their gender to give a ‘proof of surgery’, which was against the Supreme Court order in the 2014 National Legal Services Authority vs Union of India case. They said the SC order said ‘any insistence for sex reassignment surgery for declaring one’s gender is immoral and illegal’.They said the successive government, in spite of making the existing provisions better, has degraded it through the present bill. They said the bill would ‘pull back transgender rights by 50 years’.Transgender theatre artist and activist A Revathi said this bill mandates a third person to declare the gender of an individual. It gives authority to the district magistrate to accept or deny an application for a transgender ID card. “This is like belittling us. The SC has said we have rights to decide our gender,” she said.The state was currently using the term ‘third gender’ to mention transgender people, which was also problematic, she said. “Earlier transwomen were called ‘thirunangai’ and transmen ‘thirunambi’. Now by calling us ‘third’ gender, they imply a hierarchy between genders and push us further down. We insist they call us ‘Thirunar’ or transgender people,” she said.Representatives said at present they had to fight to get jobs and to study. They said there should be reservation in jobs and education for transgender people.Shyam Kamala Balasubramaniam, an engineer and a member of the transgender community, said the bill gives a punishment only up to two years for assault and other violence against transgender people, which is much lower than that for similar crime against women or children. “The punishment should be severe for crimes against transgender people,” he said.The bill also says transgender people should either live with their biological family or at government shelters. However, representatives said they face violence and discrimination from their biological families and government shelters would not provide for all their needs. “This takes away our rights to form our own alternate family structures,” Shyam said.Members and representatives of forums such as South India AIDS Action Programme (SIAAP), Queerbatore, Orinam and Nirangal took were present at the briefing.
