UP govt announces Rs 25 lakh ex gratia, house under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana to Unnao victim's family

The Yogi Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh, which has come under intense attack from the opposition following the death of the Unnao gangrape survivor, has announced Rs 25 lakh financial assistance and house under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana to the family.

The announcement was made by two Uttar Pradesh ministers who met the family of the gangrape survivor who passed away in Delhi on Friday, a day after being set on fire by the accused.

"District Magistrate will give a cheque worth Rs 25 lakhs to Unnao rape victim's family as financial assistance. Also, as per the family's demand, a house will be allotted to them under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana," state Minister Kamal Rani Varun who was one of the two ministers to visit the family said.

Yogi Adityanath had instructed two ministers to visit the family of the woman who died late last night at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital. Adityanath expressed grief over the death of Unnao rape victim and said that all the accused have been arrested and the case will be taken to a fast-track court.

She was accompanied by state minister Swami Prasad Maurya and local MP Sakshi Maharaj.

Speaking to reporters, Sakshi Maharaj said, "Whatever investigation the victim's family wants, we will do it. The names that have been taken by the victim, action will be taken against them. No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics."

Maurya said the BJP was in support of the victim's family.

"I along with my party are in support of the victim's family. I have been vocal about it in the Parliament as well. Culprits will be arrested. None will be spared. Unnao's name has been maligned," he said.

The three BJP leaders faced a massive protest when they visited the victim's home in Hindu Kheda area of the district.

Speaking to reporters, Sakshi Maharaj said, "I along with my party are in support of the victim's family. I have been vocal about it in the Parliament as well. Culprits will be arrested. None will be spared. Unnao's name has been maligned."

Maurya said no culprit will be spared.

"Whatever investigation the victim's family wants, we will do it. The names that have been taken by the victim, action will be taken against them. No culprit will be spared. It is not a subject of politics," he said.

Opposition parties have slammed Yogi government over the rape cases with Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav demanding the chief minister's resignation.

Opposition parties including the Congress held protests at various places including Unnao and Lucknow as the party blamed the Yogi government for poor law and order condition in the state.

The woman was set ablaze by her rapists on Thursday and was airlifted to Delhi for better treatment. Admitted to Safdarjung Hospital in the national capital, she passed away at 11:40 pm on Friday.

Her body is being transported to her home in Unnao.

On Thursday, the rape survivor in Unnao, some 60 km from state capital Lucknow, was set ablaze by those accused who are out on bail.

According to reports, the culprits took the woman to fields outside the village and doused her in kerosene before setting her on fire. The arrests were made on the basis of the victim's statement. While the key accused surrendered himself to the police after the incident, police raided the homes of others as they fled the spot after setting her ablaze.
