'Another daughter has lost her life while awaiting justice'

Opposition political parties hit out at the Uttar Pradesh government on Saturday, questioning its seriousness in curbing crimes against women and protecting rape victims, a day after a gangrape victim from Unnao district succumbed to her injuries suffered when she was set on fire by the accused.

IMAGE: Police personnel guard outside the Safdarjung Hospital during post-mortem of the Unnao rape case victim, in New Delh. Photograph: Vijay Verma/PTI Photo

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra questioned the state government why the 23-year-old woman was not given security keeping in mind a similar incident in the same district earlier.

In July, the car of a woman who had accused Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Sengar of raping her in 2017 was hit by a truck.

The woman's two aunts were killed in the accident and her family had alleged foul play.

Priyanka Gandhi, who was on a visit to the Uttar Pradesh capital, traveled to Unnao to meet the family of the victim this morning and consoled them.

Before leaving for Unnao from Lucknow, Priyanka Gandhi said in a tweet: "Why the victim of Unnao gangrape case was not given security keeping in mind an earlier incident of Unnao? What action has been taken on the police official who refused to register an FIR? What steps are being taken by the government to stop crime against the women, which take place on a daily basis?"

"I pray to God to give courage to the family members of Unnao victim," she said in another tweet.

The Congress leader also went on to say that it is everyone's collective failure as a society that the victim has not received justice.

"At the social level, we all are guilty, but at the same time, this also points out to the hollow law and order mechanism in UP," she said.

Priyanka's brother and Congress MP from Waynad, Rahul Gandhi condoled the "heart-wrenching" death of the Unnao rape victim and said another daughter has lost her life while awaiting justice.

"The saddening and heart-wrenching death of the innocent daughter of Unnao, that has shamed humanity, has left me angered and stunned. Another daughter has lost her life while awaiting justice and security," Gandhi said in a tweet in Hindi.

"In this hour of grief, I express my condolences to the victim's family," he tweeted with the hashtag 'Beti Ko Nyay Do'.

Samajwadi Party president and former chief minister Akhilesh Yadav sat on a dharna outside the Vidhan Bhavan in Lucknow, accusing the Yogi Adityanath government of failing to protect women in the state, and demanded that it be removed.

He too referred to the July road accident.

"What help you have given to the family of the girl? Will you run your government in this manner?" he asked the ruling party.

IMAGE: Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav along with supporters stages a dharna in front of Vidhan Bhavan in protest over Unnao rape victim's death. Photograph: Nand Kumar/PTI Photo

"(This) government is giving sorrow and creating difficulties. Hence our demand is that this government should be removed. The party will agitate for people. The Samajwadi Party will hold 'shok sabha' (condolence meetings) in all district headquarters...in memory of all the daughters who have lost their lives," Yadav told reporters.

He said his party will "continue to fight for the honour of the daughters".

"This is not the first case in this government. Try to remember the day when a daughter after failing to get justice tried to end her life outside the chief minister's residence in Lucknow. A daughter of Unnao lost her entire family, for which the BJP government is responsible. The government is also responsible for the death of a daughter, who lost her life today," he added.

Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati asked the UP government to ensure "proper justice" to the family of the 23-year-old woman who succumbed to her burn injuries at a Delhi hospital Friday night.

"To prevent such traumatic incidents all over the country, including in UP, state governments should create fear of law among people and in view of the incidents, the Centre should also make a law to ensure strict punishment by hanging to death within a stipulated time-frame," she added.

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal called the death of the rape victim from Unnao "shameful" for every Indian and said he hoped that the Uttar Pradesh government will hang the culprits "to set an example" for the society.

"The death of Unnao's daughter is shameful for every Indian. God give courage to the family of the victim. The whole country is standing with them in this fight. I hope that the UP government will soon complete the judicial process and hang our daughter's killers that will set an example for the whole society," Kejriwal said in a tweet in Hindi.

Attacking the UP government, Congress spokesperson Supriya Shrinate said it is "not the first and this will not indeed be the last case if you (UP government) don't wake up. The UP government seems to be in a dying hurry to become the rape capital".

"More than assurance, UP govt needs to strengthen the law and order situation in the state. Our straight question is to UP police that why FIR was not registered in four months and why the accused were left out on bail," Shrinate told reporters.

The rape victim was set afire by five men, including her two alleged rapists, on Thursday morning when she was going to Rae Bareli to attend a court hearing in the case filed by her.

One of the two men accused of raping her last year was granted bail about 10 days ago.

The other man had been on the run.

All the five men involved in the Thursday attack have been arrested.
