Bihar: Autorickshaw driver offers joyride to five-year-old girl, sexually assaults her

On Friday, the girl was playing with her friend near the accused's autorickshaw (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A five-year-old girl was allegedly sexually assaulted on Friday by an autorickshaw driver The accused allegedly offered to take the minor girl for a joyride The accused was arrested by the police

Darbhanga: An autorickshaw driver allegedly lured a five-year-old girl on the pretext of offering her a joyride and then sexually assaulted her. The incident took place on Friday in Khaura More area that falls under the limits of the Sadar police station. The accused has been arrested.

The accused has been identified as Sahni. On Friday, the girl was playing with her friend near the accused's autorickshaw. While playing, the two children stepped into the autorickshaw.

According to news agency PTI, the accused offered to take the two of them for a joyride. He started the vehicle and after some time, he dropped off the three-year-old girl. Sahni then drove the vehicle to an isolated spot and sexually assaulted the minor girl.

Minor boys gang-rape 13-year-old girl in Surat, leave her with auto driver who also rapes her

In November this year, a 13-year-old fled from her residence as she wanted to become a model in Mumbai. The girl was walking to the railway station when two minor boys approached her. The two minors offered to help the teenage girl in reaching her destination. The girl agreed to accompany the accused and they took her to a secluded spot.

The accused raped her and threatened her to stay quiet. After this, the two minors dropped the girl around five kilometres away from the railway station, in the care of an autorickshaw driver. The driver asked the girl where she was going and when the minor told him that she wanted to pursue a career in modelling, he told her that there were no trains to Mumbai that night.

Following this, the driver took the 13-year-old to his rented accommodation and raped her. He dropped the minor in another part of the town the next day and she somehow managed to get home. The girl told her parents about the incident and a case was registered.
