Unnao case: UP government must be dissolved, says Ram Gopal Yadav; calls for imposition of President’s Rule

Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav gave this statement when asked about crimes against women in UP The UP government has been under attack over law-and-order situation after the death of the Unnao rape victim The 23-year-old was airlifted from Lucknow's SMC government hospital to Delhi's Safdarjung hospital where she succumbed to her injuries late on Friday night

Lucknow: Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav has said the Yogi Adityanath-led Uttar Pradesh government must be dissolved and President's Rule should be imposed in the state.

Yadav gave this statement when asked about crimes against women in UP.

“Section 356 has been framed in Constitution, so in that case, if a state government doesn't function as per Constitution, then it must be dissolved and President's Rule should be imposed,” he said.

The UP government has been under attack over the law-and-order situation after the death of the Unnao rape victim, who was set ablaze, with Congress saying that the state is becoming the country's rape capital.

The 23-year-old was airlifted from Lucknow's SMC government hospital to Delhi's Safdarjung hospital where she succumbed to her injuries late on Friday night.

According to the police, the five accused had allegedly thrown kerosene on the woman and set her ablaze while she was on her way to a local court for the hearing of a rape case.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra also reached Unnao today to meet the victims’ family and said she will fight for justice along with her family. Talking to the media, Unnao rape victim's sister-in-law said that their only demand is that the culprits should be given the death penalty.

Questioning the state government she asked why atrocities on women were rampant in the state and why no protection was provided to the Unnao rape victim.

"Keeping in mind the previous incident of Unnao, why did the government not give immediate protection to the victim? What action was taken against the officer who refused to register her FIR? Every day there are cases of atrocities against the women in Uttar Pradesh, what action is the government taking on this?” she tweeted.

While Samajwadi Party chief and former UP CM Akhilesh Yadav sat on dharna, BSP supremo and four-time CM Mayawati said that the state is in a state of 'jungle raj'.

The Uttar Pradesh police, on Friday, took to Twitter to counter the allegation made by Bahujan Samaj Party President Mayawati that the state is in a state of 'jungle raj'.

Earlier, she had praised the Hyderabad police for its strong action against the four accused in the gang rape and said that the Uttar Pradesh police should take inspiration from its counterparts.
