Boy Sexually Assaults Classmate Inside School's Bathroom, Friends Film Act

A teen sexually assaulted his female classmate and also made two of his friends record the act in India’s capital New Delhi, police said Thursday.

A senior police officer said the victim was allegedly kissed inside the school's bathroom by the boy, who asked two of his friends to record it, the Hindustan Times reported. The incident reportedly took place in the last week of December.

The victim informed her parents about the incident after photos and videos of her went viral, following which a police report was filed.

The girl told police the boys harassed her and also made vulgar gestures. She felt humiliated when she found out her other classmates were aware about the incident.

Police said all the three boys, aged around 15, were arrested and the investigation was underway to know if any staff member also knew about the harassment. The phones were seized by the police, local daily the Times of India reported.

A case was, however, filed under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

In a similar incident that took place in November 2017, a four-year-old girl alleged that her classmate assaulted her in school in India’s capital New Delhi. The victim’s mother filed a police complaint after the girl complained of severe pain in her private parts and lower abdomen. Though the mother had dismissed it before, she took it seriously when the girl started crying profusely.

"Since she was complaining of it at sporadic intervals, I initially ignored it as one of her tantrums. It worsened on Saturday (Nov. 18, 2017), and at night she started crying profusely narrating the shocking incident in school on Friday (Nov. 17, 2017) during school hours. She told me that a boy in her class had abused her. She said she tried pushing him away but to no avail. There was no didi (sister) or aaya (helper) around," the mother said.

“It took long to fix the hook of her pant and by then all children had left the school. She narrated the incident to my husband over the phone at 11.57pm on Saturday. It was a restless night for both of us. She kept repeating the same sequence of events and cried inconsolably. At night, I sent a message to her teacher informing her about the incident. In the morning, I asked her school teacher and coordinator about it. They feigned ignorance in their attempt to dilly dally," she added, online community The Indus Parent reported.

Since the boy was also only four-years-old, police were probing all angles to figure out how to solve this case.
