JDS activists attack house of BJP MLA Preetam J Gowda

HASSAN: The Operation Kamala turned violent at Hassan, the JDS bastion as the JDS activists attacked the house of the saffron party MLA Preetam J Gowda around noon on Wednesday.What was planned to be a protest in front of the BJP legislator by the angry JDS workers has now led to political turmoil with the state BJP chief B S Yeddyurappa and a contingent of senior leaders of the party rushing to Hassan to meet the injured worker.Meanwhile, BJP district unit leaders alleged that police are hand in glove with the JDS activists which resulted in the incident, a charge denied by the cops.It all started at around 11.30 am when a bunch of JDS activists started a bike rally from Inspection Bungalow at NR circle towards MLA Preetham Gowda's residence in the Vidyanagar. Gowda is the lone non-JDS MLA from Hassan district As the bike rally proceeded towards Gowda's house, over 100 JDS activists joined them. After reaching near Gowda's house, they sat on a dharna and started sloganeering against him accusing him of speaking low of JDS supremo HD Deve Gowda and his family members including CM HD Kumaraswamy referring to audio clip which was released by the CM.There were a posse of cops at the house to control the JDS activists.Nearly 30 minutes into the protest, all hell break loose as some BJP members arrived at the spot and stood guard at the front gate even as the JDS workers tried to gatecrash. The MLAs parents were at the house when the incident happened.The JDS local leaders claimed that the BJP netas questioned and criticised the JDS activists which led to the ruckus.Angry workers pelted stones on the MLA's house. BJP youth morcha state executive committee member Rahul Kini sustained injuries near his right eye in the stone pelting. He was rushed to the district hospital for the treatment. Slippers and stones were pelted inside the home in which a car parked in the driveway was damaged.As the news of stone pelting was reported, both BJP and JDS members started to gather in large number near Gowda’s residence. But the cops intervened and sent away the JDS activists.A few BJP activists tried to block city roads by setting the tires on fire which was doused by the police. Additional police forces were rushed and deployed at sensitive areas.Speaking to the reporters, BJP district spokesperson Venugopal blamed the police for the incident. "We tried to reach out to the police over the mobile to alert them about JDS attack. But police didn't receive the call resulting in the attack," he alleged.As the situation turned grim, SP AN Prakash Gowda rushed to the spot and took the situation under the control.
