Gang-rape victim's mortal remains reach Unnao; police yet to file chargesheet

The survivor was set ablaze by five men when she was going to attend a court hearing in Rae Bareilly. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights On Friday, the gang-rape victim had been airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital from Unnao She had suffered 90 per cent burn injuries The mortal remains of the deceased reached Unnao on Saturday

Unnao: The Unnao gang-rape victim who died on Friday has reached Unnao, Uttar Pradesh. The victim died at 11.40 pm on Saturday, around thirty minutes after suffering from a cardiac arrest. The doctors at Safdarjung Hospital said that the victim suffered a cardiac arrest at around 11.10 pm and could not survive even after repeated efforts of resuscitation.

The mortal remains of the victim had been taken to Unnao by road. The victim had been airlifted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital on Friday. She had suffered 90 per cent burns. The survivor had been set ablaze by the five men who raped her in March last year.

Unnao: Mortal remains of Unnao rape victim have been brought to her village, from Safdarjung hospital in Delhi. She had passed away last night during treatment. pic.twitter.com/p4OsU61Poh — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 7, 2019

A senior police officer said to the media, "In this case, the police reached the spot as soon as it got the information. The victim was shifted to the hospital immediately. Five accused were taken into custody and were produced before the court which sent them to judicial remand. We will complete the investigation quickly to file the charge-sheet."

In her last words, the victim said to her family, "Save me, I don't want to die, I want to see them hang to death." The victim was set ablaze by five men when she was going to attend a court hearing in Rae Bareilly.

While giving her statement to the magistrate, the 23-year-old victim said that the accused attacked her with sticks and stabbed her on the neck before setting her ablaze. The five men had been out on bail.

Allegedly, the fact that the victim took the decision of reporting the crime instead of staying mum, irked the five men and they took the decision of attacking her.
