17-year-old gang-rape survivor hangs herself in UP's Kanpur

An officer familiar with the case said that the girl had been kidnapped on November 13 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On November 13, two men allegedly abducted a 17-year-old girl in Kanpur and raped her On the next day, the girl returned home and narrated her ordeal to her parents The police arrested the accused but the minor girl hanged herself to death on Friday

Kanpur: A gang-rape survivor hanged herself in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh on Friday. The 17-year-old girl took the drastic step about one month after the incident. The girl had allegedly been gang-raped by her neighbours. The accused were arrested after her parents registered a complaint in relation to the incident.

The 17-year-old girl hanged herself to death at her cousin's residence. None of the deceased's family members was at home when the incident took place. No suicide note has been recovered yet.

An officer familiar with the case said that the girl had been kidnapped on November 13. Her neighbours- Sunny Balmiki and Lala Balmiki allegedly abducted the girl. Lala Balmiki is Sunny Balmiki's uncle. When the girl's parents learned that she had been missing, they approached the police and lodged a missing complaint.

According to Press Trust of India's report, the teenager returned home one day after the complaint was filed. After returning, the girl told her family that the two accused had raped her. The girl's parents then informed the police. Following this, the girl's statement was recorded before a court.

After the 17-year-old girl's statement was recorded, the police made significant changes in the complaint. On Friday, the police added relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and gang-rape to the complaint. Later the same day, the cops arrested Sunny and Lala.

The 17-year-old survivor was taken to her cousin's house in Chaubepur for counselling. After a few hours, she committed suicide. Superintendent of police (SP) Anurag Vats has directed the police to ensure that proper investigation of the case is conducted.

This incident came to light one day after the death of Unnao gang-rape survivor. The Unnao gang-rape survivor died on Friday at the Safdarjung Hospital, due to cardiac arrest.
