'Probe into rape cases of minors should be completed within 2 months': Ravi Shankar Prasad to write to CMs, HCs

Amid outrage over rape cases in the country, Union Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad on Saturday said that investigation in rape cases involving minors should be completed within two months and he will write to all chief ministers and Chief Justices of High Courts regarding this.

His remarks come when a series of brutal rapes, including cases where minors have been raped, have shocked the country. There were also massive protests over the death of the Unnao rape survivor who was set ablaze by her rapists on Thursday.

"I am going to write to Chief Ministers of all states and Chief Justices of High Courts to appeal that investigation in rape cases involving minors should complete within 2 months. I have issued necessary directions to my department as well," Prasad said.

"Also, I will write to the Chief Justices of High Courts requesting them for the speedy disposal of the rape cases," he added.

The Union minister also said that there is a proposal of 1023 new fast track courts across the country.

"Central and state governments have proposed for the constitution of 1023 new fast track courts across the country. Out of these 1023, a consensus has been reached on 400 and more than 160 have already become operational. Also, 704 fast track courts were already operational," he said.

On Friday night, Unnao gangrape survivor died at Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital, a day after she was set ablaze by her rapists.

Protests were held across in Uttar Pradesh and Delhi on Saturday following the death of the woman.

Opposition parties have slammed Yogi Adityanath' UP government over the case.

The woman was set ablaze by her rapists on Thursday and was airlifted to Delhi for better treatment. Admitted to Safdarjung Hospital in the national capital, she passed away at 11:40 pm on Friday.

Earlier on Friday, four accused of a brutal rape-murder of a woman in Hyderabad were killed in a police encounter. The actions of the Telangana police were celebrated people across the country, while some questioned the extrajudicial killings.
