Unnao Case: Victim's Family Refuses To Complete Last Rites Until CM Yogi Adityanath's Visit

New Delhi:

The family of the Unnao gang rape and muder victim is demanding the presence of Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Aditynath at her funeral. According to her sister, the last rites will not be performed untill Adityamath visits the family. She also demanded she would be given government job. The last rites of the the gang rape and murder victim is expected to be performed on Sunday. The victim's family has decided to give her body a burial instead of cremating it and turn the site into a memorial in reminder of her fight against injustice. The last rites may take place early on Sunday morning. Her devastated father told Times of India, "We will bury her. I won’t light her pyre. My beloved daughter is already burnt."

Victim's father added that her memorial will be made beside the already existing memorials of her grandparents. "The land on which the memorial will be built belongs to the victim's family."

The body of the rape victim who succumbed to severe burn injuries in Delhi hospital arrived in her native village here on Saturday. Brother of the victim along with other relatives reached the village with the body. Heavy police arrangements were made to avoid any untoward incident. Fire brigade personnel have also been deployed in the village, where senior officers were camping since morning.

About timings of the victim's last rites, Unnao District Magistrate Devendra Pandey said, "It is yet to finalised. Senior officials as well as two ministers, who were sent by the Chief Minister would remain in the village till the final rites take place."

There was an emotional outburst, as the family received the body in the presence of large number of people, including Samajwadi Party leaders. Earlier, UP ministers Swami Prasad Maurya and Kamal Rani Varun met the victim's family.

After battling for her life with more than 90 per cent burns for almost 40 hours, the 23-year-old woman died following a cardiac arrest on Friday night at the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. The woman, who was raped last year, was set on fire early Thursday morning when she was on her way to Raebareli in connection with the court case filed by her. Five accused persons, including the two who had allegedly raped her, were arrested soon after.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
