25 killed and 130 injured in Baghdad in deadly attack

IRAQ: THE death toll from a night of attacks by unknown gunmen targeting anti-government protesters in Baghdad has risen to 25, Iraqi officials said.

More than 130 other people were injured.

The attack was among the deadliest since October 1, when thousands of Iraqis took to the streets calling for sweeping political reforms and the end of Iran’s influence in Iraqi affairs.

Security forces regularly use live rounds and tear gas to disperse the demonstrations, leading to heavy casualties.

The gunfire continued until the early hours of yesterday morning. The assailants first unleashed the deadly assault on Baghdad’s Khilani Square and Sinak Bridge, driving through the areas that are the epicentre of the popular uprising.

Iraqi security forces were deployed to streets leading to the square by the early morning.

USA: AN aviation student from Saudi Arabia opened fire in a classroom building at a Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Florida on Friday morning, a US official said, in an attack that left three dead in addition to the assailant.

The assault was the second at a US Navy base this week and prompted a massive law enforcement response and a lockdown at the base.

The student, who was fatally shot by a sheriff’s deputy, was a second

lieutenant in the Saudi Air Force, two US officials said. US President Donald Trump tweeted his condolences to the victims’ families and noted he had received a phone call from Saudi King Salman.

The Saudi government offered condolences to the victims and their families and said it would provide “full support” to US authorities investigating the shooting.

The shooting is the second at a US naval base this week, after a sailor opened fire on three civilian employees at Pearl Harbour, Hawaii on Wednesday, killing two before taking his own life.

HONG KONG: HUNDREDS of protesters waving Chinese flags packed into a Hong Kong park to denounce what they say is a reign of terror being imposed by “rioters” during months of

anti-government demonstrations that have shaken the city.

The rally yesterday underlined the deep divisions that have opened up in Hong Kong between pro- and anti-government camps, with divisions that appear irreconcilable.

Unlike anti-government protesters, pro-government demonstrators praised Hong Kong police and signed “Thank you” letters for officers.

Calling them “rioters”, many said hard-line protesters are destroying Hong Kong’s freedoms, rather than protecting them, by resorting to violence.

In chants, the crowd called anti-government protesters “cockroaches”.

“Who is more scary: the communists or the rioters?” said retiree Peter Pang. “I don’t like the government very much but I don’t like rioters even more.”

SWITZERLAND: IRAN and the US have conducted a prisoner exchange in a rare diplomatic breakthrough between Tehran and Washington after months of tensions.

In a trade conducted in Zurich, Switzerland, Iranian officials handed over Chinese-American graduate student Xiyue Wang, detained in Tehran since 2016, for scientist Massoud Soleimani, who had faced a federal trial in Georgia.

While the exchange represents a rare win for both countries, it comes as Iran still faces crushing American sanctions and the aftermath of nationwide protests that reportedly saw more than 200 people killed.

INDIA: AN alleged rape victim in northern India who was set on fire on her way to a court hearing in the case has died in a hospital in New Delhi, officials said.

The woman was attacked on Thursday by a group of men in the state of Uttar Pradesh, including two of the five men she had accused of gang-rape last year who were on bail.

Five men were arrested in connection with the fire attack.

The 23-year-old woman suffered extensive injuries and was airlifted from Uttar Pradesh to a hospital in New Delhi, where she died late on Friday of cardiac arrest, according to Dr Shalab Kumar, head of the hospital’s burns unit.

The woman’s death came on the same day that police in the southern state of Telangana fatally shot four men being held on suspicion of raping and killing a 27-year-old veterinarian after investigators took them to the crime scene.

Their deaths drew both praise and condemnation in a case that has sparked protests across the country.

The woman’s burned body was found last week by a passer-by near the city of Hyderabad, India’s tech hub, after she went missing the previous night.

SLOVAKIA: THE death toll from a gas explosion in an apartment building in eastern Slovakia has risen to seven.

Firefighters and local officials in the city of Presov said one person is still missing.

The explosion occurred towards the top of the 12-storey building on Friday. More than 100 firefighters tackled the blaze, which was finally fully extinguished yesterday morning.

Rescuers have said some 40 people were injured.

Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini, who visited the site late on Friday, said the building is so damaged that it is possible it will have to be demolished.

SWEDEN: THREE of this year’s Nobel Prize laureates have said addressing climate change is of great importance.

Winners of the prizes in physics, chemistry and economics issued the warning yesterday at a news conference in Stockholm ahead of next week’s presentation of the awards. Their remarks came as a global summit on climate change was taking place in Madrid.

Didier Queloz, who shared the physics prize, took issue with people who shrug off climate change on the grounds that “anyway we’re going to leave the Earth at some point”.

Esther Duflo, one of the economics laureates, cautioned that dealing with climate change “will require a change in behaviour, particularly in the rich countries” that are heavy consumers of goods and energy.
