Delhi's Anaj Mandi fire: Death toll rises to 43; extremely horrific incident, says PM Narendra Modi

New Delhi: The death toll in Delhi's Anaj Mandi fire, that broke out in the wee hours on Sunday, has reached 43, police confirmed to news agency ANI. The rescue and fire department sleuths have rescued several people from the building where the fire broke out, many of whom are said to be critical.

As per a report, more than 50 people have been rescued and shifted to the Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital and Lady Harding Hospital.

Death toll rises to 43 in #Delhi fire incident, according to police. pic.twitter.com/FAYd3LNoOB — ANI (@ANI) December 8, 2019

Speaking to media, Deputy Fire Chief Officer Sunil Choudhary said: "A fire broke out in a 600 sq feet plot. It was very dark inside. It is a factory where school bags, bottles and other materials were kept."

In the meantime, Prime Minister Narendra Modi took to Twitter to express his condolence with the bereaved families. PM Modi said that his thoughts are with those who lost their loved ones in the fire accident. "The fire in Delhi’s Anaj Mandi on Rani Jhansi Road is extremely horrific. My thoughts are with those who lost their loved ones. Wishing the injured a quick recovery. Authorities are providing all possible assistance at the site of the tragedy," he wrote on Twitter.

The fire in Delhi’s Anaj Mandi on Rani Jhansi Road is extremely horrific. My thoughts are with those who lost their loved ones. Wishing the injured a quick recovery. Authorities are providing all possible assistance at the site of the tragedy. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 8, 2019

Union Home Minister Amit Shah and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal too expressed their grief on the tragedy. "Tragic loss of precious lives in the fire accident in New Delhi. My deepest condolences with families of those who have lost their loved ones. I pray for the early recovery of the injured. Have instructed concerned authorities to provide all possible assistance on urgent basis," Amit Shah wrote.

Kejriwal described the fire incident in Delhi's Anaj Mandi as 'tragic' and said firemen were doing their best. "V v tragic news. Rescue operations going on. Firemen doing their best. Injured are being taken to hospitals," Kejriwal tweeted today morning.

President Ram Nath Kovind shared his grief on the massive fire tragedy, writing, "Extremely sad to hear the tragic news about fire in Delhi’s Anaz Mandi. My thoughts and prayers are with affected families. Wishing an early recovery to those injured. The local authorities are doing their best to rescue people and provide help."

Extremely sad to hear the tragic news about fire in Delhi’s Anaz Mandi. My thoughts and prayers are with affected families. Wishing an early recovery to those injured. The local authorities are doing their best to rescue people and provide help. — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) December 8, 2019

Expressing his deepest condolence to the families of those killed in the incident, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi tweeted, "Hurt by the news of death and injury in Delhi's Azad Mandi fire. I express my deepest condolences to the family of the dead and wish the injured get well soon."

Delhi Minister Imran Hussain said that action will be taken against those responsible after a thorough investigation.
