Why cops involved in Gudiya case reinstated: Mankotia

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Dharamsala, December 7

Former minister Vijai Singh Mankotia today questioned the silence of state leaders on the Gudiya rape case.

Mankotia, while addressing mediapersons here today, said that while there was anger over the rape and killing of the Hyderabad veterinary doctor and the Unnao rape victim, the state government had reinstated police officials “involved in the Gudiya rape case and the custodial death of accused Suraj”.

The veteran leader said the government should give the reason behind the reinstatement of the police officials, that too in such a haste.

The Gudiya rape case was identical to the Cyderabad rape and murder case. The girl was raped and murdered in the most brutal manner. Her parents have questioned the CBI investigation, saying it was not possible for one person to brutally rape and murder their daughter.

“Initially, the photos of the main suspects went viral on the social media. Later, I learnt that some of them even left the country. The police arrested some innocent people and killed one of them in custody,” Mankotia alleged.

The CBI has filed cases against some senior police officials for destroying evidence related to the custodial death of Suraj, who was falsely implicated. Despite this, the present government has reinstated and posted these police officials. “It shows the callous attitude of the Jai Ram Thakur government towards the heinous crime,” he said.

Mankotia alleged that it was a common belief among the people of the state that the real culprits were saved by their political masters. “Now that there is national outrage against rape and murder cases, the political leadership should come out clean on the Gudiya rape and murder case. Leaders should express solidarity with the parents of Gudiya and do whatever they can to give her justice,” he said.

Asked about the police encounter of the four accused of the Cyderabad rape and murder case, Mankotia said: “As far as I am concerned, it seems that justice has been delivered”.
