Unnao case latest news: Unnao’s beti fought hard, had faith in justice

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

Unnao rape victim dies due to cardiac arrest in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital

Amid the deathly quiet in the village of Unnao rape victim, the one word that is whispered again and again is "courage".The graduate who stayed home to take care of her mentally challenged little brother would have gone on to lead an exceptional life, said her eldest brother's wife, exhausted and distraught. "She was that kind of girl."She added, "She had the guts to go to Rae Bareli to pursue the case against her tormentors all by herself. We would often discourage her not to move alone at all hours but she would say, 'Bhabhi jo dar gaya, samjho woh mar gaya'." The third of five sisters, "Unnao ki beti", as she is being called by many, had for a while taught in a primary section. From a poor OBC family, the onus of upkeep fell on her father and an older brother, both of whose wages were less than modest.Almost a year ago, on December 12, she had been sexually assaulted at gunpoint by men from her village, one of whom she knew well. She reached the police station the very next day to lodge an FIR, but police did not budge. Though she pursued her case, it was not until three months later, on March 4, that a report was filed against Shivam and Shubham Trivedi for gangrape and criminal intimidation at Bihar police station, Unnao, on the orders of a Rae Bareli court."I admire her for challenging upper-caste hierarchy though she was so poor. She was always full of life and never regretted falling in love with a Brahmin," said Kavita (name changed), her childhood friend.Caste barriers are sacrosanct in this Unnao village. "Look at the muddy pathway splitting into two lanes," a former classmate said. "On one side, the Brahmins live and on the other backwards and Dalits. We're not allowed to walk past the upper-caste neighbourhood. And this brave girl dared to have a relationship with one of them." Though she and Shivam grew up in the same village, the two never even exchanged pleasantries until they connected via social media. "His parents were always emphatic that they would have nothing to do with what they called 'untouchables'," said her sister-in-law. They split ways, but within months, on the pretext of reconciliation, he attacked her along with his friends.Her faith in judiciary saw her braving a yearlong fight for justice by herself. With no funds and none willing to take up an OBC's case, she had contacted a Muslim lawyer in Rae Bareli to represent her in the district court.
