Delhi fire department reeling under lack of staff, equipment

At least 25 fire tenders were deployed to douse the hotel fire and rescue people inside on Tuesday. (Photo: Kasif)

A fire fighter’s account on Wednesday revealed some glaring lapses in steps taken to fight the massive fire that at Arpit Palace hotel in central Delhi’s Karol Bagh area early on Tuesday.

Some 17 people, including two people who jumped off the building in a desperate bid to save themselves, were killed in the incident. The fire incident has left people wondering whether there was any possibility to save more lives.

The firefighters deployed in the rescue operation on Tuesday claimed that if they had better equipment and more manpower, they could have saved more lives. We could have saved people who lost their lives had we had better equipment and more manpower, one said.

According to the reply to the Assembly, there are a total of 3,195 posts sanctioned for fire officials, but as of April 30, 2018, some 1,474 of these posts were still vacant. There is a requirement of 2,367 fire officers but only 1,225 officers are in action in the national capital.

Six posts of divisional officers are vacant while there is a requirement of nine officers there. Also, 59 out of a total of 90 stations run without station officers. The working fire officers claim that they have to do a 24-hour work shift and it is not easy to work for so long under so much pressure.

At least 25 fire tenders were deployed to douse the fire and rescue the people inside at 4.30 a.m. on Tuesday.

However, Kaptan Singh, a sub-officer at the Connaught Circus fire station said that his department has been facing a shortage of manpower along with equipment shortage to fight massive fire incidents at multi-storey buildings like that of at the Hotel Arpit Palace.

Sky Lifter is the most required vehicle during massive fire incidents but there is a shortage in the number of lifters as most of them are out of commission because of several reasons.

According to Singh, the fire officers could only use one Sky Lifter driven by Singh himself for the Tuesday incident.

The fire at Arpit Palace Hotel could have been controlled had we had more workers and more sky lifters, Singh claimed.

Apart from all these issues, even the congested Karol Bagh area was a problem for them as there was no space where they could use more fire lifters.

The hotel’s general manager Rajender Kumar and manager Vikas Kumar Takkal were arrested for culpable homicide, police said on Wednesday. The hotel owner, Shardendu Goel, has been absconding since the incident. A Delhi court on Wednesday sent the two men, arrested in connection with the massive fire at Karol Bagh area, to two-day police custody.

Metropolitan magistrate Shilpi Jain allowed the custodial interrogation of Rajender and Vikas till February 15. The court directed police to not torture the accused during remand.

The court said, In view of the facts, accused persons Rajender Kumar and Vikas Kumar Takkal is granted subject to medical examination.
