A timeline of major fire mishaps in Delhi

IMAGE: Charred remains after a major fire which broke out in a factory at Rani Jhansi Road, in New Delhi, on Sunday. Photograph: PTI Photo

A major fire tragedy at a factory in Anaj Mandi in the national capital that claimed 43 lives has again highlighted the issue of fire safety norms.

In the recent past, Delhi has witnessed several fire incidents that have claimed a substantial number of lives and caused heavy damages.

At least 43 people died in a massive fire that broke out at Anaj Mandi in Rani Jhansi Road on Sunday morning, police said.

A major fire at a hotel in Karol Bagh that claimed 17 lives in February this year also raised the issue of violation of fire safety norms.

Taking action against errant hotels over violation of fire safety norms, Delhi government had cancelled fire safety certificates of 27 hotels.

Here is a list of some major fire incidents in the national capital region that happened recently:

November 17, 2019: One person died in a fire that broke in a shoe factory in Narela area.

October 1: At least one worker was killed and another was injured after a fire broke out in a factory following an explosion in a wielding tank in Mandoli Industrial Area.

August 6: Six people, including a child, died and 10 sustained injuries after a fire broke out in a multi-storey building in Zakir Nagar in southeast Delhi.

July 13: At least three people were killed after a massive fire broke out in a rubber factory in Jhilmil industrial area.

June 26: Five persons had sustained major injuries while two sustained minor injuries in a massive fire incident at Narela.

March 26: Two minors were killed in a fire that broke out in a four-storey building in South Delhi's Shaheen Bagh due to a short circuit.

February 13: At least 250 huts were gutted in a massive fire which broke out in a slum in Delhi's Paschim Puri area.

February 12: In one of the worst fire tragedies in Delhi, 17 people, including a child and a woman, were killed as a blaze engulfed a budget hotel in Karol Bagh.

November 19, 2018: Four people were killed and one person was injured after a fire broke out at a factory in Karol Bagh.

April 23: A girl was killed and least 300 shanties were gutted after a major fire broke out in Shahdara's MS Park.

April 13: Four members of a family, including two minor children, were killed in a major fire in Kohat Enclave.

January 20: At least 10 women and seven men were charred to death in a major fire that broke out in a firecracker unit in Bawana industrial area.
