Man throw acid on victim after she refused to compromise in the case of gang rape

LUCKNOW: Recently, a sensational incident like Unnao of UP has come up in the police station Shahpur area of Muzaffarnagar. Here, the accused entered the house and threw acid on the victim after he did not compromise in the case of gang rape in a village. The police registered the report, but did not arrest the accused. The incident is three days old, on Saturday, the victim reached the SSP office and requested for the arrest of the accused. The victim told SP Dehat Nepal Singh that while returning from Muzaffarnagar three months ago, three people from the village had gang-raped her by giving her a lift in a car.

According to sources from Emily, a report was filed on the order of the court in the case. In that case, the accused pressurized the agreement and made threats. It is alleged that in the early hours of December 4, accused Shahnawaz son Umardin, Arif son Habib, Sharif son Meedu and Abid son Akbar entered the victim's house and threw acid on the victim. The woman's face, left hand, stomach-waist and left leg were scorched. The police sent the woman to the district hospital, from where she was referred to Meerut. On December 5, Shahpur police station filed a report against the four accused, but did not make any arrest.

Teenager raped, revealed while pregnant: According to the information, let us tell you that about five months ago the man raped victim in field. Since then, the accused had been forcibly having a relationship with the teenager. Fearing the accused, the teenager was silently tolerating this exploitation. The teenager became pregnant for about four months due to the forced rape. At the same time, Inspector Gurbachan Singh says that a case has been registered against the accused in rape and POSCO act. The teenager is undergoing medical treatment at the district hospital.

Also Read:

Congress attacked PM Modi says, "Law and order has collapsed but Prime Minister...."

Modi govt resolves to make changes in IPC, CRPC: Amit Shah

Indian American MP raised Kashmir issue in Parliament, kept his demand for religious freedom

Sonia Gandhi expressed grief over Delhi fire

Mastermind of Vyapam scam seen with CM Kamal Nath in this program
