Kolkata: Man rapes 6-year-old girl inside marriage hall's bathroom, arrested

The accused is a worker of a marriage hall. He took the girl inside the bathroom and raped her. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Teenager arrested for raping a 6-year-old girl Police said the crime took place at the bathroom of a marriage hall The girl narrated her ordeal to her mother, who later filed a case against him

Kolkata: Police in Kolkata have arrested a 19-year-old youth for allegedly raping a six-year-old girl on Friday.

The youth was picked up from West Port area of the city.

According to a report in The Indian Express, the accused was arrested after the victim's mother filed a complained against him for allegedly violating the girl on Thursday.

Police said the crime took place at the bathroom of a marriage hall.

"The youth has been arrested for allegedly raping a minor girl. A case of rape under Section 376 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children against Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act has been registered against the accused," the report quoted Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime) Murlidhar Sharma as saying.

The accused is a worker at the marriage hall. He took the girl inside the bathroom and raped her. The girl later narrated her ordeal to her mother, who filed a case against him.

In a similar incident, a 61-year-old man was arrested for allegedly raping a six-year-old girl living in his neighbourhood in Kurla suburb of Mumbai. The incident took place on December 1 when the minor went out to play with her friends in the evening.

Police officials said that the accused assaulted the minor girl for three days. He kept luring the victim with the promise of giving her a bar of chocolate. The incident came to light on December 3 (Tuesday) when the victim informed her family and complained about suffering from pain.

Police later registered a First Information Report (FIR) at the Vinoba Bhave police station under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The medical examination of the minor confirmed sexual assault. The police arrested the accused on the same day.
