Days after Cyberabad horror, girl's boyfriend, his friends gang-rape her and set her ablaze in Agartala

The girl's boyfriend has been identified as Ajoy Rudrapal (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A girl in Agartala was set ablaze after being gang-raped for around two months The girl was allegedly gang-raped by her boyfriend and his friends The accused had demanded Rs 50,000 for the release of the girl

Tripura: Days after the death of a veterinarian in Cyberabad, a 17-year-old was allegedly raped and set ablaze in Agartala. The girl was admitted to a hospital on Saturday with burn injuries. She had suffered 90 per cent of injuries. Allegedly, the girl was set ablaze by her boyfriend and his mother in Santirbazar in South Tripura.

The girl's boyfriend has been identified as Ajoy Rudrapal. The police said that the girl had met the accused on social media. After Diwali, the victim eloped with the accused. After some time, the behaviour of the accused towards the victim changed drastically and he started torturing her.

The accused had allegedly confined the girl after eloping with her. He also demanded a ransom worth Rs 50,000 for releasing the girl. While the accused confined the girl, he raped her on multiple occasions. Further investigation revealed that Ajoy's friends also raped the girl.

As on Friday, the girl's parents paid 17,000 for the release of the girl. According to a report in The Times of India's, Ajoy's mother had allegedly received the money at Chandrapur ISBT. Ajoy's mother was not satisfied with the same as she wanted more money.

On Friday, the girl's parents were informed about her address and they tried to reach out to her. Early morning on Saturday, the girl's parents learned that she had been set ablaze and was undergoing treatment at a hospital. Following this, the girl's parents turned to the police for help.

The police, however, did not reach the spot. The girl's mother said, "When we met her at the hospital, my daughter was in critical condition. She told us she had been repeatedly gang-raped for the past two months and was continuously tortured as we did not pay the ransom money. Finally, when Ajoy got to know that only Rs 17,000 had been paid, he became furious."

The girl's mother said that she approached the police twice but they were of no help. Jal Singh Meena, Superintendent of Police (South Tripura), however, said that the accused has been taken to the Santirbazar police station and that further investigation is underway.
