Dowry Harassment: 26-year-old demands an apartment from wife on Valentine’s-Day, then tortures her

Valentine’s Day gifts

Madiwala police

Bengaluru

social networking sites

By Praveen KumarTwo months after her wedding, this woman waited eagerly forfrom her husband. But little did she realise that he had the same expectations of her. And this is where things took a turn for the worse. He demanded a flat from the 25-year-old woman’s parents and when he did not get it, he and his parents tortured her for over a year. The woman filed a complaint on January 25.The victim, a resident of BTM 1st stage has filed a complaint with theagainst her husband, 26-year-old husband Ajay, an employee at a private firm and four others who are all staying at Mumbai.The woman in her complaint has stated that she got married to Ajay in December 2017 in Uttar Pradesh. During her stay at her husband’s house in Mumbai, her mother-in-law allegedly took all her gold ornaments and money. Within a fortnight of her wedding, her husband is said to have brought her to her parents’ house inand demanded dowry.“During the last Valentine’s day, her husband is alleged to have harassed her to get him an expensive gift. He had demanded a flat from his in-laws. After taking her back to Mumbai, the woman claims that the harassment was unbearable.She has also made allegations of physical and mental torture by her in-laws. She alleged that she was given pills to forcibly terminate her pregnancy. And when she got pregnant again, her in-laws allegedly hit her in the stomach following which she developed complications. Upon the doctor’s advice, she had to terminate her pregnancy again,” said an officer who is a part of the investigation.Things turned worse for her after she was thrown out of his house in the second week of December. She also told the police that her husband was blackmailing her, threatening to upload private photos and videos on. Unable to bear the harassment, she is alleged to have returned to her parents’ house in Bengaluru and filed a complaint.“No arrests have been made yet. After the complaint was filed by the woman, notices have been sent to her husband and others named in the complaint,” said the police officer.When contacted, the victim refused to comment.The Madiwala police has registered a case of assault with an intent to outrage her modesty (IPC 354), extortion (IPC 384), husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty (IPC 498A) and criminal intimidation (IPC 506).
