NHRC team faces criticism for calling Disha's parents to Police Academy

National Human Rights Commission

Hyderabad

The(NHRC) panel that is investigating into the encounter of four accused in the gang rape and murder of veterinary doctor Disha, interacted with the bereaved family of the woman, at the Telangana State Police Academy (TSPA) at Rajendranagar in the outskirts ofThe team faced criticism from several sections for asking late Dr Disha's family members to come to the Police Academy. Residents of the gated community where the family stays staged protests denouncing the NHRC visit. They questioned the silence of the Commission when Disha was brutally raped and murdered allegedly by the four youths.The family too was reluctant to go initially. Today is the 12th day of Disha's death and the family was observing a ritual. Her mother is said to be unwell.However, police officials from Cyberabad Commissionerate convinced the family to present its views before the NHRC. Dr Disha's father, sister and uncle went to the Academy. They are said to have asked what justice the NHRC could do for Disha? “They assured us justice,” her father said after the interaction.Meanwhile, Chilkur Balaji temple chief priest CS Rangarajan questioned what authority the NHRC team had to summon the bereaved family of the victim to the Police Academy. “It is audacious. The family was mourning their daughter’s death. Nobody would disturb them as you did. You have come here to investigate the encounter. You do it. Disha's family has nothing to do with the encounter. Why did you make them come to the Academy and stand before you to give their statement?” he thundered.The NHRC team also collected statements from the families of the four encountered youths -- Mohammed Arif, Jollu Naveen, Jollu Shiva and Ch Chennakeshavulu. The families said the police picked them up on November 28, promising to send them home after an enquiry.The team also met the two police officers -- sub-inspector Venkatesh and head constable Aravind Goud -- at a corporate hospital where they are undergoing treatment. The two police officers were said to have sustained injuries in the alleged attack by the four accused, at the time of reconstructing the scene of offence (rape and murder) at Chettanpally in the outskirts of Hyderabad in the wee hours of Friday, December 6.The NHRC team visited the encounter spot and inspected the bodies and verified the postmortem process at Mahabubnagar district government hospital on Saturday. The panel’s fact-finding process is expected to conclude on Monday. The members may interact with the Telangana director general of police.The pre-dawn encounter of Dr Disha accused triggered huge debate with the human rights groups from across the country objecting to the ‘extrajudicial killings’.The Telangana High Court will hear a writ petition by 15 rights activists on Monday (December 9) morning. It may be mentioned that the HC took up an urgent representation made by these activists as a writ petition and directed the police to preserve the bodies of the four youths till Monday night.The families may likely get the bodies for the funeral on Tuesday.
