No mercy for Rapists

Vinod Chandrashekhar Dixit

The rape and murder of a 26-year-old veterinary doctor shocked the nation. The incident has reminded the nation the 7 years old incident of Nirbhaya gang rape case that shocked the entire nation triggering a nationwide outrage. The protestors are rightly demanding demanding the death penalty for the accused. Every day the newspaper reports of rape incidents. In majority of rape cases the accused is known to the victim. It is clear that violence against the weaker sex brings out the manly demeanor of our society where oppression of women is deemed as a custom. Expressing concern over the rising cases of rape reported across the country, our While serious law reform is the need of the hour, it also should be taken into consideration that the planners, administrators, and law enforcement agencies work efficiently and diligently in that direction. This diminishing social protection has made vulnerable, especially working and college going women in the city to crimes like eve-teasing, molestation and rape. It is noticed that the prevalence of crimes against women in a certain place depends on a large extent to the social ambience of that place. The punishment for battering, molestation, sexual molestation and unlawful threat must be increased. Projects must be launched for a better cooperation between the police, the social services and other relevant parties. Government should come out with much more essence and urgency to check the indecent behaviour against women folks, and the need to chart out stern measures on the part of administrative authorities for curbing down such events. People also need to come out with determination against such evils and not be a moot spectator wherein a daughter, or a sister, or a wife, or a mother is crying for alms. In our country, rapists act with impunity as they know they can get away with their crime. Unless laws are strengthened to punish wrong-doers and justice is delivered speedily this crime will continue unchecked and our daughters will continue to suffer.

One would find that the scenario for women seems grim indeed and this will continue so long as the basic social and economic structures remain unchanged and the implementing and law and order agencies show indifference. Public display of big hoardings only serves to excite the young minds. Laws alone cannot put an end to evils that are endemic in the social structure; the government can at least make some attempt to take its own enactments seriously. Crime is endemic to the human condition, but a crime specifically directed at one sex is most despicable and unfortunately, the one that is punished least. According to the Government’s statistics twenty five rapes are committed in the country everyday but the unofficial record is in very large number. One would find that Rape is a sexual as well as cultural attack which has become a great social problem today. There are many rape cases which have become the headlines of the leading newspapers but the timely actions are not taken. After a rape incident, a woman lives a pathetic life which includes fear, depression, guilt complex, suicidal action and social stigma.

In view of the increasing incidence of the rape incidents, it is absolutely necessary to review the rape law humanely and progressively as the existing law is not only partial but also outdated. The decision of the government to bring out an ordinance to award death penalty for rape of children below 12 years has ignited a debate over the effectiveness of the step. The maximum sentence for a rapist found guilty remains unclear under prevailing laws. The maximum sentence includes seven years of life imprisonment, or up to ten years. For those guilty of gang-rape, rape of a pregnant woman and related offenses the maximum for the guilty is 10 years. The subject needs a comprehensive review and should include various types of assault, violence and torture, and with gender neutrality. Indian women are far too vulnerable to violent assaults. Sexual violence in villages, though little reported, keeps girls and women indoors after dark. The pity is that to change attitudes to rape so many young women have had to suffer and die. An act the police never prosecute and the public ignores.Women are routinely groped and harassed by men on buses and trains. The reason behind is the vulgar display by even top grade heroines in the form of ‘item numbers’ has become a must for any successful movie. All these adds to the frustration where the age of sexual maturity does not match with the permissible age for marriage. A piece of fool-proof legislation is needed to safeguard innocent victims. Before the dignity of more women is sacrificed, we need to have a real change for the better democracy, greater freedom, full transparency, strict law enforcement, and mandatory punishment for heinous crimes against women. Don’t we think shouting on roads demanding death penalty for rapists will not work but what we need is that our law makers need be pressurized to enact such law in the Parliament to empower our legal system to hang such criminals irrespective of major or minor.

[email protected]

B-15 Jyoti-Kalash Society,

Jodhpur Tekra

Satellite

Ahmedabad – 380 015
