Call records helped nab prime accused

Ludhiana: Technical evidence provided police the crucial leads to crack the Ludhiana gang-rape case.

On February 10, Dakha police had booked 10 miscreants for gang-raping a 20-year-old student after holding her and her friend hostage in Issewal the night before.

A member of the investigating team told The Times of India, “The call records of the mastermind, Jagroop Singh, helped nail him.”

So how did police zero in on him? “A CCTV camera installed about 3km from the crime spot — Sidhwan Canal bridge in Changna village, near Issewal — had captured the car of the survivor’s friend. It passed through the area at 8.26pm on Saturday. After calculating the distance between the crime spot and the area where the camera was installed, we roughly estimated the time at which the accused reached the spot. We then checked the dump data of cellphones operational in the area at that time. From around 300 cellphones, five were sifted out,” he added.

Of the five, the phone that had received the maximum calls was the first on the police radar. “When we dialled its number, we found that it was of a Jagroop Singh. It was a major lead as the survivor and her friend had told police that the main accused went by the name Jagroop. The duo had also told that he was getting repeated calls from his wife, whom he addressed as Pal,” said the investigator.

Police then checked the voter list of Gill constituency, where the crime spot falls. “Besides, we suspected that the accused might be a resident of the Gill constituency. While going through the voter list, we winnowed the names of women that ended with Pal. Out of them, we focussed on five women whose husbands were named Jagroop Singh. One of the women’s voter card was made recently. We went to the address — Tibba — mentioned on the card. There, we learned that the family had shifted to Jaspal Bangar, which falls under Gill constituency,” sources in police said.

When the police met the woman at her house in Jaspal Bangar, she told them that on the night of February 9, her husband had gone to attend a religious function. When he did return till late night, she got worried and called him up many a time. “This led us to the main accused,” the cop added.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
