Techie assaulted by auto guy,given the run-around by police, cheated by hospital

software engineer

Silk Board Junction

Medico-Legal-Case

CT scan and blood test

A 27-year-oldwas beaten up black and blue by an auto-rickshaw driver for not getting into his auto after he got down from a bus that had arrived from Chennai. As though that wasn’t enough, he claimed that the police took nearly two days to register the FIR while the private hospital he was taken to fleeced him for treating a bloody nose.Sandeep Ashok (in pic), who works with a tech firm in Bellandur and a resident of Marthahalli, had gone to attend a friend’s wedding in Chennai and had returned by bus to the city on Sunday night. The bus reached thenear the flyover where he got down around 10.40 pm. “Auto-drivers were crowding the bus door to coax passengers to get into their autos.When I got down and started to walk, an auto-driver followed me and asked me to take his auto,” Sandeep said. “I simply refused by shaking my head at him and started to walk when he held me by the shoulder.I pushed him away and continued walking. He slapped me on the back of my head and my spectacles, fell to the ground,” Sandeep added. The auto-driver then started raining blows and punches on Sandeep’s face, body and hands. All the fellow auto-rickshaw drivers stood there watching, a few passengers from the bus came to Sandeep’s help. But by then, the rogue auto-driver had fled the spot.As the Madiwala police station was closer to Silk Board junction, a bleeding Sandeep walked to the station to narrate his ordeal, but the police listened the story and then said that the spot where the crime occurred did not fall under their jurisdiction. They asked Sandeep to head to Bommanahalli police station. Sandeep went to the police station where a constable after listening to his entire ordeal took him on his bike to Prashanth Multispeciality Hospital.The constable had not registered a complaint and instead was taking him to a private hospital, where a duty doctor was forcing him to get admitted if he wanted the complaint to be registered. Sandeep got suspicious. “At the hospital, I was told by the duty doctor that I had to get admitted for at least for 24 hours to get the(MLC) registered,” he said. Sandeep paid Rs 5,500 as initial deposit and got admitted. The constable then told him the spot where he was assaulted fell under the jurisdiction of the Mico Layout police. Sandeep informed his uncle about the incident, who rushed to the hospital on Monday morning. “I was bleeding the entire night and the doctor did not do anything about it except for a. As the blood test showed my platelet count was low, the doctor also got a Dengue profile done on me, which cost me Rs 1,500,” Sandeep told Mirror.The bleeding stopped by itself in the morning and when he requested discharge from the doctor, he refused telling him that he was under observation. Sandeep urged his uncle to speak to the doctor to facilitate discharge him. In the end they agreed, but the bill was already Rs 12,500, including Rs 2,000 as charges for MLC. On Monday afternoon, before the discharge formalities were over, Sandeep called the Mico Layout police and narrated the incident. They told him that no one from either Madiwala police station or Bommanahali police or Prashanth Multispeciality Hospital have informed them of any such incident. “It was then I suspected there was a nexus between the Bommanahalli police and the hospital for fleecing victims like me,” Sandeep told Mirror.Sandeep has finally filed a complaint with the Mico Layout police station. “Nearly two days after the incident, the police registered an FIR,” Sandeep said. It’s been six days since the incident, and the Mico Layout police are yet to arrest the auto driver.
