The abomination that’s UP

Yogi Adityanath

encounter!

Mayawati

Muzaffarnagar

Uttarakhand

Swami Chinmayanand

Saina Nehwal

By Radhika RamaseshanUnnao district alone reported 86 rapes in 11 months this year, but’s reputation thrives on encounter killingsThe Uttar Pradesh police has a new coinage to dress up its bloody encounters with alleged criminals. It’s “engagement”. The term carries the air of a midnight rendezvous over chai and namkeen, peppered with conversations around weapons, revenge and, of course, politics – since it’s UP. Oh, for anThat’s what a cop posted in a crime-prone Madhya Pradesh district – who went on to become a big gun in Chhattisgarh when it was carved out of MP – told me years ago. He said that when his men, posted in the boondocks of Chambal and away from their families, were bored, the standing order was to go into a village, do an encounter and get sloshed. There was always a “petty” criminal lurking around as easy prey. A blood sport, if there was one.In this miasma of cynicism, amorality and illegality, where even the primeval credo of an eye for an eye doesn’t work because often the retaliation is disproportionate to the “crime”, it is no wonder that Yogi Adityanath sanctified the encounters staged during his regime as just, as kosher. On January 26 this year, the chief minister’s officials were directed to list the 3,026 police encounters in which 69 “criminals” were eliminated and 7,043 arrested as his government’s “achievements”. A figure of 11,981was highlighted for good measure because these were reportedly criminals who chose to have their bails cancelled, surrender and serve out the rest of their lives in jails rather than be gunned down in encounters. A pathetic reflection on the state’s security ambience. On Friday, the stats were upgraded: 5,178 police “engagements” since March 2017 that claimed 103 criminals. It was the official answer to, who counselled Adityanath to emulate the Hyderabad encounter, which has split every segment of the country vertically down the line and raised more questions than it has answered.In UP, a social and economic context was prepared for the encounters. The Hindus of West UP, which reported the maximum number of police “engagements”, were “besieged” by the Muslims after thecommunal violence of 2013 and were “forced” to migrate toand Haryana for “safety”. This was truth distorted because it was the Muslims who bore the brunt of the atrocities and had to flee their homes and seek refuge in camps or with relatives in other parts. The “palayan” (coerced migration) theory, conceptualised and propagated by the BJP, won the party handsome votes and a mandate for Adityanath to unleash the cops on Muslims. First, they went for the Muslims, and then the Dalits and Yadavs. The incidents were meticulously documented by the Rihai Manch, a Lucknow rights group.So why did Mayawati exult over the Hyderabad encounter? Surely she knows that encounters are not the most desired means of enforcing law and order. As a chief minister in her own right, who ruled without an ally from 2007 to 2012, Mayawati might be dissed by the elite for her profligacy in memorialising India’s Dalit icons but even the upper castes speak about her administration with some nostalgia. If they have a quarrel with it, it’s with the “excesses” allegedly committed by the cops while enforcing the Dalit Act. Mayawati didn’t need a trigger happy police to nab the dreaded Raja Bhaiyya or Brijesh Singh. She used the now defunct Prevention of Terrorism Act against them. But she made an example of the fact that the law can be an equaliser so that women from the weaker sections mustered enough courage to file FIRs against rapists and not suffer in silence.UP has changed, and Mayawati flowed with the tide. Even Akhilesh Yadav, whose regime was criticised for its “patronage” of unsavoury elements, walked the middle path after Hyderabad. Happy someone got justice but happier when a safe and secure environment for women is ushered in.What is it about police encounters that taps the lowliest instincts in people and causes them to vent uninhibited negativity? The commonest explanation was they were fed up with a stagnant system of jurisprudence. But Akhilesh Yadav hit the nail on the head when he said anyone can be killed anywhere in UP, if not by the police then by criminals. So deep is the nexus. The criminals who rape with impunity are also those who don’t have to fear the police because they know the cops won’t touch them except under political duress.Ask Kuldeep Sengar and. One’s a legislator from Unnao district and the other’s a former MP from Shahjahanpur, not far from Unnao. Both are from the BJP and have been accused of rape. The question of nabbing Sengar and Chinmayanand didn’t arise because as Thakurs, they are close to Adityanath. If they were eventually arrested it was because they became embarrassments for Delhi.Nobody’s baying for their blood because they are big men in their spheres of criminal operations. Agreed, justice must not take the form of revenge, but must revenge be selective?, PV Sindhu, say something on Sengar and Chinmayanand. Or is your outrage conspicuously selective?
