Third accused arrested, all identified, one may be minor

Ludhiana: The police on Wednesday arrested third accused and identified the sixth one in the gang rape of a 20-year-old student near Sidhwan Canal bridge in Changna village, close to Issewal.

Three days ago, the police had booked 10 unidentified accused. Now all the accused have been identified, but only three arrested. The main accused had said during interrogation that six, including him, had gang-raped the student.

Deputy inspector general (Ludhiana range) Ranbir Singh Khatra said Surmu of Khanpur was arrested from a check-post near Chak Kalan village on Wednesday morning after he got down from a vehicle at Ladowal. He added that Surmu had gone to Kathua in Jammu and Kashmir after the incident and returned after the police mounted pressure on him.

The officer said their teams were conducting raids outside the state, too, to arrest the other three accused. “The only unidentified accused has also been identified, and he might be a minor, but that would be verified after his arrest. The juvenile accused belongs to Kathua in Jammu and Kashmir and would frequent here to meet the other three accused, who are from a nomad community,” the DIG added.

The accused were produced in a local court that sent them to seven-day police remand.

Cops said they had sought 14 days’ remand on the plea that they have to extract evidence, recover motorcycles and arrest three more accused, but the court of judicial magistrate first class Ankit Airi granted seven days.

Sources in the police said two accused, Saif Ali and the suspected juvenile, may have also gone to Kathua and raids were being conducted with help from Jammu and Kashmir police as well.

Earlier, Sadiq Ali, 24, of Rempa near Hakimpura Banga, was held. Main accused Jagroop Singh, 30, of Jaspal Bangar in Ludhiana, who worked as a part-time driver, had surrendered on Tuesday evening.

BOX

Footwear tossed at accused

When the police brought the three accused out of the district courts and they were being taken to vehicles parked outside, Youth Akali Dal leader Meetpal Dugri and his accomplice threw sandals at them and raised slogans, Balatkari Murdabad. A police officer said footwears didn’t hit the accused as a strong contingent of cops was present. Talking to mediapersons later, Dugri said such acts wouldn’t be tolerated in the state and insisted that the accused be handed over to them. “We will show what to do with these goons. We will teach them such a lesson that no such case will take place in India,” he added.

NCW team meets survivor

National Commission for Women’s two-member team, led by under-secretary Priti Kumar, reached Ludhiana on Tuesday night. The team met the survivor and SSP Varinder Singh Brar on Wednesday morning.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
