Unnao rape victim laid to rest amid tight security

UNNAO

Samajwadi Party

Swami Prasad Maurya

Kamal Rani

Yogi Adityanath

Lucknow

Come after you get raped: Unnao cops tell woman



The last rites of the 23-year-old Unnao rape victim, who succumbed to her burn injuries in Delhi’s Safdarjung Hospital, were performed at her native village here on Sunday amid tight security arrangements.She was laid to rest in the fields belonging to her family, where the mausoleum (mazaar) of her grandparents is situated.A large number of local residents and officials were present.leaders, UP Cabinet ministersandVarun were also present.Kamal Rani Varun, said, “The slogan of Beti Padhao, Beti Bachaao is meaningful. We stand with the aggrieved family in the hour of grief and will ensure that the accused get stringent punishment.”“The law and order scenario in the state has significantly deteriorated in the state. Today, girls are not feeling secure and their FIRs are not being registered. The government ofmust tender its resignation,” Samajwadi Party MLC Sunil Singh Sajan said.Local Congress leader and former Unnao MP Annu Tandon in a tweet on Sunday said, “We said our goodbyes to the daughter who has found eternal peace and ensured eternal security... And the fight for justice continues...” Tandon also gave financial assistance of Rs 5 lakh to the aggrieved family.Earlier in the day, family members of the rape victim agreed to perform her last rites following a negotiation withDivisional Commissioner Mukesh Meshram and other senior police officials.Meshram told reporters that the family members would be provided security and a house under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.Meshram also said, “The sister of the victim too will be given separate security, since she may be a witness in the case. One person of the family (as decided by them) will be given a government job. Apart from this, if any member of the family seeks an Arms Licence from the point of view of self-defence, it will be given after completing the due procedure of law.” The sister of the deceased had earlier said her family would not perform the last rites unless UP CM Yogi Adityanath arrived in her village and assured of strict action against the accused.A woman in Hindupur village, the same place where the Unnao rape victim had been set on fire on Thursday, alleged on Saturday that the police had refused to file her complaint of attempted rape.The police allegedly asked the woman to come with her complaint after the rape had taken place. “Rape toh hua nahi, jab hoga tab aana (Rape has not happened, come when it happens),” is what a cop at the police station told the woman, she claimed.The woman, whose complaint has not been registered, said that three men from the village attempted to rape her some months ago when she was on her way to buy medicines.“I was going to take my medicines. These three men stopped me and started pulling my clothes. They also attempted to rape me,” she said. She has also identified the accused. The woman said she has been visiting the police station for over three months but no one has heard her case.“After the incident, I called 1090 (women help line) and they asked me to Dial 100 but they asked me to report the matter to Unnao police,” she said.She alleged that the three accused have been threatening to kill her as well.“They come to my house every day and threaten me with dire consequences if I file a complaint,” the woman said.IANS
