Man strangulates 2 kids to death, hangs self in Mumbai's Chembur

The SHO also said that he is waiting for the autopsy report and will add further sections against Dinesh Yadav if his involvement was found in the murders. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man strangulates two kids to death before committing suicide in Mumbai Accused had frequent fights with wife and the murders seem to be result of domestic dispute Matter came to light on Sunday when Dinesh's brother knocked his door and did not get any response

Mumbai: In a shocking incident, a man allegedly strangulated his two children and later committed suicide by hanging himself in Chembur area of Mumbai in Maharashtra.

The accused is identified as Dinesha Yadav, who worked as a plumber. The deceased children were his 3-year-old daughter and an 18-month-old son.

According to a report in The Times of India, the police believe the children were strangled to death by Yadav. The bodies have been sent for autopsy.

According to police, Dinesh Yadav was upset as his wife ran away from home frequently. The door was locked from inside when the incident took place on Sunday night.

The couple used to have a frequent fight over some or the other issues at home. Dinesh's wife was not at home when he killed his kids and himself. The report further suggests that Dinesh's wife did not come home in the last five days.

The matter came to light when Dinesh's brother knocked on the door and got no response for a long time. Later, he got suspicious and gathered other neighbours to break open the door.

As his brother opened the door, the bodies of the children were lying on a bed, while Dinesh was found hanging from the ceiling of the room.

Senior Inspector Sopan Nighot from RCF police station said, "We have registered a case of accidental death and are probing the matter further. The bodies have been sent for post-mortem at Rajawadi hospital. We believe that the children have been strangled and the accused later committed suicide by hanging."

The SHO also said that he is waiting for the autopsy report and will add further sections against Dinesh Yadav if his involvement was found in the murders. Police officials said they will record the statement of family members to find out the reason behind the deaths.
