PM Modi extends birthday wishes to Sonia Gandhi, tweets 'praying for her long life, good health'

Sonia Gandhi and PM Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Praying for her long life and good health, PM Modi tweeted on Sonia Gandhi's birthday The Congress party also wished Gandhi on her birthday, saying her strength and compassion has united the party Sonia Gandhi, who turned 73 on Monday, has decided not to celebrate her birthday

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on Monday, extended birthday greeting to Congress interim chief Sonia Gandhi.

Keeping aside the political differences, the prime minister took to Twitter and prayed for Gandhi’s long and healthy life. “Birthday wishes to Mrs. Sonia Gandhi Ji. Praying for her long life and good health,” he wrote on Twitter.

Birthday wishes to Mrs. Sonia Gandhi Ji. Praying for her long life and good health. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) December 9, 2019

The Congress party also wished Gandhi on her birthday, saying her strength and compassion have united the party and made it strong.

“The longest-serving Congress President, Smt. Sonia Gandhi's exemplary strength of character has inspired generations of Congress leaders. Her strength, dignity, compassion & grace has united us and made us strong. We wish her a very happy birthday,” the party said in a tweet.

The Congress leader, who turned 73 on Monday, has decided not to celebrate her birthday in the wake of rising incidents of crime against women in various parts of the country.

Gandhi took the decision as she is concerned about women's security, and is also saddened by rape incidents and assaults on women in various parts of the country.

The move comes amid public outrage over two recent incidents of crime against women – the Unnao rape case and the Telangana rape and murder case. On Friday night, the Unnao rape victim, who was set on fire, died at a hospital in Delhi while in Telangana’s Cyberabad, a 27-year-old veterinary doctor was gang-raped and charred to death by four men.

The Congress leader had earlier too dropped her birthday celebration plans in wake of some tragic incidents. In 2014, she decided no to celebrate her birthday after terror and Naxal attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and Chhattisgarh, respectively. Gandhi had asked Congresspersons not to celebrate her birthday to show solidarity with the martyred Army and police personnel there.

She had also not celebrated her birthday in 2013 following the demise of Nelson Mandela, former South African president.
