Bihar police apathy: Gang rape survivor sent back from police station; made to wait for hours at another

It is to be noted that Bihar police is already under the scanner for its shoddy handling of women’s safety issues in the state.

Key Highlights The survivor approached a police station to complain about her gang rape. Cops refused to take her complaint and said that the scene of crime was outside their jurisdiction. The second police station did not take her complaint promptly and made her wait for long.

Patna: Another shocking case of police apathy was reported from Hajipur in Bihar where a gang rape victim was turned away by the police when she approached them to file her complaint. The woman, who was allegedly abducted and gang-raped near the Hajipur Railway Station in Bihar was turned away by the cops on duty from the first police station she approached.

Their excuse for not registering her complaint was that their station did not come under the jurisdiction of the area where the crime was committed. The shocking apathy comes in the light of the ruling that no sexual abuse survivor can be turned away citing the ‘jurisdiction’ excuse.

The woman then approached a second police station where she was made to wait for two hours before her complaint was heard. She was finally sent for a medical test to a government hospital hours after her ordeal had started.

According to the woman, she was on her way to a bus stand and the accused men abducted her. The accused men then took her to a secluded spot where they took turns to rape her.

It is to be noted that Bihar police is already under the scanner for its shoddy handling of women’s safety issues in the state and a few days ago, a woman was raped, shot and burnt in Buxar. The incident had sparked massive outrage and drew condemnation from all sections of society.

Such was the gruesomeness of the case that despite hundreds of villagers coming forward to identify the victim, none could do so because the victim’s body was charred beyond recognition and there were no other identifying objects like jewellery, phone etc found near her.

The latest case from Hajipur is another one in line with the inhuman crimes being committed against women in the state. Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has condemned the incidents and ensured speedy justice but with the police apathy still running rampant across the state, much needs to be done.


