While Police Is Unable To Stop Crimes Against Women, They Use Force At Public Protesting Rapes

The staggering rate of crimes against women in the country shows how we have failed as a society towards respecting women. It also reveals the acute failure of the government and authorities in controlling such crimes and acting swiftly for redressal of complaints.

The Telangana gangrape case, where a 26-year-old government vet was gangraped and burnt alive by a group of four men while she was returning from work, is an example why women in India refuse to trust police.

The vet had called her sister and her to keep talking to her when she saw the men approaching towards her.

In the Unnao rape case, the victim was set ablaze by her perpetrators while she was on her way to the court. She was not given any police protection. She died at a Delhi hospital after sustaining 90 per cent burns.

The accused were out on bail in the rape case when they set her on fire.

Police use water cannons at protesting students

While the police pan-India have failed utterly in controlling crimes against women, they used force on students who were protesting rapes in Delhi and Faridkot.

On November 7, Delhi Police used water cannons on agitated protesters after the march from Raj Ghat to India Gate to against the Unnao rape-murder incident turned violent. The protests are reminiscent to the outrage that erupted after the 2012 Nirbhaya gangrape case in the national capital. The police had used water cannons and tear gas at the activists and students while they were protesting at India Gate.

A clash broke out between the protesting students and police after they were stopped by the latter on their way.

Delhi Commission For Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal has been on a hunger strike to demand capital punishment for rapists within six months of their conviction. Her supporters took out a candlelight from Rajghat to India Gate when they were stopped by force.

The police used barricades to stop the barricades and used water cannons to disperse the crowd. Few of the protesters even climbed atop the barricades to move ahead.

The police said that the protestors were not allowed to move ahead as they did not seek prior permission. They also claimed that the protesters had lit up a marshal and brandished it in front of them.

Earlier, the police had also used force on the crowd that gathered outside Unnao rape victim’s house in Uttar Pradesh. The crowd shouted “vaapas jao, vaapas jao” (go back) and raised slogans against the state government and Sakshi Maharaj.

In Faridkot, the police used water cannons and fired tear gas shells to disperse the crowd. The crowd was protesting and marching towards the Deputy Commissioner’s office on Saturday. The police also allegedly wielded lathis on the occasion.

The protesters were demanding justice for a woman doctor who has accused a senior doctor of sexual harassment. They have been sitting on a dharna the Deputy Commissioner’s office here on Saturday. The police also allegedly wielded lathis on the occasion.

Such incidents of police using force on protesters highlight their own failure in controlling crimes and then trying to control the voices that protest.
