No stupid court can book me as I am Param Shiva: Rape accused, self-styled godman Nithyananda

Nithyananda recently suggested that he has received funding for founding his own country called 'Kailaasa' on his website. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Swami Nithyananda - the self-proclaimed godman has possibly fled the country and he is wanted in cases pertaining to rape and confinement of children Ecuador has denied that it has given refuge to Nithyananda or that his fantasy nation Kailaasa has been given space on its soil Nithyananda is wanted in India for multiple cases including alleged rape and abduction of minor girls and had been denied renewal of passport

New Delhi: After the government has cancelled the passport of the rape-accused self-styled godman Nithyananda, a video of the fugitive figure has gone viral on social media. In the video, he was seen mocking the judiciary and boasting that no 'stupid court' can prosecute him as he is the 'Param Shiva'.

Nithyananda is wanted in India for multiple cases including serious crimes like rape and abduction of minor girls. In the video which is making rounds across social media, Nithyananda can be heard saying that the world has gone against him but you (the audience) showed integrity and he will show his integrity by revealing the reality and truth to you. He added that nobody can touch him as he is Param Shiva. Further mocking the judiciary he stated that no stupid court can prosecute him for revealing the truth.

"No judiciary can touch me. M param shiva"

: #NithyanandaSwami from an undisclosed location. pic.twitter.com/WXdZ6bGCdO — Divesh Singh (@YippeekiYay_DH) November 22, 2019

The self-styled godman had allegedly fled the country without a passport and the application for his news passport has been rejected by the authorities. Currently, the Gujarat police are searching for him after he has been accused of confining minor girls at his ashram in Ahmedabad.

However, earlier, External Affairs Ministry Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar told media outlets that all Indian missions and posts abroad have been sensitised to inform local governments so that he could be traced.

Nithyananda recently suggested that he has received funding for founding his own country called 'Kailaasa' on his website. However, the embassy of Ecuador, in a statement, categorically denied that the Nithyananda was given asylum by it or has been helped by its government in purchasing any land or island in South America near or far from Ecuador.
