3 Delhi Metro Stations Shut Amid Protests By JNU Students, Youth Congress

The three metro stations in the Central Delhi area are where most government offices are located.

Entry and exits at three metro stations in central Delhi were closed today ahead of a march by JNU students to Rashtrapati Bhavan, seeking to meet the president over a hike in fees. Also, Youth Congress workers will be marching to Parliament to express solidarity with the 23-year-old Unnao woman who died last week, days after being set on fire by men accused of raping her.

"As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Udyog Bhawan, Lok Kalyan Marg and Central Secretariat have been closed. Trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg," the DMRC tweeted. The three metro stations in the Central Delhi area are where most central government offices are located.

Central Secretariat is the closest metro station to Rashtrapati Bhavan, while the Lok Kalyan Marg station is near the Prime Minister's official residence.

Yellow Line Update



As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Udyog Bhawan, Lok Kalyan Marg and Central Secretariat have been closed. Trains are not halting at Udyog Bhawan and Lok Kalyan Marg. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 9, 2019

"IYC's protest march from 5, Raisina Road to the Parliament demanding justice for the horrific crime committed against the Unnao rape victim has been joined by a multitude of IYC members, volunteers and citizens from across Delhi," the Youth Congress tweeted.

A 23-year-old woman was set on fire on Thursday by men accused of raping her in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao. She had suffered 90 per cent burns and was airlifted to Delhi's Safdarjung Hospital from Lucknow the same evening. She suffered a cardiac arrest and died at the hospital at 11:40 pm Friday.

Glimpses of the IYC protest march to the Parliament demanding #JusticeForUnnao.



Led by IYC National President Shri @srinivasiyc. pic.twitter.com/b628MboZf7 — Youth Congress (@IYC) December 9, 2019

JNU students have been protesting since last month against a 300 per cent increase in hostel fee. The students have held multiple protests demanding the government roll back the fee hike and make "education affordable for all". Days after the initial protests, the Education Ministry announced what they called a "major rollback" in the fee hike but it was rejected by the students as "eyewash".

In massive protests held last month, JNU students marched towards parliament chanting anti-fee hike slogans and carrying placards and posters. During one of the marches, the students climbed the police barricades and subsequently clashed with police personnel who tried to stop them. Students were injured in the lathicharge and many alleged brutality and abuse by the police.

Education Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank' last week said that the increase fee will go towards meeting the increased expenditure on the maintenance of hostels and to run them on a "no profit no loss" basis.
