Gujarat: 19 Days Later, No FIR in Rape Case Against Industrialist

New Delhi: A 28-year-old woman who moved to register an FIR against an Ahmedabad industrialist accusing him of rape said that the police have not filed her complaint. The woman, who works as an event planned in Ahmedabad, said that the police have not registered her complaint even 19 days after she moved to do so, according to the Times of India.

The woman, who is originally from Rajasthan, sent a plea to Gujarat home minister Pradipsinh Jadeja, seeking action against the industrialist. In the plea, she says that in 2013, she started working with the industrialist, who runs an agrochemical, pesticides, and crop protection product manufacturing company.

She says she was frequently raped by the industrialist during her employment with the company. According to TOI, the woman said she was given Rs 1 lakh by the industrialist in December 2013, when she was in dire need of financial assistance.

The industrialist later told her he had secured a significant event-planning contract and offered her the woman a partner’s role in the project. He told her that they have to travel to Gandhinagar to meet the clients. When they did so, he took her to a hotel in Kudasan village of Gandhinagar and allegedly raped her, recording the act with a spy camera.

Also Read: Handling of Recent Rape Cases Turns Spotlight Back on Need for Police Reforms

According to reports, the woman said that the industrialist used the video clip of the rape to blackmail her and repeatedly rape her in various places in Gandhinagar, Thaltej and Naranpura.

The woman’s account only emerged when the crime branch’s women’s cell was investigating another rape allegation against the same industrialist. A 32-year-old woman who worked as private secretary to the industrialist has also accused him of rape.

According to reports, the 28-year-old woman was interviewed by the police in connection with the first case. During the interview, she said she was also raped by the industrialist and moved an application to file an FIR. Both the women approached home minister Jadeja last week.

The crime branch’s women’s cell ACP Mini Joseph told the Times of India that as the incident happened six years ago, “We will register an FIR only after verifying the charges.”
