Fact Check: Did this man track down and brutally torture his three-year-old daughter's rapist?

A photo showing two police officers holding a man has gone on viral on social media with the claim that this South African father chased down his three-year-old daughter's rapist and brutally tortured him.

The caption with the photo reads, "This Soweto father tracked down the man who raped his 3-year-old daughter, tied him to tree, cut off the rapist's penis, cooked it, and forced him to eat it." Soweto is a township in South Africa.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the post to be misleading. The man in the photo was arrested by South African police for allegedly looting and clashing with foreign residents.

The post has been viral since April this year when Twitter user 'Zaddy Ajala' tweeted it. Till the filing of this story, it has been retweeted more than 500 times. Several Facebook users have also shared the post.

Upon reverse searching the viral photo, we found an old article by Daily Mail which carried this photo. In the report, the viral photo is captioned as, "A South African resident is arrested by police after allegedly looting and clashing with foreign residents during a xenophobic march by the Mamelodi Concerned Residents through the streets of Pretoria."

The article was published in February 2017 when violent clashes broke out between black South Africans and immigrants from other African countries in South Africa's capital Pretoria.

The viral photo is also available on 'European Pressphoto Agency' with the same piece of information and is titled "South Africa xenophobia". Therefore, it is clear that the viral photo has nothing to do with a father who brutally tortured his three-year-old daughter's rapist.

In 2014, a similar case was reported in Delhi when a furious father tortured and killed his 14-year-old daughter's alleged rapist. According to a report by The Indian Express, the 36-year-old man burnt the genitals of the alleged perpetrator and then strangled him to death. The incident took place on November 1, 2014.

AFP Fact Check had also debunked this misleading post earlier.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Photo is of man who tracked down his three-year-old daughter’s rapist and brutally tortured him Conclusion The man in the photo was arrested by South African police for allegedly looting and clashing with foreign residents JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
