Telangana HC orders bodies of Hyderabad accused to be preserved till December 13

The four were arrested on November 29 for allegedly raping and killing the woman by smothering her and later burning the body. (Photo: PTI)

The Telangana High Court on Monday ordered to preserve the bodies of the accused in the Telangana doctor's rape and murder case till December 13. The matter has been posted for hearing on December 12.

The alleged rapists were shot down by the Cyberabad police on Friday after they tried to run away during the recreation of crime scene. The police claimed that the accused had snatched their weapons and fired at them, following which the police fired in retaliation, leading to their death.

The Telangana government has constituted a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to probe the killing of four accused in the rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in "retaliatory" firing by police last week.

A Government Order was issued in this regard on Sunday.

"The cause and circumstances leading to the death of the four persons should be ascertained with reasons and establish truth and in view of the fact that the case requires sustained and focused investigation, a SIT is constituted to investigate the case," the Order said.

The eight-member SIT led by Rachakonda Police Commissioner Mahesh M Bhagwat, should immediately take over investigation in the case registered over the "exchange of fire" and all other related cases registered in the state as per Supreme Court guidelines, it said.

The SIT should complete the investigation and submit the report before a competent court of law, it said.

The four were arrested on November 29 for allegedly raping and killing the woman by smothering her and later burning the body.

A petition has also been moved in the Supreme Court questioning the legality of the Hyderabad encounter.

ALSO READ | Complaint filed against Cyberabad police over killing of accused in Hyderabad rape-murder case

ALSO WATCH | Justice prevailed: Hyderabad locals hail police over killing of vet's rape-murder accused
