Monster 'raped girl, 5, and smashed her head in with stone' in sickening attack

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

A farmworker has been charged with raping and murdering a five-year-old tribal girl in a horrifying attack in central India.

Sanjay Puri, 32, was arrested charged with raping the young girl before smashing her head in with a stone, police said on Monday.

The body of the girl - who had been missing since December 6 - was found on a farm in the village of Linga, some 25km (16 miles) from the city of Nagpur in the state of Maharashtra.

Police Superintendent Rakesh Ola told reporters: "The arrested accused, Sanjay Puri, also works as a farm labourer like the parents of the girl in the farm."

According to police, the girl's parents live on one side of the farm while her grandmother lives on the other, with a small path connecting the houses.

(Image: DIVYAKANT SOLANKI/EPA-EFE/REX)

An official said: "The girl went missing on Friday evening.

"Initially, her parents assumed that she might have gone to the house of her grandmother.

"However, they lodged a missing person complaint on Saturday afternoon after realising that she was not traceable."

On Monday, nearby residents organised rallies and called for mass protests against the girl's brutal murder.

Police said Puri has been charged with rape, kidnapping and murder, as well as other crimes under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act and the Prevention of Atrocities Act.

A post-mortem was carried out at a government medical college and hospital by a team of forensic experts.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

Police spokeswoman Monica Raut said four people in total have been rounded up for questioning.

"We will shortly crack the case. Interrogations are underway," she said.

It is the latest shocking sex crime to horrify many in India, which last year introduced the death penalty for child rapists.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

In July this year, the rape of a seven-year-old girl triggered riots in the Indian city of Jaipur.

A three-year-old girl was raped by a boy, 11 after he lured her into his house with sweets in the city of Dehradun, northern India in June.

And an eight-year-old girl was gang-raped at her school in Baghpat in September.

Earlier this month, four suspected rapists were shot dead by police after a woman was attacked before being burnt alive near Hyderabad.
