Telangana HC orders cops to preserve accused's dead bodies till December 13

Telangana High Court

Supreme Court

Hyderabad

NHRC team faces criticism for calling Disha's parents to Police Academy The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) panel that is investigating into the encounter of four accused in the gang rape and murder of veterinary doctor Disha, interacted with the bereaved family of the woman, at the Telangana State Police Academy (TSPA) at Rajendranagar in the outskirts of Hyderabad.

NHRC team arrives in Telangana to assess Hyderabad encounter A team from the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) arrived in Hyderabad on Saturday noon to assess the encounter of four youths accused in the sensational rape and murder of a veterinary doctor.

Theon Monday directed the police to preserve the dead bodies of the four youths encountered at Chettanpally on Friday (December 6) till next Friday (December 13). The HC adjourned to Thursday (December 12) the hearing on the petition challenging the ‘extrajudicial killings’ of the four truck workers accused in the gang rape and murder of 26-year-old veterinary doctor Disha.Thewill hear a similar petition on Wednesday.The HC directed the police to move the four dead bodies to the mortuary in state-run Gandhi General Hospital in. Presently, the bodies are at government general hospital in Mahabubnagar, as per the earlier order of the HC. Originally, the HC on December 6 directed the cops to preserve the dead bodies till 8 pm on December 9.Today, the HC began hearing on the petition and issued a new directive. The bench asked the state advocate general if the Supreme Court guidelines were followed in the exchange of fire. It asked the AG to furnish the documentary evidence for the same. The AG sought time till Thursday to furnish the details and documents.It may be mentioned that a group of women and human rights activists had written an urgent letter to the Chief Justice of Telangana on Friday evening seeking judicial intervention in ‘extrajudicial killings’ of the four accused by the Cyberabad police.The HC took up the letter as a writ petition and passed certain orders instantly while posting the petition for hearing on Monday. Video recording of the post-mortem procedure was among the court directives. A National Human Rights Commission panel had inspected the bodies at Mahabubnagar hospital and went through the autopsy records.
