MP government recedes from the promise to hold students’ union elections, cites approaching exams as reason

Kamal Nath, Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights MP govt has retracted from its election promise to hold students' union elections at colleges The state's higher education minister cited approaching examinations in the colleges as a reason for calling off elections ABVP and NSUI have expressed disappointment over the government’s decision

Bhopal: The Kamal Nath-led Congress government in Madhya Pradesh on Sunday retracted from its promise of holding students’ union elections in government and private colleges in the state.

The state’s Higher Education Minister Jitu Patwari said that the government will, in all probability, hold elections next year.

Patwari said, "I was keen to hold elections because there has been a wide gap since the students got their rights. Now the examinations are getting closer. As such it is not possible to hold elections this year. Students' union elections will be held next year in colleges under any circumstances.”

The Congress manifesto for Assembly polls “Vachan Patra” (promissory note) promised the reintroduction of students’ union elections if the party was voted to power. After the Congress won, the promise has been reiterated several times in this year and student organisations such as NSUI and ABVP, backed by Congress and BJP, respectively, were preparing for polls. "They should also keep their word. We will discuss the matter with the government. At the same time, students will continue to fight for rights," said Vivek Tripathi, state spokesperson for the NSUI.

They have expressed their resentment and disappointment over the government’s decision.

"This is very unfortunate. The ABVP will organise state-wide agitation against the government inaction on the issue," said Chetas Sukhadia, ABVP’s organisational secretary.

The then BJP government, in 2003, banned the direct elections to students’ union in the state. It permitted indirect elections under which the students chose their class representatives and then the class representatives elected the leaders for unions. This process was also stalled after one Professor HS Sabharwal died during the elections in 2006. The professor was attacked by a group of 25-30 ABVP member students on August 26, 2006 at the college premises and succumbed to his injuries the next day at the hospital, as per news agency IANS.

This process was restored in 2017 and NSUI and ABVP registered wins on several seats along with AAP’s youth wing Chhatra Yuva Sangharsh Samiti (CYSS) that contested for the first time and managed to secure wins. But the polls were abandoned last year due to Assembly elections in the state.
