Kolkata man attacks daughter after she elopes with man of her choice

On Sunday, Barnali's father Dulal went to her in-laws' residence (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Sunday, a man identified as Dulal attacked his daughter with a chopper Dulal was allegedly upset with his daughter for marrying a man of her choice Dulal's daughter Barnali has sustained injuries and is undergoing treatment

Kolkata: A man in Kolkata's Ashokenagar, North 24 Parganas attacked his daughter on Sunday. The accused allegedly attacked his daughter as she married a man of her choice. The accused has been identified as Dulal. The victim, Barnali Halder is undergoing treatment at a hospital in Kolkata, she is said to be critical.

Barnali Haldar had allegedly been a relationship for some time. As her father did not approve of her relationship, Barnali and her lover took the decision of eloping and getting married.

On Sunday, Barnali's father Dulal went to her in-laws' residence. Dulal told his daughter that he was visiting as he wanted to meet her. According to Times of India's report, Barnali's in-laws and her husband were not home when Dulal came to the house. When Barnali approached her father, the latter allegedly took out a chopper and attacked her.

Barnali's painful screams were heard by the neighbours and they rushed to help her. Her neighbours caught hold of Dulal and beat him up before handing him over to the police. Meanwhile, the victim was taken to the Ashoknagar State General Hospital. However, later, she was shifted to the RG Kar Medical College where treatment is being administered to her.

Man burns daughter's body over friendship with boy

In March this year, a man allegedly set his daughter ablaze in Maharashtra's Ahmednagar for befriending a boy. The accused was identified as Shreerang Saygunde. Allegedly, Shreerang's daughter had become friends with a boy of her college. She used to talk to him on the phone and the two even used to go to college together.

Shreerang allegedly did not approve of his daughter's increasing friendship with the boy and he had also asked her to put an end to it. Shreerang's daughter, however, did not listen to him. On the day of the incident, Shreerang strangled his daughter at their residence and tried to set her ablaze. However, the deceased's sister saw her half-burnt body near their house and informed the police. The police reached the spot and arrested Shreerang.
