JD(S)-BJP workers clash in Hassan; one injured

JD(S)-BJP workers clash in Hassan; one injured

Hassan: Tension prevailed for a while when JD(S) workers resorted to stone pelting at the house of BJP MLA Preetham Gowda, resulting in injury to a BJP worker, in Hassan, on Wednesday.

The injured is Rahul Kini, a supporter of Preetham Gowda. He is being treated at the District Hospital. The cause behind the tension is said to be the controversial remarks by Preetham Gowda, the lone BJP MLA in the JD(S) dominant Hassan district, in the audio clip released by Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy to tackle BJP state president B S Yeddyurappa and others. Condemning the insensitive remarks of Preetham Gowda against JD(S) supremo H D Deve Gowda and Kumaraswamy in the audio clip, JD(S) supporters pelted stones at his house, when one of them hit Kini. Preetham Gowda has allegedly said that the JD(S), which is a father-son party, will disintegrate once Deve Gowda, who is old, and Kumaraswamy, who is a heart patient, die.

Hundreds of JD(S) workers, took out a motorbike rally to protest against the MLA in the city on Wednesday. They demanded that Preetham Gowda should tender apology to Deve Gowda and Kumaraswamy.

When the JD(S) workers were returning after the protest rally, Preetham’s supporters raised slogans in favour of the MLA. In reply, JD(S) men raised slogans against the MLA, resulting in a heated exchange of words. They tried to gain entry into the house of Preetham Gowda forcefully, but the police stopped them, resulting in chaos.

Meanwhile, a JD(S) worker pelted a stone at the door of the house, which injured Rahul Kini. The situation turned worse, with both the groups engaged in fisticuffs. The Police had to intervene to bring the situation under control.

Speaking to reporters, Preetham’s mother Nagarathna said the incident was politically motivated.

“The incident is created intentionally in view of the upcoming elections. District In-charge Minister H D Revanna should ensure that such incidents do not reccur. But we are not afraid of such threats. My son will not do anything wrong,” she said.

BJP State president B S Yeddyurappa, who rushed to Hassan, after the incident, told reporters that all the 104 BJP MLAs are with Preetham Gowda.

“They will meet Governor Vajubhai Vala in Bengaluru on Thursday and lodge a complaint against the failure of Hassan SP A N Prakash Gowda in controlling the situation,” he said.
