Maharashtra: Man rapes trainee nurse, attempts to murder her; arrested as survivor lodges complaint

The survivor works at a private hospital in Desaiganj (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Sunday, a man in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli district raped a nurse and tried to murder her The accused also robbed the nurse of her cell phone and valuables and fled from the scene assuming that she had died after he trangled her The accused has been arrested and the survivor has been admitted to hospital

Mumbai: A man from Gadchiroli, Maharashtra was arrested for raping a woman and trying to murder her. The incident took place on Sunday and the accused was arrested on Monday. The accused has been identified as Rajesh Suresh Kambli. The survivor is a trainee nurse.

The survivor works at a private hospital in Desaiganj. At around 8 pm on Sunday, the nurse went to a bus stop in Desaiganj after her shift ended. While the woman was waiting at the bus stop, the accused came there on his bike.

As it was getting late for the nurse, she asked the accused to drop her home and he agreed to do the same. The accused then rode his two-wheeler to a farm and raped the nurse.

After raping the woman, the accused allegedly tried to strangle her to death. The woman lost consciousness and the accused assumed that she had died. According to PTI, the accused took the woman's mobile phone and her valuables and left. When the woman regained consciousness, she reached home and informed her parents about the incident.

At around 11.30 pm, the woman's family went to the Desaiganj police station and lodged a complaint in relation to the incident. The police launched an investigation and arrested the accused. During the early hours of Sunday, the woman was admitted to a hospital where treatment is being administered to her. She is said to be in a stable condition.

Youth offers to drop 16-year-old girl home in Tirupati, rapes her with his friend

A similar incident came to light from Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh in December when two youths allegedly raped a minor girl. The girl was waiting for a vehicle to go back to her residence in Tiruchanoor. When she saw a bike-borne man approaching her, she asked him for a lift.

The accused agreed to drop the girl at Tiruchanoor junction. However, instead of going there, the accused Chittoot Venkatesh rode to Mullapudi village. On reaching the village, Chittoor pretended that his vehicle had run out of fuel and called his friend. Chittoor's friend came to the spot and the two of them raped the 16-year-old girl. The two accused were arrested after the girl reached home and narrated her ordeal to her parents.
