#MeToo: Mandy Moore & half a dozen other women accuse Ryan Adams of sexual misconduct

2018: The Year When #MeToo Shook India







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 13 2018: The Year Of #MeToo In India 2018 saw the rise of the #MeToo movement in India. Inspired by a global campaign against sexual harassment and assault, women across the spectrum opened up and shared their stories about abuse by men in positions of power. And it began in October with actress Tanushree Dutta accusing actor Nana Patekar of sexual harassment while shooting for the 2008 film 'Horn Ok Please'.



What followed was a series of posts by other women who shared their experiences with the world. From actors, film directors to advertising top guns, artists and writers and politicians, women professionals called out obnoxious behaviour at the workplace. From unwanted attention in the office to sexual innuendos on the film set, there were many kinds of allegations that surfaced.



While some of these are still struggling in the industry amidst the allegations, some succeeded in getting a clean chit from authorities. Recently, rumours surfaced that Patekar has been given a clean chit. However, the 'Aashiq Banaya Aapne' actress quashed the rumours. However, director Vikas Bahl, who was one of the prime accusees, has been set free from all charges against him. The internal complaints committee of Reliance Entertainment, today, set the 'Queen' director free, who was accused by an employee of Phantom films under the #MeToo movement.



(In Pic: From top left, Nana Patekar, Aditi Mittal, Subhash Ghai, Anirban Das Blah. From bottom left, Alok Nath, Sajid Khan, Jatin Das, Vikas Bahl) Nana Patekar, Tanushree Dutta Former actress Tanushree Dutta in September accused Nana Patekar of sexually harassing her during the shooting of their 2008 film 'Horn Ok Pleassss'. Dutta went on to say that she had brought up the complaint 10 years ago when the incident occurred, but no action was taken.



The actress also said that she was supposed to do a solo number for the film, but Patekar decided to join in and perform intimate dance steps that made her uncomfortable.



Patekar denied the allegations and sent a legal notice to the actress, who filed a police complaint against the actor and the film's choreographer Ganesh Acharya, producer Samee Siddiqui and director Rakesh Sarang.



Meanwhile, Rakhi Sawant who had replaced Dutta in the song for the film, then accused her of taking drugs on the set. Dutta slapped a Rs 10 crore defamation suit against Sawant.



(In Pic: On the left Nana Patekar, on the right is Tanushree Dutta) Vinta Nanda, Alok Nath, Sandhya Mridul Alok Nath, known for his popular on-screen portrayals, found himself in the midst of the #MeToo controversy after writer-director Vinta Nanda accused him of rape. Actress Sandhya Mridul also alleged that he had made sexual advances towards her during a shoot.



Nanda had alleged that the actor had raped her 19 years ago. Nath, however, refuted the allegations and filed a civil defamation suit against Nanda. Nath's wife Ashu had also recorded her statement in court against Nanda and sought defamation against the writer-director.



Mridul, while slamming Nath for causing agony, praised Tanushree Dutta and Vinta Nanda for their courage to come forward and urged others to not be ashamed and ‘keep this fire going.’



(In Pic: From the left, Vinta Nanda, Alok Nath and Sandhya Mridul) Vikas Bahl, Vikramaditya Motwane, Anurag Kashyap, Kangana Ranaut On October 6, hours after Anurag Kashyap, Vikramaditya Motwane, Madhu Matena and Vikas Bahl announced the decision to dissolve their production house Phantom Films, director Bahl was accused of sexual harassment by a former employee.



The victim who had worked on the production house's film 'Bombay Velvet' recalled her ordeal with Bahl in 2015. Soon after, Kashyap and Motwane went on record to say that they were informed about the allegations by the employee and detailed the backdoor deliberation that took place in order to punish their partner. Their statement led to Bahl filing a Rs 10 crore defamation suit against them. The 'Queen' director also demanded interim action from the court seeking to restrain Kashyap and Motwane from making statements against him to media or through social media.



While the woman had earlier refused to take any legal action saying that she stands by her claims, the former partners continued to fight it out in court.



However, today, the director was set free of the allegations against him.





(In Pic: Top left is Vikas Bahl, top right is Vikramaditya Motwane, bottom left is Anurag Kashyap, bottom right is Kangana Ranaut) Sajid Khan, Saloni Chopra, Priyanka Bose, Mandana Karimi Sajid Khan had to step down from 'Houseful 4' after multiple allegations of sexual impropriety surfaced against the Bollywood director. His close friend and aide in Bollywood, Akshay Kumar also chose to not support him and decided not to shoot if Khan was on-board.



On October 11, an aspiring actress, Saloni Chopra had posted a detailed account of the harrowing time she had with Khan.



A freelance journalist also claimed that Khan had exposed himself when she was interviewing him in the early 2000s. After the allegations, Khan stepped down from the upcoming comedy 'Housefull 4'. The movie, produced by Sajid Nadiadwala and being distributed by Fox Star Studios, is the latest entry in a franchise that began in 2010. Khan has directed two of the previous three films.



Priyanka Bose, who has acted in critically acclaimed films including 'Lion', 'Gulaab Gang', and 'Half Ticket' among others, opened up about the incident that allegedly took place when Khan had called her for an audition. She detailed the incident and shared that soon after when she narrated the incident to her partner, he asked him to quit right away. She has been quoted as saying, “He called me for an audition. The text from his assistant read, “Should be comfortable in a bikini.” When I landed up with the required clothing, no sides were given.”



Mandana Karimi alleged that Khan made inappropriate remarks when she visited his office to discuss a role in his 2014 film 'Humshakals'. The actress said that Khan had asked her to remove her clothes, in order for her to get the part.



(In Pic: Top left Sajid Khan, top right Saloni Chopra, bottom left Priyanka Bose, bottom right Mandana Karimi)

But the picture that this article paints is upsettingly inaccurate. Some of its details are misrepresented; some ar… https://t.co/Hge1wNVt6W — Ryan Adams (@TheRyanAdams) 1550099009000

LOS ANGELES: Grammy-nominated musician Ryan Adams has been accused of sexual misconduct and emotional manipulation by more than half a dozen women, including ex-wife Mandy Moore In a report published in The New York Times, multiple people including Phoebe Bridgers , Moore and singer-songwriter Courtney Jaye , have detailed their accounts of their experiences with Adams.A woman named Ava, who claims she was 14 when she began talking to Adams in 2013, said their conversations turned sexual by the time she was 15.She said Adams, 44, was doing Skype calls and phone sex with her during which he exposed himself.Over a nine-month communication, Adams promised to help Ava with her career. She claimed he continued sexting her and asking for photographs."If people knew they would say I was like R Kelley lol," he wrote in November 2014, when he was 40 and she was 16, according to messages revealed by The Times.Ava added that she sometimes lied about her age but that she never offered any evidence, despite his requests.Moore, who was married to the singer from 2009 until they finalised their divorce in June 2016, said he constantly manipulated her. She met Adams in 2007, when she was 23 and he was 33.During their relationship, Moore claimed Adams discouraged her from working with other music producers or managers and acted in ways which she now considers "psychologically abusive"."He would always tell me, ‘You're not a real musician, because you don't play an instrument'. His controlling behaviour essentially did block my ability to make new connections in the industry during a very pivotal and potentially lucrative time — my entire mid-to-late 20s," Moore said.Jaye said that Adams contacted her in 2013 with an offer to collaborate.However, according to the Times report, Adams "began remarking on Jaye's appearance and moving in on her" once they met to work on songs."I just shut myself off," she said. Jaye claimed they did not have sex but ended up in bed together, and while Adams maintained that he still wanted to work together and they continued to talk after the first meeting, they never recorded anything.Two other singer-songwriters shared similar accounts with The Times.His ex-fiancee, Megan Butterworth, claimed that he relentlessly texted and called her after she left him in 2018, including threatening suicide.Adams has denied the allegations."I am not a perfect man and I have made many mistakes. To anyone I have ever hurt, however unintentionally, I apologise deeply and unreservedly."But the picture that this article paints is upsettingly inaccurate. Some of its details are misrepresented; some are exaggerated; some are outright false. I would never have inappropriate interactions with someone I thought was underage. Period," Adams wrote on Twitter The musician said as someone who wishes to spread joy through music "hearing that some people believe I caused them pain saddens me greatly. I am resolved to work to be the best man I can be. And I wish everyone compassion, understanding and healing."
