Early-morning garbage burning makes Dhayari locals lose sleep

Residents say dry waste from nearby hsg societies is set on fire, claim multiple complaints to PMC have not yielded results



While the city is yet to witness dense fog in the onset of winter, residents of Dhayari in Sinhagad Road have been waking up to smoke-laden air for the past couple of months. Locals have approached Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), alleging that some people are setting dry garbage on fire in the area. This, according to them, has been leading to a smog-like situating, choking their breath.



Residents have claimed that despite lodging a complaint with the civic body, they have not received any positive response from the authorities, promising them quick action. “We have been reading about the horrible air quality making headlines in the capital. We do not want a similar situation to occur in our area. However, the authority responsible to act against those who are burning the waste has turned a blind eye towards the pressing issue,” Madhav Patil, a resident of Dhayari, told Mirror.



Patil has been approaching the civic body with complaint of burning dry garbage in lane number 30 of Dhayari in Sinhagad Road. “A few cleaning workers of a couple of residential societies in lane number 30 clean the housing premises every morning. They collect the dry garbage outside the societies. After sweeping the area in front the gate, they set that garbage on fire. There are many such societies where the dry garbage is burnt every morning.”



According to the residents, due to the garbage burning, the whole area gets covered with smoke. This, locals claim, has led to residents facing various health issues.



Manish Doiphode, another resident from the area, said, “During monsoon, we did not face any menace arising out of garbage burning. However, as soon as the rain stopped and the winter set in, we are witnessing garbage being burnt at every street corner. Due to the constant burning, we are facing health hazards. Members of my family have stopped going for morning walks due to the thick smoke.”



Residents have also complained that many children from the area leave for their schools in the morning navigating their way in the smoke. “Those who set the garbage on fire do not realise what harm they are doing to the residents, especially the children. The fumes will have a long-term impact on the kids.”



When contacted, Santosh Tandale, ward officer of PMC’s Sinhagad Road ward office, said, “I will personally look into these complaints and instruct the staff to take action against those who are setting the garbage on fire.”


