Chennai shocker: School girl raped by boy who fed her drug-laced chocolate after befriending her

chennai girl raped | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: Relatives of a girl student in Reddipalayam, a village near Minjur on the outskirts of Chennai, badly beat up a boy after it came to light that he had sexually assaulted the girl after giving her a chocolate that had been laced with ganja.

A 16-year-old girl in the village studying in class 12th, became friends with a boy Bharath, (22) of the same village. Some days ago she was returning from her school when Bharath approached her and said he will take her to a place where she can see some natural expanse and promised her that she would definitely like it.

He took her on his motorcycle and drove to a grove in the Reddipalayam area. Later he allegedly gave her a chocolate laced with ganja of which she had no clue. The girl, unsuspectingly, accepted the chocolate and consumed it. After some time, she fainted. It is alleged that Bharat too consumed ganja-laced chocolate and sexually assaulted the girl.

Bharat recovered after 2 hours and took his motorcycle and went home. Meanwhile, the girl’s parents were worried that their daughter had not returned from school and started making enquiries. They were informed that she had last been seen riding pillion to Bharat on his motorbike and that the duo had driven away in a certain direction.

When Bharat was confronted, he confessed to what had happened. The girl's relatives then took him to the grove and found the girl in a naked condition. The parents and relatives were enraged after seeing the girl in such a condition and thrashed the boy.

They then carried the girl to the hospital. Having learnt of what happened to the boy, Bharat’s relatives rushed to the grove and picked him up and admitted him to the Stanley Hospital. They have filed a complaint with the police based on which the police have registered a case of assault against 4 relatives of the girl and arrested them.

At the same time, based on a complaint filed with the All-Woman police station in Ponneri regarding the alleged sexual assault by Bharath on the minor girl, the police have filed a case, under POCSO, against Bharath.
