India slowly heading towards 'rape in India' from 'Make in India': Congress' Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

Congress leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Congress' Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury made the statement in reference to the recent incidents of rape and killing from Telangana and Uttar Pradesh A 27-year-old veterinarian in Telangana was first gang-raped and then killed by the accused in the last week of November On December 6, a 23-year-old woman was set on fire by four men, including two rape accused, while she was en route from Unnao to Raebareli for a court hearing

New Delhi: In yet another controversial remark, Congress' Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury on Tuesday said India is slowly heading towards "rape in India" from "Make in India", which is an initiative of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to promote industries in the country.

"It is unfortunate that the prime minister, who speaks on everything, is silent on this issue (crimes against women). From 'Make in India', India is slowly heading towards 'rape in India'," said Chowdhury.

Chowdhury made the statement in reference to the recent incidents of rape and killing from Telangana and Uttar Pradesh.

A 27-year-old veterinarian in Telangana was first gang-raped and then killed by the accused in the last week of November. A few days later, a rape victim was set ablaze in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao.

On December 4, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury had to seek an apology for calling Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman as "Nirbala" (weak). "I had addressed our Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman as 'Nirbala'. Nirmala ji is like my sister and I am like her brother. If my words have hurt her, then I express my regret," Chowdhury had said.

Notably, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi yesterday lashed out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi for staying silent over rape incidents in the country.

"India has become rape capital of the world. Prime Minister Narendra Modi maintains silence over rape incidents. His MLA in Uttar Pradesh was accused of a woman's rape, he maintained silence. The women are being burnt, shot down and raped in the country but Modi maintains silence," Rahul Gandhi had said in Barkagao.

"Women and farmers are being targeted with bullets. Women cannot step out from their houses without fear," Gandhi had added.

Meanwhile, the Congress today gave an adjournment motion notice in the Lok Sabha over the 'violence on women, children, SC/STs in the country'.

On December 6, a 23-year-old woman was set on fire by four men, including two accused of raping her, while she was en route from Unnao to Rae Bareli for a court hearing. The rape accused had been out on bail since November 30.

The victim was first rushed to a government hospital and then shifted to the civil hospital in Lucknow with 90 per cent burn injuries. She was later airlifted to the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi the same evening where she succumbed to her injuries on Friday night.

As the incident created a political storm, the Yogi Adityanath government on Sunday night suspended seven policemen for alleged negligence of duty.
