Nirbhaya convict shifted to Tihar Jail due to security concerns; another files review petition in SC

According to sources, Kumar was shifted due to security issues. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights One of the accused, Ram Singh, had committed suicide in 2013. President has rejected the mercy plea of one of the convicts and he is expected to be hanged soon. The rope for hanging the convict is being sourced from Buxar jail.

New Delhi: In the latest development in the Nirbhaya rape case, one of the four convicts, Pawan Kumar, was on Tuesday shifted from Mandoli Jail in East Delhi to Tihar Jail. According to sources, Kumar was shifted due to security issues.

Talking to Mirror Now, jail authorities said that all four convicts have been kept under a close watch due to the infamy of their crime. It was also added that such a transfer was usual practice in such cases where the convicts were infamous.

The Nirbhaya case shook the nation when a 23-year-old girl was brutalised and gang-raped by six men on December 16, 2012. She succumbed to her injuries later and the case resulted in amendments to the existing laws at the time.

One of the accused in the case was a juvenile and was tried as such. Another accused, Ram Singh, committed suicide in 2013 while another accused Vinay Kumar tried to hang himself in the jail in 2016.

Recently, Vinay Kumar had sought a mercy plea from the President which was rejected. Also, convict Akshay has also filed a review petition against the capital punishment awarded to him.

On July 9 last year, the Supreme Court had dismissed the review petitions of the three other convicts Mukesh, Pawan and Vinay. Akshay had not filed a review petition then.

Speculation was rife about the hanging of the convicts after the news of them being shifted to Tihar came out. The Tihar Jail authorities are expected to send out a black warrant in the name of the convict who is to be hanged till death.

Preparations for the hanging are underway at Tihar Jail and the rope for the same would be sourced from Buxar jail in Bihar. In the meanwhile, since there is no hangman in Tihar Jail, it is expected to outsource the job to either the hangman at a Bihar jail or hire someone else. A lot of people have written to the jail authorities volunteering to hang the convict.
