Failing India's daughters

There are gaping fault lines in the criminal justice system | Photo Credit: IANS

The recent gruesome incidents of gangrape in Cyberabad, Unnao, and Sambhal have left the nation numb and shocked. The question then arises what ultimately is the solution.

In Cyberabad, Disha (name changed), a veterinary doctor was stalked and her two-wheeler was punctured, in a premeditated conspiracy, by the criminals who deviously volunteered to assist her and then overpowered and gang-raped her.

Then, they burned the body, using the petrol that they had just bought from a neighbouring petrol pump, to destroy all forensic and medico-legal evidence. This led to great public outrage. The police later arrested the four accused and sent them to judicial custody. Later, the four accused were taken on police remand and subsequently escorted to the scene of the crime for the reconstruction of the chain of events. It is alleged that the culprits suddenly attacked the police party and brazenly tried to snatch their weapons. They also used sticks, bricks and stones to assault the police. Consequently, the police also retaliated in self-defence, as a result of which all the four desperados died in the ensuing encounter. There was a festival-like atmosphere in Telangana after this -- women in huge numbers feted the police with flower petals, sweets, rakhis and garlanded the personnel in the force. This swift action was lauded by MP Jaya Bachhan, Baba Ram Dev, Saina Nehwal, Mayawati etc. This appreciation of police action was unprecedented.

However, another section of the society like the legendary police officer JF Ribeiro, MPs Maneka Gandhi and Asaduddin Owaisi, political leader Brinda Karat condemned the police encounter for the extrajudicial killings.

The nation has been continuously engaged in a vociferous debate on the correct and appropriate course of action under these demanding circumstances. To recapitulate the Nirbhaya case, the fast track court convicted and pronounced the death penalty to all the accused within nine months. In six months, the high court upheld the sentence; the Supreme Court took a little more than three years to confirm this sentence in May 2017. The Supreme Court rejected the review petitions in July 2018. The final decision on mercy petitions is still awaited. Therefore, the truth and the reality is that the conviction pronounced in September 2013 has not been given effect till date. If this is the fate of the most high-profile case of gangrape in the national capital, what fate would await the cases that take place in remote corners of the country?

There are gaping faultlines in the criminal justice system. Shoddy investigations, worse prosecutions, delayed trials, hostile witnesses, poor witness and victim protection programmes contribute to the terrible mess we have created for our womenfolk. Damaging as this atmosphere of insecurity is for the morale of the precious workforce, its material consequences are worse still. The GDP is adversely impacted. Already there are advisories from the USA and the UK on travel to India. Due to poor and inadequate financial grants to the judicial system, (ideally one per cent of the GDP), the fast track courts could not come up, staggering 38 per cent vacancies exist for the post of high court judges alone, which in numbers translate to 410 judges out of the total strength of 1,080 judges.

We are plagued by the criminal non-utilisation of Nirbhaya Funds, of which only eight per cent has been spent till now. Matters pertaining to recruitment of women police officers, women prosecutors, sensitisation of the police force, have also not been addressed at the desired pace. Even the most basic requirements of Section 41-C of the Criminal Procedure Code have largely not been complied with, that names, addresses of all arrested persons, plus other details are to be stored at district and state control rooms for purposes of a functional database and to be available to the public also. The central government now proposes to set up a thousand fast track courts to expedite the trials of the pending 1,67,000 rape cases.

There is a need to drastically cut down the pernicious adjournments on flimsy grounds. The duration and number of appeals need to be rationalised, as is the case in the USA.

Very little is spoken about the cult of masculinity that prevails in the police department and a major contributor to the negative general reputation of the police department; this also explains the adverse subculture at police stations which needs to be addressed on a war footing.

It was expected that after the 13th Criminal Law Amendment Act, that came after the Nirbhaya case, and the pronouncement by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari versus the State of UP case, that it would be easy to lodge FIRs in matters pertaining to crime against women. Unfortunately, this did not happen. Even in the Cyberabad case, the victim's family was misguided and irresponsible statements were made by the police. It is a different matter that some police personnel were suspended both in Cyberabad and Unnao cases. Are the authorities oblivious of the provisions of Section 166-A of the Indian Penal Code that was introduced after the Nirbhaya case, that any police officer found wanting in responding professionally in such cases would be dealt with under the provisions of this section that has a punishment of up to two years of imprisonment? There have hardly been many cases against delinquent police officers under this clause, betraying a liberal attitude of police officers towards unprofessional policemen.

Justice Krishna Iyer, observed in the case of Rafiq vs. State, “A murderer kills the body but a rapist kills the soul.”

These are words of profound wisdom and anguish that reflect the concerns of the society at large. Cyberabad and Unnao tragedies should be a wake-up call to the nation. All arms of the criminal justice system must put their act together to ensure accountability, responsibility and certainty of punishment, delivered without excessive delay, thereby ensuring that all escape routes for rapists are firmly blocked for all times.

Vikram Singh is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
