Sikh cabbie racially abused, strangulated by passenger in US [DETAILS]

File picture: UberMoto | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The Sikh driver picked 22-year-old Grifin Levi Sayers and took him to make some purchases When the cabbie returned to the pick-up location, Grifin Levi Sayers became abusive Sayers was released on USD 13,000 bail on December 6

Washington: In yet another shocking incident, a Sikh cab driver in the US was racially abused and strangulated by a passenger. The incident occurred in the coastal city of Bellingham, Washington on December 5.

The Sikh driver picked 22-year-old Grifin Levi Sayers and took him to buy some fast food and cigarettes. When he returned to the pick-up location, Sayers became abusive.

The passenger then grabbed the Uber driver by his throat and squeezed it so hard that he could not breathe.

While doing so, Sayers made “racially-biased comments about the victim’s ‘dark skin,’ the fact he was from India and the turban he was wearing,” Bellingham Police Lt Claudia Murphy told The Bellingham Herald.

The Sikh cabbie, however, managed to exit the cab and dialled 911. The US Police later arrested Sayers on the suspicion of second-degree assault and a failure-to-appear warrant for fourth-degree assault.

As per police records, Sayers was released on USD 13,000 bail on December 6.

“This assault is being investigated as a bias incident, as Sayers maliciously and intentionally assaulted the victim because of Sayers’ perception of the victim’s race, national origin and religion,” said Murphy, adding: “Additional charges by the prosecutor’s office for (a) hate crime offence are pending.”

The driver, who was not identified, has retained non-profit organisation Sikh Coalition for pro bono legal assistance.

Meanwhile, in an official statement to KOMO News, Uber said, "Violence and discrimination have no place in the Uber community. What's been reported is unacceptable and we immediately removed the rider's access to the platform."

Notably, hate crimes against Sikhs in the US have always been a concern. In November, a report had released which had identified Sikhs as the third most commonly targeted religious group after Jews and Muslims in the US.

As per a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) report published in 2018, anti-Sikh hate crimes have increased by 200 per cent since 2017.

Responding to the FBI report, Sikh Coalition - a minority civil rights organisation - had sought an immediate action to effectively thwart hate crime against targeted communities.

"At the end of the day, this data simply isn't giving us the accurate information we need to effectively counteract hate against targeted communities," Sim J Singh, Sikh Coalition senior manager of policy and advocacy, had said.

"It's past time for action... Congress must pass the next generation of common-sense legislation that equips law enforcement to better identify and track hate incidents with the bipartisan Khalid Jabara-Heather Heyer 'No Hate Act'," Singh had added.
