From ropes of death being prepared in Buxar to ‘dummy execution’ in Tihar, it’s endgame for Nirbhaya’s killers

Four convicts face the death penalty in the Nirbhaya gang rape and murder case. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Buxar jail’s ropes used for hanging were earlier known as ‘Manila’ ropes Until recently, such ropes were being manufactured only in Buxar, but in recent years a few other jails in the country have also started making them Though these ropes are strong, once ready, they can’t be stored indefinitely and need to be used within a certain time frame for them to be effective

Amid mounting anger over crimes against women and growing speculation that the convicts in the Nirbhaya rape case will be hanged sometime soon, media reports indicate that the hangman’s noose is being prepared in Bihar’s Buxar central jail.

It is believed that more than a week ago, Vijay Kumar Arora, the Buxar jail superintendent, received a missive telling him to get "10 hanging ropes" prepared.

Meanwhile, there are further indications that the executions are imminent: Preparations for the hanging have begun at Delhi’s Tihar Jail, reports suggest, and a “dummy execution” was recently carried out as a test run. A Tihar jail official told news agency ANI that a hangman was yet to be finalised.

The ropes are being prepared by the Buxar jail’s convicts. The news comes days after the Union Home ministry requested President Ram Nath Kovind to reject the mercy petition of one of the Nirbhaya convicts.

This is not the first time the Buxar jail is preparing ropes for high-profile hangings. The rope for the execution of the 2001 Parliament attack convict Afzal Guru, who was hanged in February 2013, was prepared at Buxar jail.

Buxar’s ‘Manila’ ropes

Buxar jail’s ropes used for hanging were earlier known as ‘Manila’ ropes. Until recently, such ropes were being manufactured only in Buxar, but in recent years a few other jails in the country have also started making them. The ropes are manufactured at Buxar jail for the past nine decades.

For Afzal Guru’s hanging, the cost of rope was reportedly Rs 1,725. That is likely to have risen by now. At least five persons are deployed for manufacturing one rope. It takes three days to make a rope and this includes the use of manual labour along with a bit of motorised machinery, the jail superintendent was quoted as telling news agency PTI.

Though these ropes are strong, once ready, they can’t be stored indefinitely and need to be used within a certain time frame for them to be effective.

The Manila rope was designed to be one inch thick and 19 feet long. The jail manual rules state that it should be of uniform thickness and strong enough to withstand a strain of 127 kg for a seven-feet drop. The drop is believed to be crucial – if it goes wrong, it can lead to a botched-up execution.

What is the Nirbhaya case?

Nirbhaya was the name given to a medical student who was gang-raped and brutalised on a moving bus in Delhi on 16 December 2012. Despite the unspeakable horror she was subjected to, she heroically struggled for her life for days before succumbing to her grievous injuries.

The brutality of the crime shocked the nation and brought tens of thousands of Indians to the streets, and the mass movement eventually led to more stringent rape laws.

However, as last month’s gang rape and murder of the 26-year-old veterinarian in Hyderabad showed, brutal crimes against women continue unabated. In a controversial encounter, the Telangana police killed the four suspects in the wee hours of the morning.

In the Nirbhaya gang rape and murder case, of the six accused, one committed suicide in prison. One was a minor, and eventually sent to a juvenile home.

The other four -- Pawan Gupta, Vinay Sharma, Akshay Thakur and Mukesh Singh – have been found guilty and sentenced to death, and appear to have exhausted most legal remedies.
