Unnao rape case: Delhi court to announce verdict in case involving Kuldeep Singh Sengar on Dec 16

File photo of Unnao rape accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The judgment will be pronounced by District Judge Dharmesh Sharma The Central Bureau of Investigation had completed its arguments in the case on Monday Kuldeep Sengar, his brother Atul Sengar and two of their henchmen have been imprisoned in Tihar Jail since last year

New Delhi: A Delhi court on Tuesday reserved the verdict for December 16 in the case of alleged kidnapping and rape of a woman by expelled Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar in Uttar Pradesh's Unnao in 2017.

The judgment will be pronounced by District Judge Dharmesh Sharma.

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) had completed its arguments in the case on Monday. Recording of defence witnesses' statements was concluded on December 2.

Notably, the judge heard the case on a day-to-day basis from August 5 after it was transferred to Delhi from a court in Lucknow on the directions of the Supreme Court.

The woman was purportedly abducted and raped by Sengar, a four-term MLA from Unnao's Bangarmau, in 2017 when she was a minor. The court has also framed charges against Shashi Singh, the co-accused, in the case.

On August 9, the court had framed charges against Sengar and Singh under Sections 120 b (criminal conspiracy), 363 (kidnapping), 366 (kidnapping or inducing a woman to compel for marriage), 376 (rape) and other applicable sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Kuldeep Sengar, his brother Atul Sengar and two of their henchmen have been imprisoned in Tihar Jail since last year.

The BJP had expelled Sengar, an influential Thakur leader, from the party in August after the rape survivor and her lawyer received serious injuries in a road accident, which took place on July 28 in Rae Bareli. Two of the woman's female relatives were killed in the accident.

The CBI had booked Sengar and nine others for the murder after the rape survivor's family alleged foul play.

On August 1, the Supreme Court had transferred all five cases filed in connection with the Unnao rape incident from a court in Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh) to the Delhi court with directions to hold a daily trial and concluding it within 45 days.

The trial in the rape case was held in-camera. Thirteen prosecution witnesses and nine defence witnesses were examined.
