Not Rape Or Crime Against Women, People Are Worried That Mardaani 2 Shows Kota In A Bad Light

Rape and crime against women are on the rise. The #MeToo movement which took the nation by storm last year didn't really change anything. Many gruesome and brutal crimes have taken place in the recent past, especially the gang-rape and murder of young doctor from Hyderabad that enraged the entire nation. Isn't it high time that we start collectively fight for women's safety and demand a stern action against the offenders?

While talks and discussions around it are still on, an absurd demand came from a Kota resident who has filed a petition against the release of Rani Mukerji's Mardaani 2, the movie which revolves around fierce female police officer who is on a quest to track a serial rapist and murderer. The movie is set in Kota, Rajasthan, and the petitioner thinks that the movie is tarnishing the image of the city. So, that's what we are worried about? Are we seriously running away from the grave issue that needs our attention?



If we go by the statistics, a woman is raped in India every 20 minutes. And according to government data, 32,500 cases of rape were registered with the police in 2017. That makes 90 rape cases every day. And many cases go unreported too.



So, Instead of fighting against rape and violence, this man wants Mardaani 2 to be banned because it shows the city as rape hotspot. That's exactly what the problem is.

In last couple of years, such crimes have taken place all across the nation, not just Kota. In July, a man accused of rape and murder of a seven-year-old girl was arrested from Kota. Later, the police found out that 10 such cases against him were registered.



Rape is the fourth most common crime against women in India. But this man named Taslim Ahmed is only bothered about the reputation of Kota. So, he has filed a plea challenging the release of Rani Mukerji’s Mardaani 2 because he thinks the content of the movie tarnishes the image of the city.



reuters/representational image

For the uninitiated, Mardaani 2 is inspired by real-life events and actual crimes against women committed by juveniles. Since the trailer of the movie has been released, people in Kota have been protesting against the movie's release. They demand that Kota's name should be removed from the movie.



Meanwhile, Rani Mukerji thinks the movie can bring about a change in the society. “We would want ‘Mardaani’ to be a franchise that stands for tackling various societal issues. While the first film spoke about child trafficking, ‘Mardaani 2’ takes a stand against rapes and highlights the rise of violent crimes committed against juveniles in India. Just today, I was shocked reading how a 15 year old boy attacked and raped a 29 year old woman in the heart of my city,” Mukerji was quoted as saying by PTI.



“Mardaani series of films would stand for being a mirror of society to educate, create awareness and also leave a strong message for people to sit up and notice. Some films do have the responsibility to affect social change and our intention is that through all Mardaani films we will try and bring out the hard reality, the threat that looms large next to us,” she added.

Reacting to the petition, writer-director Gopi Putran has meanwhile clarified, "Despite all the inspirations, Mardaani 2 at the end of the day is a film and not a documentary and it should be seen as that. Kota has been used by us as the setting for this film only. We are, in no way, suggesting that such events or incidents happen in Kota and there was no intention to tarnish the reputation of the city," he said.

Produced by Yash Raj Films, Mardaani 2 is slated to release on Dec 13.


