Dubai Health Authority signs deal with leading Indian hospital

Dubai Health Authority and Kokilaben Dhirubhai Ambani Hospital and Medical Research Institute (KDAH) have signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) to collaborate in key areas of healthcare.



The MoU was signed by Humaid Al Qutami, director-general of the Dubai Health Authority and Dr Santosh Shetty, CEO and executive director, KDAH in Mumbai during the DHA delegation’s recent visit to India.



The MOU envisages cooperation and sharing of advanced knowledge protocols to strengthen expertise in various aspects of healthcare. The MoU will facilitate knowledge transfer and collaboration in key areas of healthcare and facilitate better healthcare services to the communities.



Al Qutami headed the delegation that was on an official visit to India. During their visit to the Kokilaben Dhirubhai Ambani Hospital and Medical Research Institute in Mumbai, they were presented an overview of the specialties available across 15 centres of excellence of the hospital, especially in the areas of Neuro sciences, Oncology, Advanced Robotic Surgeries, Organ Transplant centre, Children’s Heart centre and Neuro Rehabilitation Centre, by Dr Santosh Shetty, .



Al Qutami said: “The provision of high-quality healthcare across the complete spectrum of care continuum for our community members and visitors is a core priority of the Dubai Health Authority. We aim to provide patient centric care, which is both affordable and accessible. Collaborations such as this one with leading healthcare institutes in the world helps us achieve our vision. We are also focused on healthcare technologies and medical education to keep up-to-date with the latest developments in the field of medicine.”



Dr Shetty added: “It’s a proud moment for us to offer the people of UAE the advanced healthcare knowledge protocol that KDAH has developed over the years, with the Dubai Health Authority. This will help save lives and strengthen healthcare services and medical education in both countries. The collaboration will enrich our relationship with the ethos of KDAH that ‘every life matters’.”



The Dubai Health Authority delegation was appraised with the model adopted by KDAH, which focused on the finest medical professionals and a full-time specialist system (FTSS).



Dr Shetty also gave the delegation an overview of the 15 Centres of Excellence, 27 Specialty Departments and 25 Super Speciality clinics with best-in-class diagnostic and surgical solutions, backed by the latest equipment with cutting-edge technology to successfully treat complex health conditions across the board. - TradeArabia News Service
