The Rape of India’s Soul by Jayati Ghosh

You definitely address the real serious negative implications. I hope that there can be some effort to retain what India already has to support secular legal system. It is extremely difficult to maintain order with such extreme polarities that are presently creating general chaos amongst so many different groups. There needs to be some basic boundaries drawn. I think that the biggest issue, of course, I admit my bias, is the drastic loss of any rights for anyone if the polarity swings to Sharia law. With the racial and religious issues that are confronting any political leadership, a loss of what exists would bring the nation to the level of total dysfunction. I do think the only way to establish any basic freedoms for the citizens is this drawing of the lines based on an approach that supports that does support the citizenship rights, and religious tolerance that presently exists. If these tolerance minimums are sacrificed, I would expect a total loss of rights for women, and total loss of any religious rights for Hindus, Christians and Buddhists. It seems to be a total cataclysmic shock back to a resurgence of war similar to the conflicts of the Ottoman Empire. There is so much unrest due to the unsettled issues within the Middle Eastern Muslim States. Then there are the unresolved conflicts between all the Muslim States and Israel. Then there are the unresolved conflicts between Israelis, Zionists, and all other groups, political, and religious. It just seems to be such an ongoing conflict of conflict, upon conflict upon conflict that the most basic rights for any kind of citizen, so even the most basic male and female rights become lost in the shuffle. If there is no bottomline starting point, then the houses of all the different cards just keep blowing in the wind, as whatever change in temperature ignites the tempers of the latest usurpation of power. I think it is just so absurd, but in the process so many innocent people's lives are jeopardized over what is essentially worthless fiat currencies, and totally hypocritical messages that are supporting and promoting the God awful global dilemma. We are all caught up in the tornado that is gathering impetus and force, and has not even begun to touch down yet.



I sure hope and pray that the Indian Leadership do not establish an intolerant state. Historically Hindus are more tolerant than Muslims. I do realize that is a very relative statement, and reality. However, to me, as an outsider, as a female, and Christian I know I can walk at least into a Hindu Temple. Muslims do not even begin to allow me that minimal courtesy, right, or privilege.
