Coroner IDs husband, wife found dead inside home in Delhi Township

An investigation is underway in Delhi Township after a husband and wife were found dead inside their home Tuesday, police said.Officers responded to Pontius Road around 3:25 a.m. after a man inside the home called 911, according to Delhi Township police Chief James Howarth. Police said a woman in the background of the phone call sounded like she was in pain. The man on the phone told dispatchers that his wife was "in constant pain and nothing else could be done." A short time later, two gunshots could be heard in the background and the caller hung up the phone, police said. Dispatchers attempted to call the man back, but contact with him was not reestablished.When police arrived on the scene, they found the couple dead inside the home. The Hamilton County coroner identified the couple as Harvey Sander, 70, and Patricia Sander, 73. The cause of death is listed as apparent murder-suicide. Police said the investigation is ongoing and they are not looking for a suspect.

An investigation is underway in Delhi Township after a husband and wife were found dead inside their home Tuesday, police said.

Officers responded to Pontius Road around 3:25 a.m. after a man inside the home called 911, according to Delhi Township police Chief James Howarth.

Advertisement

Police said a woman in the background of the phone call sounded like she was in pain. The man on the phone told dispatchers that his wife was "in constant pain and nothing else could be done." A short time later, two gunshots could be heard in the background and the caller hung up the phone, police said. Dispatchers attempted to call the man back, but contact with him was not reestablished.

When police arrived on the scene, they found the couple dead inside the home.

The Hamilton County coroner identified the couple as Harvey Sander, 70, and Patricia Sander, 73. The cause of death is listed as apparent murder-suicide.

Police said the investigation is ongoing and they are not looking for a suspect.
