Indian Army’s arsenal gets major upgrade after 10,000 Sig Sauer assault rifles handed over to Northern Command

American-made Sig Sauer assault rifles. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights The Army has so far also received more than 21 lakh rounds of ammunition supplies from its vendors The Indian Army’s Northern Command is responsible for counter-terrorist operations in the Valley, including tackling insurgency from Pakistan and Pakistan-occupied Kashmir

New Delhi: The Indian Army’s arsenal has got a major upgrade after newly-acquired American-made Sig Sauer assault rifles were inducted to its weaponry to combat terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir against the Pakistani Army and its terror proxies along the Line of Control.

“The Army has started inducting its first batch of 10,000 Sig Sauer assault rifles for counter-terrorist operations in Jammu and Kashmir. India has placed orders for 72,400 rifles under fast-track procedures to equip its frontline soldiers with more capable guns,” sources in the Indian Army were quoted by news agency ANI as saying.

In addition to that, the Army has so far also received more than 21 lakh rounds of ammunition supplies from its vendors.

“The first lot of 10,000 Sig 716 assault rifles has arrived in India and has been sent to the Northern Command,” the Army sources added.

The Indian Army’s Northern Command is responsible for counter-terrorist operations in the Valley, including tackling insurgency from Pakistan and Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK).

A majority of these rifles, around 66,000, are for the Indian Army, while the rest will be divided between the Indian Navy (2,000) and the Indian Air Force (4,000), news agency ANI reported.

The new Sig Sauer SIG716 7.62x51 mm assault rifles are set to replace the indigenously-manufactured 5.56x45mm Insas rifles.

With the induction of these assault rifles, troops will be able to engage with terrorists with more precision. India had signed a contract worth more than Rs 700 crore to equip the Indian Army with the state-of-the-art weapon.

US arms maker Sig Sauer supplies the rifles and the units will be manufactured in the US. The order will be supplied within one year since the contract is made for the new rifles under the fast-track procurement (FTP) agreement.

Meanwhile, the Army is also set to get a major boost with the induction of over seven lakh AK-203 assault rifles, produced under a joint venture between India and Russia.
