14-year-old Pak girl allegedly abducted for forceful marriage, SAD leader requests speedy enforcement of CAB

Shiromani Akali Dal MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa. | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Sikh leader hailed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and appealed to the government of India to look into the matter and bring in the law as quickly as possible so that persecuted minorities in Pakistan can be provided refuge in India

New Delhi: In yet another case of atrocities against minorities and ethnic communities in Pakistan, a 14-year-old girl was allegedly abducted and was forced to marry a Muslim man recently in the neighbouring country.

In a video shared on social media, Shiromani Akali Dal MLA Manjinder Singh Sirsa claimed that the eighth standard student in Pakistan was kidnapped and forced to marry a man named Abdul.

“Another 14-year-old girl has been abducted in Pakistan. Huma Younus belongs to the minority community. She is forced to do nikkah (wedding) with a man named Abdul even when she is just a student of class 8. This is a serious infringement of human rights and we must raise a strong voice of protest,” Sirsa said.

The Sikh leader hailed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and appealed to the government of India, especially Union Home Minister Amit Shah, to look into the matter and bring in the law as quickly as possible so that persecuted minorities in Pakistan can be provided refuge in India.

“Amit Shah ji, I request you to give an open call to the oppressed Hindu and Sikh families in Pakistan to take citizenship of India. They need to be with us, there is danger, both of honor and life of our girls,” Sirsa said.

The incident come barely two months after a series of such cases emerged from Pakistan, when another young Hindu girl was allegedly abducted and converted to Islam by a man in Mirpur Khas in Sindh province. She too was forcibly married.

Under the CAB, which the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance government plans to implement, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian communities from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who have entered India on or before 31 December 2014 will be given citizenship rights, and they will cease to exist as ‘illegal immigrants’.
