Mumbai: Four stalkers use 22-year-old man's Instagram selfie to trace his location, rape him

The Mumbai Police has registered a case under Section 377 of the IPC after a 22-year-old man was raped by four people in the city.

A 22-year-old man in Mumbai was allegedly raped by four people who used a post put up by the victim on Instagram to trace his location and later abduct him. According to the police, the man was raped in a moving car for three hours before being dumped by a road.

The Mumbai Police has registered a First Information Report (FIR) under Section 377 (unnatural sex) of the Indian Penal Code and has arrested all the four suspects. One of the suspects is a minor and has been sent to a child remand home.

According police officers from the VB Nagar police station, where the case has been registered, the four suspects used to follow the 22-year-old man on Instagram. On Sunday, the man, who lives in the central suburbs of Mumbai, posted a selfie outside a restaurant in the city.

The four suspects saw this post and used the details of the restaurant to trace the man's location. The four reached the restaurant and approached the man, telling him that they followed him on Instagram and were huge "fans" of him.

The four then asked the man to accompany them for a bike ride. The victim agreed and the five people rode for around 20 minutes, reaching a hotel near the Mumbai airport. There, the four suspects forced the man into a car, drove off and gang-raped him over the next three hours.

The four accused also used the victim's credit card to buy petrol and also withdrew some cash for their personal use.

The men then dumped the 22-year-old victim on a road early Monday morning. The victim then called his parents and along with them approached the police and registered a complaint. The police managed to nab all the four suspects later that day. The three adults were produced in a court and sent to police custody while the minor boy was sent to a child remand home

Senior police officer Madhuri Pokle of the VB Nagar police station said further investigations are on. "All the accused are remanded to police custody... We are taking down further statements in the case and investigating the sequence. We are awaiting reports from hospital as well," Pokle said.
