Momen bins Indian’s allegation over minority torture in Bangladesh

DHAKA, Dec 11, 2019 (BSS) – Foreign minister Dr A K Abdul Momen today ruled out allegations raised in Indian parliament that Bangladeshi minority communities were being tortured and feared the neighbouring country’s proposed citizenship law could rather affect its historic character as a secular nation.

“It’s not true that torture on minority is taking place in Bangladesh,” he

told reporters this afternoon as approached for comments on the allegations

made by the Indian Union Home Minister Amit Shah in Lok Sabha, the lower

house of Indian parliament.

Momen added: “Whoever gave them the information, it is not correct.”

The foreign minister simultaneously added that the “Citizenship Amendment

Bill, 2019” passed two days ago in Lok Sabha could weaken the country’s

“historic position” as a tolerant and secular country.

“India is historically a tolerant country which believes in secularism . .

. their historic position will be weakened if they deviated from that,” Momen

said emerging from back to back meetings with Japanese ambassador and US

ambassadors in Dhaka Naoki Ito and Earl R. Miller.

He added that Bangladesh and India were currently were enjoying close

friendly relations “that is termed as ‘golden chapter'” of bilateral ties and

“so, naturally our people expect that India won’t do anything that could

create anxiety among them”.

Momen said Bangladesh maintains strong religion harmony and ensures that

followers of all faiths enjoy same rights in every area including the job

sector.

“Many important decisions of our country are taken by persons belonging to

different religions . . . we never judge anybody by their religion, we treat

all as Bangladesh citizens,” he said expecting the minority community

representatives to echo his remarks.

Shah, who also heads India’s ruling BJP, claimed that torture on Hindu

communities in Bangladesh alongside Afghanistan and Pakistan were taking

place, as a fierce debate was underway for nine hours in Lok Sabha on the

bill which eventually was passed amid protests from opposition parties and

various groups.

Momen said during his meeting with Miller, the US envoy expressed as well

his country’s concern about the Indian bill as they believe in religious

freedom.

“They (USA) are being critical about that . . . they believe India weakened

its position by doing it (passing the bill),” he said.

US Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) sought sanctions

against Amit Shah and other principal Indian leadership if the bill was

passed by both houses of Indian parliament describing the draft law as a

“dangerous turn in the wrong direction”.
