Kurukshetra police in Haryana arrest man for attempting to rape orchestra dancer

The accused has been booked under relevant sections of the IPC (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Kurukshetra police have arrested the accused on charges of attempt to rape A video of the complainant attempting suicide has gone viral on social media Police dragged their feet over filing a complaint, alleged the woman's husband

Gurugram: Police in Haryana's Kurukshetra have arrested a man for attempting to rape a 30-year-old female orchestra dancer. This development comes one day after a video of the woman attempting suicide after citing police inaction in this regard went viral on social media platforms and left the Kurukshetra police red-faced.

In the video, the woman alleged that she approached the police multiple times to register a complaint of an attempt to rape against the accused but not only did the concerned officers delay her plea but some even pressured her to settle the matter with the accused. She cited this inaction as the reason for trying to take her own life and even identified four police officers by name.

Adding to her ordeal, the woman's husband claimed that they first approached the police on November 10 of this year to file a complaint but the case was registered much later and that too on lesser charges. It was only after the video went viral and Haryana police took cognizance of the matter that an inquiry was initiated and led to the arrest of the accused.

Earlier this month, a female dancer performing during a wedding reception in Uttar Pradesh was accidentally shot in the face after a drunken reveller opened fire in the middle of the function. The woman suffered a severe bullet wound on her face and is still undergoing treatment at a local hospital. Two men were arrested in this regard by Chitrakoot police in Uttar Pradesh. They were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Arms Act. Similarly, a 17-year-old girl committed suicide in Kanpur city of Uttar Pradesh after accusing the police of inaction in her complaint of rape against a group of local boys. Several such cases where rape survivors have accused police departments of delaying the arrest of the accused individual(s).
