After BHU Protests, Sanskrit Prof. Firoz Khan Resigns & Joins Arts Faculty In Same University

The Benaras Hindu University (BHU) was in news last month when it witnessed an uproar brewing over the appointment of a Muslim Sanskrit professor.

Protests by RSS-affiliated students’ union ABVP, made headlines after the group of students objected that a Muslim cannot teach Sanskrit, a stand that was opposed by other students.

Now, the Muslim professor has resigned from the Literature Department of the Sanskrit Vidya Dharma Vijnan (SVDV) faculty, but he will still teach Sanskrit at a different department of the same institution.

Image Credit: TOI

The ‘compromise’ between the BHU administration and the protesting students came after a month-long protest by students who asserted that a non-Hindu professor could not teach Sanskrit because the faculty intertwined the study of religion and literature.

Professor Firoz Khan has now shifted to the Sanskrit department of the Arts faculty.

Professor Kaushalendra Pandey who accepted his resignation said, "Professor Khan has resigned from here. He has expressed an interest in joining another wing in the university that teaches Sanskrit. He gave his resignation yesterday (Monday) evening. He will join the Sanskrit department of the Arts faculty... As a teacher I can only say it is good that he has got other opportunities.”

Image Credit: Twitter



Shubham Tiwari, one of the protesting students, reportedly said, "...want to tell Professor khan we do not have personal enmity... we wish him well.”

He was posted to the Sanskrit Vidhya Dharma faculty on November 5, but could not take classes because of protests. However, there was one section of the university - faculty members and some students who vocally supported him.

Allegedly, on Monday, a senior member of the Sanskrit Vidya Dharam faculty, Professor Lal Shanti, was attacked for supporting the professor.

Image Credit: Twitter



"I was sitting in a classroom when some students barged in and started abusing me in foul language. They asked me to stop supporting a Muslim's appointment to the faculty. Some of the students then hurled stones at me... and shoved and pushed," NDTV quoted him as saying.

If the problem was a non-hindu teaching Sanskrit, does it still not hold true? He is still going to teach Sanskrit in the same university albeit a different department. This just goes to show that the protest was fickle and pointless and should not have happened in the first place. It is sad that a large section of the student body protested the hiring of a professor, not judging him on the basis of his prowess, but his religion. It didn't matter to them how educationally sound he was, but it mattered that he was a Muslim, and that's something that we should be concerned about.
