Dad 'rented out daughter to 30 paedo pals for sex' in horrific abuse case

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Don't miss a thing by getting the Daily Star's biggest headlines straight to your inbox!

A vile dad rented his daughter out to as many as 30 paedophiles who raped and took pictures of her, the latest example in a string of horrific sex abuse cases gripping India.

The distraught girl has now bravely opened up about the torture she had to endure as her sick father sold her for money.

The 12-year-old, from southern India, who can not be named for legal reasons, was gang-raped every weekend for two years by up to 30 men, counsellors believe.

It is understood the father, whose name also can not be revealed to protect the identity of the victim, would call men and take bookings for time with his daughter.

Whenever the paedos turned up to the family home, the victim's mother would be ushered into another room while the victim was locked in a bedroom where the perverts would rape and take pictures of her.

Authorities say that four men, including the dad, have been arrested and charged with rape, sexual assault and using a child for pornographic purposes, as the young girl bravely decided to speak out about her horrific ordeal.

(Image: DIVYAKANT SOLANKI/EPA-EFE/REX)

Cops in India showed the victim pictures of around 25 men known to the family and believed to have been involved in the sick acts.

But she was so traumatised by what her own flesh and blood had put her through that she couldn't identify the suspects. "I don't remember any faces," she told police. "It's all a blur."

The vile abuse began when the dad's friends would drunkenly tease and grope the victim in front of her apparently unconcerned parents.

"Men would come and take my mother into the bedroom," the victim explained.

"I thought this was normal. And then my father pushed me into the room with strangers."

Teachers living in the victim's neighbourhood first sounded the alarm when they noticed a change in her behaviour, leading them to ask about what was going on at home.

Following a tip-off, the school then called in a counsellor from a woman's assistance group who then spoke to the girl the following day.

(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

It was then that the full details of the girl's horrific plight came to light, after spending just four hours with a counsellor.

The 12-year-old admitted how her dad would force her into a room with strangers and would make her take nude pictures of herself for the men that visited her.

After missing her period for three months, the girl said that her parents took her to a doctor, who gave her an ultrasound and prescribed her some medicines.

Convinced that the girl was a victim of serial rape by at least 30 different men, the counsellor called in child welfare and she was removed from the family home and whisked off to a shelter.

When asked whether she knew about contraceptives used to help avoid pregnancy and diseases, the 12-year-old said: "No, no, we use condoms."

The girl's mum was also violated by her dad and was similarly sexually exploited by men visiting the house.

One of the men, who was first rebuked by the mum, then went on to assault the 12-year-old girl instead, the BBC reports.

And the poor little girl had no sympathy from her mother who said her daughter had made the claims up in a bid to teach her parents a lesson after they had fallen out.

"[She] made up this story [of sexual exploitation] because she had been fighting with us and wanted to teach us a lesson," the mother said.

It has been reported in local media that the girl remains at a shelter while her dad awaits trial in prison.

The story of the young girl's horrific ordeal comes as India battles with what was been described by campaigners as a sexual abuse epidemic.

(Image: DIVYAKANT SOLANKI/EPA-EFE/REX)

Just last week, a woman who was allegedly gang-raped was dragged into a field and set on fire by three of her suspected attackers as she went to give evidence against them at court in the village of Unnao.

Mass protests have erupted across India recently, as women take to the streets in an attempt to end what they describe as a "rape culture" in the country.

Demonstrators have held placards in support of rape victims across the country, with estimates suggesting that there may be as many as 40,000 cases of the crime each year, according to Government figures.

campaigners say the real number is likely to be far higher, with victims wary of filing cases because of the social stigma surrounding rape and a lack of faith in the justice system.
