Three friends pedal across country in their mission for a ‘rape-mukt Bharat’

Piyush Monga, Yogesh Rawal and Ranchod Devashi in Kutch on Wednesday

RAJKOT: Looking at the spate of crime against women in the country, mere condemnation of the heinous acts have become almost lip service. Not willing to join the bandwagon of usual protests, three friends from Delhi wanted to share their angst with their peers through hard labour.

In their search for a rape-free and sensitive India that respects its womenfolk, the trio — Piyush Monga, Yogesh Rawal and Ranchod Devashi — decided to pedal all the way across the country. They want to sensitize young generation on being the change-makers.

Their first stop was at Kutch on Wednesday.At a ‘chai kitli’ (tea kiosk) the three friends started interacting with people about the most discussed topic – rape.

They also went to a school, met the principal and the teachers and sensitized teenage students about how to act responsibly as young adults.

For about a month now, the trio has been dedicatedly doing their bit for the society, a mission they embarked upon from Delhi on October 17. Their journey was flagged off by mother of Nirbhaya, Delhi rape victim.

Haryana-born Monga, 23, a food quality officer in a soft drink company in Delhi was triggered to do something like this by the daily news of rising sexual crimes against women. He was joined by the other two from Sirohi district in Rajasthan who have just completed their graduation. The trio started a group on Instagram titled ‘Youth against rape’, which has more than 50,000 followers.

Talking to TOI, Monga said: “All these news of sexual violence made me feel as if we are uncivilized. We started a debate on social media and from there we decided to take the issue even to young people in rural India.”

The three youths have also made a list of rape survivors and will try to meet them and their families. They have already met four such families so far.

The journey has covered covered nearly 162 schools of Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat so far and they have visited nearly 75 towns and villages before reaching Kutch, good and bad experiences greeting them at every stop.

“We met people in some remote villages who couldn’t comprehend the term ‘rape’!”,exclaimed Ranchod, who was dejected after some people showed their negativity by asking them to concentrate on making their own careers instead of trying to change people’s mindset. “Nothing will change in this country, they told us,” he said.

However, not the ones to be dejected, the trio move on covering district after district in a journey that may take three years to complete. From Kutch, they will go to Rajkot, Ahmedabad, Vadodara and Surat before they leave for Nagpur.

Raval said that there have also been instances where people have come in cars to appreciate their efforts.


