Guwahati News: Curfew in Guwahati, no internet in 9 districts

NFR cancels 13 trains, reschedules some others

GUWAHATI: Curfew wasimposed in Guwahati and the Army was called out in Assam’s largest city and two Tripura districts after anti-CAB protests turned violent on Wednesday. Mobile internet service was suspended in nine Assam districts, including Kamrup (Metro), under which Guwahati falls, in the evening as the Rajya Sabha moved closer to passing the CAB Since morning, protesters, mostly students, came out in huge numbers and took control of most of Guwahati. The situation turned grim when they gave a call for ‘Dispur Chalo’ and marched towards the nearby state capital and laid siege to the state secretariat. Security personnel fired rubber bullets and teargas shells and used batons to disperse the agitators after the latter tried to storm the secretariat. Soon after, two colums of Army personnel were brought in and curfew was announced.Guwahati remained shut all through the day as protesters roamed around shouting slogans, burning tyres on roads and clashing with security personnel. A recovery van and a bus belonging to police and a motorcycle parked outside the secretariat were setablaze. A fire brigade vehicle brought to throw water at the protesters was also damaged. The agitators pulled down hoardings and banners advertising the government’s welfare schemes and made a bonfire of those before the secretariat. A traffic signal point was uprooted and set afire.The demostrators damaged a wooden ramp erected near a prominent hotel welcoming Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Japanese counterpart, Shinzo Abe, for a three-day summit from December 15 in the cityAs a fallout of the trouble, the Modi-Abe summit may be shifted to another location. “It may now go to Bhubaneswar,” a source said. Since early morning, the protesters blocked roads, bringing traffic to a standstill. Hundreds of vehicles were stranded in the city. Guwahati police commissioner Deepak Kumar said, “A lot of anti-social elements have infiltrated the agitators.” Despite curfew, violent protests continued till the time of filing the report.Besides Kamrup (Metro), the other districts where the internet service was stopped are Lakhimpur, Dhemaji, Tinsukia, Dibrugarh, Charaideo, Sivasagar, Jorhat and Golaghat. This was announced in a notification issued by additional chief secretary (home and political department) Kumar Sanjay Krishna.Apart from Guwahati, Army personnel were requisioned by civil authorities in Bongaigaon (Assam) and Tripura’s Kanchanpur (Radhanagar district) and Manu (Dhalai district). “Field commanders and the Army headquarters are monitoring the situation closely,” defence PRO Lt Col P Khongsai said. He added, “Two columns have now been requisitioned by the district administration in Kamrup (Metro).” At Chauldhowa in Upper Assam’s Dibrugarh, many students were injured in a police lathi-charge. They were admitted to Assam Medical College in Dibrugarh.Life came to a grinding halt in Lakhimpur, Dibrugarh, Tinsukia, Jorhat, Sivsagar districts in Upper Assam and many other areas in lower Assam.The Northeast Frontier Railway cancelled as many as 13 trains and rescheduled some others. Guwahati University and Dibrugarh University postponed their examinations for an indefinite period.
