Rape accused in Baghpat threatens survivor of 'Unnao like consequences'

The accused had been pestering the survivor to withdraw the case and not to testify against him in court. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights A rape survivor in Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh has been threatened of Unnao-like consequences A rape accused has been arrested for putting up a threatening poster at the home of a survivor The accused allegedly put up the poster one day before the hearing of his case

Baghpat: A rape accused in Baghpat's Bijraul village put up a poster outside a survivor's house on Thursday. In the poster, the rape accused threatened the survivor of "Unnao like consequences". The incident came to light after a rape survivor was set ablaze in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh.

The survivor's house falls under the limits of the Badaut police station. The survivor had lodged a rape case against the accused in July 2018.

According to an investigation, the accused and survivor are residents of Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh. They had been studying in the national capital. The boy allegedly offered to help the girl in her studies and raped her on the pretext of the same. Following this, the girl approached the Mukherjee Nagar police in Delhi and lodged a complaint.

After a case was filed, the accused started pestering the survivor to withdraw the complaint and asked her not to testify against him in court. A hearing of the case is scheduled for Friday. In an attempt to stop the survivor from attending the hearing, the accused put up the threatening poster on Thursday.

After the police were informed about the incident, they arrested the accused and registered a case against him. Gopendra Yadav, SP, Baghpat said that police protection is being granted to the survivor and her family.

Last week, a rape survivor was set ablaze in Unnao's Bihar by five men. The five accused had raped the survivor in March 2018. The survivor was set ablaze when she was on her way to a court hearing in Raebareli. The accused were allegedly irked as the survivor took action against them instead of staying mum.

The 23-year-old woman suffered 90 per cent burn injuries. Preliminary treatment was administered to the survivor at Unnao Civil Hospital, she was later airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital. The survivor suffered a cardiac arrest while she was undergoing treatment and passed away.
