Supreme Court orders judicial inquiry into deaths of 4 accused in Telangana rape-murder case

The site of the encounter near Shadnagar, Telangana | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The four men were arrested in connection with the rape-murder of a 27-year-old veterinarian Her charred body was found under the Chatanpally bridge near Shadnagar in Ranga Reddy district Cyberabad police claims that the accused were killed during 'retaliatory fire'

New Delhi: A bench of the Supreme Court led by Chief Justice of India SA Bobde today ordered a judicial inquiry into the killings of four men accused of gang-rape and murder of a veterinarian in Telangana. The accused were killed during a stated 'exchange of fire' between them and the Cyberabad police on December 6.

While hearing the PIL on Thursday, the SC bench also confirmed that the probe will be headed by former Supreme Court judge Justice VS Sirpurkar. Other members who will be part of the inquiry panel will be former Bombay HC judge Rekha Baldota and former CBI director Karthikeyan.

With its seat in Hyderabad, the panel will be required to complete its probe within six months and submit a report to the apex court bench that constituted it. The purpose of a judicial inquiry, in this case, is to acquire an independent objective opinion to ascertain what happened on the morning of December 6 near the Chatanpally bridge in Telangana's Ranga Reddy district, said the bench. The PIL in this regard was filed by Advocate GS Mani and Pradeep Kumar Yadav.

(Cyberabad police commissioner at the site of the incident)

Appearing for the state of Telangana, former attorney general Mukul Rohatgi said that the state administration has no grounds to prosecute the involved policemen as yet. Rohatgi further told the apex court that the four men had snatched the revolvers of the police and attacked them during recovery of the victim's personal belongings in the early hours of that morning. The counsel also mentioned that the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) has taken suo-moto cognisance of the matter.

Cyberabad commissioner of police VC Sajjanar while addressing a press conference said that a total of 10 personnel attached with Cyberabad police were accompanying the four accused when they were attacked and had to engage in "retaliatory fire" in self-defence.
