Man flees after raping deaf and mute girl in UP's Kanpur

The girl's family raised an alarm when they noticed that she was missing (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A deaf and mute girl was allegedly raped in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh The accused, Sanjay Gautam is still at large An FIR has been registered in relation to the incident

Kanpur: A man allegedly raped a minor deaf and mute girl in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday. The accused is on the run. The 19-year-old girl was allegedly taken to a secluded spot by the accused when her family was having dinner. The police have said that they will arrest the accused at the earliest.

The accused has been identified as Sanjay Gautam. Sanjay allegedly took the girl to a secluded spot and raped her. It is also being alleged that the accused threatened the survivor of dire consequences.

According to news agency PTI's report, the girl's family raised an alarm when they noticed that she was missing. The 19-year-old girl's family then started searching for her and found her writhing in pain. The family said that when they saw the girl, they could make out that she had been raped.

The survivor's parents then informed the police about the incident and submitted a written complaint. Following this, the police lodged an FIR against Gautam under Section 376 (rape) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Vinod Kumar Singh, station house officer (SHO), Bithoor said that the girl's medical report is yet to arrive.

Deaf and mute woman gang-raped in Mumbai; two arrested

In a similar incident reported in October this year, a 20-year-old man and his friend were arrested for allegedly raping a deaf and mute woman in Mumbai. The accused were identified as Lakhan Kaale and Sandip Kurhade. Both the accused were residents of Thane.

The survivor used to work as domestic help in a residential society in Bandra. The woman's employer approached the police after she suddenly disappeared one day. When the police started investigating the case, they found out that the woman's phone was switched on and according to her location, she was in Thane.

The police traced the woman's location and rescued her from Dadar railway station. Kurhade was with the woman during that time. The woman penned down her ordeal and gave it to the police. The police nabbed Kurhade and the two accused were arrested.
