Imran Khan targets Modi govt over CAB; India tells him to focus on treatment of minorities in Pakistan

File picture: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The Indian Parliament passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, on Wednesday The "world must step in before it is too late", said Pakistan PM Imran Khan The Ministry of External Affairs in New Delhi has asked Pakistan to focus on its treatment of minorities

New Delhi: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Thursday accused the Indian government of moving systematically with a "Hindu supremacist agenda" while urging the world to “step in before it is too late”.

Khan’s tweets came a day after the Indian Parliament passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

"India, under (Prime Minister Narendra) Modi, has been moving systematically with its Hindu Supremacist agenda," tweeted Khan.

This agenda, "accompanied by threats to Pakistan under a nuclear overhang, will lead to massive bloodshed and far-reaching consequences for the world," he added.

The "world must step in before it is too late", further said Imran Khan.

The Ministry of External Affairs in New Delhi, meanwhile, asked Pakistan to focus on its treatment of minorities rather than commenting on the internal matter of India.

What is Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019?

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, would grant Indian citizenship to people belonging to the six specified communities i.e. Hindu, Sikh, Parsi, Buddhist, Jain, and Christian from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan, who have taken shelter in India because of persecution on grounds of religion or fear of such persecution in their countries and have entered into India on or before 31.12.2014.

Speaking in the Rajya Sabha, Union Minister for Home Affairs Amit Shah had on Wednesday said that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, will give a new ray of hope to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, who have migrated to India after facing persecution.

He had also said that there has been a decline in the population of minorities in the Islamic States of Pakistan and Bangladesh over the years, as they were either killed or forced to change their religion. Hence, they were forced to flee to India, said Shah.

Partition of India on the basis of religion and subsequent failure of the Nehru-Liaqat pact of 1950 in safeguarding the rights and dignity of minorities in Pakistan and Bangladesh are the reasons for bringing the CAB, asserted Shah in Parliament.
