7 Retro Fashion Trends That Made A Strong Comeback & Defined The Decade

When it comes to fashion, there are certain aspects that leave an indelible impression on us. No matter what the fashion police say about them (usually bashing them and calling them 'fads', they do make a comeback every 5-10 years.

© Instagram/fdciofficial

Then there are some trends and 'fads', which, when they make a comeback, it makes people feel “How on earth did they really go out of fashion?" This inkling is sometimes so strong, that instead of trickling down and slowly permeating our zeitgeist, they just explode.

© Instagram/theanisha

These statement worthy trends can be spotted not just on actors, stars and others in vogue, but on common people too, who consider themselves to have nothing to do with fashion, i.e. fashion renegades.

© Viral Bhayani

Here are seven such trends made a huge comeback this decade. The best thing about them, however, is the fact that we simply owned them up, deconstructed, and made them our own.

PS - We loved each and every one of them

1. Baggy Athleisure

© Instagram/badboyshah

Wearing 'ill-fitting' clothes was once a cardinal fashion sin. So much so, that, if the fashion police had their way, people who wore ill-fitting clothes would have been executed (just a figure of speech, guys). However, 2010s were the years of the baggy athleisure wear. Athleisure anyway was huge, especially in the late 2000s. However, it simply exploded after the change of the decade. As for baggy sweatshirts, and co-ord tracksuits, they just roared into the scene and how. From A-list directors to the most in-demand rappers and musicians, everyone could be seen in a pair of oversized track jackets, and pants that looked like they were repurposed from parachutes.

2. Chunky Dad-Sneakers

© Instagram/ishabhansali

Oh boy, where do we begin with these…

As popular as sneakers were this decade, chunky dad sneakers were monumental. For something that started as basic, “non-fashion” pieces, it just exploded towards the middle of the decade. So much so, that sneakerhead worth his salt, would have at least one pair of chunky, dad sneakers, and always in some simplistic colour. These sneakers just symbolised, how normcore became the “It” thing this decade.

3. Fanny Packs

© MensXP / Sowrav Bhowmik

If I had a rupee for every time someone cracked a joke or two at my fanny pack back in the 2000s, I am pretty sure I would have been able to afford this Gucci belt bag. This decade, belt bags or fanny packs, as a trend, made one of the most resounding comebacks, especially during the latter half of the decade. What once was a very “touristy” and “yucky” thing, could not only be spotted on some of the most religiously followed celebrities, but also on some of the most coveted runways from fashion weeks across the world. One of the main reason why we as a society felt so strongly about the belt bag was not just its utility, but the fact, that we really reconstructed it to bring it to the 21st century. Just consider the materials - from nylon, we moved onto calfskin leather, khadi cotton, linen, velvet, jacquard and what not. And let's not even get started on the embellishments and silhouettes.

4. Oversized Suits

© Instagram/nikitajaisinghani

For something that was a massive hit during the '80s in the USA, and during the '90s in India, oversized suits saw a massive resurgence this decade. Speaking of suits from the '90s that made a comeback, we also saw three buttoned blazers on and off the ramp on a number of occasions, especially post 2017. Them making a major comeback during the 2020s should not come as a surprise, therefore. This decade saw several 'antiquated' silhouettes ruling the street. And man, the manner in which jacket collars have been manipulated throughout the decade is simply insane.

5. Zany, Quirky Prints

© Instagram/theanisha

Suits, shirts, pants, sneakers - you name it and we can show you some celebrity, or the other wearing something with a zany and quirky print. And we are not just talking about printed slogans, but a mish-mash maze of colours, emblems and patterns. From tie-and-dye prints to psychedelic iterations, and even animal prints, the 2010s saw some really unhinged pieces come to life. From zebra printed suits to memes being printed on t-shirts, we saw it all proliferate the market.

6. Everything Neon

© Instagram/nitashagaurav

Neon coloured clothing items were conspicuously absent from the market and the streets through the better part of the 2000s. After all, back then, pastels were our newfound love. However, with the turn of the decade, our craving for all things neon came to an avenue, where it knew no bounds - we had neon colours for everything - track pants, jackets, sneakers, suits - you name it.

7. Low-Top White Sneakers

© Instagram/jaysamuelstudio

Remember our canvas keds, or PT shoes, with those green soles? Would you have believed it if we said that barely a decade later, they would be one of the most raved about trends? The thing is, as phenomenally widespread coloured low-top sneakers were, white low-top sneakers were just everywhere. Thanks to our love for all things retro, we paired white low-top sneakers with just about everything, starting from jeans and t-shirts, to suits.
