India is laying the groundwork for a mass faith-cleansing

Many people expected Prime Minister Narendra Modi's landslide re-election victory this summer to spell trouble for India's pluralistic democracy. But few appreciated just how much trouble. This week, in two days flat, the Modi government pushed through both chambers of parliament the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB). This law uses a good cause as a Trojan horse to advance a radical faith-cleansing agenda that has more than a passing similarity with the shocking policies that China has deployed against its Uighur Muslim minority. Skip advert On the surface, CAB is a mass amnesty bill of the kind that pro-immigration advocates in America can't even dream of. It amends India's Citizenship Act to hand expedited citizenship — not mere legal status — to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, and Christians from Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh currently living in the country without authorization. But it conspicuously leaves out Muslims. This means that the Ahamadiyyas, who belong to a reviled Islamic sect in Pakistan, are out of luck — as are the Rohingya from neighboring Myanmar. The omission of the Rohingya lends a lie to the official explanation for excluding Muslims, namely, that the bill is aimed at handing relief only to persecuted minorities in India's neighboring countries, not members of the majority population. But Myanmar is a majority Buddhist country that has subjected the minority Rohingya to some of the most grisly bloodletting in modern times. Yet they didn't qualify. This kind of anti-Muslim discrimination isn't the worst feature of the citizenship bill, however. What makes it even more abominable is that it lays the legal groundwork for a wholesale attack on the rights of India's 140 million Muslim citizens, not just unauthorized Muslim refugees.

The Modi government has pledged to create a nation-wide National Register of Citizens before the 2024 election that will contain the name of every man, woman, and child in the country who is entitled to be an Indian citizen. The eligibility criteria to get on the list is not entirely clear yet, but if the pilot in the state of Assam is any indication, all of India's 1.3 billion residents will have to produce papers to show that they or their ancestors have lived in the country since before 1971. Skip advert This exercise will change the fundamental presumption of the Indian polity whereby Indians will now have to prove to their government that they're entitled to citizenship rather than the government having to show them they're not. But the additional problem is that India is an exceedingly informal country where people don't bother to maintain meticulous records, particularly the poor and illiterate. In villages especially, people often don't even know their birth dates let alone keep birth certificates or passports going back generations. Nor do municipal governments bother with good record-keeping, making it incredibly difficult for people without means or connections to retrieve the necessary documents. The upshot in the case of Assam was that a whopping four million people — 13 percent of the state's population — were excluded from the NRC. This would have been no problem for Modi if the excluded were Muslims. Amit Shah, his home minister, whose brainchild this whole scheme is, calls Muslims termites and infiltrators and made an election promise to throw them into the Bay of Bengal. But, as it happened, lots of Hindus in the state didn't make the list either. If this happens nationally, the whole purpose of the exercise — boosting the already massive numerical strength of Hindus — would be defeated. Hindus are 80 percent of India's population and Muslims only 14 percent. But in the paranoid Hindu nationalist mind, that is not enough of a guarantee of enduring Hindu dominance against the allegedly higher Muslim fertility rates. Skip advert That's where the citizenship bill comes in. It will offer recourse to Hindus who are unable to prove their ancestry to get on the NRC, but not Muslims in the same predicament. Indeed, according to Indian Express' Harsh Mander, in Assam, CAB will treat all Hindus who speak Bengali as refugees, even those born in India, so that they can qualify for its immunity. But Bengali-speaking Muslims will be excluded. Similar guidance will likely apply in other parts of the country. This means that Muslims who have ancestry dating back eons will be rendered stateless but Hindus, recent arrivals and those with long-standing roots alike, will be protected.
