Fact Check- Incident of a man kidnapped and raped by three women is not from Telangana

Following the brutal rape and murder of the female veterinary doctor in Telangana a Facebook post has gone viral which claims that a young man has been raped by three women for three days in Telangana.

A Facebook page V R Watching U News, has posted an image of a man and posted a long story detailing the incident which is captioned as SNS NEWS : ShockingStory: A Young Man Kidnapped And Raped By Three Women For Three Days In Telangana.

The FB post says The females forced him to consume viagra and energy drinks and as continued taking turns on him for three days before they dumped him in a field of Medak district in Telangana.

The long post ends with saying We would like to know what you think of sexual molestation of men? Share your views with us in the comment section!

The archived version of the post is saved here.

India Today Anti Fake News War room ( AFWA) found this to be a misleading post. This incident has nothing to do with Telangana. The particular incident happened in Pretoria of South Africa two years back. The image of the man used in the viral post is also related to a different incident.

With the help of a keyword search, we found a similar incident that happened in 2017 in Pretoria, South Africa. International media like The Sun reported the incident during that time. The headline reads GANG RAPE HORROR Three women raped man, 23, for THREE days’ after kidnapping man in a taxi and force-feeding him energy drinks in South Africa..

This was also reported by the Indian media like India Today.

With the help of a reverse image search, we found that the image used on the viral post is also misleading. The image is of a man from Pune, who killed 14 members of his family before committing suicide. The incident happened three years back and was widely covered by the media.

We could not find any such incident of a man being raped by three women for three days in Telangana, in any mainstream media. Hence, it is clear that the viral post is misleading. The incident happened in South Africa and the image is also not related to this incident.

Also read: Fact Check: Truth behind viral post showing Chinese biz tycoon Jack Ma’s struggle

Also read: Fact check: No, lawyers are not exempted at Toll plazas on the national highways

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Image of a Man kidnapped and raped by three women for three days in Telangana. Conclusion The incident happened in South Africa. The image is of a different incident. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
