Maharashtra man stabs former girlfriend in Thane after she marries someone else

The accused has been arrested and booked under Section 307 (attempt to murder) and other relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused was identified as 19-year-old Vishal Khade, a resident of Vadole village He attacked the victim at around 8:30 am on Thursday morning while she was returning after attending nature's call The accused has been arrested and booked under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC

Thane: A 19-year-old woman's former boyfriend stabbed her multiple times, a day after she got married to another man in Maharashtra's Thane district on Thursday.

The accused was identified as 19-year-old Vishal Khade, a resident of Vadole village in the district. According to a report in The Times of India, the victim is now said to be out of danger and is currently undergoing treatment in a nearby hospital. She is a resident of the Ambernath town and told police that she was in a love relationship with Khade but chose to marry the other man as per her parents' choice. The wedding took place on Wednesday, while the accused attacked her within 24 hours of her marriage.

He reportedly attacked the victim at around 8:30 am on Thursday morning while the woman was returning after attending nature's call from a nearby public washroom. The accused accosted her and stabbed her multiple times.

Sanjay Dhumal of Ambernath police station told a media person that the woman is now out of danger was admitted to a government-run hospital. However, the accused has been arrested and booked under Section 307 (attempt to murder) and other relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. Further probe in the matter is underway.

In another case reported from Thane district, a couple was arrested for allegedly killing a 70-year-old relative and dumping her body in a water body in Bhiwandi, Thane.

The police arrested the accused named 37-year-old Somnath Wakde and his 31-year-old wife Neelam for allegedly killing their elderly relative and neighbour Sonubai Krishna Chowdhari. The body of the victim was found floating in the lake at Vadunavghar and while the post-mortem report indicated that the woman has died as a result of being hit on the head with a hard and blunt object.

Further investigations revealed that Chowdhari, a resident of Bapgaon in Choudharpada, was reported missing by her son. However, after an investigation in the matter, the police arrested both the accused.
