Kolkata feels Assam CAB protest heat

KOLKATA: News of the turmoil back home has been keeping the people from Assam living in the city on tenterhooks as the northeastern state continued to singe for the second consecutive day, with protesters taking over every street to affirm their stand against the passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019, in Rajya Sabha. Although living hundreds of miles away from the turbulence, the situation has turned all the more menacing for them as call drops and the internet ban in Assam have made it difficult to get information about the well-being of their families.“My uncle suffered a stroke and passed away on Wednesday night. But getting the body to the cremation ground proved to be a Herculean task,” said Patanjali Banerjee, who is from Tinsukia. “A bookstore owned by a Bengali gentleman was set on fire and that scared everyone in our locality, which is predominantly Bengali. Provisions are also a cause for worry as all shops are closed,” she shuddered. Banerjee, a content writer with a private firm in Kolkata, felt the anger of the indigenous people was triggered by the lack of jobs in the state.For Sanjeev Baishya, a private firm executive in Kolkata, the health of his parents and in-laws has become a major worry. “The youngsters in our family have joined the protest. But my parents have not been keeping well. Since the roads in Guwahati are blocked and a curfew is in place, an ambulance cannot get to our home in case of an emergency,” Baishya said.Manager at a Kolkata restaurant, Rwitwick Gohain, who went to his Guwahati home on December 6 for some work, is stuck. “There is total unrest and people are not ready to step back,” he said. Basudha Bhattacharya from Digboi, who lives in Kolkata, added, “I spoke to my mother on Thursday morning. She said the town was in a shambles with shops and vehicles being vandalized. My cousin’s wedding had to be cancelled as the groom couldn’t reach the venue because of blocked streets. A Muslim woman at my father’s office was harassed and forced to chant ‘Joy aai Axom’ (hail Mother Assam).” “The terms Muslim, Bangladeshi, Bengali and illegal immigrants have got mixed up, thanks to fake news on social media,” the St Xavier’s passout said.Tania Chakraborty, an MNC employee, too, sounded scared. “I grew up with these people. I don’t understand why they are attacking Bengalis,” she wondered, referring to slogans such as ‘Bongalik thakibo nidiu’ (We won’t let Bengalis stay). Her husband Subhankar, however, felt fake news had played a big role in stoking violence. “A friend’s wedding in Guwahati was cancelled due to the protests. But when they say ‘Bongali’, they actually mean the illegal Bangladeshis,” he said.
