Nirbhaya's mother moves SC after Patiala House Court postpones hearing

The hearing was scheduled after the victim's parents lodged a petition to expedite the execution of the convicts (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights On Friday, the Patiala House Court adjourned the hearing of review plea filed by Nirbhaya's parents Hours before the hearing, AP Singh, one of accused's lawyers said, "When those sitting in the Parliament say these kind of criminals should be shot dead, it's disrespect of the Constitution" Nirbhaya's mother said that she is willing to wait for another week for justice After the hearing was adjourned, the victim's mother turned to the Supreme Court and sought permission to present her side during the hearing of Akshay's review plea

New Delhi: Delhi's Patiala Court has adjourned the hearing on the plea of Nirbhaya's parents seeking issuance of death warrant and execution of all convicts, till 18 December. After the hearing, Asha Devi, Nirbhaya's mother said, "When we have fought for 7 years, we can wait for another week. On 18 December, their (convicts in the case) death warrant will be issued. "

Asha Devi also wrote to the Supreme Court, requesting the apex body to hear one of the convicts Akshay Kumar Singh's review plea at the earliest to prevent further delay in the case. Asha Devi's lawyer filed the application after the Chief Justice of India gave a nod to the same. Nirbhaya's mother claimed that she should be given a fair chance to represent her viewpoint on the case when the court hears Akshay's review plea. She said that the mercy petitions filed by the convicts are 'delay tactics'.

#Breaking | Nirbhaya’s mother moves SC requesting the top court to hear her plea along with the convict Akshay’s review plea.



TIMES NOW’s Harish Nair with details. Listen in. | #IndiaSaysNoMercy pic.twitter.com/mIA24suToq — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 13, 2019

During the hearing, the Tihar Jail authorities were going to present a status report. The status report comprised a detailed account of the legal remedies sought by the convicts. All the convicts were asked to be present at the hearing via video call. The review petition will be heard by the Supreme Court of India on December 17.

Asha Devi, mother of 2012 Delhi gang-rape victim: When we have fought for 7 years, we can wait for another week. On 18 December, their (convicts in the case) death warrant will be issued. https://t.co/M3BSNvIw6g pic.twitter.com/BZB2hnJeh4 — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

#Breaking | Patiala Court postpones the hearing of Nirbhaya’s parents’ review plea. Court asks to wait for the SC order on the review plea filed by the rape convict.



TIMES NOW’s Bhavatosh Singh with details. Listen in. | #IndiaSaysNoMercy pic.twitter.com/9Gqi2t0OeR — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 13, 2019

The Patiala House Court hearing was scheduled after the victim's parents lodged a petition to expedite the execution of the convicts. During the hearing, the lawyers of the convicts filed an affidavit in the court. While two of the convicts, Vinay and Akshay filed a review plea, the others have not done the same. The mercy petition filed by Vinay is with the President of India.

Before the hearing, AP Singh, the advocate of one of the convicts said, "When those sitting in the Parliament say these kinds of criminals should be shot dead, it's disrespect of the Constitution. Can anyone guarantee that after these convicts are hanged atrocities against women, rape cases will stop?"

AP Singh,Adv for convict in 2012 Delhi gang-rape case: When those sitting in Parliament say these kind of criminals should be shot dead, it's disrespect of the Constitution.Can anyone guarantee that after these convicts are hanged atrocities against women,rape cases will stop? pic.twitter.com/W9J44jdWOe — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

The four men were convicted in the Nirbhaya gang-rape and murder case. The four convicts - Pawan Gupta, Akshay Thakur, Mukesh Singh and Vinay Sharma are all facing a death row. On December 16, 2012, six men raped and murdered a medical student in a moving bus in Delhi.

After the case surfaced, the six men were taken into custody and were interrogated for further information. As one of the accused was a minor, he was sent to a rehabilitation centre. One of the other accused, Ram Singh, committed suicide when he was lodged in the Tihar Jail.
