'Rahul welcoming people to come and rape us': Massive uproar in Parliament over Gandhi's remark

Uproar in Parliament over Rahul's remarks | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Parliament was hit by massive uproar on Friday morning – the last day of the Winter Session – over Congress leader Rahul Gandhi’s ‘rape in India’ remark. As the Lok Sabha convened at 11 am today, ruling Bharatiya Janata Party MPs demanded that Rahul should apologise for saying India was moving from ‘Make in India’ to Rape in India’.

Over the last few days, in the wake of the gruesome Telangana vet rape and murder and Unnao rape victim’s death, Rahul has twice hit out at the Narendra Modi government for failing to curb crimes against women. He has also described India has a “rape capital of the world”.

Speaking in the Lok Sabha today, Union minister and Amethi MP Smriti Irani asked what message was Rahul Gandhi giving to the country.

“This is the first time in history that a leader is giving a clarion call that Indian women should be raped. Is this Rahul Gandhi's message to the people of the country?” an angry Irani asked in the house.

BJP MP Locket Chatterjee remarked: "Modi ji said 'Make in India' but Rahul ji said 'Rape in India'. He is welcoming everybody that come and rape us... this is an insult to Indian women and to Bharat Mata."

BJP MPs, especially women parliamentarians, in unison demand an apology from the former Congress president.

DMK MP Kanimozhi came in defence of Rahul Gandhi and said: “PM said 'Make in India', which we respect, but what is happening in the country? That is what Rahul Gandhi intended to say. Unfortunately, Make in India is not happening and women in the country are being raped. This is a concern.”

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said Rahul Gandhi's remarks had hurt the entire India: “Main toh aahat hua hun, poora desh aahat hua hai. Kya aise log sadan mein aa sakte hain jo aise shabd istemaal karte hain? Kya unko poore sadan hi nahi, balki poore desh se maafi nahi mangni chahiye?”

The Lok Sabha was adjourned sine die amid continuing uproar over the issue.

In Rajya Sabha too, the issue echoed with a few MPs raising slogans of 'Rahul Gandhi maafi maango' over his 'rape in India' remark. Responding to the protests, Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu said: "You cannot take the name of a person who is not a member of this House. Nobody has the business to disturb the House."

The Congress leader has been targeting the Modi government over recent incidents of rapes and crimes against women.

"Narendra Modi had said 'Make in India' but nowadays wherever you look, it is 'Rape in India'. In Uttar Pradesh, Narendra Modi's MLA raped a woman, then she met with an accident but Narendra Modi did not utter a word," Rahul claimed at a poll rally in Jharkhand’s Godda yesterday.

"Narendra Modi says 'Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao' but he never told from whom should the daughters be saved? They should be saved from BJP's MLA," he added.

Rahul had also hit out at the media and alleged it was working for a few 'industrialists' only.

"People watch television and only Narendra Modi's face is being featured on the screens 24/7, but you won't see the faces of Hemant Soren or Rahul Gandhi. Is the media for farmers, labourers or the unemployed youth? Media is working for the owners of Narendra Modi. The media belongs to some 10-15 Indian industrialists, that's why Rahul Gandhi's face won't be featured on the television screens," he claimed.

"If someone wants to see Rahul Gandhi's face, visit a farmer's household and ask them who is working for the welfare of the farmers and they will take Rahul Gandhi's name," he added.

Earlier, speaking in his parliamentary constituency Wayanad in Kerala, Rahul had said that India was being looked down as ‘rape capital of the world’.

“India is known as the rape capital of the world. Foreign nations are asking the question why India is unable to look after its daughters and sisters. A UP MLA of the BJP is involved in the rape of a woman and the Prime Minister does not say a single word,” the former Congress president had said.
