Gallows to be strengthened at Tihar Jail for hanging Nirbhaya convicts together

A team comprising jail authorities has also been designated to ensure the efficient restructuring of the gallows (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The gallows in Delhi's Tihar Jail are being strengthened to ensure that the four convicts in Nirbhaya case are hanged simultaneously The four men will be hanged to death 14 days after their mercy petitions and pleas are rejected On Friday, the Patiala House Court postponed the hearing of Nirbhaya's parents' plea till December 18

New Delhi: The four convicts of the Nirbhaya rape case will be hanged at the same time in the Tihar Jail. According to sources, new techniques are being put to test in the jail to ensure that the hanging of the four men is conducted simultaneously from the gallows.

The jail is allegedly trying new techniques to ascertain if the existing gallows are strong enough to withstand the weight of the four men at the same time. The four convicts of the case - Mukesh Singh, Vinay Sharma, Pawan Gupta and Akshay will be hanged 14 days after their mercy petitions are rejected.

As per sources, it is mandatory for the four men to be hanged at the same time. The execution will be called off if one of the convicts encounters an anxiety-induced issue. Till date, two trial runs have been conducted in Delhi's Tihar Jail to find out if the gallows will be able to bear the weight of the four men for three hours.

A team comprising jail authorities has also been designated to ensure the efficient restructuring of the gallows. Sources from the jail said that the hanging courtyard of Tihar Jail was constructed in the 1950s. Two pillars are joined by an erect metal crossbar which has loops for the hanging rope.

Jail sources told the Times of India, "It is made in such a way that the ropes do no cut through the neck of the convict. While hanging, multiple knots ahead of the noose are greased with butter so that it gradually untangles and presses against the neck of the convict, giving a 'less painful' death."

The four convicts are lodged in separate cells of jail number 3. They have regularly been meeting their lawyers to discuss the developments in their case. A jail officer said that while there has been no change in the behaviour of the accused, they have been experiencing anxiety as they are inching closer to the time of the execution.


