Rahul Gandhi says won’t apologise for ‘rape in India’ remark, alleges BJP diverting attention from CAB row

Congress MP Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Congress MP Rahul Gandhi on Friday refused to apologise over his ‘rape in India’ remark, rejecting the demand of BJP MPs made in Parliament today. Speaking to reporters after Lok Sabha was adjourned sine die amid uproar over his remarks, Rahul categorically said: “I will not apologise.”

The former Congress president hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah and said the BJP was attempting to divert attention from the massive protests that were taking place in the Northeast over the Citizenship Amendment Act.

“I have a clip on my phone in which Narendra Modi ji is calling Delhi a 'rape capital'. I will tweet it so that everyone can see. Just to deflect attention from protests in the Northeast, this is being made an issue by the BJP,” Rahul said.

“Modi and Shah have set Northeast on fire. Now to divert attention from the protests issue, they are targeting me. When we open newspapers everyday, we come across news of rapes only. Most of the states in India are under BJP rule. In Uttar Pradesh, Unnao rape survivor’s car met with an accident but Modi didn’t say a word,” the Congress leader said, accusing the PM and his BJP of failing to put a check on crimes against women.

“Modi uses violence - violence against women, in the Northeast, in Kashmir. On economy, (former RBI governor) Raghuram Rajan met me and said India is not being talked about in the US or anywhere else. Our reputation has taken a hit. The PM must answer why he has snatched jobs from the youth,” Rahul went on to add.

Rahul’s remarks came following an uproar in Parliament over his ‘rape in India’ remark. Ruling BJP MPs said Rahul must apologise for his ‘Rape in India’ comment.

In the wake of the gruesome Telangana vet rape and murder and Unnao rape victim’s death, Rahul had slammed the Modi government for failing to curb crimes against women. He had also described India has a “rape capital of the world”.

Speaking in the Lok Sabha today, Union minister and Amethi MP Smriti Irani asked: “This is the first time in history that a leader is giving a clarion call that Indian women should be raped. Is this Rahul Gandhi's message to the people of the country?”

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said Rahul Gandhi's remarks had hurt the entire India: “Main toh aahat hua hun, poora desh aahat hua hai. Kya aise log sadan mein aa sakte hain jo aise shabd istemaal karte hain? Kya unko poore sadan hi nahi, balki poore desh se maafi nahi mangni chahiye?”

In Rajya Sabha too, there was an uproar and several MPs raised slogans of 'Rahul Gandhi maafi maango'.

"Narendra Modi had said 'Make in India' but nowadays wherever you look, it is 'Rape in India'. In Uttar Pradesh, Narendra Modi's MLA raped a woman, then she met with an accident but Narendra Modi did not utter a word," Rahul had earlier claimed at a poll rally in Jharkhand’s Godda.
