Andhra Pradesh Assembly clears Disha Bill: Judgement within 21 days, death sentence for rape convicts

Andhra Pradesh Assembly passes Disha Bill | Photo Credit: BCCL

Hyderabad: The Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly on Friday approved the strict Andhra Pradesh Disha Bill, 2019 [Andhra Pradesh Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2019]. Once approved by the Governor, the law would provide for awarding capital punishment to those convicted of offences of rape and gang rape. The bill also provides for expediting the judicial process in such cases and the same should be completed within 21 days.

Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy’s Cabinet had approved the bill on Wednesday. The Cabinet had cleared the enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, also known as the Disha Act.

The bill has been drafted with the single thought of providing for harsher punishments, including death sentence, to those found guilty of committing heinous crimes against women like rape.

The passing of the bill comes in the wake of the gruesome rape and murder of a woman veterinarian in Telangana’s Cyberabad late last month. The woman was burnt by the accused after being raped. Four accused arrested in the case were killed in an encounter with the police a few days later. The accused had tried to flee and attacked the police who were then recreating the crime scene in the early hours.

CM Reddy had earlier said in the Assembly that if there was adequate conclusive evidence in cases of crimes against women like rape and acid attacks, the trial in such cases must be completed within 14 days and judgment pronounced within 21 days.

The Jagan Mohan Reddy Cabinet also gave a go-ahead to the Andhra Pradesh Special Court for Specified Offences against Women and Children Act 2019, under which special courts would be established in each district of the state to put a curb on crimes against women and children.

Under the proposed legislation, those who upload posts on social media that degrades women's reputation would face legal action under Section 354 (E) of the Indian Penal Code. Strict punishment has also been provided for those involved in sexual assault on children.

Those convicted in such cases would face punishment between 10 and 14 years, while in cases with severe crimes, the punishment would go upto lifetime imprisonment. The Andhra Cabinet had also given a nod to extend the imprisonment for such crimes under POCSO Act.

After the Cabinet had passed the bill, ruling YSR Congress Party’s women legislators had tied ‘rakhi’ to the Chief Minister.
