Rahul Gandhi's 'Rape in India' comment row: Here is what politicians have said on rapes in past

The last day of Parliament's Winter Session started and ended in chaos in both the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha as the BJP launched a scathing attack on Congress MP Rahul Gandhi for a comment he made on rape cases in India.

Addressing an election rally in Jharkhand on Thursday, Rahul Gandhi said Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said 'Make in India' but today what we see is "rape in India".

"Narendra Modi ne kaha tha 'Make in India'...kaha than na?...par ab aap jahan bhi dekho...make in India nahi...ab hai rape in India...rape in India...jahan bhi dekho...(Narendra Modi had talked of 'Make in India' but today everywhere we see 'Rape in India')."

#WATCH Rahul Gandhi, Congress in Godda, Jharkhand: Narendra Modi had said 'Make in India' but nowadays wherever you look, it is 'Rape in India'. In Uttar Pradesh Narendra Modi's MLA raped a woman, then she met with an accident but Narendra Modi did not utter a word. (12.12.19) pic.twitter.com/WnXBz8BUBp ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

Attacking the Modi government and the BJP, Rahul Gandhi had said, "Women are being raped in Jharkhand. In Uttar Pradesh, a BJP MLA (Kuldeep Senger) raped a woman. In every state rapes are happening every day. PM Modi had also said 'Beti bachao, beti padhao' (protect girls and educate them), but Modi didn't say whom should the daughters be protected from. Should they be protected from BJP MLAs?"

Taking strong objections to these comments, the BJP came down heavily on the Congress in both the Houses today and demanded an apology from Rahul Gandhi. Defence minister Rajnath Singh said Rahul Gandhi's comments have not only hurt the Lok Sabha but the entire country. "Such members have no moral right to be in the House," he said.

While Rahul Gandhi's comment on rapes in India has triggered a blistering attack from the BJP, three days ago in the Lok Sabha, Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chaudhary had used the same phrase'Rape in India'- in his speech. Back then, the comment didn't trigger a protest.

Speaking on rising crime against women, he said, "Unfortunate that Prime Minister who speaks on everything, is silent on this issue (crime against women). From 'make in India', India is slowly heading towards 'rape in India'."

In the aftermath of the 2012 Nirbhaya gangrape, Narendra Modi (then Chief Minister of Gujarat) had said under the Congress rule Delhi has become India's rape capital.

In 2013, he tweeted, "When you go to vote, think, they (Congress) made my Delhi a rape capital."

Open the news and you will see news of rapes in Delhi. It became the rape capital: Narendra Modi in Karnataka http://t.co/vWaAC0xucN narendramodi_in (@narendramodi_in) February 18, 2014

In another tweet later, he said, "Open the news and you will see news of rapes in Delhi. It became the rape capital."

HERE IS WHAT OUR POLITICIANS HAVE SAID ON RAPE

2 men raping a woman isn't gang rape: KJ George

In 2015, then Karnataka home minister KJ George courted controversy when said rape by two men is not gang rape. KJ George said gang rape is when four or five people are involved.

The National Commission of Women took a suo motu cognisance of the comment and issued him a notice.

Rapes linked to rising population: Mamata Banerjee

In 2013, while responding to the Opposition's charges on rising rape cases in West Bengal, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee had attributed rising population a contributory factor.

"Population in our state as well as in the country is increasing. Do you think that West Bengal has the same population now as it was during the tenure of Bidhan Chandra Roy ?," she had said in response to charges of rape cases increasing under her government.

Boys are boys, they make mistakes: Mulayam Singh Yadav

In 2014, former Union minister and founder of the Samajwadi Party Mulayam Singh Yadav triggered a row with his comment on rapes.

"Boys will be boys, they commit mistakes," was what he had to say on three people who had been held guilty in a gangrape case.

Rape victim is a prostitute: KC George

A seven-time MLA from Kerala, KC George is known for his brazen comments on rapes and sexual harassment. Last year when a nun in Kerala had accused Bishop Franko Mullkal of raping her multiple times, George said the nun who is alleging rape is a prostitute.

"No one has doubt that the nun is a prostitute. Twelve times she enjoyed it and the 13th time it is rape? Why didn't she complain the first time? (sic)," KC Geroge had said.

Rapes will stop if girls are married off at an early age: Om Prakash Chautala

Former Haryana Chief Minister and INLD leader Om Prakash Chautala propounded his own theory on curbing rapes in Haryana, a state notorious for such cases. In 2012, he proclaimed that rape cases will be prevented if girls are married at an early age. He said on this, he agrees with the Khap Panchayat.

"I am with the khaps on this issue. This will protect women," Chautala had said.

ALSO READ | Both Houses of Parliament adjourned amid uproar over Rahul Gandhi's rape remark

ALSO READ | Rahul Gandhi won't say sorry, accuses Modi-Shah of trying to distract from Northeast unrest

ALSO WATCH | Rape remark row: Watch what Rahul Gandhi actually said
