Pulwama Attack: Intelligence issued alert about IEDs a week before assault, say sources

Six days after the alert was issued, the CRPF convoy took for Srinagar from Jammu, when the deadly attack took place.Image: Twitter

Six days after the alert was issued, the CRPF convoy took for Srinagar from Jammu, when the deadly attack took place. The convoy started from Jammu around 3.30 am and was supposed to reach Srinagar before sunset, officials said. The number of personnel travelling back to the Valley was high as there was no movement on the highway for the last two to three days because of bad weather and other administrative reasons, they said. Usually, about 1,000 personnel are part of a convoy but this time it was a total of 2,547 personnel. A road opening party was deployed and the convoy had armoured counter-terror vehicles, officials said. Sources also revealed that it was a revenge attack planned by terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed. #Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad executed #KashmirTerrorAttack to avenge deaths of its chief Maulana Masood Azhar's two nephews: Sources. #CRPF #Pulwama — ABP News (@abpnewstv) February 14, 2019 The Pakistan-based terror outfit executed the suicide attack to avenge deaths of its chief Maulana Masood Azhar's two nephews, sources said. JeM has claimed the responsibility of the attack. Police said the terrorist driving the suicide vehicle was Adil Ahmad from Kakapora in Pulwama who joined the JeM in 2018. "It was a large convoy and about 2,500 personnel were travelling in multiple vehicles. Some shots were also fired at the convoy," CRPF DG R R Bhatnagar was quoted as saying by news agency PTI. Forensic and bomb analysis teams are on the spot. The bus that was the focus of the attack belongs to the 76th battalion of the force and had 39 personnel on board, officials said. CRPF Inspector General (Operations) in the Kashmir Valley Zulfiqar Hasan described it as a "vehicle-bound attack" and said Jammu and Kashmir Police has taken up the investigation.

An alleged major security lapse on the part of authorities has come to light in the Pulwama terror attack case. Intelligence agencies had given out a prior warning about plan of terrorists to use Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in the area, sources said. On February 8, intelligence agencies had issued an alert about an IED attack and had advised forces to sanitise the area properly before occupying their place of deployment. “Before occupying your place of deployment, please sanitise the area properly as there are inputs of use of IEds," the alert had mentioned. “Matter most urgent”, read the last line of the alert note.
