In brief

CEC to inaugurate PGIMER’s academic session

Chandigarh: Sunil Arora, Chief Election Commissioner of India will inaugurate the new academic session of PGIMER on January 7 in Bhargava Auditorium of the institute. He will speak on "The Road Ahead- Opportunities and Challenges''. In the new academic session, nearly 110 students have joined the postgraduate courses of major specialties i.e. MD/MS,DM/M.Ch, PhD and other courses. Since, its inception PGIMER has produced 6000 specialists, 2000 super specialists and a large number of postgraduates in basic and allied sciences.

Kashmiri Pandit food festival at JW Marriott

Chandigarh: Kashmiri Pandit Food Festival will be held from January 5 to 13 at JW Marriott's The Cafe@JW, the all-day dining restaurant of the hotel. “Our patrons are in for a surprise, especially since we are all used to a certain style of curries and cannot think beyond basic ingredients like onion and tomato while making one. As chefs, it was a delight to explore the possibility of flavours and tastes in the Kashmiri Pandit cuisine using the simplest of ingredients and traditional cooking methods,” said Naveen Handa, Executive Chef.

Primero skills to launch training in Chd

Chandigarh: Primero Skills will shortly launch training in Chandigarh and execute the flagship Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) in partnership with Chandigarh Police and National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC). Primero Skills inaugural centre is planned to be located in the police station premises of Sector 26.

Tata Motors’ programme reaches Chandigarh

Chandigarh: Tata Motors is organizing a special customer preview programme- ‘Discover The Harrier’ at the Chandigarh Club on January 5and 6. This preview event will provide a sneak peek to all existing and prospective customers who have been awaiting for the launch of this vehicle. Through this event, Tata Motors will provide all visitors with a chance to experience the Harrier and book the vehicle.

PVR launches its first multiplex in Karnal

Karnal: PVR Cinemas marked its debut in Karnal with the launch of its new multiplex at Harsha K3C Mall. The 3-screen multiplex offers an enhanced in-theatre technology by introducing 3D experience with the comfort of recliners for the first time in the city. With this launch, PVR’s total screen count in Haryana stands at 32 screens in 9 properties augmenting its presence in the Northern region of the country to 216 screens in 52 properties.

‘Aao Karien Haryana Ki Baat' launched

Chandigarh: In a bid to reach out to the voters ahead of 2019 general and assembly polls, Congress Legislative Party leader and MLA from Tosham, Kiran Choudhary has started her own talk show, utilising the social media platforms. The talk show titled ‘# Aao Karein, Haryana_Ki_Baat' will feature Kiran Choudhary addressing queries from all over the state regarding various sectors of public welfare and administration, offering insight on varied persisting issues.

data entry operator held for taking bribe

Chandigarh: Punjab State Vigilance Bureau has nabbed data entry operator red handed for accepting bribe of Rs 3000. A spokesperson said data entry operator Tejinder Kumar posted at Social Security office in Ludhiana was nabbed while accepting bribe of Rs 3,000 from complainant Zarina of Kabir Nagar in Ludhiana.
