Nirbhaya convicts have reduced food intake, undergoing depression: Tihar jail officials

A protest against the grotesque rape incident (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Nirbhaya's mother has demanded that her daughter's killers be brought to justice without delay One of the four accused was moved from Delhi's Mandoli jail to Tihar earlier this week A hangman from Meerut jail in Uttar Pradesh has volunteered to carry out the executions

New Delhi: The four convicts who await the execution of their death sentence for the horrific 2012 Delhi gang-rape case, are going through depression. Officials from within Tihar jail in the national capital have told media outlets that the convicts have reduced their food intake ahead of December 16, the fateful day in 2012 when a 23-year-old paramedical student fell prey to their criminal intentions.

All of the four men are being kept in 8x8 cells and are being closely monitored. According to reports, at least four-five jail officials have been assigned to each convict to ensure that they do not harm themselves or attempt suicide. Their food is also being prepared separately, added a Tihar staffer. This comes days after reports fuelled speculation about the executions.

On Friday, a group of senior officials, including Tihar Director-General Sandeep Goel visited Jail Number-3 where the executions are supposed to take place. Addressing media persons on the same day, Goel said that he is satisfied with the preparations. Rope to be used for the execution of these death sentences has been brought in from Buxar jail in Bihar and the state of Uttar Pradesh has been asked to facilitate two hangmen for this purpose.

The Supreme Court is slated to hear a review petition filed by the lawyer of one of the accused, Akshay Kumar Singh, on December 17. Meanwhile, another accused, Vinay who had filed a mercy plea which was rejected by the Delhi government, Ministry of Home Affairs and forwarded to the President of India, has also withdrawn the same. Parents of the victim have demanded that all four of the remaining accused be brought to task. A fifth accused had committed suicide in Tihar jail in 2013 and the sixth accused, a juvenile, was released on bail after serving time in a correction home.
