Rahul Gandhi has politicised rape for brownie points: Smriti Irani

A remark by Rahul Gandhi during an election rally in Jharkhand led to an uproar in both the Houses of Parliament. Union Cabinet Minister for Textiles and Women & Child Development Smriti Irani registered a complaint with the Election Commission of India (ECI) soon after Rahul Gandhi's remark.

Addressing a poll rally in Jharkhand on Thursday, Rahul Gandhi had said that "Prime Minister Narendra Modi had launched 'Make in India' but nowadays it is 'Rape in India'".

"Narendra Modi had said 'Make in India' but nowadays wherever you look, it is 'Rape in India'. In Uttar Pradesh Narendra Modi's MLA raped a woman, then she met with an accident but Narendra Modi did not utter a word," Rahul Gandhi had said.

Smriti Irani along with Maneka Gandhi, Saroj Pandey and several other woman MPs knocked on ECI's door to register their complaint.

Addressing the media, after meeting Chief Election Commissioner, Smiriti Irani said, "Rahul Gandhi made that comment because he wanted to politicise the issue. We came to ECI to register our compliant against him. We know that he made that derogatory comment because he wants to settle scores with PM Narendra Modi."

"I want to ask, who gave Rahul Gandhi the right to say that 'Make in India' is 'Rape in India'? We have requested ECI to give Rahul Gandhi a befitting response. We are outraged by his behaviour and want him to be punished," Smriti Irani added.

Rahul Gandhi on the other hand, refused to apologise for his remark. Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Friday said that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is trying to divert attention from the Northeast, which is witnessing widespread violence due to the Citizenship Act.

"I have a clip on my phone in which Narendra Modi ji is calling Delhi a 'rape capital', will tweet it so that everyone can see. Just to deflect attention from protests in Northeast, this is being made an issue by the BJP," Rahul told reporters.

Modi should apologise.



1. For burning the North East.



2. For destroying India's economy.



3. For this speech, a clip of which I'm attaching. pic.twitter.com/KgPU8dpmrE Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) December 13, 2019

There was a massive uproar in both Houses of Parliament by BJP legislators who demanded that the Congress leader should tender an apology for terming Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 'Make in India' campaign 'Rape in India' during an election rally.

Union Minister Rajnath Singh said that equating 'Make in India' to rape is hurtful. "People who make such remarks have no moral right to be a member of this House," Rajnath Singh said.
