Pulwama attack: NIA to assist J&K police in forensic evaluation

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 14

In the wake of the dastardly terror attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama, NIA team with suitable forensic component is leaving on Friday morning for Kashmir to assist the J&K Police in forensic evaluation of the scene of crime.

Meanwhile, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh has cancelled his visit to Bihar scheduled for Friday. He is now expected to travel to Kashmir tomorrow, details of which are being worked out.

Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba who was in Thimpu in Bhutan for the secretary level talks also cut short his visit to rush back. Following the attack, the Ministry of Home Affairs is closely monitoring the situation.

In a series of tweets condemning the suicide attack claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), Rajnath Singh wrote, "Today's dastardly attack on crpf in Pulwama (J&K) is extremely painful and disturbing. I bow to each and every CRPF jawan who has sacrificed his life in service to the nation. I pray for the speedy recovery of the injured."

The Home Minister also dialled Jammu and Kashmir governor Satyapal Malik and held conversations with DG, CRPF, and Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba who are apprising him of the situation.

Senior intelligence and CRPF officials are also briefing National Security Adviser Ajit Doval, said sources.

Earlier calling the attack as despicable Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote on twitter, "Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly."

In a pre-recorded chilling video message released by JeM, the alleged suicide bomber Adil Ahmad, reportedly a resident of Pulwama, is seen confessing his plans to carry out the strike while bragging about other attacks perpetrated by the Jaish, including one on the Parliament in 2001 and the Uri and Pathankot strikes.

Jaish remains a banned terrorist group designated by the UN Security Council. However, India-led proposal and supported by majority members to ban the Jaish supremo Masood Azhar continues to be blocked by a veto wielding China. Diplomatic sources told the Tribune that at the moment a fresh attempt in moving the proposal again is unlikely as China will continue to advocate the old argument demanding of terror links traced directly to Azhar and not just JeM.
