Assam protests latest news: Uneasy calm in North East, but protests spread to a few cities elsewhere

CAB stir: Two killed in separate police firing incidents in Assam

Violence in Assam and Tripura over the new citizenship law ebbed on Friday after 72 hours of mayhem on the streets even as new pockets of unrest emerged in Bengal, Delhi, parts of western UP and Kerala.As the shifting sands of the agitation against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, kept the Union government guessing, the All Assam Students' Union (Aasu) appeared to set the tone for more organised and less disruptive protests in Guwahati, where it had all started last Monday.In Delhi, a protest at Jamia Millia Islamia turned violent when students and locals of Jamia Nagar pelted stones at cops after being stopped at a police barricade. Hundreds of people had assembled in the university complex for a march to Parliament. Police lobbed tear gas shells and resorted to lathicharge to control the crowd. About 42 students and locals were detained, and later released, while police sources said 12 cops were injured, two seriously.Another protest at Jantar Mantar, called by Muslim groups led by Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind, was peaceful. “The (citizenship) law violates the pluralistic fabric of the country,” said Jamiat general secretary Mahmood Madani.Bengal witnessed violence at several places, with protesters blocking road and rail traffic, ransacking railway property and attacking the police. In Murshidabad, a mob targeted Beldanga railway station and set a maintenance car ablaze before ransacking the panel room next to the stationmaster’s cabin. They also set the panel room on fire. Another mob stormed the Beldanga police station and attacked officer-in-charge JamalUddin.Protests also took place at Jangipur station while trains were blocked at Basuldanga station in South 24-Parganas. At Kazipara in Howrah, a burning effigy was thrown at a bus packed with passengers. No injuries were reported.At Harinkhola in Hooghly’s Arambagh, burning tyres littered the state highway connecting Arambagh to Kolkata. Protesters clashed with police personnel along the highway and the SDPO’s official vehicle was damaged.In Kolkata, gatherings at Esplanade, Park Circus and Rajabazar caused a traffic gridlock that lasted till late evening. Trouble was reported in Uluberia in the afternoon after protesters blocked NH-6 and GT Road. Around 3.20pm, a 250-strong mob entered Uluberia railway station, ripped out benches from the platform and threw them on the tracks. They also pelted stones at trains, several of which were held up for hours.CM Mamata Banerjee convened an emergency meeting with top officials and sought a detailed report of the situation, particularly violence in Uluberia and Murshidabad.In UP, Muslim organisations took out protest marches after Friday prayers in Saharanpur, Meerut, Bareilly, Muzaffarnagar, Bijnor, Shamli , Baghpat and Aligarh. However, the district administration barred Aligarh Muslim University students from taking out a procession against the new law.All districts under the Meerut zone were on high alert in the light of violence by some youths during protests by Deoband students in Saharanpur two days ago. However, no untoward incident was reported on Friday. One person was arrested for posting inflammatory messages on WhatsApp in Bareilly on Thursday night.The citizenship law figured in Friday khutba (speeches) in many mosques in the northern Kerala. Muslim groups organised protests after prayers in some places, including Malappuram. Meghalaya was the only northeastern state where police had to crack down on protesters, leaving many injured. This happened outside the gate to Raj Bhavan in Shillong, where a one lakh-strong procession had gathered to demand that governor Tathagata Roy immediately give his assent to an ordinance making registration mandatory for all "outsiders" visiting the state.Officials said some in the crowd tried to scale the Raj Bhavan gate, forcing police to fire tear gas shells. A vehicle parked inside the nearby Youth Hostel was set ablaze and the windshield of a fire engine was smashed by the protesters.Indefinite curfew in the East Khasi Hills was, however, eased for 12 hours from 10am on Friday. The ban on mobile internet and messaging services continued.In neighbouring Assam, Aasu's call brought thousands of students, senior citizens, artistes, teachers and professionals to Guwahati's Chandmari playground for a 10-hour hunger strike to kick off a week-long protest schedule, including a gathering of Assamese diaspora in London. The student organisation said there would be no protests at night from now on.“Since certain sections of protesters have taken the law into their own hands, vandalising public and private property, Aasu has decided to call off all protest programmes beyond 5pm. We want to proceed with caution so that mobs or hooligans don't get the chance to resort to vandalism in the name of protest," Aasu president Dipankar Kumar Nath said.Aasu's decision to distance itself from the anger that has erupted on the streets of Guwahati, Dibrugarh and some other places in Assam came less than 24 hours after two youths were killed in police firing on protesters allegedly resorting to vandalism. Indefinite curfew remains in force in Guwahati along with an extended ban on internet, including broadband.After three days of violence, a semblance of normalcy returned to most of Tripura, although Gandacherra in Dhalai and Kanchanpur in North Tripura remained tense during a 48-hour general strike called by a non-tribal forum from Friday morning.Rail and road traffic between Dharamanagar and Sabroom via Agartala resumed with paramilitary escort. But hundreds of passengers travelling to Silchar remained stranded in Agartala, Ambassa, Kumarghat and Dharmanagar.
