Students erupt in anger over gang rape of 20-year-old girl

PATNA: Hundreds of students of various colleges of Patna University hit the streets on Friday blocking Kargil Chowk demanding immediate arresting of the four youths involved in the alleged gang-rape of college girl that took place on December 9. The spontaneous protest crippled traffic around Gandhi Maidan for nearly four hours.The protest started around 11am and continued till after 3pm forcing police to lathi-charge and use water-cannon to disperse the agitating youths. A large number of women from Magadh Mahila College and BN College took part in the protest.Students burned tyres and formed human chain to block the roundabout. The Indo-Nepal Friendship Bus en route to Kathmandu from Bodh Gaya was also stuck for more than an hour. Apart from Kargil Chowk, protest against the gang rape also took place at other locations in the state capital.Akansha, a first-year PG student of philosophy at Darbhanga House said the entire justice system has collapsed. “Apart from this, there is no political, financial or personal independence for woman in the country. We need to become independent in every aspect along with being self-dependent then such incidents won’t happen,” she said.Radheshyam Mishra, a first semester student of MA in philosophy from Patna University, said, “At some point, it seems there is patronage to such accused persons by those who are in power as there are several such accused among them too. Such incidents should be termed as failure of the government.”Another agitating student, Kundan Kumar, said the accused youths should be encountered by police in the same way as the Hyderabad accused who had gang-raped and killed a veterinary doctor. Several students at the spot protesting against the incident echoed his views. Another protestor Ajyesh Kumar, a second-year student of Bihar Institute of Law, said only poor were being encountered by police and no such action ever takes place against the rich and influential accused.
