Mumbai school student colours private part of Class 1 girl inside washroom

The attendant who was in the washroom knowing about the incident (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A minor girl studying at an international school in Mumbai has alleged sexual assault The minor girl is a student of Class 1 The student told her mother that a boy of her school coloured her private part with a red crayon

Mumbai: A minor girl was allegedly sexually assaulted in the washroom of her school on Thursday afternoon. The incident came to light on December 12 after the girl's mother lodged a complaint with the Malvani police. The minor has alleged that a student of her school sexually assaulted her.

The minor girl studies in class 1. When the girl returned home on Thursday, she seemed upset. The girl's mother noticed her daughter's mood and tried to talk to her. It was during her conversation with her mother that the minor opened up about the incident.

The minor told her mother that a boy from her school came into the washroom after her and coloured on her private part with a red crayon. The attendant who was in the washroom denied knowing about the incident.

A police officer familiar with the case told the Times of India that they are checking the CCTV footage to identify the accused. The minor's mother said, "My daughter returned home from school and was quiet. This raised suspicion. I repeatedly inquired with her and finally, she broke and told that a boy from the school sexually harassed her with a crayon colour stick in the toilet.

After the minor girl's mother approached the police, a team of cops rushed to the school and recorded the statements of the managerial staff. The police are yet to confirm if the offence was made by a school student or a person who is not part of the institution. The police have registered a case under Section 376 (rape) and under other provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

An official working with the international school said that child safety is their priority. Speaking on the incident, the official said, "The police are stationed in school and has the full cooperation of the school."
