BJP demands apology from Rahul for his ‘rape remarks’

New Delhi: The BJP on Friday launched a no-holds-barred attack, both inside and outside Parliament, against Congress leader Rahul Gandhi over his rape remarks and demanded an apology from Gandhi, who refused to do so, and instead asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi to tender an apology for calling Delhi a “rape capital” under the UPA government.

The BJP disrupted proceedings in Rajya Sabha as well as in Lok Sabha, where the party protest, led by party’s women MPs who assembled together just near the Well to attack Gandhi, derailed the scheduled business and forced Speaker Om Birla to adjourn the proceedings twice on the last day of the Winter Session.

Sticking to his guns, Gandhi told reporters outside Parliament, “as far as their (BJP’s) demand for apologising (is concerned), I am never going to apologise to them.” The Congress leader also said he has a video clip of Narendra Modi in his phone in which he is seen calling Delhi the ‘rape capital’ which he will post on Twitter for the whole country to see, and demanded Modi should apologise.

Later, Union minister Smriti Irani, who also led the attack against Gandhi in Lok Sabha, along with other BJP women parliamentarians petitioned the Election Commission demanding “severest action possible” against him, alleging that he has used rape incidents as a “political tool” to settle scores with Prime Minister Modi.

Under the BJP’s vociferous attack, the Congress leader alleged that the issue was being blown up only to divert the attention of the public from the country-wide protests over the Citizenship Amendment law.

Referring to his Jharkhand speech, Gandhi asserted “I had said that Narendra Modi had talked about ‘Make in India’ and we thought we would see ‘Make in India’ in all the newspapers. But, when we read newspapers we only see ‘rape in India’ everywhere. There is no BJP-ruled state where rapes are not happening against women. In Unnao, a BJP MLA committed rape against a woman, and also got an accident done of the victim’s car, but Narendra Modi did not utter a single word and neither took any action.”

“What has happened is that Narendra Modi makes use of violence and spreads it and today there is violence in the entire country. there is violence against women, there is violence in the North East and in Kashmir, and there is violence in the entire country,” he further alleged.

He said the main issue today is that “the BJP, Narendra Modi and Amit Shah have burnt the entire North East and this is a tactic used to divert attention” by raising his rape remarks.

“Modi should apologise. For burning the North East. For destroying India’s economy. For this speech, a clip of which I’m attaching,” Gandhi later tweeted.

Gandhi also said India’s biggest strength was its economy and claimed that Raghuram Rajan (former RBI governor) during a meeting told him that no one talks about India or Indian economy any longer in the US or Europe.

“And, when India is talked about it is about atrocities, division and violence. They have ruined the entire reputation of our country and this is what I talked about in my speech yesterday,” he said.

Gandhi’s ‘rape in India’ barb at the Modi government triggered furious reactions from senior BJP leaders and Union ministers, including Rajnath Singh who said leaders like him have no “moral right” to be in Parliament. (PTI)
