'Some women don't resist going out with men', Delhi cop blames women for getting raped

The on-duty cop said that women should only party with their families and relatives.

Key Highlights The on-duty cop gave a list of rules that women should follow to prevent instances of rape Deployed in Delhi's Greater Kailash, the cop said that women should only go out for parties with their families and relatives The cop said, "If they want to party, it should be done with their family and relatives. Women should not party with their friends because one can't be sure about the behaviour of friends

New Delhi: In the last month, there has been a massive outrage in the country. With harrowing rape cases being reported from several parts of the country, the citizens live in worry as the safety of their betis stands compromised. From Nribhaya's gang-rape in 2012 to the Cyberabad gang-rape case, there have been ample incidents in the country to prove that Indian women are not safe.

While on one side, rape survivors and victims rely on law and order for justice, a large part of the responsibility falls on the police personnel of the country. In several cases, the victims' families have accused the police of being indifferent and of not acting promptly on their complaints.

Mirror Now performed a sting operation on the cops deployed in the country and the revelations are appalling.

WATCH:

In 2012, the gang-rape of a medical student in a bus took place in the national capital. Citizens from across the country came forward and staged protests, demanding stringent punishment for offenders and a more favourable environment for women. It was after this incident that Delhi came to be known as one of the most unsafe places for women.

A cop deployed in the Greater Kailash area of Delhi said, "Some women and girls don't hesitate in going out with men. There are a lot of intoxicants in use these days. Some precaution should be exercised. Women should know that they also have families. They should return home during specified times instead of going out in odd hours with their friends. "

Ready with a decided list of rules, the cop said, "If they want to party, it should be done with their family and relatives. Women should not party with their friends because one can't be sure about the behaviour of friends. Please don't mind what I am saying but friends are of different kinds. Some are good friends while others are opportunists. "

A key responsibility area for the police is the safety of women. However, the state of affairs in the national capital is worse than expected. With misogynist judgement shrouding their minds, cops are making statements that raise questions on the social and moral fabric of all Indians.
