Man gets 14-year rigorous imprisonment for raping his 11-year-old cousin

Representative image

LUDHIANA: A local court has sentenced a man to 14 years of rigorous imprisonment for raping his 11-year-old cousin.

The court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma also imposed a fine of Rs 1 lakh on the convict. In case of default in fine payment, the convict will have to undergo another year of rigorous imprisonment. The court said of the fine amount, Rs 80,000 would be paid to the survivor as compensation.

Police had booked the accused under sections 376 (rape) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC on September 11, 2016.

The survivor’s mother had told the police that she had gone to a market and her daughter was alone at home on September 7, 2016. “When I returned home after about half-an-hour, my daughter was crying. She did not say anything even as I asked her the reason many a time. Four days later, she told me that her cousin had raped her that day and that he had been doing so for the past five months. She did not speak about it as he had threatened to kill us,” her mother had said in her police complaint.

After registering an FIR, the police arrested the accused.

During the case trial, the accused pleaded innocence.

Additional public prosecutor for state S S Haidar sought strict punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence.

Stressing delay in registration of FIR, the defence counsel said the date of occurrence of the alleged incident was September 7, 2016, and the FIR was registered on September 11, 2016. “On account of a property dispute, the prosecutrix’s parents tried to negotiate with the accused’s family and when it did not work out, they got an FIR registered,” defence counsel argued.

Turning down the contention, the court observed, “Consensus of judicial opinion is on the side that there cannot be any ritualistic formula through which inference on either side can be drawn by delay in registration of FIR. The argument raised by defence regarding family relations between prosecutrix and accused is itself an answer regarding delay in registration of FIR. Child of 11 years of age cannot be considered to be competent and bold enough to report about such matter immediately.”

The court added, “In the natural course of events, child has to first understand that a wrongful act has been done and thereafter muster courage by overcoming threats given by the accused to disclose the occurrence to her parents or any other family members.”

The court did not find weight in the accused’s plea of false implication. “The plea of false implication of accused, who is cousin of prosecutrix, has fallen flat from the side of defence. Totality of the evidence available on the record makes it highly improbable that owing to allegation of a dispute regarding which there is no evidence, parents of a young child would let her undergo the turmoil and trauma of being a victim of sexual assault,” it held.

“When such heinous offences occur, the victim looks upon court as saviour of her rights. Court would be failing in its duty if the offenders who display such unscrupulous conduct are shown any leniency,” the court added.

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


