Telangana: Govt school teacher molests students on pretext of providing extra-study material

The student's family asked the girl to talk to them after they observed a change in her behaviour (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A social studies teacher in Telangana's Neredmet allegedly molested his students The accused R Jagadeeshwar was arrested on Friday The accused allegedly asked the student to meet him on the pretext of discussing issues and getting extra-study material

Secunderabad: A school teacher in Telangana's Neredmet has been accused of molesting and inappropriately touching his girl students. The accused has been identified as R Jagadeeshwar. He was arrested on Friday. Jagadeshwar teaches social studies at a government school.

Three Class 8 students have accused Jagadeeshwar of misbehaving with them on the pretext of giving them extra-study material. One of the students had stopped eating as she was upset over the accused's behaviour.

The student's family asked the girl to talk to them after they observed a change in her behaviour. The girl narrated her ordeal to her parents on Thursday and said that the accused had been harassing her for the past three months. After the girl opened up, other students of her class also came forth with similar allegations.

A Narsimha Swamy, Neredmet inspector told the Times of India, "We had organised a Legal Aid Camp in the school, where a local magistrate explained to children about child abuse. When the girls came to lodge a complaint, they said they realised after the programme that this behaviour was sexual harassment. "

The girls told the police that the accused asked them to meet him personally. He would ask the students to meet him to discuss class-related issues or for giving them additional study material. While on one side, the student accused the teacher of harassing them, he defended himself by saying that he was trying to be friendly with them.

After the allegations surfaced, the police booked the teacher under section 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and relevant provisions of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Jagadeeshwar has been sent to judicial custody.
