Pune: 15-year-old girl smothered to death after sexual assault by step-father; accused on the run

The accused was alcoholic and addicted to gambling and thus could not contribute to the monthly rental of the house. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man allegedly rapes, kills step-daughter in Pune Accused autorickshaw driver absconding since girl's murder Doctors confirm girl died of asphyxia caused by smothering

Pune: In a shocking incident, a 15-year-old girl was allegedly smothered to death by her step-father in Dapodi area of Pune district in Maharashtra on Thursday. The police have launched a manhunt to arrest the accused, a 45-year-old autorickshaw driver.

The police have also invoked rape charges against the accused after doctors indicated sexual assault on the minor. The incident took place on Thursday when the victim was alone at home. Her mother, who works as domestic help, had gone to work and the elder sister was in school.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the mother of the victim married the accused seven years ago. The victim was the second daughter of the woman from her first marriage. The woman's first husband had a speech and hearing impairment and accepted her second marriage to the autorickshaw driver.

The incident came to light when the elder sister of the victim returned home from college and found the doors of the house locked from inside. The girl immediately called her mother to the spot and both forced open the gates and found the girl lying on the floor. The woman had earlier warned the accused to keep away from her daughters. Whether she meant sexual or physical assault by her husband is not yet clear.

The victim, a class 8 student, suffered injuries on her nose and face. The police believe she was hit on the face before being smothered to death. According to doctors at the Yashwantrao Chavan Memorial Hospital in Pimpri, the girl died of asphyxia caused by smothering.

"On the day of the incident, the accused fought with the victim's mother in the morning and returned home at 4 pm when the minor girl was alone at home. The accused used to frequently beat up girls and their mother and suspected that the girls were having affairs with men," said Assistant Police Inspector (ASI) Gajanan Bansode of Bhosari police station.

According to police, the accused was an alcoholic and addicted to gambling and thus could not contribute to the monthly rental of the house. The victim's body has been sent for post-mortem.




