CAA fire rages on, student protest over Citizenship bill continues at Jamia Millia Islamia

The protest turned violent after students along with locals started pelting stones at the police | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The protesters left late in the night but the situation remained tense with heavy police deployment in the area Before the students' march, teachers and other non-teaching staff organized a protest in the campus Delhi Police said that students, locals broke barricades and indulged in stone-pelting at police personnel

New Delhi: Students of Jamia Millia Islamia called for a university lockdown on Saturday and also planned to boycott the exams to protest against CAB. This comes after Friday's violence in which students along with locals clashed with the police during their march to the Parliament House.

After taking stock of the situation all semester exams scheduled for today were postponed.

According to a statement issued by Jamia administration, all exams have been postponed and new dates will be announced in due course of time.

"Winter vacation declared from 16th December 2019 to 5th January 2020. University to open on 6th January 2020," the statement read.

Yesterday, 42 protesters were detained and subsequently released by Delhi Police. The protest turned violent after students along with locals started pelting stones at the police. The police had to use tear gas and force to disperse the agitators. However, 12 police personnel were injured while two of them sustained serious injuries and are currently under observation in ICU.

Speaking to the media a senior police officer said that they tried to convince the protesters to protest peacefully at the university requesting them to not march towards New Delhi area. However, they got agitated and aggressively confronted the police personnel.

The officer further said that they broke barricades and indulged in stone-pelting at police personnel, which also caused damage to vehicles parked there.

Police also said that the protest was scheduled at Jantar Mantar, however, the number of protestors exceeded beyond the permissible number of 1,000.

“They were coming from different parts of the city to gather at Jantar Mantar and were advised to not proceed to Jantar Mantar,” PTI quoted police official as saying.

The protesters left late in the night but the situation remained tense with heavy police deployment in the area.

Before the students' March, teachers and other non-teaching staff organized a protest in the campus against CAB calling it 'unconstitutional'.
