Violence erupts in West Bengal over new citizenship law

Arson and violent protest erupted in parts of West Bengal protesting India’s new citizenship law. Photo taken from Times of India

Arson and violent protest erupted in parts of West Bengal today for the second consecutive day of the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Some shops, a ticket counter at a railway station and 15 buses were set ablaze during the protest against India's new citizenship law, reports our New Delhi correspondent.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and Governor Jagdeep Dhankhar appealed for peace and warned those indulged in the violence over the law.

A portion of the railway station complex was set on fire in Sankhrail by protesters who continued protest blocking roads and disrupting rail services in different parts of the state.

Hundreds of people blocked roads in and around Sankrail railway station this morning, our correspondent reports quoting police sources.

"Later in the afternoon, they entered the station complex and set the ticket counter on fire. When RPF and railway personnel tried to stop them, they were beaten up by the protesters," a Railway Protection Force official said.

Protesters squatted on the railway tracks at Poradanga, Jangipur and Farakka stations in Murshidabad district and Bauria and Nalpur stations disrupting rail services in Howrah district.

Fifteen buses were set on fire by the protestors after they forced out the passengers.

The National Highway 34, which connects the north and south Bengal, was blocked in Murshidabad bordering Bangladesh. Several roads in the district were also blocked due to the protest.

As the violence raged, Mamata tweeted, "Don't block road and rail. Harassment of the ordinary public will not be tolerated. Those creating trouble and taking law into their own hands will not be spared. Those setting fire to buses, pelting trains and damaging public property will face action."

Besides, West Bengal Governor Dhankar said "Distressed and pained at events unfolding in the State. Chief Minister as per oath has to 'bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India' and I as Governor will 'to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law."
