Hyderabad man rapes mother-in-law under influence of alcohol, apologises to wife later

The incident took place at the accused's home in Hyderabad (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police have booked the man under Section 376 of the IPC The woman approached police with a complaint in this regard on Friday My daughter was at work when the incident took place, said the complainant

Hyderabad: A man, aged 34, has been booked in Telangana for allegedly raping his mother-in-law. The accused was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the incident on the night of November 13, said police. Most recent inputs suggest that the complaint is being probed and the accused is yet to be placed under arrest.

In her complaint to the police on Friday, the 48-year-old woman said that she has been living with her daughter and son-in-law for a couple of years now. The daughter had left for work on the night of November 13 when the son-in-law entered my room after consuming alcohol, she added. The complainant further alleged that he raped her.

A case under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which corresponds to punishment for rape was registered against the accused on the basis of the survivor's complaint. According to a report by Indian Express, the accused apologised to his wife for the incident but it is still unclear whether the family has been able to forgive him for the heinous crime.

Another instance of violent sexual crime was reported from Hyderabad today where police arrested two brothers for abducting and sexually assaulting an 18-year-old girl. The matter was brought to the attention of the police by family members of the girl who lodged a missing person complaint in this regard on December 8. The prime accused is an autorickshaw driver who abducted the girl and her sister on the pretext of dropping them off at their grandmother's.

However, he took both of them to a lodge in Nampally where he raped the elder sister as the younger one slept. The next day, he dropped the girls near the Falaknuma railway station from where they managed to contact a relative who lived nearby and reported the matter to the police.
