Jamia says those who clashed with police were outsiders, calls off university 'lockdown'

Jamia says those who clashed with police were outsiders, calls off university 'lockdown' | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Administration of Jamia Millia Islamia calls out university 'lockdown' against newly-enacted citizenship law Jamia students, police clashed on Friday leaving 12 police personnel injured out of which 2 had to be admitted to ICU JNU postponed all exams and declared winter vacations from December 16, 2019, to January 5, 2020

New Delhi: A day after 12 police personnel were injured during the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests by Delhi-based Jamia Millia Islamia University, the administration of varsity said those who clashed with police were outsiders.

The varsity also called off the university ‘lockdown’ on Saturday with teachers, alumni and students forming a coordination panel to peacefully conduct protests against new citizenship law.

The university also postponed all exams that were scheduled to begin from Saturday. After taking stock of the situation all semester exams scheduled for today were postponed.

"All examinations have been postponed. New dates to be announced in due course of time. Winter vacation declared from December 16, 2019, to January 5, 2020. University to open on 6th January 2020," a release from the university said.

Hundreds of students from the varsity clashed with the police on Friday and then again earlier today. The students called for a lockdown of the university earlier today and called upon fellow students to boycott the exams.

As many as 42 students were detained and then released by the police on Friday. As protests flared up again on Saturday after the police prevented the students from conducting a protest march to Parliament House. The police detained 50 students as the violence spiralled out of control and placed restrictions on large gatherings in the area.

The police fired tear gas shells and baton-charged the students in a bid to disperse the agitating students. The video of the incident shows police lathi-charging those who attempted to climb over barricades installed to limit their movement.

As many as 12 cops were injured including two who were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of a Delhi hospital after university students clashed with the police on Friday.

Violence occurred at the Jamia Millia University where students pelted stones and clashed with the police against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019.
