Alert biker saves woman from rapists’ clutches

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

RAJKOT: If it was not for one man’s alertness , this would have another report of rape and sexual abuse of woman. However, the exemplary courage and determination shown by Shrikant Vyas while saving a woman with learning difficulties from the clutches of her potential rapists near Anand Bangalow Chowk in Rajkot on Friday night will help millions of Indian women pin their hopes of a better India.Police said Vyas was going on his two-wheeler when he heard a woman’s cries from inside a moving autorickshaw. Vyas followed his instincts and showed enough daredevilry by overtaking the speeding auto, forcing it to stop, fighting off the two occupants of the rickshaw and then rescuing the woman, who turns out to be mentally unstable too.“Vyas sped up and overtook the rickshaw. He parked his vehicle right in the path of the auto forcing it to come to a halt. He then asked the driver and his accomplice why the woman inside the auto was crying and where were they taking her. The two men, whose identities are yet to be ascertained, suddenly attacked him. Startled at this, Vyas fought back and was successful in driving them off from the spot,” said an official from Abhyam women’s helpline.The woman then told Vyas that she was molested by the driver and his aide and also that she was hungry. Vyas took her to a roadside eatery and offered her snacks and also called up the 181 Abhyam helplines.The Abhyam official further said that prima facie it appears like the rickshaw driver and his accomplice had all wrong intentions. “They may have kidnapped the woman in their rickshaw with the intention of rape. Luckily, the woman gave us her address and we could unite her with her family members who were searching for her,” the official added.Meanwhile, the police have booked the rickshaw driver and his aide and launched a manhunt for them.
