Three women murdered

Two of them killed over 'family feud', the other by robbers

Two women were murdered in separate incidents in Cumilla and Dinajpur yesterday.

Besides, another woman was killed in Munshiganj on Thursday night.

The victim in Cumilla is 70-year-old Morsheda Begum, in Dinajpur 40-year-old Joynab Begum, and in Munshiganj 60-year-old Aleya Begum.

A robbery gang entered Morsheda's house by breaking the window grill and strangled her to death, said Sirajul Islam Sarker, chairman of Elahabad union parishad in Munshiganj's Debidwar upazila.

Morsheda's hand and legs were tied with towel and scotch tapes when her body was found, the chairman said.

The body was recovered around 10:00am and sent to Comilla Medical College morgue for autopsy, said Sarker Abdullah Al Mamun, inspector (investigation) of Debidwar Police Station.

A case was filed with Debidwar Police Station over the incident.

Meanwhile, police recovered the slit-throat body of Joynab around 11:30am from Jalalpur village of Dinajpur Sadar.

The body was sent to M Abdur Rahim Medical College morgue for autopsy, said Bazlur Rashid, inspector of Dinajpur Sadar Police Station.

A bloodstained knife was also recovered from the spot, he added.

The inspector said they were suspecting Joynab was killed by her husband over family dispute. Police are conducting drives to arrest her husband, he added.

In Munshiganj, Aleya was hacked to death by some unidentified criminals at East Bejgaon village in Sreenagar upazila on Thursday night.

According to locals, Aleya was attacked when her family members were out of home to attend a marriage ceremony of a neighbour.

Returning home, Aleya's son Didar found her bloodstained body and took her to upazila health complex where doctors declared her dead, said police.

Mohammad Younus Ali, officer-in-charge of Sreenagar Police Station, said the victim's family claimed she was killed over land dispute.

The victim's elder son Anowar filed a case with Sreenagar Police Station against four people including his uncle and cousins, the OC said.

Police already arrested one of Aleya's relatives -- Asharful Alam -- and are investigating the incident, he added.
