18-year-old girl set ablaze in Uttar Pradesh was raped by uncle

When the girl raised an alarm, the accused allegedly poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Saturday, a 18-year-old girl was raped by her uncle in Allahabad The 22-year-old accused allegedly set the teenager ablaze after she screamed for help The police are yet to arrest the accused

Allahabad: According to a recent development, the 18-year-old girl who was set ablaze in Allahabad was allegedly raped by her uncle. The accused allegedly set the girl ablaze after raping her. The incident took place on Saturday afternoon in the Ubhipur village of Fatehpur. The survivor is 18-years-old.

Prashant Verma, superintendent of police, Fatehpur said that the survivor was alone at home when the incident took place. The 22-year-old accused came to the survivor's house and allegedly raped her.

When the girl raised an alarm, the accused allegedly poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze. According to the Times of India's report, the teenaged girl has been admitted to the Hallet Hospital in Kanpur where she is undergoing treatment for her 90 per cent burn injuries. The accused is on the run.

Three teams have been formed to nab the accused. The cops are conducting raids at several places to locate the accused.

Unnao gang-rape survivor set ablaze by accused

This incident came to light days after a gang-rape survivor from Unnao suffered a cardiac arrest and passed away. The survivor died at the Safdarjung Hospital where treatment was being administered to her. The 23-year-old survivor was set ablaze by five men and she suffered 90 per cent burn injuries.

In March 2018, the woman was raped by five men. The five men allegedly wanted the survivor to stay mum about the incident. The accused lost their temper after the survivor took the decision of reporting the crime and fighting for justice. When the survivor was on her way to a court in Rae Bareilly, the accused beat her up with sticks, stabbed her and set her ablaze.

The survivor was rescued by passersby after flames engulfed her. She was taken to the Unnao Civil Hospital where preliminary treatment was administered to her. After her condition worsened, the survivor was airlifted to Safdarjung Hospital. The survivor suffered a cardiac arrest and even after multiple attempts of resurrection, she passed away.
