On Hunger Strike, DCW Chief Swati Maliwal's Health Deteriorates, Shifted To Hospital

New Delhi:

The health of Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal on Sunday deteriorated following which she was shifted to the nearby Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital. Maliwal’s who has lost around 7-kg weight so far, fell unconscious on Sunday. The DCW chief is on a hunger strike for over 10 days to demand capital punishment for rapists.

On Saturday, Maliwal wrote to Prime Minister Narendra Modi demanding immediate implementation of Disha Bill in the entire country, which mandates disposal of cases of atrocities against women within 21 days and handing out the death penalty.

Delhi: Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) Chief, Swati Maliwal who is on a hunger strike demanding death penalty for convicts in rape cases within 6 months, taken to LNJP hospital after she falls unconscious. pic.twitter.com/WUvc5yT0zI — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

The Delhi Commission for Women chief also expressed sadness over the “indifferent attitude” of the central government till date over the issue of women’s safety.

“If the Andhra Government can take this historic decision (of passing Disha Bill), why can’t the Central Government show the same urgency and concern. I fervently appeal to you to immediately enact the Disha Bill for the entire country,” Maliwal said.

"Today is 12th day of my indefinite fast. I wrote to you on 1st day, seeking immediate action. I'm deeply saddened to note that despite this alarming situation and demands from across the country, there has been hardly any response from you to these appeals," letter further reads.

On Friday, the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly passed the bill.

The proposed new law has been named the ‘Andhra Pradesh Disha Act Criminal Law (AP Amendment) Act, 2019 as a tribute to the veterinary doctor who was raped and murdered recently in neighbouring Telangana.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
