'Maulvi' arrested in Bengaluru for sexually assaulting domestic help

The victim girl is said to be the domestic help of the accused. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights A cleric from Bihar was arrested in Bengaluru over allegations of sexual and physical assault The accused has been identified as Rahabare Islam Pravaz Rahabare allegedly sexually assaulted his domestic help and even confined her

Bengaluru: A Muslim cleric accused of sexual assault was arrested in Bengaluru, the police said on Sunday. The accused Rahabare Islam Pravaz is a native of Bihar. Allegedly, the victim was physically and sexually assaulted by the accused.

Pravaz has also been accused of burning the victim with a hot iron rod. The accused allegedly burnt the victim whenever she did refused to listen to him. The victim girl is said to be the domestic help of the accused.

According to the FIR, the domestic help of the accused was confined to his residence. The accused also refused to let the victim consult a doctor for her burn injuries. Pravaz had also forced the girl to terminate all communication with her family.

The 20-year-old victim has been taken to a private hospital where treatment is being administered to her. As per the report of the victim's medical examination states that she has six burn marks on her body.

Pravaz is married to a woman from Bihar and the couple has two sons. A police officer said, "He had brought the woman to Bengaluru in 2016 on the promise of providing her with a handsome salary and accommodation. But soon, her ordeal began and she was threatened. " The police suspect that Pravaz's wife is aware of his abusive behaviour.

Cleric sexually exploits minor girl in Aligarh madrassa

This is not the first instance where an advocate of religious beliefs has been involved in a sexual abuse case. In February this year, a Muslim cleric was arrested in Aligarh for sexually exploiting his seven-year-old girl student. The accused was identified as Mohd Shariq. Shariq used to teach the Quran-e-Sharif at a madrasa in Kela Nagar area of Aligarh.

The accused had allegedly been sexually exploiting his student at the madrassa. Tired of being abused, the minor girl opened up to her parents and narrated her ordeal to them. The girl's parents lodged a complaint against Shariq at the Kawarsi police station, following which, he was arrested.


