Internal battles in Google rise over transparency vows

Each morning, workers at Google get an internal newsletter called the “Daily Insider”. Kent Walker, Google’s top lawyer, set off a firestorm when he argued in the November 14 edition that the 21-year old company had outgrown its policy of allowing workers to access nearly any internal document. “When we were smaller, we all worked as one team, on one product, and everyone understood how business decisions were made,” Walker wrote. “It’s harder to give a company of over 1,00,000 people the full context on everything.”Many large companies have policies restricting access to sensitive information to a “need-to-know” basis. But in some segments of Google’s workforce, the reaction to Walker’s argument was immediate and harsh. On an internal messaging forum, one staffer described the data policy as “a total collapse of Google culture”. An engineering manager posted an lengthy attack on Walker’s note, which he called “arrogant and infantilising”. “The need-to-know policy denies us a form of trust and respect,” the manager wrote.The complaining also spilled into direct action. A group of Google programmers created a tool that allowed employees to choose to alert Walker with an automated email every time they opened any document at all, according to two people with knowledge of the matter. The deluge of notifications was meant as a protest to what they saw as Walker’s insistence on controlling the minutiae of their professional lives.“When it comes to data security policies, we’ve never intended to prevent employees from sharing technical learnings... and we are not limiting anyone’s ability to raise concerns or debate the company’s activities,” a Google spokeswoman said. “These activities need to be done in line with our policies on data security.” Walker’s critics say his November 14 email is part of a broader erosion of one of Google’s most distinctive traits — its extreme internal transparency. The conflict comes as Google is changing. On December 3, Sundar Pichai became the head of Alphabet, Google’s parent company. He has at times supported internal activism. He spoke at an employee protest against the Trump administration’s immigration policies and apologised to employees for Google’s track record on sexual harassment.
