Sexual assault on minor lands man behind bars for 7 yrs

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a man to seven years rigorous imprisonment for sexually assaulting an eight-year-old girl.

The accused who was known to the girl’s family had carried out the crime after taking her to an isolated place on the pretext of buying her a banana.

The court of additional sessions judge Rashmi Sharma also imposed a fine of Rs 60,000 on the convict and said that in case the convict fails pay up, he will have to undergo rigorous imprisonment for another six months. The court said Rs 50,000 of the fine would be given to the girl as compensation.

The case was registered against the 23-year-old construction worker on August 27, 2018, under Section 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act and 354-A (sexual harassment) of IPC. Cops had later added Section 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty).

Prosecution had said the girl’s father, who was a mason, and the convict had been working together for the past two months before the crime.

The youth used to visit his house and had dinner at his place often. On the day when the incident occured, the youth had taken his daughter to buy her a banana. The complainant however found him sexually assaulting his daughter after partially removing her clothes. After seeing him, the accused fled the spot.

The police had later arrested the accused and filed a chargesheet in the court.

During trial, the youth had pleaded false implication, but failed to provide any evidence in his defence. The defence counsel had argued that in the complaint given to the police, no place of occurrence was mentioned. He had also claimed that there were material discrepancies regarding the manner in which the youth had claimed to have taken away the girl and committed the crime.

The court however turned down the arguments and observed that undue importance cannot be attached to the omissions, contradiction and discrepancies which do not get to the heart of the matter and shake the basic version of the prosecution witnesses.

“The court has to consider the fact that the mental capabilities of a human being cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb all the details and some hits and omissions are bound to occur. So long as they do not affect the core of prosecution case, they shall not prompt the court to reject the evidence in entirety,” the court remarked.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
