Tamil Nadu: Man hurls acid at police personnel after killing 69-year-old woman, locals stone him to death

At around 8 pm on Friday, Samuel went to Dhanammal's residence to get the girls (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights On Friday night, locals in a Namakkal village stoned a man to death in front of the police Locals attacked the man after he allegedly murdered a 69-year-old The man had been forcing the deceased woman to push his granddaughters into prostitution

Namakkal: A man with a criminal history was stoned to death in Namakkal district of Tamil Nadu on Friday night allegedly after he murdered an elderly woman. The man was said to be pestering the deceased woman to force her granddaughters into flesh trade.

The man was identified as Samuel. Samuel was a native of Dharmapuri. He had over 15 cases registered against him. Samuel was in a relationship with R Vijayalakshmi.

Vijayalakshmi's three daughters shifted to their grandmother's house after she (Vijayalakshmi) tried to push them into prostitution. Two of Vijayalakshmi's daughters are in school while one of them is in college. The deceased grandmother has been identified as Dhanammal.

Around 8 pm on Friday, Samuel went to Dhanammal's house to get the girls. The 41-year-old history-sheeter allegedly attacked Dhanammal with a blade and knife when she refused to let go of her granddaughters. According to a report in TheTimes of India, Dhanammal's painful cries were heard by her neighbours who rushed to her house and tried to help her.

Samuel managed to threaten the woman's neighbours with a sickle. Unable to help the 69-year-old woman, the neighbours informed Puduchatram police. The cops reached the spot at the earliest and opened fire at Samuel. The bullet, however, got stuck in the barrel of the pistol and gave Samuel a window to attack the police.

Samuel then threw acid at the police. Two sub-inspectors Muruganandham and Karthikeyan were injured. When the police opened fire at the history-sheeter, he hacked Dhanammal to death. Agitated locals then pelted stones at the accused and injured him on the head.

Samuel collapsed after the locals continued to attack him, and was rushed to the Rasipuram Government Hospital. Samuel was unresponsive to treatment and eventually succumbed to his injuries. Dhanammal's body was taken for post-mortem and a case has been registered in relation to the incident.
