Ayodhya priest announces Rs 1 lakh 'reward' to anyone who kills rape accused

Raju Das, who is a priest at Hanuman Gari Temple, has announced Rs 1 lakh reward for anyone killing a rape accused. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Ayodhya priest announces RS 1 lakh cash reward for killing rape accused Raju Das, who announced the reward, is a priest at Hanuman Gari Temple in Ayodhya Priest also announced 'help' to family members of any cop who kills a rape accused

Ayodhya: As some people began to lose faith in police and judiciary for justice in rape cases, many khap type courts and individuals have started to encourage extra-judicial killing in such cases.

In the latest shocking incident, a priest in Ayodhya has said he will give Rs 1 lakh cash 'reward' to anyone who will kill an accused in any rape case.

According to a report in Indian Express, Raju Das, who is a priest at Hanuman Gari Temple, has announced Rs 1 lakh reward for anyone killing a rape accused.

The priest also reportedly said that if a cop kills the accused in a sexual assault case, then he will extend the help to family members of the policeman.

The priest said that the purpose behind the announcement is to create awareness among people that accused of heinous crimes like rape should not be spared.

"Incidents of crimes like rape are happening frequently against women and the accused are from among us. This has everything to do with the mindset. And such crimes are also perpetrated against children. Until the society, is made aware, such crimes won't stop," the report quoted Raju Das as saying.

Meanwhile, police are yet to take any action on the violent utterances of the priest.

Ayodhya Circle Officer Amar Singh said he is not aware of such a statement by the priest. "We will take cognisance of the remarks and verify them if they are made from a public platform," said Singh.

In similar utterances, a Shiv Sena leader in Mumbai announced a Rs 1 cr reward for beheading three people who were arrested for allegedly killing Hindu Mahasabha Kamlesh Tiwari in Lucknow.

In a video statement, Shiv Sena leader Arun Pathak said he will give Rs 1 cr reward to anyone who will behead the accused in Kamlesh Tiwari case
