Subramanian Swamy on Rahul’s ‘Savarkar’ jibe: Congress making easy for BJP to be dismissive

Firebrand BJP leader Subramanian Swamy said he was not surprised that Rahul Gandhi thinks rape is something which can be trifled with.

Firebrand BJP leader Subramanian Swamy hit back at Congress leader Rahul Gandhi for his Savarkar remark. Swamy said that Mahatma Gandhi himself paid tributes to Savarkar and held talks with him on how to achieve freedom.

“(Mahatma) Gandhi himself paid tribute to Savarkar he went and had a discussion with him on how to achieve freedom. Their paths diverged when they propagated but they both rose… Indira Gandhi issued a stamp in honour of Savarkar,” he said.

“So, these people don’t know even their own tradition. Sonia Gandhi is actually an Italian transplant here and she has never blended with the culture of this country,” the Rajya Sabha MP added.

At the ‘Bharat Bachao’ rally in Delhi yesterday, Rahul said he would not apologise for speaking the truth as he turned down his political opponents’ demand to tender an apology for his ‘rape in India’ remark.

“The BJP asked me to apologise. My name is not Rahul Savarkar, it is Rahul Gandhi, and I will never apologise for speaking the truth,” he said. He was apparently referring to the allegation against Veer Savarkar that he tendered apology to the British for securing early release from the Cellular Jail in Andaman during the freedom struggle.

Watch: Subramanian Swamy speaks



Rahul courted controversy at an election rally in Jharkhand when he said that PM Narendra Modi has turned Centre’s ambitious ‘Make in India’ into ‘rape in India’. The BJP raised the issue in the Parliament as well and sought an apology from him.

Speaking about Rahul’s controversial remark, Swamy said, “He is just shooting on his foot all the way. He is making it very easy for us to be dismissive… as far as rape is concerned, I would say it is a freudian slip…”

“I am not surprised that he thinks rape is something which can be trifled with,” said.

Swamy added that Rahul’s mother and party’s interim president Sonia Gandhi wants him back at the helm of party affairs.
