Why hanging Nirbhaya convicts isn’t enough; psychological and societal changes are the need of the hour

Researcher Tracy N. Hipp and a team of her colleagues conducted research which concluded that men give sub-conscious validation to themselves while or after raping women (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Four men raped a veterinarian in Cyberabad and set her ablaze after the committing the crime In 2012, six men raped a medical student in the national capital Last month, a rape survivor was set ablaze in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh after she reported the incident and initiated action against the accused

New Delhi: Last month, the gangrape and murder of a veterinary doctor in Cyberabad sparked several protests across the country. Four men allegedly raped the doctor and set her ablaze. Days later, the four men were killed in an exchange of gunfire at the same spot where the doctor's body was found charred.

In December 2012, a medical student was gang-raped by six men, including a juvenile boy in a moving bus. The survivor passed away when treatment was being administered to her. While the trial, in this case, is nearing its end, a question that still remains unanswered is if capital punishment is the only solution.

Mukesh Singh, one of the convicts in the Delhi gang-rape case was interviewed for India's Daughter (documentary on the victim). During the interview, the convict said that if the victim and her friend had not fought with them, they would not have physically assaulted them. Showing no remorse at the time, the convict said that women who step out of their houses at night are the ones who should be blamed in such cases.

Singh's statement substantiates the fact that the social fabric of the country is to be blamed. Mukesh Singh is not the only person in the country who has the aforementioned opinion. From police officers to politicians who represent commoners, there have been many persons who have claimed that rape is a repercussion of certain actions of women.

Researcher Tracy N. Hipp and a team of her colleagues conducted research with 12,000 offenders. Their study concluded that men give a sub-conscious validation to themselves while or after raping women.

From being unaware of the concept of consent to the mentality that a woman does not necessarily mean 'no' when she says it, the problem more often than not lies in the psyche of the culprits. In some of the cases, men pin the blame on women and their inability to conform to societal norms. However, sexism and patriarchy are not the only factors that propel such crimes.

As many as 18 per cent of Tracy's subjects gave alarming statements like "my hormones were just going insane". Some of the offenders justify their actions by citing biology and the needs of their body. Objectification of women is another factor that often drives men to this path. Another important element is sociosexuality which stands for having sexual partners outside of a relationship.

The increasing number of crimes amply proves the fact that even the hanging of rapists is not a deterrent in other cases. It cannot be denied that harrowing offences like rape do not stem from just sexual manifestations. They stem from psychological instincts. A Natural History of Rape: Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion, a book written by biologist Randy Thornhill and anthropologist Craig T. Palmer, argues that rape is either a behavioural adaptation or a result of adaptive traits like sexual desire and aggressiveness.

The several psychological facts that prompt a person to commit a crime as heinous as rape prove that it is a complex issue. The fear of being hanged to death will not prevent other persons from committing a crime. A nurturing environment, freedom to express oneself, knowledge of ethics and a strong moral fibre are among the few factors that can help in preventing crimes likes rape.
