Citizenship Act: Protest turns violent in some districts of West Bengal, internet suspended

West Bengal

Citizenship Amendment Bill: National Kids Commission bars children in protests The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has written to directors general of police of all states directing them to ensure that the children are not misused in the ongoing protests against the Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB).

Murshidabad district

Citizenship Act protest: Violence, arson in south Delhi; buses torched Violence erupted on Mathura Road in southeast Delhi following a clash between police and Jamia Millia Islamia students who were protesting against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act.

West Bengal turns into warzone: Buses, trains and two wheelers set on fire in protest against CAB, NRC West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee urged people to maintain peace and warned protesters to refrain from taking law into their hands.

Mamata Banerjee

‘CAB will shred India’s soul, time to rise to save country’ Congress President Sonia Gandhi on Saturday said the Citizenship Amendment Act would "shred the soul" of India as she launched a scathing attack on 'Modi-Shah government'

Violence rocked’s various districts mainly Murshidabad, Malda, South and North 24 Parganas on Sunday for the third consecutive day as angry anti-CAB protesters burnt down railway stations, set fire on trains and ticket counters, vandalised buses and railway properties. Many trains across the state have been cancelled due to the rampage by the agitators. The Internet has been suspended for 48 hours in six districts.Two trains were vandalised in South 24 Parganas district's Akra Road blockades and protests were staged in various parts of the state. Glass panes of the trains were broken and the trains were damaged. The protesters hurled stones and threatened the railway employees at the ticket counter at Akra station. The counter was set ablaze as the railway employees took refuge inside a toilet.“The protesters threatened to set fire if we did not close the counter. We immediately closed the counter and I took shelter inside a toilet with the station master and some other staffs. It was very scary as the angry mob vandalised the station, ticket counter and set ablaze the counter,” said I B Chowdhury.The highest number of incidents have been reported in, which is a minority-dominated area. Nimtita station in the same district was rampaged and set ablaze by angry agitators.Nimtita station under Suti Police Station in Murshidabad district was rampaged as agitators vandalised the ticket counter, platform and seats for the passengers. The seats were uprooted and thrown on the railway tracks by the protesters.In Murshidabad’s Raghunathgunj, the State Highway was blocked and protesters burnt tyres. In Sagardighi, agitators burnt tyres and the protests turned violent. A TMC leader and Panchayat chief’s house was vandalised by some protesters.Murshidabad’s Katakhali state highway was blocked and Farakka to Azimgunj- train services were stalled. Rezinagar also witnessed violent protests as an RPF vehicle was set on fire.In Malda and Murshidabad, State Highways and National Highways were blocked, tyres burnt and public property vandalised.Malda’s Bhaluka station was attacked by the protesters and vandalised. In the same district, police lathi-charged as the protesters vandalised a toll plaza.Fifty passengers travelling from Assam have been stranded inside a train in North Bengal due to the ongoing agitation in various stations in Malda and Murshidabad.North Amdanga road in North 24 Parganas was blocked with logs and then the protesters set fire on them. The Kalyani Expressway in Nadia district was also blocked.In Deganga, protesters burnt tyres on Berachapa Road and roads were blocked. The protesters also burnt tyres and blocked roads in Birbhum.In North Dinajpur, passengers were dragged out of the buses and the buses were vandalised by the anti-CAB protesters.The internet suspension by the state administration was announced in Malda, Murshidabad, Uttar Dinajpur and Howrah districts, and Barasat and Basirhat subdivisions in North 24 Paraganas and Baruipur and Canning subdivisions in South 24 Paraganas.Passengers faced trouble as many long-distance and local trains were cancelled from Howrah and Sealdah Station. People were stuck in railway stations and faced major inconvenience due to the cancellation of the trains. Altogether ten trains have been cancelled in Kharagpur section.According to a statement of Railways, due to the agitation at Bhaluka Road and Kumedpur stations under North East Frontier Railway and possibility of agitation at other stations in Katihar Division of North East Frontier, the services have been cancelled.Several trains, including Howrah – Guwahati Saraighat Express, Up Sealdah-Bamanhat Uttar Banga Express, Seladah - Alipurduar Jn. Kanchan Kanya Express, Sealdah – Agartala Kanchenjungha Express have been cancelled. Kolkata-Guwahati Garibrath, Sealdah-Puri Duranta Express, Teesta-Torsha Express, Howrah-Hyderabad East Coast Express were also cancelled.West Bengal Chief Ministerurged the protesters to follow a democratic and peaceful path. She will walk in a rally in Kolkata to protest NRC and CAB.In Howrah, TMC organised rally led by TMC leaders and minister Arup Roy. He protested against NRC and CAB while appealed to maintain peace in the state. Several other rallies were brought out in other districts also.BJP state president Dilip Ghosh said, “Bangladeshi infiltrators, backed by TMC, are conducting anti-national activities across the state.”In Assam, two more people succumbed to injuries. They were injured in police firing on Thursday night. Normalcy returned in the state with curfew getting relaxed for nine hours in Guwahati and Dibrugarh.
