Jamia protest: Woman journalist says cops pulled her hair, hit with baton, broke phone

Journalist Bushra Sheikh said she was attacked and abused by a Delhi Police personnel while she was covering the protest in Jamia Millia Islamia University.(Photo: ANI)

After students and teachers of Jamia Milia Islamia University, a woman journalist has alleged she was harassed by the Delhi Police while she was reporting the anti-Citizenship Amendment Act in Delhi on Sunday.

Bushra Sheikh, a journalist with the BBC said as she was covering the students’ protest in South Delhi, a male cop pulled her hair, hurled abuses and hit her with a baton.

LIVE updates on anti-CAB protest in Jamia Millia Islamia University

I came here for BBC's coverage. The police took away my phone and broke it. A male cop pulled my hair. They hit me with a baton and when I asked them for my phone, they hurled abuses at me, Sheikh was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

I didn't come here for fun. I came here for coverage, she said.

Bushra Sheikh, Journalist: I came here for BBC's coverage, they (police) took away my phone,broke it.A male police personnel pulled my hair.They hit me with a baton&when I asked them for my phone they hurled abuses at me.I didn't come here for fun,I came here for coverage https://t.co/x7GpU6flfd pic.twitter.com/pB8ph94WW9 ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

The protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in Delhi on Sunday with the Delhi Police firing teargas shells and resorting to lathicarge. Some buses of the Delhi Transport Corporation were also torched during the protest. The students have distanced from the violence and said it was carried out by outsiders and that they have been protesting in a non-violent manner.

Meanwhile, officials of the Jamia Millia Islamia University told media that the Delhi Police barged into the university campus without seeking any permission from the university. They said the cops locked the university gate and some students and staff were beaten up.

Police have entered the campus by force, no permission was given. Our staff and students are being beaten up and forced to leave the campus, Waseem Ahmed Khan, Chief Proctor, Jamia Millia Islamia University, was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

ALSO READ | CAA protest rocks Delhi: Police enter Jamia Millia, teargas shells fired, Metro service disrupted

ALSO READ | Police entered Jamia Millia Islamia by force, students being beaten up: Chief proctor

ALSO WATCH | Anti-Citizenship Act protest turns violent in Delhi's New Friends Colony, 3 buses torched
