Police, students clash at Aligarh Muslim University

Twitter grab

Aligarh/New Delhi/UNI: A day when protests were seen in Delhi over the new citizenship law, which involved Jamia Millia Islamia University students, clashes also took place between students of Aligarh Muslim University and the copsin Uttar Pradesh on Sunday.

The police reportedly resorted to firing tear gas shells to bring the situation under control.

According to media reports, students pelted stones on police during the protest.



Meanwhile, the protests outside the Jamia Campus area turned violent on Sunday, with mob pelting stones at the police, leaving six police personnel injured, police said here.

Meanwhile, the Delhi government has ordered to close all the government and private schools falling under the South-East Delhi, including Okhla, Jamia, New Friends Colony and Madan Pur Khadar area.

Police clarified that there has been no casualty during the police efforts to maintain the law and order.

According to Delhi Police PRO DCP Mandeep Randhawa, police were present at the site and the protest was peaceful till afternoon.

After a while, some anti-social elements joined the protestors and instigated them, diverting the route of the peaceful protest march, reported UNI.

Police has also appealed to the people not to believe on rumours spread over the social media, where some doctored photographs are being circulated to instigate the people.

Police said the anti-social elements set buses and two-wheelers on fire, while they were pushed back, as they tried to move towards the Mathura Road.

Deputy Commissioner of Police, South East district Chinmoy Biswal said the police's only interest was to push the violent mob back, in view of restoring the law and order in the area, while there was no problem with the varsity (Jamia Millia Islamia University) students.

Police have also denied any allegation of firing during the protests, calling it a rumour, which was being spread to scar the image of Delhi Police.

Police said that certain people have also been detained during the ongoing situation and their identities were yet to be established.

Following the incident, the university will remain shut till Jan 5.

Meanwhile, denying any role in today's protest, Jamia Millia Islamia students' body stated that no student from their varsity participated in the agitation against Citizenship Amendment Bill, passed by Parliament earlier this week, which aimed to provide Indian citizenship to Hindu immigrants from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

"No Jamia student is involved in the violence happening on the streets of Delhi. These are fringe inciting violence in the garb of Jamia students," Jamia Students Union and Administration said.

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal urges people to maintain peace.

"No one shud indulge in violence. Any kind of violence is unacceptable. Protests shud remain peaceful," Kejriwal tweeted.

"Spoke to Hon’ble LG and urged him to take all steps to restore normalcy and peace. We are also doing everything possible at our end. Real miscreants who caused violence shud be identified and punished," he said.

While the violence was on, Jamia Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar appealed to the students to keep the peace and return to the campus. "Everything will be all right but we can't protect students if they leave the campus," she told NDTV.

Meanwhile, people are demonstrating outside the Delhi Police Headquarters over Sunday's events in Delhi.
