Police entered Jamia Millia Islamia by force, students beaten up: Varsity

Shattered glass from a damaged vehicle at Delhi's Mathura Road, located near the Jamia Millia Islamia campus, on December 15, 2019. (Photo: PTI)

Jamia Millia Islamia's chief proctor says the Delhi Police entered the varsity by force and without permission on Sunday, and that staff and students were being beaten and forced to leave campus.

The university's allegation against the police comes on a day when demonstrations against a controversial new law on refugee naturalisation, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, turned violent in South Delhi -- an alarming development that Jamia Millia Islamia students said they had no hand in.

The police says it only took action to control the situation after the violence.

LIVE: Get all the latest updates on the protests here.

DCP South East Chinmoy Biswal said protesters had been chased from the university area.

He said six security personnel had been injured in stone-pelting, and claimed motorcycles were ablaze.

Biswal said some people had been detained, and denied what he said were rumours of firing by the police.

Jamia students have been protesting the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, which was signed into law this week. The policy's critics say it deliberately discriminates against Muslim illegal immigrants seeking refuge in India, and people in India's Northeast see it as a threat to indigeneity.

VEHICLES TORCHED

In New Friends Colony, located in southeast Delhi, protesters clashed with the police and set ablaze three public buses and a fire tender today, the police said.

Three officials -- one from the police, two from the fire service -- were injured, the police said.

PTI reports that the trouble began during a protest by Jamia Millia Islamia students, but organisations representing Jamia's students and teachers have said they were not involved in the violence.

TRAFFIC TAKES A HIT

Traffic was affected in several parts of south Delhi due to the ongoing protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. Vehicles queued up on Mathura Road, Ashram, Okhla, Sukhdev Vihar, Sarita Vihar, and the road leading to Jamia Millia Islamia.

Four Delhi Metro stations on the Magenta Line -- Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Millia Islamia, Okhla Vihar and Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh -- were closed in the evening.

Commuters can follow the Twitter handles of the Delhi Traffic Police (@dtptraffic) and the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) for updates.

Inputs from agencies
