Delhi Police enters Jamia Millia campus, students allege excessive force

Police entered the Jamia Millia Islamia campus and fired tear gas inside the library, students alleged on Saturday.

The police action came in the wake of violence by protesters who allegedly torched vehicles during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Students denied any role in the violence.

Videos sent by students to DNA showed students rushing out of the smoke-filled library reading hall and disarrayed chairs.

They alleged that the mosque inside the campus was also vandalised as they threw tear gas inside it. Pictures shared by the students showed broke glasses inside the mosque.

University Chief Proctor Waseem Ahmed Khan said staff and students are being beaten up and forced to leave the campus by the police.

"Police have entered the campus by force, no permission was given. Our staff and students are being beaten up and forced to leave the campus," Khan said.

Footage run by TV channels showed police taking away students as they came out of the campus with hands up in the air.

Live Updates:

Aligarh District Magistrate Chandra Bhushan Singh: Internet services have been suspended from 10 pm tonight to 10 pm tomorrow in the Aligarh city, in view of the protests by Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) students over CitizenshipAmendment Act.

Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) Registrar, Abdul Hamid: The situation in the campus is tensed, some boys and anti-socials elements came and pelted stones, so we have requested police to take action to control the situation.

In view of the current situation, we have declared winter vacations today onwards. University will reopen on January 5 and examinations will be held after that: Abdul Hamid

Entry & exit gates of Delhi Gate and Pragati Maidan are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations: DMRC

Aligarh: Police fire tear gas shells at protesters outside Aligarh Muslim University campus after protesters pelted stones at them

#WATCH Aligarh: Police fire tear gas shells at protesters outside Aligarh Muslim University campus after protesters pelted stones at them. (Note: abusive language) #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/lUiXJUtkRx — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 15, 2019

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation: Entry & exit gates of ITO and IIT are closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations.

MS Randhawa, PRO Delhi Police on rumours of death during protests at Jamia Millia Islamia, today: I will tell the people of Delhi to not pay attention to such rumours. Delhi Police is monitoring the situation.

All schools to stay closed in Okhla, Jamia and New Friends Colony and Madanpur Khadar area of Delhi: Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia

All students and citizens of Delhi are appealed to assemble at Delhi Police Headquarters, ITO at 9.00 PM tonight to ensure that the undeclared emergency in Jamia is lifted immediately.

Delhi: Protesters, including Jawaharlal Nehru University students, hold demonstration at Delhi Police Headquarters, ITO, over Jamia Millia Islamia university incident. pic.twitter.com/0SfXYvt2Zm — ANI (@ANI) December 15, 2019

Police denied reports of firing at the students. "There has been no firing absolutely. It is a false rumour that is being spread," Chinmoy Biswal, DCP South East, said.

"The mob caused arson, set motorcycles ablaze, it pelted stones at us. This mob was violent. Around 6 policemen have been injured in the stone-pelting. We are yet to ascertain the identities," he added.

"Our only interest is to push the mob back, so law and order can be restored in the area. We have no problem with the university (Jamia Millia Islamia) students," he added.

Some people have also been detained, can only give more information later, he said.

Earlier, protesters allegedly torched three buses in city's New Friends Colony area as they clashed with cops who fired tear gas at the crowd.

As reports claimed that students Jamia Millia Islamia were part of the protest, a student group disassociated themselves from the violence saying that their protests have been "peaceful and non-violent."

"The students of Jamia Millia Islamia disassociate themselves from the violence that has erupted today. We have time and again maintained that our protests are peaceful and non-violent. We stand by this approach and condemn any party involved in the violence," a statement by the student community of JMI said.

"We have maintained clam even when students have been lathi-charged and some women protestors have been badly beaten up. Media personal are a witness to these events. Violence by certain elements is an attempt to vilify and discredit genuine protests," they said.

Police sources were quoted as saying by ANI that they are investigating elements that caused violence.

The Citizenship Act aims to provide for Indian citizenship to the Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after six years of residence in India instead of the current mandatory stay of 11 years even if they do not possess any document.

Critics claim that the Act discriminates against the Muslim community by excluding the members of the community. The claim has been refuted by Union Home Minister Amit Shah who tabled the Bill in the Parliament earlier this week.

Violent protests have also rocked Northeast and West Bengal. The administration imposed curfew in Assam's several districts. It was, however, been relaxed on Saturday.
