Police lathicharge students at Aligarh Muslim University; Internet snapped in city

Shafe Kidwai, member and in charge of Public Relations of AMU, said many students had been injured and had been admitted to hospitals. (Image for representational purpose only)

Several students of Aligarh Muslim University were injured after police stormed inside their campus while they were holding a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act on Sunday evening.

Shafe Kidwai, member and in charge of Public Relations of AMU, said many students had been injured and had been admitted to hospitals. “There was a protest against what happened in Jamia. University authorities tried to convince the students, but they did not listen to them and went ahead with the protest,” said Kidwai.

The police entered the campus through Bab-E-Syed gate and resorted to lathicharge after firing tear gar on students in order to disperse the crowd.

In the wake of the violent clashes, Internet services have been snapped in Aligarh.

The university has also been closed early for winter vacation and will now open on January 6. It was supposed to close on December 22. All examinations have been postponed.

Citizenship Act protest: Follow LIVE updates here

“The university is closed from today (15/12/2019) till 05/01/2020. This is being done due to disturbances created by some antisocial elements for last three days,” AMU Registrar Abdul Hamid said.

JUST IN: AMU closes early for winter vacation in wake of prevailing situation. Was suppose to close on Dec 22. University to reopen on Jan 6 @IndianExpress — Ritika Chopra (@KhurafatiChopra) December 15, 2019

“All other offices will remain open as usual and the closure of the university is for the purpose of reading and examination only. The remaining examination will be conducted after 05/01/2020,” the Registrar said in a statement.

Hamid was quoted by PTI as saying that hostels were being evacuated, as clashes were reported from inside after the police entered the campus.

Hamza Sufyan, former vice-president AMUSU, said some students were seriously injured. “At least 50 students have been admitted to hospitals. Police used tear gas shells and lathicharged a peaceful protest around 8.30 pm at Bab-e-Syed gate in the university. Some students are seriously injured,” said Sufyan.

Meanwhile, students also gathered at the gate of Maulana Azad Urdu University in Hyderabad to protest. They have decided to boycott their ongoing semester exams.

Earlier today, several students of Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia were injured after police entered their campus and lathicharged them after protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in South Delhi turned violent. In the afternoon, three public buses and a fire tender were set afire in New Friends’ Colony
