Students not attacked: Sulur school principal

COIMBATORE: Days after parents of two students of the Kendriya Vidyalaya at Sulur accused the school management of attacking their children for bringing mobile phones to the school, the management on Sunday said that the students were checked by the student council members and the teachers whom the students had accused, were not even present at the spot. The brothers – one studying in Class IX and the other in Class XI – were admitted to the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital (CMCH) on Thursday. Their parents said that the school authorities had assaulted them while checking for mobile phones. They complained of prolonged harassment from the school management.Principal V Meganathan said that they had directed the student council members to search all boys in classes from IX to XII to find mobile phones after receiving complaints from girl students that the boys were using mobile and pen cameras to take their videos. “The council members found a mobile phone inside the underwear of the Class XI student and handed it over to the disciplinary committee. As he had brought the phone to the school despite several warnings, he was suspended for nine days from December 13,” he said.“Meanwhile, the other student demanded that he should be checked only in front of his class monitors and the discipline committee teachers. But the committee had to leave him after he started to misbehave,” the principal said. “As an auditing inspection was going on for five days from December 9, the accused teachers and I were not present at the spot. I had sent a mail about the incident to the police department.”Deputy superintendent of police K Balamurugan said that the parents refused to file a complaint. “Once a complaint is filed, we would investigate the incident,” he said.Seema Kumari, mother of the children, said that her kids fell sick after they were attacked by school authorities. “I tried to file a complaint several times since Friday, but the officers at the Sulur police station refused to help me. Also, they don’t understand what I say as I only speak Hindi,” she told TOI.
