Deeply hurt; will take the matter forward: Jamia university VC on police-students clash

Najma Akhtar, vice-chancellor of Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia university | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The university's VC, in a video message, also assured the students that she was with them in the fight "I am deeply hurt by the way my students were brutally assaulted: Jamia VC Police said that 50 students who were detained yesterday during protests at the Jamia Millia Islamia were released in the early hours of Monday

New Delhi: Najma Akhtar, the vice-chancellor of Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia has expressed her ire over alleged assault on students of the varsity, saying she was "deeply hurt by the way they were treated."

The university's VC, in a video message, also assured the students that she was with them in their fight while cautioning them against any kind of misinformation.

"I am deeply hurt by the way my students were brutally assaulted. Delhi Police entered the campus without any permission and lathi-charged innocent students who were studying in the library which is is not acceptable. I want to assure the students that they are not alone at this time of difficulty. I'm with them. The entire university is with you. I will raise this issue as much as I can and also take this matter forward as long it's possible. You are not alone and don't be disheartened and don't believe any wrong information,” she said in the video.

Meanwhile, police said that 50 students who were detained yesterday during protests at the Jamia Millia Islamia were released in the early hours of Monday.

Of the 50 students, 35 were released from the Kalkaji police station and 15 from the New Friends Colony police station, a senior police officer was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

On Sunday, clashes erupted between protesters, who allegedly torched four public buses and two police vehicles, and the police in New Friends Colony, near Jamia Millia Islamia, during a demonstration against the amended Citizenship Act. Nearly 60 people including students, police personnel and firefighters were injured in the scuffle.

In a bid to disperse the agitators and contain the situation, police used batons and teargas shells but denied opening fire at them. However, videos of purported police firing, injured students in the university bathroom as well as footage of them bleeding went viral on the social media.

Following the scuffle on roads, police allegedly entered the Jamia university campus and detained several persons for alleged involvement in the violence, triggering tension.

The chief proctor of university, on Sunday, accused the Delhi police of forcefully entering the university premises and thrashing students.

Waseem Ahmed Khan told Times Now that police personnel entered the varsity campus in Jamia Nagar despite not being given the permission to do so. He alleged that the staff and students were beaten up and were forced to vacate the campus.

"The police chased the students, entered classrooms, library and even the mosque in order to beat them up. The situation is very grim. The students are still hiding in the campus classrooms and they are very afraid," Khan said.

The police entered the campus and blocked the university gates in order to nab the “outsiders” who took shelter there.
