UP: 16-year-old girl informs boyfriend's family after he rapes her, gets abused and harassed in return

Sanjay had allegedly filmed a video of the survivor when she was not aware (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Five members of a family were booked in Pilibhit for the rape of a minor girl According to the girl, her boyfriend, Sanjay Pandey had promised to marry her The accused took back his proposal of marriage after the two established physical relations

Pilibhit: The police in Pilibhit, Uttar Pradesh have booked five members of a family in relation to the rape of a minor girl. The survivor is a student of Class 11. The five accused were booked on Sunday. The prime accused has been identified as Sanjay Pandey.

The survivor and Sanjay Pandey were in a relationship when Pandey allegedly established a physical relationship with the minor survivor on the pretext of marriage. Pandey's father has been identified as Bhoopram and his mother has been identified as Radhika. His sisters have been identified as Anju and Manju.

Pandey had allegedly filmed a video of the survivor when she was not aware. After some time, 20-year-old Pandey refused to marry the survivor. According to the complaint lodged by the survivor, the accused raped the 16-year-old girl as she refused to get intimate with him again.

When the girl approached the accused's family, they told her that her video would be uploaded on social media if she shared the incident with anyone. Sanjay's family members also threatened the girl of dire consequences and warned her against taking action. The girl told the Times of India, "I was badly abused and warned to keep my mouth shut. "

Abused and harassed, the teenager turned to the local police for help. She went to the Pilibhit Kotwali police station and lodged a complaint against the 20-year-old accused's family.

The police booked 20-year-old Sanjay Pandey under section 376 (rape) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and section 3/4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The man's father, mother and sisters have been booked under section 504 (intentional insult to provoke breach of peace) and section 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC. Further investigation is underway.
