CAA violence erupts in heart of Delhi, 4 buses burnt, 2 injured

New Delhi, December 15 (IANS) Four buses were set ablaze by a mob and two fire officials were injured in stone pelting as the protests against the newly enacted Citizenship Act entered the third day in the national capital on Sunday. Jamia student were not involved in the brawl, the varsity union said.



Locals of the Sarai Julema in the Jamia Nagar area clashed with police.The trouble began when organisers of a protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019, turned violent.



The situation turned critical when a bus was burned by the protestors and police got into action. A photographer was injured in the stone pelting that took place during the confrontation between protestors and police.



Huge traffic snarls were experienced throughout south Delhi area, from Ashram to Friends Colony to Kalindi Kunj. Police diverted traffic from the vicinity as pitched battles continued.



For over an hour Mathura Road opposite New Friends Colony's both carriageways were blocked by demonstrator. and Delhi Traffic Police tweeted that all movement was closed from Okhla Underpass to Sarita Vihar due to the demonstration.



"Motorists coming from Badarpur side are advised to take Modi Mill Flyover from CRRI towards Nehru Place& those coming from Ashram Chowk side are advised to take Ring Road ,Moolchand Flyover & BRT Corridor or DND Flyover," it said.



A Delhi Fire Service official told IANS a call was made at 4.42 p.m. that buses were set ablaze. " We had sent four fire tenders which were also attacked by a violent mob," the official said. "Our vehicle was damaged and two firemen were injured. They are in hospital.



"There is so much mob accumulation in the area that we have failed to reach the spot, and the traffic jam has also added to the problem."



A statement issued by the Jamia Milia University said that students were not involved in the burning of buses. "It is done by some outsiders who want to disrupt the peace in the university and the locality around it."

Jamia teachers, Kejriwal condemn violence in Delhi

The Jamia Teachers Association has condemned the violence that erupted here on Sunday afternoon against the Citizenship Amendment Act.



In a release issued on Sunday, the association distanced itself from the violence. It also appealed to the Jamia students to stay away from the protests organised by political leaders.



The association has convened an emergency meeting on Monday to discuss the issue of misuse of Jamia's name in the current protests.



Meanwhile, amid reports of the local AAP MLA's involvement in the Jamia protest violence, Delhi chief minister and AAP supremo Arvind Kejriwal tweeted his condemnation of the violence near Jamia Millia University.



"Any kind of violence is unacceptable. Protests should remain peaceful." Kejriwal's tweet read.



Sunday's violence is the second in three days in the area, to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.



On Friday, Jamia University students had organised a protest which also had ended in violence.
