Assam CAA protest: 4 dead in police firing, 175 arrested, more than 1400 detained

After Rajya Sabha passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill on Wednesday night, the state erupted in uncontrolled protests, in which agitators engaged in pitch battle in almost every major city or town, forcing the administration to impose a curfew. (Photo: PTI)

Two more people succumbed to their injuries in Guwahati, taking the death toll in Citizenship Amendment Act related protests to 4 in Assam.

Both died due to police firing which took place during clashes between protesters and police in Guwahati on Wednesday and Thursday. Earlier, Sams Steford, 16 and Dipanjal Das, 17, had succumbed to injuries caused due to police firing in Guwahati.

The Assam Police has so far arrested 175 people and detained 1,460 protesters for indulging in violent agitations across the Northeastern state.

Talking exclusively with India Today TV, the Director-General of Assam Police, Bhaskar Jyoti Mahanta said, "25 protestors have received injuries. 50 policemen have also been injured."

Some police personnel also sustained bullet injuries and according to the police some protesters used rifles and fired on them.

When asked the police suspects involvement of any political group behind the violence, DGP BJ Mahanta said, "We smell conspiracy behind this and we are investigating on this line."

During the weekend, several police vehicles were set on fire in Guwahati and Dibrugarh by locals, incensed over the passing of the Citizenship Amendment Act.

On the failure of police to curb unrest in Assam, Director General of Assam Police Mahanta said, "We failed to anticipate that the protesters will get so aggressive and that's why we were unable to contain the violent protests at early stage but later on we came down heavily and it has been contained now."

On Sunday, the curfew in Guwahati was relaxed from 9 am to 6 pm while in Dibrugarh the curfew has been relaxed for six hours from 8 am to 6 pm.

To identify the persons who were involved in the clashes and responsible for damaging public and private property across Assam, the police is going through the footage of violence across the state and is in the process of identifying the agitators.

"Any person, who is found in any anti-social activity, will not be spared. We will take strict action," added Mahanta.

Assam has witnessed one of the worst violent protests by the public in its history with three rail stations, post office, bank, bus terminus, shops, dozens of vehicles and many other public properties being set ablaze or totally damaged.

After Rajya Sabha passed the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill on Wednesday night, the state erupted in uncontrolled protests, in which agitators engaged in pitch battle in almost every major city or town, forcing the administration to impose a curfew.

Several towns and cities were placed under indefinite curfew, including Guwahati, the epicentre of protests, besides Dibrugarh, Tezpur and Dhekiajuli. Night curfew was imposed in Jorhat, Golaghat, Tinsukia and Charaideo districts.
