Putin, UN Secy Gen lead world in condemning attack

rajivbhatia82@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

Russian President Vladimir Putin and UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres were among the world leaders who have condemned the Pulwama terror attack.

In his condolence message, Putin wanted the perpetrators and sponsors of this attack to be duly punished. He reiterated Russian readiness for further strengthening counterterrorist cooperation with Indian partners.

The US, France, Russia, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and the Maldives had assailed the attack yesterday itself. They were joined by more nations, including Canada, China and Pakistan.

China condemned the terror attack saying it was deeply shocked over the incident and firmly opposed to terrorism.

Pakistan issued a statement late on Thursday night calling the attack a matter of grave concern but rejected any insinuation by “elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations”.

In the US, over 40 senators condemned the attack while its mission here said the US stood alongside India in confronting terror and defeating it.

Sri Lanka Prime Minister Ranil Wikremesinghe in a Twitter post also voiced similar sentiments while Nepal Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli made a telephone call to Prime Minister Narendra Modi to condole the deaths.

Bhutan’s Foreign Ministry said it was “shocked and saddened to hear of the dastardly terrorist attack in Kashmir, which has resulted in the loss of 30 precious human lives. We strongly condemn this heinous attack and express our solidarity with the families of the victims, and the people and Government of India.”

Maldives Foreign Minister Abdulla Shahid expressed “deep shock and horror" and offered to work closely with India, and the international community in eliminating this global menace.

The French foreign minister Yves Le Drian condemned the attack in India and expressed his profound solidarity with the government and the people of India. He called on “all states to fight effectively against terrorist networks and the channels of finance and also prevent the cross border movement of terrorists like the Jaish-e-Mohammed”.

Israeli ambassador Ron Malka also strongly condemned the terror attack in #Pulwama as did the US House Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Republican Eliot Engel.

Pakistan’s reaction comes after the Ministry of External Affairs issued a statement to say Pakistan has given “full freedom” to Masood Azhar and Jaish-e-Mohammed to operate on its soil.

MEA had earlier said: "JeM is led by global terrorist Masood Azhar, who is given full freedom by Pakistan to operate and expand his terror infrastructure."

The MEA added in its statement, "India condemns Pulwama terror attack; heinous, despicable act perpetrated by Pak-based Jaish-e-Mohammed. We demand Pakistan should stop supporting terrorists and terror groups operating from its territory and dismantle terror infrastructure."

The Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror group has claimed responsibility for the attack that took place about 20 km from Srinagar.
