Citizenship Act protests live updates | Opposition spreading ‘falsehood’ about Citizenship Act: Shah

A day after the police and protesters opposing the amended Citizenship Act clashed in Jamia Millia Islamia and the areas surrounding it, students from various institutions across the country took out rallies in support, including those from Indian Institute of Science in Bengaluru, TISS in Mumbai and the Bombay university.

Violence had erupted in the area surrounding Jamia on December 15 afternoon in which scores were injured as the police resorted to lathi-charge and firing of teargas shells.

Here are the latest updates:

Jharkhand | 8.30 pm

Opposition spreading ‘falsehood’ about Citizenship Act: Shah

Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday alleged that the opposition parties are spreading “falsehood” about the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) among the students.

The BJP president accused the Congress, Aam Admi Party and the Trinamool Congress of “misleading” students on CAA.

“Congress, AAP and the Trinamool Congress are playing vote bank politics over CAA, and are misguiding the students and creating an environment of violence in the country,” Mr. Shah said.

He was addressing an election rally in support of party candidate from Poreyahat assembly constituency in Godda district of Jharkhand.

The Act paves the way for granting Indian citizenship to non-Muslim refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh who have migrated after facing religious persecution in their respective country.

“I appeal to the students to study the Act. There is no provision of striping off citizenship of anybody. This Act is only meant to accord citizenship to religious minorities facing persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh, he said.

Mr. Shah also asked the Opposition parties to abjure violence as “nothing comes out of violence”.

New Delhi | 8.10 pm

2 men admitted to Safdarjung Hospital with ‘gunshot injury’, say sources

Two men, who were apparently part of a demonstration by Jamia Millia Islamia students on Sunday, have been admitted to the Safdarjung Hospital with “gunshot injury”, sources said on Monday.

The father of one of students, Sohaib Khan, 23, said his son was not part of the protest but was passing by when he was hit by a “pellet” on the toe.

“He underwent surgery last night and was shifted to a ward,” Mohammad Arshad said.

Sohaib is a 4th-year B.Tech student at Jamia Hamdard, his father said.

Another student, 22-year-old Ajaz who also suffered gunshot injury on the chest apparently at the protest site, was undergoing treatment at the Centre-run hospital.

Delhi police has, however, denied firing on the protesters during the clash.

New Delhi | 7.10 pm

Modi govt. has declared war on own people, says Sonia Gandhi

Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Monday accused the Modi government of being the “creator of violence and divisiveness” which has declared a war against its own people and said the writers of this script of polarisation are Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah.

In a statement, she alleged that the BJP government’s intention was clear about wanting to spread instability and creating an atmosphere of religious tension for political interests.

“A government’s job is to maintain peace and harmony, deliver governance and protect the Constitution. But the BJP government has declared a war on its own people. It has become the creator of violence and divisiveness. The government has pushed the country into an abyss of hatred and made the futures of youth uncertain,” she said.

“The government’s intention is clear — spread instability in the country, rob the youth of their rights, create an atmosphere of religious tension and serve your political interests. The writers of this script of polarization are no one but Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah,” she said.

She said that Assam, Tripura and Meghalaya are burning and four youths have died due to police firing in Assam alone.

Gandhi claimed that Shah could not muster the courage to go to the northeast and the Bangladeshi foreign minister and the Japanese prime minister had to postpone their visits to India.

All over the country the students were on a path of agitation and were hitting the road against fee hikes and attacks on the Constitution, but the Modi government was busy painting them as terrorists, naxals, secessionists, renegades, she said.

“The reason is evident — Modi government has failed to govern.”

Read more

Maharashtra | 6.45 pm

Anti-CAA protests reach Mumbai

Students in large numbers hit the streets in Mumbai on Monday to express solidarity with the students of the Jamia Milia Islamia and AMU protesting against the amended Citizenship Act as agitation against the new law in other parts of the country found resonance in the metropolis.

Hundreds of students from the Tata Institute of Social Science (TISS) and the University of Mumbai held protests to denounce the BJP-led government over the Citizen Amendment Act (CAA) and also the proposed National Register of Citizen (NRC).

They condemned the police action against the students of the Delhi-based Jamia Milia Islamia (JMI) and the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU).

The protests in the financial capital were peaceful.

TISS students gathered outside the college premises in the morning, carrying placards with anti-government slogans.

“The nation is dying while you are sleeping,” read one of the placards. The students also shouted.

New Delhi | 6.40 pm

CBDT extends last date for filing advance tax payment till Dec 31 for northeastern States

In view of the ongoing protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), the Finance Ministry on Monday said the CBDT has extended the last date for filing advance income tax return by a fortnight to December 31 for northeastern States.

Considering the large-scale disruption of Internet services in the northeastern States — Assam, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram — the Central Board of Direct Taxes has decided to extend the last date for filing advance tax payment, an official statement said.

The last date for filing third instalment of advance tax was December 15.

The Central Board of Direct Taxes has decided to extend the last date for payment of December instalment of advance tax for 2019-20, from December 15 to December 31 in case of all the assessees, corporate and other than corporates of these States, it said.

New Delhi | 6.25 pm

Amnesty slams police action against Jamia, AMU students

The Amnesty International India slammed the police for its “violent” action against students at Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) protesting against the amended Citizenship Act.

It said the allegations that the police brutally beat up and sexually harassed Jamia students must be investigated and those responsible prosecuted.

The human rights body’s executive director, Avinash Kumar, in a statement said the arrest of protesters violate India’s obligations under international law, specifically the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to respect and protect the right to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, set out in Article 19 and Article 21 of that treaty.

“Students have the right to protest. Violence against them cannot under any circumstance be justified,” he said, referring to media reports on police baton charge against the protesting AMU students. — PTI

Mumbai | 6.20 pm

Atrocities against the fabric of our democracy: FTIISA

“FTII Student Association solemnly condemns CAA , CAB, and NRC, and stands in solidarity with the student movements in Jamia Milia University, Aligarh University, and all the others who have stood up in these times of grave crisis,” says FTIISA president Aadith Sathvin.

“Further, the atrocities committed against students are unacceptable, and against the fabric of our democracy,” he adds. — Shoumojit Banerjee

Ahmedabad | 5.45 pm

Protest outside IIMA to support Jamia students, 50 held

Around 50 people who gathered outside the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIMA) complex in Ahmedabad on December 16 afternoon to protest against police action on Jamia Millia Islamia students a day earlier in Delhi were detained, an official said.

Along with activists, including Shamshad Pathan of Alp-Sankhyak Adhikar Manch, several faculty members, students of IIMA, CEPT University and other prominent institutions were also taken into custody for agitating on the footpath outside IIMA.

Noted activist and classical dancer Mallika Sarabhai also took part in the demonstration, but she was not among those who were detained.

The official said the protesters, mainly from outfits like Alpsankhyak Adhikar Manch and ANHAD, besides other NGOs and civic rights groups, did not have permission to assemble at the place, adding that they would be released soon.

“We have detained 50 protesters for not taking permission to assemble at the place, which is near a road. They were causing a traffic jam. They will be released soon,” Inspector H.M. Vyas of Gujarat University police station said.

Activist Dev Desai said that besides activists, several faculty members, students of IIMA, CEPT University and other prominent institutions were detained for holding protests on the footpath outside IIMA. — PTI

New Delhi | 5.35 pm

CAA is India's internal and domestic matter: France

The amended Citizenship Act is India's internal and domestic matter, French envoy Emmanuel Lenain said as he noted that his country believes in freedom of religion.

Speaking to reporters, Mr. Lenain said India is a democracy and when there are conflicts in views of people then they can approach institutions like the Supreme Court which can competently take a decision.

"I don't think it is apt for any country to comment on the domestic matter of India. We believe in freedom of religion and it is not for us to comment on the matter," he said. — PTI

New Delhi | 5.00 p.m.

Home Ministry issues advisory to States to maintain law and order

The Ministry of Home Affairs sent an advisory to States regarding violence related to the amended Citizenship Act. State governments have been asked to take requisite precautionary measures to maintain law and order.

They have also been requested to take action against circulation of fake news and rumours on social media having potential to incite violence. — Vijaita Singh

New Delhi | 4.50 p.m.

Priyanka leads Congress protest at India Gate

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra leads a protest at India Gate against the crackdown on students and the Citizenship Amendment Act, in New Delhi on December 16, 2019. | Photo Credit: Shiv Kumar Pushpakar

Congress leaders led by Priyanka Gandhi Vadra held a sit-in at the India Gate on Monday in a show of solidarity with the students from Jamia Millia Islamia and several other universities across the country protesting the contentious amended citizenship law.

The Congress general secretary was joined by leaders like Ahmed Patel, A.K. Antony, Ghulam Nabi Azad and Randeep Singh Surjewala, besides hundreds of party workers.

Mr. Surjewala said the two-hour protest, which began at 4 p.m., is to express solidarity with students from Jamia Millia Islamia University and other places.

New Delhi | 4.45 pm

Opposition condemns police action at Jamia, demands judicial probe

Opposition leaders gathered here on Monday to condemn the police action against students of Jamia Millia Islamia on Sunday and demanded a judicial inquiry into the incidents that led to several students being injured.

At a press conference, Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha Ghulam Nabi Azad said it wasn’t just his party, the Congress, but the entire Opposition was united in condemning the Delhi Police’s actions at the university, following protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act passed by Parliament last week. He said in previous student agitations the police would not enter the university campus without the Vice Chancellor’s approval. “Since the VC has said that no approval has been given, how did the police, which is under the control of the BJP-ruled Centre, enter Jamia”, he asked. He demanded a judicial inquiry into the incidents. The Prime Minister, the Home Minister and the Cabinet are responsible as they brought in such a legislation. — Damini Nath

New Delhi | 4.20 pm

Congress leader Priyanka Vadra will be staging a symbolic dharna at the India Gate on Monday. She will take part in a sit-in protest for two hours, sources told The Hindu.

Earlier in the day, Ms. Vadra tweeted: “The country’s atmosphere is bad. Police is entering university to beat up (students). The government has tinkered with the Constitution. We will fight for the Constitution.”

New Delhi | 4.00 pm

IGNOU shifts exam centre from Jamia

The Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) shifted its examination centre from Jamia Millia Islamia to alternative venue in view of the tense situation there.

“The examination centre in Jamia Millia Islamia has been shifted to alternative places. Students are requested to check the website and the entire date sheet to reach the corresponding centres accordingly,” a university official said.

Guwahati | 3.30 pm

Internet services suspended in Assam till December 17

Suspension of internet services in Assam was extended by another 24 hours on Monday to prevent alleged misuse of social media in disturbing peace and maintain law and order in the state, officials said.

The State has been under an internet blackout since Wednesday amid violent protests against the citizenship law.

New Delhi | 3.15 pm

Owing to protests, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has closed the entry and exit gates of the Jamia Millia Islamia station. "Trains will not be halting at this station," the DMRC said.

Guwahati | 2.30 pm

AASU leaders taken into custody

AASU chief advisor Samujjal Bhattacharya and general secretary Lurinjyoti Gogoi were taken into police custody along with more than a hundred protesters during a rally in Guwahati against the citizenship law.

The AASU’s three-day ‘Satyagraha’ began in the morning and the leaders addressed the protestors at the Latasil playground before beginning a march towards the deputy commissioner’s office.

“We have information that we might be arrested but we want to make it clear that our demand is withdraw CAA or arrest us,” Bhattacharya said in his address to the protesters.

The protesters have been kept at a temporary jail created in a field near Dighalipukhuri where they continued to shout slogans demanding revocation of the Act, officials said.

2.10 pm

In a series of tweets, Prime Minister Narendra Modi assured people that Indian nationals need not have to worry about the CAA.

"Violent protests on the Citizenship Amendment Act are unfortunate and deeply distressing. Debate, discussion and dissent are essential parts of democracy but, never has damage to public property and disturbance of normal life been a part of our ethos.

"The Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 was passed by both Houses of Parliament with overwhelming support. Large number of political parties and MPs supported its passage. This Act illustrates India’s centuries old culture of acceptance, harmony, compassion and brotherhood.

"I want to unequivocally assure my fellow Indians that CAA does not affect any citizen of India of any religion. No Indian has anything to worry regarding this Act. This Act is only for those who have faced years of persecution outside and have no other place to go except India.

"The need of the hour is for all of us to work together for the development of India and the empowerment of every Indian, especially the poor, downtrodden and marginalised. We cannot allow vested interest groups to divide us and create disturbance."

New Delhi | 2.00 pm

'Take back the law'

Manoj Kumar Jha of RJD says we condemn the dog-whistle message of PM that (protesters) are recognised by clothes.

Javed Ali Khan of the Samajwadi Party says he studied at Jamia and lives in the area. "My daughter still studies there, and wife teaches there," he adds.

"As a Jamia alumnus, I thank the Opposition and other students standing in solidarity," he says. Mr. Khan claims the fire broke out some three kilometres away from the University, but the Delhi Police chose to attack students in the library. Government should call a special session of Parliament and take back this law, he says

New Delhi | 1.50 pm

Left likens the situation to civil war

CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, who is part of joint opposition press meet says "we are here primarily to condemn what happened in Jamia."

"This is unacceptable in a democracy, says Mr. Yechury. Home minister is directly in charge. Where is he?" he wonders.

"We will take this movement forward all across India," he adds.

CPI chief D. Raja says he was with the students at Police Head Quarters last night. "Large numbers of students of DU, JNU and Jamia were there to protest. Police officials told student representatives that there is no casualty, agreed that injured students would be given adequate medical help and no cases would be filed."

There is a civil war like situation in the country, says Mr. Raja

Delhi | 1.50 pm

Must be wary of jihadists, Maoists, separatists getting into student activism: Nirmala Sitharaman

Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Monday said that citizens should be wary of jihadists, Maoists and separatists getting into student activism.

Ms. Sitharaman, however, said that she was not aware of the events at New Delhi’s Jamia Milia Islamia University over the weekend.

Hitting out at the Congress, the student-activist turned politician said whipping up people’s emotions on issues like the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) only shows the opposition party’s frustration.

Read more

New Delhi | 1.40 pm

A repeat of Kashmir: Azad

Opposition leaders including Ghulam Nabi Azad, Sitaram Yechury, D. Raja, Sharad Yadav, and Manoj Jha have convenes a joint press conference to condemn the police action against Jamia students.

Leader of Opposition in Rajya Sabha, Ghulam Nabi Azad says: "The police entered the university, library and toilets of Jamia, did not spare those studying in library. In our time also there used to be agitation, police would not enter the university campus without vice chancellor's approval."

If the university administration did not give permission, how did the Delhi Police, which is under the BJP-ruled Central government, enter the university? There should be a judicial enquiry, he says.

This is repeat of Kashmir, says Mr. Azad. He holds the Prime Minister, Home Minister and the entire cabinet responsible for the violence.

Lucknow | 1:30 p.m.

Protests against CAA in Lucknow’s Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulema seminary

The protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act spread to Lucknow, with students of the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulema seminary gathering in large numbers on Monday morning and trying to lead a protest march.

However, police closed the gate of the seminary and did not allow the students, who raised slogans in solidarity with the protesting students of the Jamia Millia Islamia University, to lead the march.

Chennai | 1.20 p.m.

Loyola students resort to flash protest

Students of Loyola College skipped classes and held a demonstration on Monday inside the college premises, condemning the atttack on students of Jamia Millia Islamia University on Sunday.

Over 50 students gathered inside the college premises at 11 a.m and squatted near the main gate. They shouted slogans demanding justice for the students who were reportedly attacked by the police in New Delhi. A spokesperson of the students said, “Our demonstration was show to solidarity with agitating students against the Citizenship Amendment Act. We condemn the brutality unleashed on the students in New Delhi.”

Bengaluru | 1.15 p.m.

IISc students stage silent protest

A group of students from the Indian Institute of Science in Bengaluru staged a silent protest on Monday morning against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, and the violence of the police response against students at Jamia Millia Islamia in Delhi. “The Act and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) goes against the secular identity of the country. It is unconstitutional,” said one protester.

Students held placards with messages ranging from ‘We want democracy, not police Raj,’ and ‘Defend the right to protest’. However, in keeping with the nature of the protest, they did not chant slogans. Many also declined to talk to the media citing that it was against IISc’s Code of Conduct.

A retired scientist who took part in the protest said, “NRC itself is a wrong exercise.The procedure to prove our citizenship requires a certain number of documents, but people relocate to other states for various reasons like natural calamities. The government cannot expect these people to save all these documents when they were striving to save their lives.”

Many expressed concern over the “rapid” and “brutal” attacks on protests at educational institutes such as JMI in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University in Uttar Pradesh. “We are not terrorists. We have the right to protest against the government. What the police did was not acceptable,” said one student after the protest.

New Delhi | 1.10 pm

Jamia Vice Chancellor Najma Akhtar said the University will be approaching the police to file an FIR into Sunday's violence.

"Innocent students sitting in the library were attacked. This is not acceptable. We will ask the MHRD to conduct this probe," Ms. Akhtar said. "We demand a high level inquiry into why the police entered the campus."

He also refuted rumours that students were killed in police firing. "No student was killed," she said.

"There has been a lot of property damage at the university and there also has been immense emotional harm. Yesterday’s incident was very unfortunate," she said.

Mumbai | 1.00 pm

TISS students express solidarity with their Jamia, AMU counterparts

TISS students gathered in front of Ambedkar Garden in Chembur, Mumbai to protest against police excess on Jamia students.

According to the students, the union informed them in the morning that a few politicians helped them get the police permit for a peaceful protest.

Chennai | 12.30 p.m.

IIT-M students protest in solidarity

IIT-Madras students protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Chennai on Monday, December 16, 2019. | Photo Credit: Special Arrangement

Students from IIT-Madras also began protesting in solidarity with students in New Delhi. They raised slogans against police brutality and the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Students of Pondicherry University on Monday extended support to their counterparts in Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University.

The Students Council of Pondicherry University gathered in front of Gate II of the campus demanding the immediate release of the detained students. They raised slogans against the police action and said that State-sponsored violence was unleashed against the students for raising their voices against the recently-passed CAA.

New Delhi | 12.20 pm

DU students boycott exams, hold protests

Delhi University students are with Jamia's students in the Solidarity at Arts Faculty Delhi University North Campus, in New Delhi on December 16, 2019. Left students hold a protest against Citizenship Amendment Act and the brutal lathi charge on Jamia Millia Islamia university students on yesterday. | Photo Credit: Shiv Kumar Pushpakar

Several Delhi University students on Monday boycotted exams and held protests to express solidarity with students of Jamia Millia and AMU, following which heavy force has been deployed at the Arts Faculty.

Sources told PTI that students from the English department of the varsity had written to their professors on Sunday night to postpone exams owing to the situation in Jamia but their request could not be considered since it was late.

At the Delhi University, students alleged that police cracked down on peacefully protesting students who boycotted exams.

Students of political science department boycotted exams in solidarity with Jamia students.

“I am the only one who has been detained at Maurice Nagar Police Station. There was a group of 60-70 students who were protesting outside the Arts Faculty against police action on Jamia students,” Abhigyan, a student of Ramjas College claimed.

Chennai | 11.55 am

Stalin condemns attack on students

DMK president MK.Stalin said he was shocked to see visuals of brutal attacks on students in the Jamia and Aligarh Muslim University.

"Every drop of blood spilled will need to be answered for in the days to come," he tweeted.

He urged the BJP government to reconsider Citizenship Amendment Act taking into consideration the widespread, continuous protests.

New Delhi | 11.55 am

Jamia Alumni statement

Students form human chain outside the Jamia Millia Islamia University on December 16 to protest Sunday's clashes. | Photo Credit: R.V. Moorthy

The Jamia Alumni has said it stands by the students' protest and warned against fake news.

"We reiterate that we stand by every peaceful protest on CAA and NRC happening across the country. No amount of diversion tactic will stop us from protesting against discriminatory and anti-democratic laws. We appeal to you to be cautious of the attempts being made to term the protests communal. We must remain united.

"We request people to not share unverified information. However well-intentioned they may be, they can discredit a noble movement being spearheaded by students," the statement said.

New Delhi | 11.50 am

The Jamia Millia Islamia will be shut till January 5 and students have been asked to vacate the campus. Even as peaceful protests continued in the campus, students were seen leaving from the University.

"The proctor ensured that we'll be safe inside but if police can come inside the library, I am not sure if I can trust him," a 20-year-old student told The Hindu.

"Violence erupted when police entered the Jamia campus while students were protesting peacefully. There is video proof for everything," said Shah Rukh Tyagi, who is pursuing MA in the University. — Hemani Bhandari

New Delhi | 11.40 am

SC to hear plea of Congress, ex-Tripura King challenging Citizenship Act on Dec 18

The Supreme Court said it will hear on December 18 pleas of the Congress and former Maharaja of Tripura Pradyot Kishor Deb Barman challenging constitutional validity of the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).

A bench headed by Chief Justice S A Bobde said it will hear the pleas along with other pending matters coming up for hearing on December 18.

Senior advocate Abhishek Manu Singhvi mentioned for urgent listing the two pleas and said this petition should also be heard along with a similar plea filed by the Indian Union Muslim League (IUML), which is coming up for hearing on Wednesday.

New Delhi | 11.10 am

SC to hear plea for judicial enquiry on Jamia clashes tomorrow

The Supreme Court has agreed to hear on Tuesday pleas which have alleged police atrocities on students holding protests against the amended Citizenship Act at the Aligarh Muslim University and the Jamial Millia Islamia University here.

A Bench headed by Chief Justice S.A. Bobde on Monday also took serious note of the rioting and destruction of public property during protests against the Act and said this must stop immediately.

Read more

Delhi | 11.00 am

Two FIRs registered for violence near Jamia Millia Islamia University

Activists of the Jamia Millia Islamia University students staging a protset against Citizenship Amendments Bill at Jamia Millia Islamia University in New Delhi on Sunday. | Photo Credit: Shiv Kumar Pushpakar

The Delhi Police lodged two FIRs on December 16 in connection with the violence during the protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Jamia Nagar area and Marhura road, said Delhi police on Monday.

One FIR was registered at New Friends Colony police station, while another was lodged at the Jamia Nagar police station, he added.

Kerala | 10.40 am

Youth Cong. activists wave black flags at Manipur Governor Najma Heptulla

Youth Congress activists waved black flags at Manipur Governor Najma Heptulla at Aluva guesthouse near here on Monday morning as part of their protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

Ms. Heptulla was proceeding towards the Cochin International Airport Ltd. at Nedumbassery on her way to Lakshadweep when a group of Youth Congress members shouted slogans against the Act and the Bharatiya Janata Party-led government at the Centre. Police prevented them from moving towards the Governor’s motorcade.

Kerala | 10.30 am

DYFI organises Statewide protest march against police action on Jamia, AMU students

The DYFI organised a statewide protest march on Sunday night against the police action on the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University, who were agitating against the amended Citizenship Act.

The Thiruvananthapuram district committee of the Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI) took out a protest march to the Raj Bhavan, where the protesters tried to break a police barricade while raising slogans in support of the students of the two universities.

Police used water cannons to disperse the protesters.

Activists of the youth wing of the ruling CPI(M) in Kerala stopped the train service at Kozhikode.

“Nearly 75 activists took out a protest march to the railway station,” a city police official told PTI.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan will sit in a “satyagraha”, along with Opposition Leader Ramesh Chennithala of the Congress, against the amended Citizenshsip Act on Monday.

“Together, we will fight the CAA. Kerala’s fight against the tyrannical act will see a bipartisan coming together of parties in Govt and opposition. We will be sitting on a Satyagraha in Thiruvananthapuram. Join us in defense of our democracy. We must resist & #WeWillResist,” Mr. Vijayan said in a tweet. - PTI

Uttar Pradesh | 10.20 am

UP CM Yogi Adityanath appeals for peace

In a late night appeal, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath urged people to maintain peace and harmony and eschew rumours, after protests broke out in certain parts of the state, including at Aligarh Muslim University, against the amended citizenship law.

In a statement past Sunday midnight, Mr. Adityanath said, “People should not pay any attention to the rumours about Citizenship Amendment Act being spread by some vested interests.”

He also said the State government was committed to provide security to every citizen of the state. “For this, it is necessary that everyone follows the law. Nobody will be allowed to disturb the atmosphere of peace in the State,” he said. - PTI

Delhi | 10.10 am

Concerned about students of Jamia: Irfan Pathan

Veteran India pacer Irfan Pathan has expressed concern about the students of the Jamia Millia Islamia after several of them were injured during violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

The 35-year-old pacer, who has played 29 Tests and 120 ODIs for India, posted a tweet to offer support to the students after police entered the Jamia university campus on Sunday.

“Political blame game will go on forever but I and our country is concerned about the students of #JamiaMilia #JamiaProtest,” Mr. Pathan tweeted. - PTI

Uttar Pradesh | 10 am

University students across country protest in solidarity with Jamia Millia, AMU

In the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), students gathered at the Sir Syed gate around 8.30 p.m. in what seemed to be a spontaneous surge of solidarity with the Jamia students. Police initially fired teargas at students to disperse them.

After facing stone-pelting, the police entered the campus, beat up students, broke their vehicles and allegedly set a room on fire in Morrison Hall. At least 60 students were injured. Internet services were suspended, making it difficult to get accurate reports from within the university. Police demanded immediate evacuation of the hostels and finally, the administration shut down the campus until January 5.

Delhi | 9.50 am

Situation tense in Jamia Millia Islamia, many students decide to leave for home

The situation in Jamia Millia Islamia remained tense on Monday morning and many students decided to leave for their homes, sources said. The university had turned into a battlefield on Sunday as police entered the campus and also used force, following protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, which led to violence and arson.

According to sources, the situation continues to be tense with many women students preferring to leave the campus for their homes.

Many students feel they are not safe even inside the campus.

The varsity had declared winter vacation from Saturday till January 5 and even postponed the exams. - PTI

Delhi | 9.45 am

35 detained Jamia Millia Islamia University students released

Students of the Jamia Millia Islamia University who were detained during the protest against Citizenship (Amendment) Act have been released, police said early on December 16.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (South East) Chinmoy Biswal said that all the 35 students who were detained at Kalkaji police station were released around 4 a.m. The proctor of the university visited the police station and a letter from the Delhi Minorities Commission’s Chairman Zafarul Islam Khan seeking the release of the students was also received by the police.

Punjab | 9.40 am

Repeal controversial Citizenship Act immediately: Amarinder to PM Modi

Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh has appealed to the Centre to repeal the amended Citizenship Act while urging the Union Home Minister and the Delhi Chief Minister to do all it takes to bring the situation under control.

“Disturbed by reports from Delhi in the wake of anti CAB protests....urge (Home Minister) Amit Shah & (Delhi CM) Arvind Kejriwal to do all it takes to bring the situation under control & prevent it from escalating further,” Mr. Singh tweeted.

Delhi | 9 am

Entry, exit gates of all metro stations opened: DMRC

The entry and exit gates of all metro stations were opened and services had resumed at all stations, the DMRC said on Monday.

In the wake of violence in southeast Delhi after a protest against the amended Citizenship Act, the Delhi Metro Rail corporation (DMRC) closed the gates of around 13 metro stations on Sunday evening, following advice from police.

“Security Update Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened. Normal services have resumed in all stations,” the DMRC said in a tweet on Monday. - PTI

West Bengal | 8.30 am

Protests against Citizenship Act continue in West Bengal

Violence continues to spread in West Bengal, without any death, on Sunday despite repeated paid broadcast by the Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee to maintain peace. From parts of Howrah, Murshidabad and adjacent areas of Kolkata, the protest spread in Nadia, North 24 Paraganas and parts of Barddhaman.

Violence spread with protests and thus internet data services were stopped in six districts. The violence was described as “largely sporadic” by the officials as it was confined to setting fire on vehicles, damaging few trains and shops. President of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in West Bengal, Dilip Ghosh blamed the Chief Minister “for protecting Bangladeshi extremist Muslims who instigated violence” while Trinamool Congress (TMC) leaders said BJP is organizing “extremist Muslims.”

(With inputs from Agencies)
