Hyderabad rape and murder case encounter: Is justice really served?

The recent gruesome rape and murder of the 27-year-old veterinarian in Telangana and the subsequent death of all the four accused in the case in a dramatic encounter with the police yet again shook the nation.The FSL analysis report of the DNA samples of the accused and veterinarian were out on Thursday (December 12). "The DNA of the victim matched with that of her family members. From the DNA test report and by looking at the evidence found at the two crime scenes – including footwear, jewellery and clothes of the victim – it is now confirmed that the burnt body was Disha’s,” a police source told TOI.While this mootable ‘instant justice’ by Telangana police has won laurels from all walks of life across this democratic nation, it has indeed brought to the fore many important questions and the pressing need to view ‘justice’ from more than one perspective.While opinion on the public forum over the police encounter is divided, Keerthi, a 21-year-old young student from Osmania University Hyderabad, feels this incident will change nothing for her.Sharing her thoughts with TimesofIndia.com, she said, “Honesty as a student I feel less and less safe every time something like this happens in the city and this feeling gets even worse when I see people around me blaming the victim. The encounter is an instant gratification for masses saying that justice is served, but for me personally I didn't feel any better. It changes nothing for me. I will still think twice to get out of my house.”Reacting to the encounter, Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Telugu judge Chinmayi Sripada , who has been consistently vocal about abuse against women, said, “People have seen justice being delayed and denied. Even in the Bhanwari Devi case and Nirbhaya ’s case that shook the entire nation, years passed but nothing happened. Right now they saw someone was guilty and a very very filmy scene happened, the four are killed in an encounter. I understand why people feel the way they should but really they shouldn’t give into emotions.”S. Maya, a Hyderabad-based Health and Counseling psychologist, presses for the need to look within and beyond these triggers of mob mentality when incidents like these occur and understand the factors affecting the loss of discretion that can lead to a crime of this grade.“We all want to take a side and say who is right and wrong, but the reality is at times we tend to forget and ignore things which are important as well. Seeking violence for violence is a mob and fear indicted thinking. The impact has given way to fear in some, anger in some, and nevertheless many platforms (social, discussions, and conversations) have multiplied all emotions to a greater extent creating a mob mentality and thereby we are trying to act god at some level.”She adds, “The ability of humans to think at times is affected and compromised due to various reasons, and most of the time they act on impulse and no thought, pure animal instincts and indulge in very gut wrenching acts which cause people to lose their lives. Hence the importance of recognizing people around us with such mental health issues and acting on their impulse by being under the influence of alcohol, psychotropic drugs and substances also compromises judgment and thereby leaves the victim helpless and the perpetuator at an advantage.”Sharing her idea of real justice in cases like these, Chinmayi Sripada said, “Justice is when rape cases are tried swiftly. Policies need to be changed, funds need to be used properly, NGOs should come in more, and society in general needs to stop slut shaming women and successful women. It’s a lot of things at a time. I’m demanding so many long term policy changes. But we have MPs in Lok Sabha who have registered criminal cases against them and some of them being rape accused too. What to do?”Keerthi believes fast track trials can help but she also views change in society can be the key. “Fast tracking the proceedings and punishing the criminals lawfully is more important. I feel that even if we bring new laws in place, more brutal ones, as punishment, we might be able to control this behaviour for a while but we won't be able to stop them completely. What needs to be done by each and every one of us is to change the attitude about women in the society.”Batting for a change in the mindset of the public, K. Ajay Kumar, Advocate, High Court of Telangana, shares an insight into the functionality of our fast track judicial system.“Justice is always subjective. Fast track courts are really helpful. However, we do not have the required strength in our judiciary. The recent Disha Act passed by the Andhra Pradesh Govt is more of a knee jerk reaction to the incident. The Government is trying to please the people by designating certain fast track courts for trail of rape cases. The amendment proposes to complete the whole investigation within 7 days and the trail within 14 days which is practically impossible. Even if the trail is completed in the specified time frame, the death penalty (if awarded) cannot be executed before the High court confirms it. Government instead of enacting such laws should try to strengthen the police system and try to prevent such crimes,” opines the young lawyer.He adds, “There is a very high rate of pendency of cases and very less number of judges. In reality, the existing sessions courts are being designated as fast track courts which in turn is increasing the burden on the judges. So firstly, appointments need to be made to fill up the large number of vacancies in the judiciary.”Talking about the status of awareness in women, Keerthi said, “I feel girls do have enough awareness about the safety protocols but they have inhibitions to act on them. They have it in the back of their minds but it doesn't come to them as a first reaction because they usually are conditioned to doubt themselves and their instincts.”According to Maya, temporary fixes don’t give permanent solutions. Instead, working on building and opening up the thinking of parents and young girls to get strong and wise and not panic and seek help from the right people is also crucial.Sharing her revelations in her one-year long battle against abuse of all kinds, Chinmayi, said, “This is going to be a work of life time. We all need to change. I look at my own biases. I read and listen a lot to understand different perspectives. This is a long battle and we have mountains to scale ahead. Right now, there are multiple questions that I don’t have answers to. But I hope I’ll have some day.”
