Tamil Nadu: Class 11 boy 'sexually abused' by principal, 3 teachers in Coimbatore

The victim also alleged that his younger brother was also harassed by the three accused. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Student allegedly sexually assaulted by principal, 3 teachers in Coimbatore Student alleged that four accused assaulted him in the name of frisking for mobile phone Police have booked all the accused under POCSO Act

Coimbatore: In a shocking incident, a class 11 boy was allegedly sexually assaulted by the principal and three other teachers at Sulur Kendriya Vidyalaya in the Coimbatore district of Tamil Nadu.

The three accused have been booked by the police under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. The case was filed by Sulur police based on the statement of the student.

According to a report in Times of India, the boy alleged that the incident took place while the principal and teachers were frisking him for possession of the mobile phone. The boy was admitted to Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital on Thursday (December 12).

"As I was sitting in the class, the principal and teachers asked me to come out for a body search. They removed my clothes to check for the mobile phone. They found a phone on me," the victim alleged.

After this, the student claimed that the principal sexually assaulted him. The victim also alleged that his younger brother was also harassed by the three accused. Earlier, the mother of the victims alleged that the police did not file a case when she went to complain against the accused teachers.

Meanwhile, the school principal has denied the allegations by the victim. "We already have the student council members and they were asked to search all students from class 9-12 for possession of the mobile phone in the class. We had received complaints from girls that some students were using mobile and pen cameras to record their videos. The council members then found a phone on the student and we have suspended him for nine days," the report quoted the principal as saying.

All the three accused have been booked under sections 7 (sexual assault), 8 (punishment for sexual assault) of the POCSO Act. The principal and three teachers have also been charged under Section 66E of the Information Technology Act and section 506 (i) (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).


