Why hasn't he spoken about police action in Jamia Millia Islamia? Priyanka Gandhi slams PM Modi

Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra addresses during 'Bharat Bachao' Rally organised by the party 'against the dictatorship of the BJP government and slaughtering of Indian economy and democracy' at Ramlila Maidan in New Delhi on Dec 14, 2019 | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and other Congress leaders staged a symbolic sit-in protest at India Gate in New Delhi Priyanka Gandhi demanded that PM Modi respond to alleged police brutality against students and speak out on economic slowdown Congress leaders staged sit-in protest against the police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia on Sunday

New Delhi: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra who staged a symbolic sit-in protest at the India Gate in New Delhi on Monday against the police crackdown in Jamia Millia Islamia, said PM Modi must make a statement on the matter.

“Prime Minister should answer on what happened at the University yesterday, whose government beat up the students? He should speak on the sinking economy. His party MLA raped a girl, why hasn't he spoken on it?” asked the Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East).

Her comments assume significance in the backdrop of former BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar being convicted today of the horrific rape in Unnao.

Calling the police crackdown “dictatorial”, Priyanka said Congress workers will fight against the government injustice. Dubbing the Jamia crackdown an “attack on the soul of India”, she asked why Prime Minister was silent on Sunday’s action and has not addressed the economic slowdown yet.

Earlier in the day, Priyanka Gandhi along with other senior party leaders marched to India Gate on the anniversary of Nirbhaya gang-rape case.

She urged the people to raise their voice against the newly-enacted Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2019.

Congress leaders Ahmed Patel, A.K. Antony, General Secretary K.C. Venugopal, Ambika Soni and Mukul Wasnik were also present at the protest.

Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi slammed the government dubbing it a mother of “violence and partition”.

"The Modi government itself has become the mother of violence and partition. It has pushed the country into a dark pit of hatred and burnt the future of the youth in a furnace,” she said in a statement today.

The Congress president alleged that Centre intends to spread "instability in the country, cause violence in the country, take away the rights of the youth and create an atmosphere of religious hysteria" just for political gains. She said the “perpetrators of this violence are none other than PM Modi and Amit Shah”.
