Pulwama Terror Attack: 'We Can't Let This Be Forgotten,' Akshay Kumar, Priyanka Chopra, Abhishek Bachchan And Others React With Shock

Akshay Kumar photographed at an event

Highlights "We can't let this be forgotten," Akshay Kumar tweeted

Hate is never the answer: Priyanka

Terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad has claimed responsibility for the attack

Bollywood reacted with shock at the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday, the worst in decades, in which nearly 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed and several others were injured. "Numb beyond belief at the dastardly terror attack on CRPF soldiers in Pulwama. May God give peace to their souls, and strength to their grieving families. Wishing the injured a speedy recovery. We can't let this be forgotten," tweeted Akshay Kumar, who is currently out of India. From the US, Priyanka Chopra tweeted, "Absolutely shocked by the attack in Pulwama... Hate is NEVER the answer. Strength to the families of the martyred jawans and the CRPF soldiers injured in the attack."

Numb beyond belief at the dastardly terror attack on #CRPF soldiers in #Pulwama. May God give peace to their souls, and strength to their grieving families. Wishing the injured a speedy recovery. We can't let this be forgotten. — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) February 14, 2019

Absolutely shocked by the attack in #Pulwama...Hate is NEVER the answer!!! Strength to the families of the martyred jawans and the CRPF soldiers injured in the attack. — PRIYANKA (@priyankachopra) February 14, 2019

Vicky Kaushal, who recently starred in the Uri: The Surgical Strike, tweeted, "Deeply saddened and shocked to hear the news of the terror attack in #Pulwama. My heart goes out to the families of the brave CRPF soldiers we lost today and praying for the speedy recovery of those injured." The film was based on the surgical strikes carried out by the Indian Army in Pakistan after 2016's Uri terror attack.

Deeply saddened and shocked to hear the news of the terror attack in #Pulwama . My heart goes out to the families of the brave CRPF soldiers we lost today and praying for the speedy recovery of those injured. — Vicky Kaushal (@vickykaushal09) February 14, 2019

"Such terrible news coming from Pulwama. Today, when people are celebrating love, hate raises its ugly head too. My thoughts and prayers for the martyrs and their families," posted Abhishek Bachchan.

Such terrible news coming from #Pulwama. Today when people are celebrating love, hate raises it's ugly head too. My thoughts and prayers for the martyrs and their families. — Abhishek Bachchan (@juniorbachchan) February 14, 2019

Terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad has claimed responsibility for the attack. The terrorists rammed an explosive-laden car into a CRPF convoy.

"Deeply saddened and so angry to know about the cowardly attack on CRPF India convoy in Pulwama. My heart goes out to the members of the family who have today lost a SON, a BROTHER, a HUSBAND or a FATHER. Prayers for the speedy recovery of the injured," tweeted Anupam Kher.

Deeply Saddened and so angry to know about the cowardly attack on @crpfindia convoy in #Pulwama. My heart goes out to the members of the family who have today lost a SON, a BROTHER, a HUSBAND or a FATHER. Prayers for the speedy recovery of the injured. — Anupam Kher (@AnupamPKher) February 14, 2019

"Absolutely tragic news coming from Pulwama. Condolences to the families of the martyrs and prayers for the injured jawans. Cowards are at it again. Absolutely deplorable," read Riteish Deshmukh's tweet.

Absolutely tragic news coming from #Pulwama - Condolences to the families of the martyrs- & prayers for the injured jawans. Cowards are at it again. Absolutely deplorable. #pulwamaterrorattack — Riteish Deshmukh (@Riteishd) February 14, 2019

R Madhavan, Sonali Kulkarni, Madhur Bhandarkar and several others also condemned the attack.

#Pulwama Who are these people who are celebrating a win after this dastardly and cowardly attack..is just condemning this enough..wipe out not just their smiles but their faces.. show us our revenge, instill dismay and dread with the retaliation. — Ranganathan Madhavan (@ActorMadhavan) February 14, 2019

Shocked and saddened to hear about terror attacks at #Pulwama It's a day to spread love and not violence Strength to the families and salute to our soldiers — sonalikulkarni (@sonalikulkarni) February 14, 2019

Saddened to here about the cowardly and heinous attack on #CRPF convoy in #Pulwama today. My deepest condolences to the families of our brave Jawans who were martyred. Prayers for the speedy recovery of the injured. — Madhur Bhandarkar (@imbhandarkar) February 14, 2019

President Ram Nath Kovind tweeted that the "entire nation stands united in the fight against the forces of terror and evil."

Strongly condemn the terrorist attack in Pulwama, J&K. Thoughts and prayers with the families of martyrs and wishing an early recovery to those injured. The entire nation stands united in the fight against the forces of terror and evil #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) February 14, 2019

— President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) February 14, 2019

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said that the "sacrifices" of the jawans "will not go in vain."

Attack on CRPF personnel in Pulwama is despicable. I strongly condemn this dastardly attack. The sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain. The entire nation stands shoulder to shoulder with the families of the brave martyrs. May the injured recover quickly. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 14, 2019

Spoke to Home Minister Rajnath Singh Ji and other top officials regarding the situation in the wake of the attack in Pulwama. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) February 14, 2019

Home Minister Rajnath Singh is expected to visit Jammu and Kashmir on Friday to review the situation.
