Controversial Citizenship Bill: FM Qureshi urges US to ban Indian officials

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) - Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi expressed concern on India‘s controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill - which excludes Muslims and targeted at curbing of minorities - and urged the US to ban Indian officials including Indian Home Minister Amit Shah.

Addressing the National Assembly, FM Qureshi said that the controversial law gave rise to a constitutional crisis in India. “The real face of Modi has been exposed infront of the entire world while few have still chosen to close their eyes,” he expressed, adding that they always have, and will stand with Indian Muslims.

In a tweet, FM Qureshi showed concern over the “brutal and indiscriminate use of force” by the Indian government against the students of Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

He continued saying: “The Modi government continues to curb and undermine the rights of minorities in accordance with Hindutva Supremacist ideology.”

“Illegal annexation of Kashmir, Babri Masjid, and Citizenship Amendment Bill which excludes Muslims are all targeted towards subjugation of minorities,” he added.

The Modi Government continues to curb & undermine the rights of minorities in accordance with Hindutva Supremacist ideology. Illegal Annexation of Kashmir, Babari Masjid, Citizenship Amendment Bill which excludes Muslims are all targeted towards subjugation of Minorities. https://t.co/nIw0KmPVkm — Shah Mahmood Qureshi (@SMQureshiPTI) December 16, 2019

The Foreign Minister asserted that Muslims, Dalits, Sikhs and Christians are vulnerable in India. “Modi persecuted minorities and executed a genocide against Muslims in Gujrat, and he is doing all of this again today,” he added.

He urged the Indian Parliament to stop oppressing the minorities and release innocent people in India.

Speaking on the occasion, former Speaker Sardar Ayaz Sadiq said that the world is watching what is happening in India, and now the country has this opportunity to make the world aware of the Indian mindset.

“We will pass a unanimous resolution against the controversial Indian bill, while the Speaker and Chairman have also sought suggestions from the Senate to send delegations on overseas visits for Kashmir issue,” said Qureshi.
