CAA protest intensifies in UP, police station set on fire, internet suspended in Aligarh

UP: Trainer aircraft crashes near Aligarh; All six on-board safe

Dr Kafeel Khan arrested by UP STF for making 'inflammatory' remarks at anti-CAA rally in Aligarh

PM Modi to lay foundation stones of state varsity, Aligarh node of defence corridor: UP CM

CAA protest intensifies in UP, police station set on fire, internet suspended in Aligarh

India

oi-Mousumi Dash

Mau, Dec 16: The anti-citizenship amended law intensified in Uttar Pradesh. On Monday evening a police station in Mirza Hadipura area of the eastern part of the state was set on fire. Section 144 has been imposed in the Mau area.

Reportedly, the agitators burnt several vehicles and pelted stones at policemen amid clashes. Police was resorted to fire tear gas shells and lathi-charged to control the mob.

The cops even tried to douse the fire. The incident was triggered by the crackdown of police on the students at Jamia Millia University in Delhi and Aligarh Muslim University.

UP DGP OP Singh said to news agency ANI, "The situation in Mau is completely under control now. Administration is keeping a close watch on the situation. Section 144 has been imposed in the area."

Uttar Pradesh DGP OP Singh: The situation in Mau is completely under control now. Administration is keeping a close watch on the situation. Section 144 has been imposed in the area. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/zbNicZFVLM — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 16, 2019

Meanwhile, internet services has been suspended in Aligarh (city) till Tuesay midnight.

On Monday, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra sat on a symbolic protest at the India Gate in solidarity with students protesting against the amended Citizenship Act.

On Sunday night, Police personnel launched a crackdown on protesters inside the Jamia Millia Islamia campus in Delhi after buses and police vehicles were gutted during an agitation against the amended citizenship law near the varsity.

MHA asks States, UTs to check violence, circulation of fake news

Later, the agitation also spread in Aligarh Muslim University and today students across the nation took out protest rally in the wake of the Citizenship Amendment Act.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Monday, December 16, 2019, 20:12 [IST]
