NA passes resolution against India’s discriminatory law excluding Muslims

The National Assembly on Monday unanimously passed a resolution condemning the Indian government over discriminatory legislation against Muslims and human rights abuses in Indian-held Kashmir (IHK).

Tabled by Federal Minister for Special Education Shafqat Mehmood, the resolution condemned India for passing a controversial citizenship act that grants nationality to persecuted Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians who fled Muslim-majority Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan prior to 2015.

The passage of the controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill led to violent demonstrations across India, as protesters said it would convert thousands of illegal immigrants into legal residents. Muslims also protested against the law as it does not give them the same rights to citizenship as members of other faiths, a move critics say undermines the secular constitution. At least six people have been killed and more than 100 injured since the passage of the bill.

The enactment of the citizenship law was a key election promise of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, re-energising his nationalist, Hindu support base.

Talking about the matter in the National Assembly, PML-N leader Ayaz Sadiq said it was time to tell the entire world about the mindset which is “no longer confined to Kashmir but is plaguing the whole of India”. He stressed the need for a diplomatic offensive and said that Prime Minister Imran Khan should highlight the issue all over the world.

Khurram Dastagir, another PML-N MNA, said that India annexed occupied Kashmir 134 days ago and the Pakistani government did nothing practically for the people of the region. He said the government seemed to be paralysed at the diplomatic level.

“It seems that the government has accepted the annexation of Kashmir by India,” he said, adding that the people of Pakistan have not accepted the alleged move.

Dr Darshan of the PML-N said the entire Hindu community of Pakistan condemned Modi’s recent actions.

Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi expressed concern on India’s controversial Citizenship Amendment Bill – which excludes Muslims and targeted towards subjugation of minorities – and urged the US to ban Indian officials including Indian Home Minister Amit Shah.

Addressing the National Assembly, FM Qureshi said that the controversial law gave rise to a constitutional crisis in India. “The real face of Modi has been exposed infront of the entire world while few have still chosen to close their eyes,” he expressed, adding that they always have, and will stand with Indian Muslims.

In a tweet, FM Qureshi showed concern over the “brutal and indiscriminate use of force” by the Indian government against the students of Jamia Milia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

He continued saying: “The Modi government continues to curb and undermine the rights of minorities in accordance with Hindutva Supremacist ideology.”

“Illegal annexation of Kashmir, Babri Masjid, and Citizenship Amendment Bill which excludes Muslims are all targeted towards subjugation of minorities,” he added.

The Modi Government continues to curb & undermine the rights of minorities in accordance with Hindutva Supremacist ideology. Illegal Annexation of Kashmir, Babari Masjid, Citizenship Amendment Bill which excludes Muslims are all targeted towards subjugation of Minorities. Concerned about the brutal & indiscriminate use of force by the state on Indian Muslim students of Jamia Millia Islamia & Aligarh Muslim

University, protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

The Foreign Minister asserted that Muslims, Dalits, Sikhs and Christians are vulnerable in India. “Modi persecuted minorities and executed a genocide against Muslims in Gujrat, and he is doing all of this again today,” he added.

He urged the Indian Parliement to stop oppressing the minorities and release innocent people in India.

Speaking on the occasion, former Speaker Sardar Ayaz Sadiq said that the world is watching what is happening in India, and now the country has this opportunity to make the world aware of the Indian mindset.

“We will pass a unanimous resolution against the controversial Indian bill, while the Speaker and Chairman have also sought suggestions from the Senate to send delegations on overseas visits for Kashmir issue,” he added.
