Allow peaceful stir: Violence can’t be condoned but police can’t trample upon students’ right to protest

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act have spread to many university campuses, leading to confrontation with police in some instances. One of the bigger police-protester clashes was seen on Sunday at Delhi’s Jamia Millia Islamia. At least four buses were set on fire, and a dozen cars and scores of bikes were damaged. Reports emerged of stone pelting by protesting students on police, while the latter forcibly entered the varsity and lobbed tear gas shells on the campus. Social media videos also emerged of policemen assaulting students, suggesting the high-handedness of the crackdown.

News of police action at Jamia sparked off solidarity protests at more than 30 campuses. Students from Aligarh Muslim University demonstrated, leading to their own clashes with police. Similar scenes were witnessed at Patna University, while students of Jadavpur University in Kolkata took out a protest march at midnight. In Hyderabad, hundreds of students of the Maulana Azad National Urdu University took to the streets. Also expressing their solidarity against police action were students of Banaras Hindu University, Pondicherry University, and Nadwa College in Lucknow. Students from the Tata Institute of Social Sciences of Mumbai, DU, JNU, IIT Madras, IISc and IIM Bangalore expressed solidarity as well.

Evidently the CAA has worked up students at several universities and they feel the need to express themselves on the issue through protests – a right guaranteed by the Constitution. However, as the SC observed yesterday, this does not mean protesters can take law and order in their hands. Arson and damaging public property cannot be condoned under any circumstances. That said, where there are allegations that ‘outsiders’ have infiltrated student protests and caused the violence, these need to be independently assessed and then prosecuted. The larger body of peacefully demonstrating students must not be assaulted, just because they are critical of government policy.

Jamia vice-chancellor Najma Akhtar has said that police entered this campus without permission. Such a violation of an educational institution is shocking. Some BJP politicians have suggested the protesting students are prey to rumours. Even where this is the case, authorities should engage the students, not subject them to brutal police action. Besides, from Amit Shah to Sitaram Yechury, India has a hoary tradition of raising political stalwarts through student politics. Nothing illegitimate about it. That word is better applied to lathi charging unarmed students.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
