Opinion | Tensions when growth is slowing can be damaging

Last Friday, I was woken up by a frantic phone call from an old friend. The reason for his worry was that when he lived abroad three decades ago, he fell in love with a Muslim girl from a neighbouring country. They started living together. And when they came to know that they are going to be parents, they got married without much ado. Later when he returned home, he introduced his wife to everyone with her name changed.

My friend’s wife followed every custom and ritual and took part in every religious ceremony. Except for his close family, nobody knew the name her parents gave her. Even today, they are considered the ideal couple in our circle of friends. Celebrating Holi and Diwali at their place is a joyful experience. Now even their grandchildren have grown up and the new residents of the city don’t even remember which country or which clan she belongs to.

Why is he so worried then? He told me that he had completed all the formalities but until a few years ago, officials from intelligence police came whenever they wanted seeking various documents. It was embarrassing if there were relatives or friends around at that time. “After all, what wrong has my wife committed? She follows all the family traditions and laws of this country. Her children and her children’s children have been born on this land. She pays taxes, too, from whatever she earns with her professional skills." Then why don’t these troubles stop haunting them?

He fears his wife may lose her Indian citizenship after the amended Citizenship Act. On the other hand, her relatives living abroad are aggravating their anxiety. I asked him not to worry. “You have followed all the rules and laws of this country like a responsible citizen, you will face no problems." By the time our conversation ended, the panic in his voice had lessened but had not completely gone away. It was clear that he did not completely trust me.

When police officials harassed them without any reason, then what will they do now that they have an excuse, he argued. This question is terrifying all those whose daughter-in-law or son-in-law are from ‘abroad’.

In the five-and-a-half years of the Modi government, it is for the first time that apprehensions are rife in the entire country. After Friday prayers at mosques, the demonstrations that took place in dozens of cities is evidence of it. It is a different thing that many Muslims are saying that such demonstrations are not needed now and they will send the wrong message. They believe that the people’s movement in the North-East is not about Hindus and Muslims. They are apprehensive and insecure about their cultural identity. The protests in the rest of the country will give an opportunity to people who want to make it an issue about Hindus and Muslims.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has already urged people to trust their ‘sevak’. “We won’t let injustice to take place to anyone". Home minister Amit Shah, too, expressed the same opinion but apprehensions are not being mitigated. Of course, the government will have to assuage people’s fears. The government had taken such meaningful precautionary measures before the Ayodhya verdict, but this time such preparation and alertness were not seen.

The restoration of trust in the country is also necessary because the government requires time and peace to retain control and balance on the economic front. At a time when an economic slowdown has distressed the markets, communal tension can prove to be very damaging.

In such a situation, if unrest spreads to more parts of the country, it won’t be in anyone’s interest.

The Citizenship Amendment Act provides for citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians who have come to India from neighbouring countries before 31 December 2014. Muslims have not been included in this and this has been the trigger of all the apprehension. It is important to look at a figure here. A total of 33.03 million people had applied for the National Register of Citizens in Assam. Out of that, 31.12 million were found eligible. A total of 1.91 million out of 33.03 million people were found unfit. It’s not that all these people have been put in jails. They still have the option to approach courts. Not all are Muslims among these 1.91 million. Many Hindus have also come under its purview.

The people of the North-East fear that outsiders will become citizens under the guise of this law. They will also share the employment opportunities and other resources, which at present are insufficient. Assam has already boiled over non-Assamese people during the 1980s. People who had witnessed that agitation still get shaken while recalling those days. Hopefully, this dispute will be resolved in time so that the new generation does not have to go through the same agony.

Shashi Shekhar is editor-in-chief, Hindustan. His Twitter handle is @shekarkahin

Subscribe to Mint Newsletters * Enter a valid email * Thank you for subscribing to our newsletter.

Never miss a story! Stay connected and informed with Mint. Download our App Now!!

Topics
