Unnao rape case: CBI seeks life imprisonment for convict Kuldeep Singh Sengar; sentencing on Dec 20

File picture: Kuldeep Singh Sengar | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The CBI also called for sufficient financial compensation for the rape survivor CBI's Additional SPP Bhartendu described the Unnao victim's case "an extraordinary one" Delhi’s Tis Hazari court had on Monday found Kuldeep Singh Sengar guilty of rape

New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Tuesday urged a court to hand over life imprisonment to expelled Bharatiya Janata Party MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who was on Monday convicted for raping a minor in Uttar Pradesh’s Unnao in 2017.

Seeking maximum punishment for Sengar, the CBI's Additional Special Public Prosecutor told District Judge Dharmesh Sharma that it was a fight for justice of an individual against the system.

The agency also called for sufficient financial compensation for the rape survivor.

Delhi’s Tis Hazari court had on Monday found Sengar guilty of rape under the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

On Tuesday, the court adjourned till December 20 the hearing on the quantum of punishment to Sengar.

While describing the Unnao victim's case "an extraordinary one", CBI's Additional SPP Bhartendu urged the court to "consider her continued suffering".

The CBI said that rape "is not only a physical assault but it causes immense mental trauma too" and "undue sympathy may disrupt the balance of sentence which would, in turn, hamper its societal impact".

Bhartendu further referred to judgments delivered by the Supreme Court to back his arguments seeking a stricter punishment to 53-year-old Sengar. He added that considering the impact of such a crime, the convict deserves maximum punishment.

However, Sengar's lawyers appealed for minimum punishment from the court. The counsel said that his client was in public life for decades and had contributed in various welfare activities for the upliftment of the people.

"His conduct was good during custody. He has two minor daughters, does not have a prior history of crime. Please consider these facts also," the lawyer mentioned before the court.

The Unnao woman was abducted and raped by four-time BJP MLA from Bangarmau, Sengar, in 2017 when she was a minor.

However, the complaint was filed only after she tried to set herself ablaze outside the official residence of Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in Lucknow on April 8, 2018.

She tried to immolate herself after her father was brutally beaten up by Sengar's brother, Atul Sengar. Instead of taking him to a hospital, her father was shifted to a prison. In fact, a video clip showing Atul Sengar thrashing the victim’s father had gone viral on social media.

However, her father died two days later in police custody. Amidst hullaballoo, the case was transferred to the CBI. The Sengar brothers and two others were arrested later.

Kuldeep Sengar was expelled from BJP in August.
