Won’t intervene; approach High Courts: Supreme Court to petitioners in Jamia violence case

Supreme Court hears pleas on Jamia violence | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Hearing the pleas on alleged police brutality against students of the Jamia Millia Islamia university and other persons protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, the Supreme Court on Tuesday said the matter was a law and order issue and petitioners should first approach lower courts.

“We don't want to spend time knowing facts. You should go to courts below first,” CJI SA Bobde said while taking up the pleas on CAA protests.

The court, however, asked the question as to how were the buses burnt during Jamia students’ protest against CAA on Sunday. “We do not have to intervene. It is a law and order problem; how did the buses burn? Why don’t you approach jurisdictional High Court?” the court asked.

During the hearing, when senior advocate Indira Jaising – appearing for the protesters – pointed out that FIRs after FIRs have been filed against students at Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University, the SC bench said that FIRs are to be filed under law for offences such as destruction of properties.

“If anybody commits offence then police is free to arrest,” the court said, adding injured students should get medical attention.

When lawyer for the Alumni Association of Jamia university said before the bench that the right to peaceful protests has to be protected by the Supreme Court, the court stated: “We have disclosed our minds. High Courts should be approached for fact-finding exercise.”

The court also refused to take into account statements made by Jamia Vice-Chancellor Najma Akhtar to the media yesterday, stating it was not going to rely on newspapers to arrive at judicial decisions.

Jaising pointed out that Jamia students sustained injuries during the police action inside the campus. "It's established law that universities are not a place where police can enter without permission of VC. One person lost eyesight. Legs of some students were broken,” she said.

To this, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta replied, "Not a single student has lost eyesight (in the police action)." He added that no student is in jail and that it was police that took injured students to hospitals.

“It is a cross state issue and needs a fact-finding SIT. How can the court wash its hands of the issue? The court heard Telangana encounter case. We are asking for a similar order,” Jaising said, pleading the court to intervene in the matter.

To this, CJI Bobde said: “The Telangana encounter case could be looked into by appointing a commission but in this case, there is no committee that can look into it all over the country.”

“Having regard to the nature of the matter and the vast disputed area, we find it would not be feasible to appoint a single committee to go into the matter in different states. This will entail collection of evidence from various states,” the bench said.

Reiterating that since incidents have taken place at various places and one inquiry cannot be ordered in these cases, the court stated that the bench finds it appropriate to direct petitioners to approach HCs with their grievances.

“HCs would be at liberty to pass orders on arrests and medical assistance,” the bench said. “HCs will also be at liberty to order inquiries,” it added.

The court, meanwhile, asked the Centre to give details as to why notices were not given to protesters before arrest and whether medical assistance was given.

Senior advocate Colin Gonsalves, meanwhile, urged the court to send a former judge to AMU for a fact-finding mission.

During the hearing, the bench took a strong note of lawyers arguing at high pitch and said there should not be a shouting match just because there is large crowd and media in the courtroom.
