Malad woman sold for Rs 2 lakh on pretext of 'good' job, 6 including 2 women arrested

h. The police have arrested six people including two women in connection with this case. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The police have arrested six people including two women in connection with this case The rescued woman is a resident of Malad and lived with her husband and four children The man who bought the woman and sexually abused her was identified as Mukesh Jangid

Mumbai: What seems like a tip of an iceberg, a Malad woman was rescued by Mumbai Police after she was kidnapped and sold off to a man in Rajasthan for a sum of Rs 2 lakh. The police have arrested six people of the racket including two women in connection with the case.

The man who bought the woman and sexually abused her was identified as Mukesh Jangid. Reportedly victim was forced to marry Mukesh and sign paperwork which made it appear that she was legally his wife, in case authorities came checking. According to a report by The Times of India, the police stated that the mastermind of this racket, Kavita Jadhav is likely to have similarly sold off other vulnerable women. She is one of the arrested accused while the police officials are now tracking her phone calls.

Reportedly, the rescued woman is a resident of Malad and lived with her husband and four children. The woman was tricked in getting a good job in a catering business in Gujarat, to which the victim agreed. Meanwhile, on November 5 she was sent to Gujarat with a man named Raju. Here she was held captive for four days in Kosamba, Surat and was then handed over to Vijay at the Ahmedabad station.

While she was being forced to get married in a temple and then legally, she kept begging the accused to sent her back to the family in Mumbai but all efforts in vain. Meanwhile, the victim's family sensed that something was wrong as she did not contact ever since she had left. The family members then received a call where Jangid was asking Rs 2 lakh ransom. They rushed to lodge a police complaint following which the police tracked the caller and subsequently rescued the woman.

However, the police have arrested six people in the case who were identified as Vivek, Mukesh, Krishna, Pravin, Jadhav and Shinde.
