No bail for Congress corporator Ravindra Dhangekar who abused PMC officer

On Thursday, Pune city sessions court rejected the bail plea of Congress corporator Ravindra Dhangekar in a case pertaining to assault on Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) additional commissioner Rajendra Nimbalkar. The prosecution argued that Dhangekar hurled a chappal towards Nimbalkar and so, he was the perpetrator. The court thus considered the submission but rejected the bail.The Shivaji Nagar police have booked Dhangekar, corporator Arvind Shinde and other activists under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).Nimbalkar was attacked by the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) leaders on February 11, after an argument broke out over the tender of water hyacinth removal. While the corporators had raised a protest, Dhangekar was present in the room with 16-17 others, Nimbalkar claimed. While the latter was doling out information on the tender, Dhangekar and others made personal remarks on his integrity by referring to him as a thief and a corrupt person. Following these statements, Nimbalkar said that he had was not attending this session to listen to these allegations, following which Dhangekar and his aides abused and attacked him.^^67957035^^After the Shivaji Nagar police filed an FIR against Dhangekar and Shinde, they had filed an anticipatory bail application in the sessions court. While Shinde was granted it, Dhangekar was denied.Advocate Harshad Nimbalkar representing Dhangekar argued that he has been falsely implicated and the entire story is fabricated just to harass and pressure him. “He is a whistleblower of the corruption over the tender process for removing hyacinth at Katraj, Pashan and Nanasaheb Peshwe lakes,” he said, further arguing that the civic body had floated the tender at an inflated cost for removing the hyacinth, despite the water bodies being freed of it long ago.“The corporators were protesting as the tender was floated with an aim to please the three contractors who are closely aligned with the Bharatiya Janata Party. Dhangekar unearthed the entire modus of this corrupt deal and the trail of the tender process. He has been victimised by filing this false case only to silence the voice,” he added.As a result of their protest, the Mayor has cancelled the tender and those behind the issuance of the illegal procedures will be punished according to the law. Dhangekar’s lawyer said that there is nothing to recover from his client and so, he must be released on bail — a demand which was opposed by district government pleader, Ujjwala Pawar.She argued that the investigation has shed light on the actuality where Dhangekar hurled a chappal towards Nimbalkar, making his a role a “serious one” in the scheme of things.“He called Nimbalkar a thief and a corrupt person twice and he also assaulted him,” she told the court, adding that the cops are yet to recover the footwear used in the attack.
