CJI Bobde recuses himself from hearing Nirbhaya convict’s review plea -- Why do judges recuse themselves?

In this file photo, the then CJI Ranjan Gogoi (left) speaks with current CJI SA Bobde. | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights When they take oath, Supreme Court and high court judges promise to perform their duties and deliver justice “without fear or favour, affection or ill-will” Recusal emphasises the two key judicial concepts of impartiality and independence A recusal on mere suggestion by a party with a vested interest can be as unfair as a failure to recuse in cases of genuine conflict of interest

Chief Justice of India (CJI) SA Bobde has recused himself from hearing a review petition filed by one of the convicts in the 2012 Nirbhaya gang-rape and murder case.

A new bench constituted by the CJI will now take up the convict Akshay Kumar’s review plea on Wednesday.

While recusing himself, CJI Bobde said that his nephew had appeared on behalf of the mother of the 23-year-old paramedical student who had been brutally gang-raped and murdered in December 2012.

When it comes to recusals, it’s worth asking, however, under what circumstances do judges in India recuse themselves from a case and how common is the practice?

Reasons for recusal

Recusal is a well-known concept in the judicial history of western countries and goes back to at least the 19th century. Though it is based on the principles of natural justice and impartiality, there is no precise set of rules governing recusal in the Indian judicial system.

Recusal may be either automatic, in which a judge himself or herself withdraws from a case, or when one of the parties in the case claims the possibility of personal interest or bias on the judge’s part, and requests a recusal.

When they take oath, Supreme Court and high court judges promise to perform their duties and deliver justice “without fear or favour, affection or ill-will”.

Recusal emphasises the two key judicial concepts of impartiality and independence.

A recusal on mere suggestion by a party with a vested interest can be as unfair as a failure to recuse in cases of genuine conflict of interest.

Some examples of recusal in 2019
