Justice too late? To convict Kuldeep Sengar of rape, the survivor battled patriarchy and political power

Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Sengar has been convicted of raping a minor girl from Unnao in 2017. That experience would have been horrific enough for the survivor, but her fight for justice in the intervening years inflicted further grave traumas. The special court that convicted Sengar on Monday pointed to some of the ways in which her struggle for justice had to be a struggle against the system meant to give her justice. For example, it found that the CBI investigation “suffered from patriarchal approach”, had a mindset of “brushing the issues of sexual violence against children under the carpet”, and was in fact not “fair” to either the survivor or her family members.

That the safeguards for preventing the “re-victimisation” of rape survivors completely failed, is an experience shared with too many other cases. This is the core challenge in addressing crimes against women in India, bringing de facto practices in line with de jure law. The investigation should have involved a woman officer, it did not. The survivor should not have been called to the CBI office for recording successive statements, she was. The accused was a four-time BJP MLA, she was “under threat, worried … a village girl”. Her safety should have been guaranteed. Instead her father died suspiciously in custody, her aunts in an equally suspicious traffic accident, where she was seriously injured alongside her lawyer. Trials in these cases continue.

The widespread public outrage that erupted after the 2012 Nirbhaya case, did impel a notable strengthening of anti-rape legislation but not a true course correction in the justice system. Failures in registering crimes, safeguarding witnesses, reducing pendency and delivering convictions continue. Meanwhile, as seen in last month’s Hyderabad gang rape and murder of a young veterinary doctor, new horrors such as setting the victim/ survivor on fire seem to be “trending”. The encounter killing of the four accused just feeds into a climate of impunity.

True deterrence requires timely legal processes and calibrated punishment. And in cases where the rape accused is politically influential, the state must go the extra mile in delivering a fair probe to the survivor. Doing so will send a powerful message to the public as well as police. As will political parties refraining from fielding candidates charged with crimes against women. During 2009-19 the number of Lok Sabha MPs charged with such offences actually rose by 850%, to 19 now.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
