Nur, others hurt in DU clash

Ducsu VP Nurul Haque Nur, in blue panjabi, along with his supporters, and Muktijuddho Moncho activists engaged in clash yesterday near Raju Memorial Sculpture in the capital’s Dhaka University area. Photo: Collected

At least 15 people, including Ducsu Vice-President Nurul Haque Nur, were injured in a clash between the activists of Muktijuddho Moncho and Bangladesh Sadharan Chhatra Adhikar Sangrakkhan Parishad on Dhaka University campus yesterday.

The clash ensued after some activists of Muktijuddho Moncho -- a platform comprising descendants of freedom fighters -- swooped on the Parishad members when the latter gathered at the base of Raju Memorial Sculpture for a rally protesting the Citizenship Amendment Act of India.

Witnesses said Nur and other activists of his organisation started gathering there around 4:00pm and were about to start the protest rally as per their earlier announcement.

The incident took place after Moncho activists tried to obstruct Nur from holding a rally to protest India’s Citizenship Amendment ACT. Photo: Collected

Around 15 to 20 activists of Muktijuddho Moncho, led by its President Aminul Islam Bulbul and General Secretary Al Mamun, also took position at the venue around the same time and asked the protesters to call off their programme.

As the Parishad activists denied to do so, an altercation ensued between the two groups. At one stage, Bulbul started beating Nur and his followers.

Moments later, Parishad’s activists counter-attacked and chased the Moncho activists away.

All the injured took primary treatment at Dhaka Medical College Hospital.

Talking to The Daily Star, Nur alleged that the Moncho activists had assaulted them for raising voice against the aggression of the Indian government on their citizens.

He also said a finger of his left hand was broken in the attack.

Contacted, Al Mamun, general secretary of the Muktijuddho Moncho, said, “We only resisted the group led by Nur when they came to attack us.

“Citizenship Amendment Bill is an internal issue of India and the Ducsu VP has no right to protest the decision,” Mamun said.

ATTACK EVEN INSIDE VC’S RESIDENCE

Moncho activists carried out another attack on the Parishad members when they went to the vice-chancellor’s residence to file a complaint regarding the previous attack.

Talking to this correspondent, Rashed Khan, joint convener of the Parishad, said he, along with 15 other activists of their platform, went to the VC’s residence to lodge a complaint as the VC was not at office.

“When we were in the waiting room to meet the VC, a group of at least 50 people led by Mamun and Bulbul attacked us. They punched and kicked us indiscriminately and drove us away,” Rashed said.

Two of their activists -- Akram Hossain and Nahid Islam --were hurt in the attack and were undergoing treatment at DMCH.

Muktijuddho Moncho leaders could not be contacted for comments despite several attempts.
