7 imprisoned for interrupting court proceedings in Tirupur

Tirupur: Seven people were lodged in Coimbatore Central Prison under judicial custody on Tuesday for interrupting proceedings of Tirupur chief judicial magistrate court.

The seven - V Sivakumar, 41, A Palani Kumar, 34, Nagarajan, 45, Vijayakumar, 50, Subramanian, 43, Saravanan, 25, and Rakkimuthu, 41 - were arrested on Monday night for arguing with the court staff after they were refused the copy of first information report (FIR) registered in connection with circulating derogatory videos of judicial officers on social media.

According to police, one of the arrested - Sivakumar - is a close associate of Nal Ragu Prakash, of Moolanur, who was arrested recently for assaulting his neighbours. Since Ragu Prakash was denied bail in the case, his wife N Vidhya, along with two others, had circulated derogatory videos of judicial officers through YouTube and WhatsApp.

Subsequently, Vidhya and her aides were booked and arrested in November first week. While the case is being probed by CBCID, Sivakumar and others on Monday quarrelled with the court staff, demanding the copy of FIR in that case.

“As the FIR was not available online, Sivakumar filed a petition seeking a copy of it. But the court returned the petition saying he was not connected to the case and had no merit to demand the FIR,” a police source said.

When the trial was underway on Monday, Sivakumar and his accomplices argued with the court staff. Even after the judge intervened and directed Sivakumar to stop, he continued the argument and also raised slogans.

Chief judicial magistrate G Sundararajan took up the matter suo motu and the seven were charged under Section 228 (intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding) of the Indian Penal Code.

Following this, Tirupur north police took them into custody on Monday night. All the seven were produced before Tirupur judicial magistrate court-I on Tuesday and judge D Kaviarasan remanded them in judicial custody till December 30.

Meanwhile, Dharapuram judicial magistrate court had on Monday extended the remand period of Ragu Prakash, who has been languishing in the Coimbatore Central Prison since September 18 after being arrested for failing to appear before the court in the assault case. The court also directed police to produce his wife Vidya before it on December 30.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
