Sachin GIDC rape: Two days on, 12 teams of cops yet to make a headway

A grab of the video showing the man suspected to be the accused

SURAT: Police are yet to identify the man who had sexually assaulted and raped a four-year-old girl in an area under the limits of Sachin GIDC police station here two days ago. They have CCTV footage of a suspect though, but in the absence of CCTV coverage at the spot of crime the case has become challenging for them. Police are working on multiple theories and checking various possibilities to nab the culprit. They are also working to identify the person on the basis of description provided by the rape survivor. However, the details have not proved to be helpful to police as yet. With each passing hour, the possibility of detection of the case is lessening and chances of the accused having left the city increasing.

Twelve police teams are working to identify the suspect by taking help of around 1,000 local residents. Police teams from detection of crime branch (DCB), special operations group (SOG) and local police are working on the case. Police sub-inspectors are leading teams of five cops each. Local staff of around 100 cops are also working to identify the suspect.

“Twelve police teams of various branches are taking help of 1,000 people, including locals. We have announced reward for anyone giving us information about the suspect,” city police commissioner R B Brahmbhatt told TOI.

“We have not yet received any strong clue. Cops are each and every house in the locality and questioning residents. They are looking for men of the same age group as that of the suspect (police not giving the age of the suspect),” said a police officer.

The girl had gone to watch Ramleela just 50 metres away from her house along with her father. She was abducted by an unidentified man the moment her father went near the dais for a brief period. The man took the girl in nearby bushes and raped her. The girl returned home on her own at around 4am on Monday and informed them about her ordeal. The girl’s family immediately lodged police complaint.

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


