Unnao rapist nailed

THE Delhi court on Wednesday convicted the ‘powerful’ expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar for raping a then minor girl in Unnao, UP, in June 2017. The Unnao rape verdict comes as a refreshing affirmation of the efficacy of the criminal justice delivery on two counts. One, it bucks the trend of the powerful seeming to ride roughshod over the disadvantaged commoner and get away with it. Two, it debunks the notion that the process to punish the guilty stretches so inordinately, even decades, that it leaves the hapless victim with a sense of denial of justice.

However, the horrifying twists and turns that the trajectory for justice has taken in over two years warrant a deeper introspection and more responsive mechanism. No doubt, the judgment has oiled the wheels of the rusty system, turning it for the better. But, it is by no means a close-ended all’s-well-that-ends-well scenario. For, justice has come at a huge cost: three brutal murders. Even as the police dilly-dallied in registering the case of rape, they were quick to imprison her father on charges of illegally possessing firearms. Reeking of a decadence of law and order, he was tortured and died in custody a couple of days later. The MLA was arrested only after the family, sick of the oppression and threats to life, tried to commit suicide outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s house. But even from behind bars, he is believed to have engineered the car accident which left the rape survivor’s two aunts dead in July this year. She and her lawyer had sustained injuries. Even as this gritty girl refused to give in, another from Unnao was set ablaze earlier this month.

Sadly, the unremitting chase to silence the second victim has won. At the root of these multiple tragedies are the lapses and mishandlings commonly encountered in law enforcement. The perpetrators must pay for all the crimes and sufferings inflicted. And, these are just two cases. A rape is reported every other day in India. Deterrent action is urgently needed.
