Mumbai man burns wife: Mumbai: Man burns wife alive for serving less quantity of mutton during dinner

Pallavi Sarode was set on fire hy her husband after he got annoyed as she served him less quantity of meat. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Man burns wife alive after she served him less meat during dinner The accused has been identified as 38-year-old Maruti Sarode Woman succumbed to her burn injuries at Sion Hospital on December 9

Mumbai: In a horrifying incident, a man sets his 37-year-old wife ablaze after she allegedly served him less mutton during dinner. The incident took place in Jui-Kamothe village in Mumbai. The woman died of her injuries on December 9 at Mumbai's Sion hospital.

The accused has been identified as 38-year-old Maruti Sarode, who is a daily wage labourer from Nanded.

According to a report in Times of India, Pallavi Sarode was set on fire by her husband after he got annoyed as she served him less quantity of meat. The woman had four minor children.

"The man got angry after his wife served less mutton in his plate while having dinner on the night of December 4. Maruti was in an inebriated condition when he set Pallavi on fire after pouring kerosene on her. The neighbours rushed the woman to DY Patil Hospital in Nerul," Senior Inspector Balasaheb Tupe was quoted as saying.

The woman was later shifted to Sion Hospital. In her statement to police, the victim allegedly told police that her husband set her ablaze in anger.

In a similar incident, a young girl was murdered in cold blood after she complained of less chicken in the biryani served to her at a shop in Chennai in February this year.

A 25-year-old girl purchased a packet of biryani from one of the roadside shops and started eating it. The girl complained to the shop owner about the lack of chicken pieces in the biryani and this led to a heated argument between the two. Enraged, the shop owner attacked the girl with a knife and slashed her neck. Profusely bleeding, the girl died on the spot.

In another incident, a man in Bihar killed his four-year-old daughter after his wife delayed cooking mutton for him. The accused killed the daughter by slamming her on the floor on November 16, 2018.
