What is Nirbhaya case and when did it happen- Complete timeline of events

Nirbhaya case story - What was the case and when did it happen

Key Highlights Patiala House court ruled that the convicts are to be hanged on January 22 The fifth convict, Ram Singh, committed suicide inside his jail cell in Tihar After serving three years at a correction home, the sixth accused, a minor was released

New Delhi: A 23-year-old paramedical student was brutally gang-raped on a moving bus on December 16, 2012. Later, the victim came to be known as Nirbhaya, meaning fearless, who succumbed to her grievous injuries on December 29, 2012, at Mount Elizabeth Hospital in Singapore. The six accused in the case were arrested days after the incident, one of them committed suicide in Tihar Jail and the minor accused was convicted by a juvenile justice board and was released from a reformation home after serving a three-year term.

The gruesome crime had sparked pan-India protests and a debate on the abysmal state of women’s safety in the national capital. Here’s a timeline of how this horror unfolded:

2020

January 7: Delhi's Patiala House court issues its verdict on a plea filed by Nirbhaya's parents. Judge says four remaining accused to be hanged at 7 am on January 22.



2019

October 29: Tihar Jail gives seven days time to Nirbahaya rape and murder convicts to file the mercy petition or else they will go to court and seek black warrants.

November 8: Vinay Sharma files a mercy petition with Delhi government

November 29: Home department of Delhi government rejects Vinay Sharma's mercy petition forwards the file to chief secretary

November 30: Chief secretary rejects it and moves the file to Home Minister Satyendra Jain

December 1: Jain rejects it and forwards it to LG's office

December 2: LG rejects mercy plea of Vinay, gives approval to Delhi govt decisions

December 6: MHA has sent to President, Delhi govt recommendation rejecting Vinay's mercy plea

December 10: Akshay filed a review petition in the Supreme Court.

December 18: Supreme Court bench rejected Akshay Kumar Singh’s petition and upheld the earlier judgement that awarded him a death sentence.



2018

July 9: SC rejects review petition filed by Pawan, Mukesh and Vinay



2017

March 27: Supreme Court reserves verdict after nearly a year of hearing the case.

May 5: SC upholds death penalty of four accused - Akshay Thakur, Vinay Sharma, Pawan Gupta and Mukesh Singh.



2016

April 3: Supreme Court begins hearing in the case.



2015

December 20: Delhi High Court refuses to stay the release of the juvenile. He walks out of a correction home after spending three years.



2014

March 13: The Delhi High Court upholds the death sentences awarded to the four convicts.



2013

January 3: Delhi Police files charge-sheet against five adult accused of offences including murder, gang rape, attempt to murder, kidnapping, unnatural offences and dacoity.

January 28: Juvenile Justice Board rules that the sixth accused is a minor.

February 2: Five adult accused are charged with 13 offences including murder.

March 11: Ram Singh, the bus driver, is found hanging in his cell in Tihar jail.

March 21: Rape law in the country amended, new tougher anti-rape law to punish sex crimes, including death for repeat rape offenders.

August 31: JJB convicts the juvenile for gang-rape and murder. Awarded him three years term at a probation home.

September 10: Fast Track court convicts Mukesh, Vinay, Akshay, Pawan of 13 offences including gang rape, unnatural offence and murder of the woman and attempts to murder her male friend.

September 13: Fast track court awards death to all four convicts. The trial court refers the case to Delhi High Court for confirmation of death sentence.

November 1: The Delhi High Court starts hearing the case on a daily basis.
