Normalcy returns to Guwahati; no fresh violence in WB

The curfew imposed in Guwahati, the gateway to the Northeast, on December 11 in the wake of protests against the citizenship law was lifted on Tuesday following improvement in law and order, officials said.

New Delhi : Normalcy returned in Guwahati while the curfew imposed in Dibrugarh was relaxed for 14 hours since 6 am on Wednesday.

No fresh incidents of violence have been reported in Assam on Wednesday morning.

Businesses and banks in Guwahati were open and vehicles plied the roads but schools and colleges were closed.

Mobile internet services remained suspended.

Flight operations and railway services resumed in Guwahati on Tuesday while flights to and from Dibrugarh airport were also operating as per schedule, officials said.



The All Assam Students' Union will organise the third and final day of its 'Mass Satyagraha' against the amended Citizenship Act in Latasil field in Guwahati.

Assam witnessed violent protests against the Act with three rail stations, a post office, a bank, a bus terminus, shops, dozens of vehicles and many other public properties being set ablaze or damaged by the protesters.

Five persons have lost their lives in the stir since December 11.

Meanwhile in West Bengal, no fresh incident of violence was reported on Wednesday morning, police said.

However, a senior police officer and two other personnel were injured when a group of agitators hurled crude bombs at them in Sankrail area of Howrah district on Tuesday night.

Howrah City Police Deputy Commissioner of Police (Headquarters) Ajeet Singh Yadav was injured in both his legs after being hit by splinters of the bomb but was discharged from a hospital after he was administered medical aid.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee is scheduled to take part in a protest march against citizenship law from Howrah Maidan to Dorina Crossing in Esplanade area of Kolkata on Wednesday.

She has held two protest marches in north and south Kolkata on Monday and Tuesday respectively.

The state has witnessed pitched protests against the citizenship law since December 13.

Police has stepped up vigil across the state and as many as 354 protesters were arrested for violence.

Several trains passing through West Bengal were either cancelled or short-terminated due to the protests.
