Supreme Court rejects Nirbhaya rapist Akshay Kumar Singh's review plea

The Supreme Court has rejected a review plea filed by Akshay Kumar Singh, one of the convicts on death row in the 2012 Delhi gang rape case, saying it didn't find any grounds to review the issue.

Asha Devi, the mother of the rape victim -- known now as Nirbhaya, or "fearless" -- said she was "very happy" with the top court's decision.

In his plea to the Supreme Court, Akshay Kumar Singh made the absurd argument that air and water pollution in Delhi somehow made the death penalty pointless.

He and five others gangraped a young woman student in a moving bus in Delhi in December 2012, leaving her with horrific injuries that would prove fatal.

The Supreme Court bench that heard Akshay Singh's review plea said the argument on flaws in the investigation was rejected by the trial court, and that the judgment was affirmed by the high court.

It also said the party wasn't entitled to seek re-hearings of a petition again and again.

SINGH WANTS TO FILE MERCY PLEA

Akshay Singh's lawyer, AP Singh, told the court that the convict wanted to file a mercy petition before the President of India, and asked for three weeks' time.

Solicitor General Tushar Mehta objected and said the time prescribed was one week.

The court said the petitioner could avail the relief of a mercy petition within whatever time was prescribed under the law.

'GOD MUST HAVE HELD HIS HEAD IN SHAME'

The gang rape of Nirbhaya was a display of such perverse brutality that furious protesters poured into the streets to demand justice.

"There are some crimes for which the humanity cries," Solicitor General Tushar Mehta said today in court.

"On that fateful day, God...must have held His head in shame for two reasons. First, for not being able to save the innocent girl, and second, for have created these five monsters."

"Please reject review as early as possible so that law can take its own course immediately," Mehta said.

The convicts in the Nirbhaya gang rape case, he said, were making concerted efforts to delay the "inevitable".

CJI RECUSED HIMSELF FROM HEARING

Chief Justice Sharad Arvind Bobde recused himself from the hearing on Tuesday after learning that his nephew, a lawyer, had appeared on behalf of Nirbhaya's mother in a related case.

Four of Nirbhaya's rapists, including Akshay Kumar Singh, are on death row.

Another killed himself in jail and the sixth, a juvenile, was released from a reformation home after serving a three-year term.

Inputs from agencies
