Man Set His Wife Ablaze For Serving Him Less Mutton. Yes, Let That Sink In

This country is really no place for women. A few weeks after the horrific death of a veterinary doctor in Hyderabad, another horrific crime has taken place in Mumbai. 37-year-old Pallavi Sarode, a resident of the Jui-Kamothe village on the outskirts of Mumbai, was set ablaze by her husband for serving him less mutton. Pallavi succumbed to her burn injuries on December 9 at Mumbai’s Sion Hospital.

Maruti Sarode, her husband who is a daily wage labourer, was inebriated and poured kerosene on her and lit her ablaze. The couple’s four minor children raised an alarm which led neighbours to come and douse the flames.

In a report by The Times of India, senior inspector Babasaheb Tupe said, “On December 4 while having dinner, the woman’s husband got annoyed as she served him less quantity of mutton. He was drunk and he set her on fire after pouring kerosene on her. The children shouted for help and the neighbours rushed the victim to DY Patil Hospital in Nerul. The next day, she was shifted to Sion Hospital. On December 9, she told the police that her husband had set her on fire in a fit of anger.”

According to data by the NFHS-3, married women tend to experience physical and sexual violence by husbands more than anyone else. The survey finds that nearly 2 in 5 (37 per cent) married women have experienced some form of physical or sexual violence by their husband and 1 in 4 married women have experienced physical or sexual violence by their husband in the 12 months preceding the survey.

The findings also state that, “Women married to men who get drunk frequently are more than twice as likely to experience violence as women whose husbands do not drink alcohol at all.

However, even though alcohol is important, it is not the only factor accounting for the high prevalence of violence against women, as 30 per cent of even women whose husbands do not drink have experienced spousal violence.”

Domestic abuse happens across all strata in society, if you are a victim of domestic abuse or know someone who is one can contact these helplines.

Sakshi - violence intervention center: (0124) 2562336/ 5018873

Central Social Welfare Board -Police Helpline: 1091/ 1291, (011) 23317004




