Two gang-rapists shot dead 'as they tried to escape'

Two suspected killers and gang-rapists who were shot dead by Indian police two weeks ago had admitted to raping and burning nine other women, it is claimed.

Mohammad Areef and Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu were two of the four men accused of gang-raping a 26-year-old vet before killing her and torching her body.

All four men were shot dead by Indian police on December 6 as they allegedly attempted to escape jail while re-enacting the crime 30 miles outside Hyderabad, India.

Yesterday a senior police officer said Areef and Chennakeshavulu had confessed to nine further cases of rape and murder, the Times of India reported.

Two of the four men accused of raping a 26-year-old vet and burning her body in Telangana state, India, had admitted to raping and burning nine other women, a senior police source has said. Pictured: Police search Shadnagar, 31 miles from Hyderabad, where they were shot

Jollu Naveen, left, Chintakunta Chennakeshavulu, second left, Jollu Shiva, second right, and Mohammad Areef, right, had been accused of brutally raping and killing the woman after her scooter broke down and they offered to help. Areef and Chennakeshavulu had confessed to nine further cases of rape, said a senior police source

Police officers have previously claimed that they shot the four men dead after they tried to escape. Pictured is a forensic officer standing over one of the bodies

Police are now trying to verify the suspects' claims by sending teams to the alleged crime scenes.

Detectives are reportedly looking at the suspects' mobile phone data to track down where they were at the time of the alleged crimes.

'Once we took them into custody, we began considering their role in 15 cases of women being raped and burned in Telangana and Karnataka on the highways,' the officer said.

'Two of the accused - Areef and Chennakeshavulu - confessed to nine offences of rape and murder.

'We are verifying each case and therefore teams have been sent to various locations.'

India's Supreme Court has ordered a probe into the case, which will see the officers themselves under investigation for shooting dead the suspects.

Police said the four lorry drivers had been taken to a field on the outskirts of Hyderabad to reenact the crime when they tried to take weapons from the police, and were shot

The men were accused of posing as passersby to help a female veterinary doctor after her scooter broke down - when in fact police say they deliberately broke the scooter before dragging her away and raping her

Police officers and inspectors stand guard over the bodies of two of the alleged rapists on the outskirts of Hyderabad

The killings prompted wild celebrations, but also condemnation in a country where officers are routinely accused of killing suspects to circumvent the courts in high-profile cases

Areef and Chennakeshavulu were killed along with Jollu Shiva and Jollu Naveen while allegedly trying to seize police weapons and escape prisons.

The four lorry drivers were arrested after a female veterinarian, 26, was gang-raped and murdered before her body was found charred in a crime which shocked the country last month.

The panel leading the investigations into the officers will submit a report to the Supreme Court in six months.

The Supreme Court said: 'We are of the considered view that there should be impartial inquiry into the deaths of the four people accused in the gang-rape and murder of a veterinarian in the southern Indian state of Telangana.

'We are not saying the police is guilty. We don't know. We will order a probe and you will cooperate.

'There are aspects of your the local government of Telangana's version which needed an inquiry.'

As news of the deaths of the men spread last month, crowds gathered and broke into wild celebrations. They set off firecrackers and showered police with flower petals.

But prominent lawyers protested, saying officers had circumvented justice. Police in India are often accused of carrying out extrajudicial killings in order to appease an angry public in high-profile cases.

Officers were showered with petals after shooting the suspects in an extrajudicial killing on December 6. They have alleged the four tried to take their weapons and escape

Flowers were also scattered on the site where the woman's badly burned remains were found on Thursday November 28

A schoolgirl lights firecrackers as she celebrates along with others after police personnel shot dead four detained gang-rape and murder suspects

People offer pedas sweets to Gujarat police as they celebrate the killing of four gang rape and murder suspects on Friday

Police found the badly burned remains of the woman under a culvert on the outskirts of the southern city of Hyderabad on Thursday, November 28.

Officers say the four accused were sitting in a lorry and drinking when they noticed the victim pull up nearby on a scooter and go into a clinic.

While the woman was inside, the four men are alleged to have conspired to rape her and slashed the back tyre of the scooter to prevent her from leaving.

When she discovered the damage, the men allegedly posed as passersby who were willing to help, with Jollu Shiva taking the scooter away so it could be repaired.

Officers say Shiva actually dumped the scooter, then returned to the scene where the group allegedly dragged the woman into an abandoned compound where they believe the rape took place.

The woman had texted her sister before the attack to say she had broken down and was worried about the men, but they turned the device off before the sister could establish where she was.

Police say 25-year-old Jollu Naveen, the main accused, then forced the woman to drink alcohol to stop her screaming before all four men raped her.

As news of the shooting spread, a large crowd gathered by the side of the road next to the field and people began celebrating

People celebrate after police personnel shot dead four detained gang-rape and murder suspects near Hyderabad

Indian police shot dead four detained gang-rape and murder suspects as they were re-enacting their alleged crime, prompting outrage but also wild celebrations

At some point during the attack she fell unconscious and when she woke up again she began screaming, so Naveen placed his hand over her nose and mouth and suffocated her, police said.

The men then hid her body in their truck while they bought petrol, drove to a nearby culvert, doused the remains and set them on fire, it is claimed.

After the woman was reported missing, police used CCTV to track her movements, traced the suspects, and located her remains.

The men were taken into custody, before the reenactment early on December 6 at which they were killed.

'They were killed in crossfire. They tried to snatch weapons from the guards but were shot dead,' deputy police commissioner Prakash Reddy told AFP.

Several hundred people flocked to the scene of the men's deaths, setting off firecrackers to celebrate and showering police with flower petals.

The victim's sister also welcomed the killings.

'I am happy the four accused have been killed in an encounter. This incident will set an example. I thank the police and media for their support,' the sister told a local television station.

More than 33,000 rapes were reported in India in 2017, according to the latest government figures, but vast numbers go unreported, experts say.

At the same time, a huge backlog of cases in the highly inefficient Indian criminal justice system means that many victims wait years for their attackers to be convicted.

Police block an area near the site where they shot dead four detained gang-rape and murder suspects

An Indian woman offers sweets to a policeman as a mark of respect after all four men accused in the rape and murder of a Hyderabad veterinarian were killed by police

Indian women burn crackers after all four men accused in the rape and murder of a Hyderabad veterinarian were killed
