Andhra Pradesh: Cousin held for raping minor sister, sending nude pictures to her father

Cops have sent the girl for medical examination to a government hospital in the area and the reports are awaited. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The survivor's parents lodged a complaint in the matter a few days after the incident happened The minor and her mother stay in the village while her father works in abroad Cops sent the girl for medical examination to the government hospital

Vishakhapatnam: A 14-year-old girl was allegedly raped by her cousin at a village in Srikalum district of Andhra Pradesh. After committing the heinous crime, the 28-year-old accused allegedly sent semi-nude pictures and videos of the survivor to her father.

The incident came to light on Tuesday, a few days after it happened. The survivor's parents lodged a complaint in the matter. The police officials told The Times of India that the minor is Class 9 student and she was raped by the accused at an abandoned place near her home.

The minor and her mother stay in the village while her father works in abroad. The accused got married a few days ago before he allegedly committed the crime. However, following a written complaint by the minor, the police have registered a case in the matter and booked the accused under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

Cops have sent the girl for medical examination to a government hospital in the area and the reports are awaited.



In a similar case reported from Nagpur, three minors allegedly tried to kill a 15-year-old boy in Kanhan area of Maharashtra's Nagpur district. The incident took place on Monday night over a petty dispute about throwing water.

The victim has reportedly received stab wounds in the stomach, wrist and thigh and is currently undergoing treatment. A police official told a news agency that the victim was going to tuition classes on Monday when the three accused confronted him for allegedly throwing water.

While he was returning home, they attacked him with a sharp weapon and the minor collapsed in a pool of blood. However, the police have arrested all the accused and further probe is underway.
