Mumbai Man Sets Wife On Fire After She Serves Him Less Quantity Of Mutton In Dinner

In a shocking and shameless incident, a man set his wife on fire after she allegedly served him less mutton in dinner. The incident took place near a village named Jui-Kamothe in Mumbai, on December 9. The woman was taken to Mumbai’s Sion hospital, but she succumbed to her burn injuries. The accused, Maruti Sarode, is a daily-wage labourer from Nanded, Maharashtra, and his wife Pallavi was a homemaker. Pallavi and Maruti have four children.

According to Times Of India, Pallavi Sarode was set on fire by her husband, who was drunk and got annoyed as she served him only a small portion of mutton.'

Representational Image - Unsplash

Senior inspector Babasaheb Tupe told TOI, “On December 4 while having dinner, the woman’s husband got annoyed as she served him less quantity of mutton. He was drunk and he set her on fire after pouring kerosene on her. The children shouted for help and the neighbours rushed the victim to Dr D Y Patil hospital in Nerul. The next day, she was shifted to Sion hospital. On December 9, she told the police her husband set her on fire in anger.”

Representational Image - AFP

The woman later gave a statement to the police in which she confirmed that her husband was the one who set her on fire in a fit of anger.

In another shocking incident, a man living in Chandausi in Sambhal district of Uttar Pradesh, divorced his wife because she didn't prepare lunch on time. According to reports, the woman was brutally thrashed and assaulted by her husband and she later filed a case against him in Chandausi Kotwali police station, Uttar Pradesh.

Not just this, a husband gave triple talaq to his wife inside the civil court premises in Lucknow in the presence of her advocate, after she refused to accept a chewing gum from him.

BCCL - Representational Image

The woman, identified as Simmi was in court for the hearing of a dowry case she had filed against her in-laws. While Simmi was talking to her lawyer, her husband Syed Rashid offered her a chewing gum, which she rejected. Rashid, in a fit of rage, allegedly gave her triple talaq by uttering ‘talaq’ three times in the presence of the lawyer.

It is unfortunate that even in this day and age, women are being ill-treated, and how. It is beyond our comprehension, as to how can someone be so barbaric, so as to set someone on fire over serving less food, or thrash someone because dinner was late?
