Childless man kidnaps 4-year-old in Telangana, hands child over to police within hours

The kidnapper took the child to his wife who refused to adopt her (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The child was playing outsider her home with other kids when she was kidnapped Police circulated her photos and CCTV footage of the kidnapping on social media platforms Ravi and his wife had been married for five years but could not have children

Hyderabad: Five hours after he allegedly kidnapped a four-year-old girl from outside her home in Telangana's Shadnagar on Tuesday, a man approached the police and returned the child. This came as a pleasant surprise to Cyberabad police who had already launched an extensive search operation to rescue her on the basis of an official complaint by her parents.

According to their statement, the girl's parents claimed that she came home from school at around 4.30 pm. No one was home at the time and she went outside to play with other children of the same locality. This is when a man reportedly approached her and asked her to sit on his two-wheeler. Once she did, the man rode away before neighbours could raise an alarm or warn the child.

The man in question, Ravi, took the girl back home to his wife of five years. However, his wife decided that kidnapping is not the solution for a childless couple and asked him to return the child. Around the same time, the couple saw photos of the missing girl on social media platforms. This is when Ravi approached the Cyberabad police and returned the child. The police, in turn, handed the child over to her parents.

Ravi has been arrested and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for kidnapping. He was produced before a court on Wednesday.

An incident, much similar to this, was reported from East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh in July of this year. Kidnappers barged into the home of four-year-old N Jasisth in Mandapeta, assaulted his grandmother and abducted the boy. Parents of the child approached the police and a complaint was filed in this regard. Footage of the kidnapping caught on CCTV along with pictures of the boy began circulating on news channels and social media platforms. Spooked by the sudden target on their backs, the kidnappers left the boy in a village 60 hours after he was first taken.
