People Serving Tea & Biryani To CAA Protesters Are Fighting Injustice In Their Own Way

Solidarity and support poured in from across the country for students of Jamia Millia Islamia University in Delhi, who were injured in police action inside the varsity campus.

On December 16, which was a day after the violent police crackdown against Jamia students, people across Delhi gathered at India Gate to read out the Preamble to show solidarity with the students, and vowed to adhere to the secular values enshrined in the Constitution.



Twitter

What stood out at the protests that were held at India Gate were Good Samaritans who didn't let any of the protesting students go hungry.

According to The Quint, one of the organisations named Khidmat Foundation - meaning 'to serve' - brought vegetarian biriyani, so that people of all preferences could eat.

Here's how free Biryani is being served to the Jamia protestors who are taking part in the #CABProtest. This is proof that there are people funding and patronising the protests.

Who do you think is spending their hard-earned money to sponsor this protest? pic.twitter.com/gc1SITkqFg — Soumyadipta (@Soumyadipta) December 17, 2019

The group serving the food also spoke up against the Citizenship Act, saying, “A black bill, or a black law has been introduced. India’s unity is being divided by this law, and students all over the country are raising their voices against them.”

In another video that is going viral, two brothers can be seen handing out cups of tea to the demonstrators who gathered at India Gate. The Sikh brothers are garnering applause from citizens across the country for their exemplary support to the peaceful demonstrations organised at the war memorial located alongside Rajpath.

Protest at India Gate ended with volunteers serving tea as langar outside the protest area. :) Heartened by the solidarity I saw on display today. Rage, rage against the dying of light. #CAAProtests pic.twitter.com/7DySUE2K7V — Asmita (@asmitaghosh18) December 16, 2019

A young Sikh man named Jabarjan Singh did his bit by serving chai and samosas to students there because he didn't want students to stay hungry while they stood up for what is right.

'United we stand, divided we fall', is the mood that resonated through the protests that were held at India Gate, a tenet that India stands by.



Congress leaders led by Priyanka Gandhi Vadra held a sit-in at the India Gate in a show of solidarity with the protesting students from JMI and several other universities across the country, and alleged that the amended citizenship law was intended to destroy the Constitution.

Photos from the CAA Protest at India Gate last evening. #caaprotests pic.twitter.com/l6RiLHMqUF — Jishnu Ghose (@JishnuGhose) December 17, 2019

After a two-hour 'silent protest' from 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm, the Congress general secretary hit out at the Modi government over the citizenship law, saying the police crackdown on Jamia students on Sunday was an attack on the soul of India. "When the government goes inside the varsity campus and beats the students, then the entire country is hurt. I can understand this as I am a mother and these students were of my children's age," she said.

This bill, that now has become an Act, makes it easier for the non-Muslim immigrants from India's three Muslim-majority neighbours — Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan — to get Indian citizenship.



On December 9, 2019, Amit shah introduced the Bill in Lok Sabha and it was passed on December 10, 2019.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill voting in Rajya Sabha was taken up after six hours of debate on the legislation on December 11. In the Rajya Sabha as many as 125 lawmakers voted in the favour of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and 99 against it.

75 tear gas shells were fired at #JamiaMiliaUniversity, reveals @DelhiPolice FIR.



Will @AmitShah clarify why such excessive force was authorised when none of the students were involved in destructing property?#CAA_NRC#IndiansAgainstCABhttps://t.co/RakzWJaSxs — Shama Mohamed (@drshamamohd) December 18, 2019

There are two kinds of protests that are taking place across the country, against the Act.

In the northeast, the protest is against the Act's implementation in their areas. The Act for them will cause influx immigrants - irrespective of what religion they belong to - that may alter their demographic. In the rest of India, like in Kerala, West Bengal and in Delhi, people are protesting against the exclusion of Muslims.
