Srinagar SSP orders inquiry into cops' assault on journalists during coverage of anti-CAA protest

The protests on Tuesday were being held in Old City area (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The two scribes, Azaan Javed and Anees Zargar were covering a protest near Islamia college In their statements, the scribes alleged that their phones were snatched and they were thrashed A delegation of senior journalists met with Srinagar SSP who has ordered an inquiry

Srinagar: Two journalists were manhandled and assaulted by police personnel while covering a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in Srinagar on Tuesday. In a video of the incident that is doing rounds on social media, cops can be seen thrashing the two scribes who have been identified as Azaan Javed and Anees Zargar.

According to the journalists, they were covering a demonstration by locals near the Islamia college in old city when they were thrashed by Superintendent of Police (north city) Sajid Khan and a junior cop in his police party, Rashid Khan. They further alleged that the policemen snatched their cell phones and assaulted them in full public view even after they had disclosed their designations and purpose for visiting the area.

On Wednesday, journalists from across the city gathered outside the Directorate of Information and Public Relations in Srinagar and demanded accountability, They have further demanded the LG and DGP order security personnel not to take law into their own hands or attack journalists for doing their duty. A delegation from the Kashmir Press Club met Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Haseeb Mughal who has assured action against the erring personnel.

In a statement, SSP Mughal's office confirmed that a departmental inquiry has been initiated in this regard. A report has also been sought from the concerned SP's office within ten days. This development comes days after the National Commission for Women (NCW) demanded an explanation from Delhi Police for allegedly harassing a female journalist covering the Jamia Milia Islamia protest earlier this week. In her statement, the scribe alleged that her phone was snatched from her and smashed by police personnel while she was recording videos and taking pictures. Journalist bodies from across India have asked police officers not to harass or stop journalists from doing their duties.
