Eight schoolboys suspended from elite school for WhatsApp group full of violence, homophobia and talk of raping classmates

The boys who created the WhatsApp group were just 13 and 14 years old. (Envato)

A “top-ranked”, elite school in Mumbai has suspended eight boys after a WhatsApp group was discovered containing violent and homophobic messages, and talk of raping their female classmates.

The messages from the schoolboys, aged just 13 and 14, were obtained by the Mumbai Mirror after they were seen by two “celebrity” mothers of girls at the top International Baccalaureate school.

The two mothers reported the WhatsApp group to the school, and transcripts of the messages between November 8 and November 30 ran to over 100 pages. Parents also reported that some female students were avoiding going to school out of fear.

The boys reportedly referred to female students at their school as “trash”, and threatened to “gang bang”, “rape” and “destroy” them.

One of the boys, in reference to a classmate, wrote: “Then one night we just go bang her.” He was then cheered on by his friends in the group chat.

The now-suspended students also made remarks like “I’ll destroy that little b*tch” and “should I go full on and kill her existence”, as well as body shaming female students and using homophobic slurs.

According to the Mumbai Mirror, the messages were posted on a parents group chat and have since been leaked.

The school has not been identified in the report and has reportedly not responded to requests for comment, but parents confirmed the suspensions to the newspaper. The children involved cannot be identified as they are minors.

On the condition of anonymity, one parent told the publication: “It is shocking as some of the boys were in leadership positions. I think what the children need is serious counselling.”

Another said: “We must trust the school will take care of it. There is no need to go beyond the school to take care of the situation.”

Gay sex was decriminalised in India last year, but prejudice against LGBT+ people is still widespread.

A recent survey by a Mumbai-based a life insurance company showed that “antagonistic sentiment” against LGBT+ people meant that 56 percent of people would not even want to receive a life-saving organ from an LGBT+ person.
