Gang rape: 3 more accused in police net

Ludhiana: Three remaining accused, allegedly involved in the gang rape of a 20-year-old college student near Issewal village, were arrested on Thursday. Police had earlier arrested three accused — two on Tuesday and one on Wednesday — for the crime. On Thursday, police arrested Saif Ali and Ajay of Tibba, and a juvenile belonging to Jammu and Kashmir.

Addressing the media, Punjab director general of police (DGP) Dinkar Gupta said they have arrested all the accused in the gang-rape case. While Ajay and Saif Ali were nabbed from Talwandi Naubad village in Sidhwan Bet, the juvenile was apprehended from New Basti Changran in Kathua. Gupta said the juvenile is 17-and-a-half-years-old, and is student of Class XI. A team of Punjab Police had gone to Kathua to nab him, he added.

On Tuesday, police had arrested Sadiq Ali of Rehmpa village in Nawanshahr from Hakimpur near Banga, and Jagroop Singh of Jaspal Bangar from outside DIG office in Ludhiana. Police had apprehended the third accused — Surmu of Khanpur in Ludhiana — from Chak Kalan village in Sidhwan Bet on Wednesday.

On being asked about delayed response from Dakha police, and whether action would be taken against other officers, the DGP said he had marked an inquiry to an IG-rank officer to investigate the handling of the case by Ludhiana Rural police, and to find out if there was any laxity on their part. He said action would be taken if negligence was found on the part of Ludhiana Rural police in handling the case.

The rape survivor and her friend, who were held hostage near the Changna bridge on Sidhwan canal, had alleged that the police had not acted promptly when their friend had contacted the cops for assistance. Police had later suspended ASI Vidya Rattan, who was duty officer at Dakha police station that night.

Asked about the rape survivor’s statement in which she had claimed involvement of 10 men in the crime, Dinkar Gupta said investigation had so far suggested that only six accused were involved. But he said they were keeping it open if the investigation further indicated the involvement of more accused in the case.

DIG Ludhiana Ranbir Singh Khatra said interrogation of the accused had established the number to be six, but they were not ruling out more arrests in the case in future. He said sketches of the accused were made by an expert on the basis of description of persons provided by the rape survivor who could recall six faces.

The DGP said DSP Dakha Harkamal Kaur is the investigating officer in the case, and they have a trained team interrogating the accused. He said they would complete the probe within 60 days, and will try to get the trial in a fast-track court.

Asked about the findings of the medical report of the rape survivor, the DGP said the preliminary medical report has confirmed rape, while detailed medical reports were awaited. On being questioned whether the accused had a criminal past, the DGP said till now they did not find any criminal record of the accused.

Flanked by DIG Khatra, Ludhiana police commissioner Dr Sukhchain Gill, SSP Ludhiana Rural Varinder Singh Brar, SSP Khanna Dhruv Dahiya, the DGP said the six accused were arrested in joint operations by Ludhiana Rural, Khanna and Ludhiana Commissionerate police. The DGP said safety and security of women was his foremost priority, and added various steps would be taken to check cases of crimes against women.

DGP’s promises

The probe will be completed within 60 days under the supervision of IGP (Ropar Range) V Neerja

The police will ensure that all six accused get punishment within four months

To revive 181 helpline, deployment of PCR vans, bikes, and services of rural rapid response teams in each corner of the city and rural areas, besides installment of CCTV cameras



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
