Fact Check: Is this the school bus anti-CAA protesters targeted in Delhi’s Seelampur?

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act have turned violent in parts of India, including the capital Delhi. After Jamia Nagar, protesters in Seelampur clashed with policemen and damaged vehicles, including a school bus.

And now, a video of a moving bus with shattered windows, wailing children and adults reassuring them is spreading like wildfire on social media, linking it to Tuesday’s violence in Seelampur.

Facebook user Ram Navmi posted the video along with a claim in Hindi that translates to, It is being clearly seen in Seelampur, the fear of stone-pelters among school-going kids. Stone-pelters did not even spare a bus filled with children.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that the video is from last year and has nothing to do with anti-CAA protests in Seelampur. The school bus was attacked in Gurugram during a protest against the release of the movie Padmaavat’.

The viral video shows terrified students and adults ducking and cowering in fear as the bus keeps moving with shattered window glasses.

Many Facebook and Twitter users have shared the video with similar claims.

AFWA probe

To check the veracity of the video, we selected a few frames and did a reverse search. This led us to news articles by NDTV and tweets saying that the video is from January 24, 2018.

According to news reports, organisations such as Karni Sena were protesting the release of Padmaavat’ for wrongful portrayal of history. In Gurugram, protesters threw stones at a school bus, smashing its windows. School kids who were on the bus had started crying in panic. However, nobody was injured. The video, shot from inside the bus, had gone viral at that time.

Therefore, it can be said that the viral video of a school bus being attacked by protestors is from 2018 and has nothing to with anti-CAA protests in Delhi’s Seelampur.

Also read: Fact Check: No, this is not ABVP man in the garb of Delhi police

Also read: Fact Check: This little girl was not injured in stone pelting on trains in India

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Video of school bus pelted with stones by anti-CAA protesters in Delhi’s Seelampur. Conclusion Video is from 2018 when a school bus was attacked in Gurugram during a protest against the release of ‘Padmaavat’. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
