Women’s group for foolproof security system

Ludhiana: Worried about the security of women in view of gang rape of a student near Issewal village, a group of women led by a leading woman industrialist met Ludhiana police commissioner in presence of the Ludhiana MP and a women councillor.

Industrialist Mridula Jain said they met police commissioner to share with him their concern about the security of women in Ludhiana. She said they also wanted to know why such a gruesome act did take place and what was it that they could have done to ensure that such incidents didn’t take place.

“We did have very good patrolling on this particular stretch about a year ago, but just because no untoward incident happened during that time, so police took it easy and maybe deployed their forces elsewhere. We as women of Ludhiana want a foolproof security system so that such crimes against women don’t occur in the future,” said Jain.

She said they would see the security system remains in place or they would take up the matter with the senior-most authorities in the state government.

The group of women said they also mooted a general proposal for the state to a make a film clip on rape on the lines of ‘Campaign against Tobacco’ for mass circulation on all kinds of media.

Harpreet Soin, a prominent member of the group, said in the proposal specific to South City, the group sought resumption of patrolling, lighting of roads and cautioning the hordes of youth who park their vehicles and drink on roadsides.

She said the group also proposed that women safety app that has been launched by the Punjab Police needs to be replayed after national anthem in the multiplexes.

The group members also suggested that security of officials and politicians who are using police personnel for personal purposes for self and family need to be strictly curtailed and same be deployed in crime-prone areas.

Responding to the suggestions, Ludhiana police commissioner said they are formulating strategy for better security in periphery including South City, Hambran road, Dehlon, Meherban and Koom Kalan etc. He also advised them to use women safety apps.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
