Fight not over, we don't have death warrant but a new date: Nirbhaya's parents | Exclusive

The Supreme Court Wednesday confirmed the death penalty awarded to one of the four convicts, Akshay in the gruesome Nirbhaya gang rape-and-murder case by dismissing his plea which sought a review of its 2017 judgment.

After the Supreme Court's decision, India Today TV spoke to Nirbhaya's parents. Nirbhaya mother's welcomed the Supreme Court's decision to reject the review petition of the guilty. She said now we are one step closer to the issuance of death warrant and hanging of the four convicts in the case.

When India Today TV mentioned how a few days back she was feeling dejected on the comments by the Patiala House Court expressing its inability to issue the death warrant as review petition of one of the guilty was pending and now that the Supreme Court has also concluded the matter in her favour, Nirbhaya's mother said she was disturbed after the Patiala House Court hearing as now she has another date.

She said, "Today I have another date in my hands. Today, the Patiala Court has deferred the matter for January 7."

Aaj Tak also spoke with Nirbhaya's father about their seven-year-long fight. He said the fight is not over yet and he still feels something or the other may come up to hinder or delay the execution as it has happed numerous times since death penalty was issued by the Supreme Court.

For Nirbhaya's parents, there have been ups and downs in their fight against the guilty but now, it is likely that the fight is coming to an end and the execution of all the guilty will take place.

Nirbhaya's mother broke down outside the Patiala House court on Wednesday after the court adjourned for January 7 the hearing on the issuance of death warrants against the four convicts in the Delhi gang rape-and-murder case.

She said she was "upset" over the court's decision. "The convicts have been given one more chance. Why are their rights being considered? What about our rights," she asked.

"We have been fighting for seven years and the court has not considered our rights when giving this decision. There is no guarantee that a final judgement will be delivered at the next hearing as well," she said.
