India news: gang rapist to face death after Indian Supreme Court rejects appeal

A man convicted of the shocking gang rape and murder of a woman on a bus will face the death penalty after his final appeal was rejected by the Indian Supreme Court.

The court's decision will allow death warrants to be issued against the four men convicted of the crime.

The man facing death, Akshay Kumar, filed a review petition earlier this month saying he should be spared from the death penalty because "pollution" was already killing him.

Women activists hold banners and shout slogans demanding justice in the case of a veterinarian who was gang-raped and killed last week, during a protest in New Delhi, India, Tuesday, Dec. 3, 2019. The burned body of the 27-year-old woman was found Thursday morning by a passer-by in an underpass in the southern city of Hyderabad after she went missing the previous night. Placard bottom right reads " Save daughters from sons." (AP Photo/Manish Swarup) (AP/AAP)

All four men filed review petitions which have now all been rejected.

Jyoti Singh was repeatedly raped by six men after she boarded a private bus with a friend, who was beaten and knocked unconscious.

After being repeatedly assaulted, Ms Singh was dumped on the side of the road and later died from her injuries.

One of the men arrested for the crime was a minor at the time of the assault, while another allegedly killed themselves while imprisoned in 2015.

University students hold placards demanding justice in the case of a veterinarian who was gang-raped and killed last week during a protest rally in Kolkata, India, Monday, Dec. 2, 2019. The burned body of the 27-year-old woman was found Thursday morning by a passer-by in an underpass in the southern city of Hyderabad after she went missing the previous night. (AP Photo/Bikas Das) (AP/AAP)

The 2012 case of the 23-year-old sparked nation-wide protests to end violence against women and shone a spotlight on the growing issue of rape in India .

The attack spurred quick action on legislation that doubled prison terms for rapists to 20 years and criminalised voyeurism, stalking and the trafficking of women.

Indian politicians also voted to lower the age at which a person can be tried as an adult for heinous crimes from 18 to 16.

Ms Singh's father, Badrinath, told reporters he and his family would not be satisfied until the court has issued the death warrants.

"The entire country wants justice for her," he said.

According to the most recent available official crime records, police registered 33,658 cases of rape in India in 2017, an average of more than 90 every day.
