Pulwama Terror Attack: Jammu and Kashmir Guv directs surveillance at important installations

New Delhi:

Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik has directed immediate enhancement of surveillance and review of the security management of all important installations and establishments in the state in view of the Pulwama terrorist attack. At least 42 CRPF personnel were killed on Thursday in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 350 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district that also left many critically wounded. "Such acts of terror will not deter the resolve of our security forces and the spirit of the people. We will finish these inimical forces to their last. The forces responsible for the insurgency in the state are desperate and frustrated. They just want to prove their presence," Malik said.

“The governor has urged all commanders of security forces to enhance surveillance on every front and directed the district and divisional civil and police administration to immediately review the security of all important installations and establishments,” an official spokesman said.



ALSO READ | Pulwama Attack: World leaders extend support to India, vow to fight terror

Malik has expressed sympathy to the families of the soldiers who lost their lives and prayed for the speedy recovery of all the injured persons.



Reports suggest that there were nearly 70 vehicles in the convoy in which around 2500 personnel were traveling. "Senior officers at the spot, the investigation is underway. Injured being taken care of. There were 2500 personnel in the convoy," CRPF DG RR Bhatnagar had said.



The terror attack has drawn international condemnation. Countries from across the globe condemned the attack with nations such as the US, Russia and France asserting that they stand with India.



ALSO READ | Pulwama blast: Condemn the heightened acts of violence in Valley, says Pakistan



The US while condemning the attack said, "The US Mission in India strongly condemns today's terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims," US Ambassador to India Kenneth Juster tweeted.

Pakistan has called the incident a matter of grave concern. In a tweet, FO spokesperson Mohammad Faisal said, "We have always condemned heightened acts of violence in Valley."

Asserting that Pakistan has "always condemned acts of violence" anywhere in the world, it said, "We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations."

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
