Delhi High Court dismisses Nirbhaya convict Pawan Kumar's plea

The convict has claimed that the case should proceed under the Juvenile Justice Act as he was a minor at the time of the incident (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The Delhi High Court on Thursday dismissed the plea filed by convict Pawan Kumar Gupta The Delhi High Court scheduled a hearing on Thursday after the victim's lawyers objected to the delay in judgement In his plea, the convict has claimed that he was a juvenile at the time of the incident

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court has rejected the plea filed by Pawan Kumar Gupta in the 2012 Delhi gang-rape case. The Delhi High Court had initially adjourned the hearing but it recalled the same after the victim's lawyers objected to it. The matter will be taken up before the court today. A convict in Nirbhaya case, Pawan Kumar Gupta has claimed that he was a juvenile when the incident took place.

The next hearing of the case was initially scheduled on January 24, 2020. Pawan's lawyer AP Singh has sought time to file for fresh documents in relation to the case.

Delhi High Court dismisses the plea of Pawan Kumar Gupta, one of the convicts in Nirbhaya case, who had moved the court claiming that he was a juvenile at the time of the offence in 2012 and should be treated under the Juvenile Justice Act. pic.twitter.com/LtUDkho6dP — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

Delhi High Court recalls its adjournment order in Nirbhaya case convict Pawan Kumar Gupta's plea. Matter to be heard today after the 2012 gangrape victim's lawyers again mentioned and objected for the adjournment. — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

The convict has claimed that the case should proceed under the Juvenile Justice Act as he was a minor at the time of the incident.

In his plea, Gupta claimed that the benefit of the doubt should be given to him as his ossification test was not conducted at the time of his arrest. The petition read, "No ossification test of the petitioner was conducted by the investigating officers. The age verification report filed by the investigating officers could not be relied upon. The convict should be treated as a juvenile under the Juvenile Justice Act. "

On Thursday, the Tihar Jail administration issued a notice to the four convicts, asking them to file a mercy petition within the next seven days. The notice was issued after the Supreme Court dismissed Akshay Kumar Singh's petition.

A Supreme Court bench observed, "We don't find any merit in the review petition. We dismiss it accordingly." In his petition, Akshay had claimed that rising levels on pollution in the national capital have already caused several deaths. The bench of the apex court said on Wednesday, "Considering the submissions, we have said that the petitioner has sought to assail the facts yet again which can't be done at this stage. We have given due consideration to grounds. Accordingly at this stage, we dismiss the review petition."
