Another Rape Survivor Set Ablaze. Fire Has Long Been Used Against Indian Women

On Wednesday, we told you about the death of a 23-year-old student from Muzaffarpur, Bihar, who was set on fire because she resisted rape. A day later, a 20-year-old woman breathed her last in Uttar Pradesh’s Fatehpur district; she was reportedly set on fire after she was raped by her neighbour.



According to a leading national daily, the young woman was set on fire by her neighbour after she refused to keep quiet about the incident and was about to tell her family about the sexual assault. The man has been arrested.

The Muzaffarpur woman is now the fourth woman whose death by fire has made national news in less than a month.

Hyderabad, Unnao, Muzaffarpur, and now Fatehpur - these are the sites of the murder of four young women, and the body count keeps increasing day by day. The veterinary doctor from Hyderabad was raped and set on fire, the woman from Unnao was set on her fire by her rapists while she was on her way to court to testify against them, the Muzaffarpur woman was set on fire as punisment for resisiting rape, and the woman from Fatehpur was set on fire as a way to silence her from speaking up about her rape.

Reading about the gruesome deaths of these women shocks all of us. We may even ask: why are they setting these women on fire? Even a cursory glance at the leading cause of women’s death in India will make it clear that fire has long been weaponised against women in our country. Till date the largest number of deaths of women fall under the category of ‘dowry deaths’. Then there is the evil shadow of ‘Sati Pradha’, a custom which glorified the immolation of women. Now, fire is being used by rapists to stop women from seeking justice after being sexually assaulted.

Indian women and death by fire

A 2009 study published in the British medical journal The Lancet estimated that more than 100,000 women were killed by fires in a single year, more than six times the number reported by the police. Three researchers from Cambridge, Harvard and Johns Hopkins University examined census figures, death certificates from urban hospitals and "verbal autopsy" reports from rural communities to come to that figure. The study found that young women were three times as likely to be killed by fires than their male peers. "These deaths share common causes, including kitchen accidents, self-immolation, and different forms of domestic abuse," said the report.

The lives lost to ‘dowry deaths’

The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) stated that in 2015, as many as 7,634 women died in the country due to dowry harassment. That is 21 women burned to death every day, because they were unable to meet the demand of money made by their husbands’ families. The murder was most commonly executed by dousing the woman with kerosene and then setting her alight. The tell-tale signs according to reports was the smell of kerosene on the corpses and the removal of all jewellery before the “accident”.

Data further revealed that after the registration of dowry deaths, police chargesheeted around 93.7 per cent of the accused, of which only 34.7 per cent were convicted. As of 2017, the remaining cases were still pending in various courts. The number put forward by NCRB is far lower than the actual casualty rates.

The dark shadow of Sati

The practice of Sati was banned in 1829, but sporadic cases have continued. The death of Roop Kanwar, an 18-year-old bride who self-immolated on her husband’s pyre in 1987 raised questions about the glorification of the barbaric practice and the pressure on young women to sacrifice themselves in the name of “honour”.

Photo Credit: BCCL




