Large-scale violence rocks UP's Lucknow over CAA; vehicles set ablaze, police chowki gutted [PICS, VIDEO]

Clashes also took place in Hazratganj locality, with protesters pelting stones on the police | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: Violence rocked Uttar Pradesh’s capital Lucknow on Thursday, with agitation against the amended citizenship law turning violent in several parts of the city.

Clashes also took place in Hazratganj locality, with protesters pelting stones on the police. The cops resorted to lathi-charge to disperse the protesters. But not before the protesters targeted the media and set fire to an OB van.

Protesters resorted to arson and set vehicles ablaze in Hasanganj. The protesters also set a police chowki ablaze in Madeyganj and set police vehicles on fire. Violence was also reported from old city areas like Khadra where stones were pelted at the police.

Some 20 motorcycles, 10 cars, 3 buses and 4 media OB vans were set ablaze in the area around Parivartan Chowk during protests against the CAA.

Lucknow: 20 motorcycles, 10 cars, 3 buses and 4 media OB vans have been set ablaze in the area around Parivartan Chowk during protests against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct, today. pic.twitter.com/uUkLDOII46 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

#WATCH Lucknow: A media OB van set ablaze after protest against #CitizenshipAmendmentAct turned violent in Hazratganj. pic.twitter.com/RjfFtMNK4X — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019

Clashes were also reported from Hussainabad, Daliganj, Teele Wali Masjid and Chhota Imambara.

Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police OP Singh visited the site of violence at Hazratganj to review the situation. SSP Lucknow said in Hussainabad: "The situation is under control now. Mob had turned violent but the police force didn't lose their patience. Mob has been dispersed forcefully so that there is no loss of life or property. The force is now being moved to other locations. 40-50 people have been arrested across the distrist."

Lucknow District Magistrate Abhishek Prakash too said the situation was under control now. “We used moderate force where Section 144 was violated by a violent mob and stone-pelting happened and arrested those who were involved in it,” Prakash said.

DGP Singh said police resorted to firing tear-gas shells to control the situation in Madeyganj area. About 20 people were detained there.

There were tensions in Muslim-dominated Old City areas, and police were making efforts to maintain law and order there. Senior officers have been sent to these areas.

In Uttar Pradesh’s Sambhal district, roadways buses and private vehicles were set ablaze by protesters. As a result of the violence, Internet services were suspended in the western UP district.

Violence was also reported from Kushinagar where protestors pelted stones at the cops.
