CAA protests: Will seize properties of those who indulge in violence, says Yogi Adityanath

In a stern warning to the protesters demonstrating against the Citizenship Amendment Act, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has said that the authorities would seize the properties of those who indulge in violence in the state.

Condemning the violence and protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in parts of Uttar Pradesh and parts of the country, Yogi Adityanath said people cannot indulge in violence in the "name of protests".

Yogi Adityanath also said strict action would be taken against those who indulge in violence while demonstrating against the Citizenship Amendment Act. He said the state government will make those who damaged property pay for it.

"I have called a meeting over this. You cannot indulge in violence in the name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize the property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property," Yogi Adityanath was quoted as saying by ANI.

Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath: I have called a meeting over this. You cant indulge in violence in name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property. #CitizenshipAmendmentAct pic.twitter.com/6jxuXDLWDt ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 19, 2019





Yogi Adityanath also accused the Congress and the Samajwadi Party (SP) of "misleading" people on the Citizenship Amendment Act. An order regarding this has been issued to the home secretary and the DGP.

The Uttar Pradesh chief minister's warning has come in the backdrop of violent protests that broke out in Lucknow on Thursday. Protesters demonstrating against the Citizenship Amendment Act pelted stones, torched vehicles and faced tear-gas shells in Lucknow and some other parts of Uttar Pradesh as police struggled to contain the fallout of the amended citizenship law.

Internet services remained suspended for at least part of the day at various places, including Aligarh, Sambhal, Mau and Azamgarh districts.

Section 144 of the CrPc, which bans the assembly of people, had already been in force in the entire state for several days now.

Samajwadi Party and Congress MLAs held protests in the state assembly complex against the Citizenship Amendment Act. SP workers also defied the ban on protests in several districts, the party said. Their protests largely remained peaceful.
