Asked to produce reservation, cops assault ticket checker onboard Janshatabdhi Express

Stills from a video of the incident | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Passengers intervened and handed over the errant cops over to the RPF The ticket checker had reportedly asked them to produce their reservation Videos of the incident are doing rounds on social media platforms

Thiruvananthapuram: A scuffle broke out between a travelling ticket examiner (TTE) and two police personnel aboard the Janshatabdhi Express today. A video of the assault is doing rounds on social media platforms and highlights the differences between police personnel and Indian Railways employees which evade the public eye in most cases.

According to eyewitness accounts, TTE Satyendra Kumar Meena asked the two policemen accompanying two convicts for a hearing to Ernakulam for their reservation tickets. The cops reportedly were carrying a general ticket and were asked to pay the difference between the general ticket and the Janshatabdhi fare which led to a heated argument between them and Meena. As the train was approaching Ernakulam station, the policeman began assaulting the TTE.

They were subdued by passengers who came to Meena's rescue and handed the errant policemen over to the Railway Police Force (RPF) personnel deployed at Ernakulam railway station. In a video of the incident, passengers can be seen holding the policeman back in an attempt to subdue him and prevent him from further assaulting the TTE. According to a spokesperson for the Railways, the two policemen were handed over by RPF to the General Railway Police (GRP) and two cases have been registered, one against the policemen for assaulting the TTE and one against the TTE for misbehaving with the cops.

"No passengers are allowed to board Janshatabdi without Janshatabdi reservation ticket as per Railway board policy, the police boarded without consulting anyone. When the Ticket Examiner saw them in the moving train, he asked them to pay the difference of fare," added the spokesperson. Another video shows them trying to snatch something from Meena's hands. They push him down as he refuses to pay heed to their demands. The two accused have been identified as Nijan and Rinto CJ, both deployed with the Army Reserve Camp in Trichur.

In 2017, a ticket checker at Dadar Railway station in Mumbai was allegedly assaulted by a police constable when he asked the latter to produce a ticket. Both parties registered a case against each other following the incident at platform number 6 on the central line at the Dadar station. The TTE maintained that he has asked the man to produce a document proving that he was a policeman but when the constable failed to do so, he was fined. This enraged the cop who got into a fistfight with the ticket checker.
