Groups on ground will take appropriate action: VK Singh on Pulwama terror attack

VK Singh condemned the attack, saying that his "blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks". (Photo: PTI)

Former Army chief and Minister of State (External Affairs) VK Singh has reacted strongly to the terror attack in Pulwama. He said action will be taken after an assessment of the situation is done.

"Action will be taken after assessment. It will be will be thought of. What you do must have a result," said VK Singh. He assured that the armed forces on the ground will come up with an appropriate response to the attack that killed at least 37 CRPF jawans.

On Thursday, Singh had condemned the attack in strong words, saying that his "blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks". Tweeting about the attack, he promised that "every drop of our soldier’s blood will be avenged".

As a soldier and a citizen of India, my blood boils at the spineless and cowardly attacks. 18 brave hearts from the @crpfindia laid down their lives in #Pulwama. I salute their selfless sacrifice & promise that every drop of our soldier’s blood will be avenged. #JaiHind Vijay Kumar Singh (@Gen_VKSingh) February 14, 2019

He reiterated the need for action in Kashmir, saying "It is a very sad incident. Each incident in Kashmir is sad. Each incident tells you what needs to be done."

Follow our live updates on the fallout from the Pulwama terror attack here

VK Singh slammed Pakistan, saying that the world knows that Pakistan is responsible for the attack. He also commented on the statement released by the US, where it has held Pakistan responsible for the attacks and asked Islamabad to stop support to terrorist organisations. "The world recognises Pakistan's involvement. The US named Pakistan because it has stood with India in this fight against terrorism."

Speaking on how India will respond to Pakistan after the attack, he said that India will see if it will move the United Nations Security Council. He said all decisions will be taken after an assessment.

Singh also refused to comment on whether an intelligence failure led to the attack, claimed by terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Muhammad, as he was not on the ground.

Sources have revealed that security forces had recently received intelligence inputs about the possibility of a suicide bomber travelling in a car.

At least 37 CRPF personnel were killed and five injured in one of the deadliest terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir when a Jaish suicide bomber rammed a vehicle carrying over 100 kg of explosives into their bus in Pulwama district on Thursday.

More than 2,500 Central Reserve Police Force personnel, many of them returning from leave to rejoin duty in the Valley, were travelling in the convoy of 78 vehicles when they were ambushed on the Srinagar-Jammu highway at Latoomode in Awantipora in south Kashmir.
