Two civilians killed, five injured including soldiers in unprovoked shelling across LoC: ISPR

RAWALPINDI (Dunya News) – At least two civilians embraced martyrdom while five others sustained injuries including three Pak Army soldiers as Indian troops resorted to unprovoked firing and shelling across Line of Control (LOC) on Thursday.

According to ISPR, Pakistan Army effectively responded to the firing and destroyed an Indian military’s post and inflicted heavy casualties in return fire.

The ISPR reported that deceased include a 14-year-old boy, Sheharyar, and a 29-years-old man named Naveed.

Earlier, Director General Inter Services Public Relations, Major General Asif Ghafoor has on Thursday reiterated that Pakistan Armed Forces shall befittingly respond to any Indian misadventure or aggression.

Major General Asif Ghafoor took to Twitter and wrote, “Provocative statements and preparations for escalation along LOC by Indian COAS appear to be an effort as usual to divert world attention from wide spread protests in India against CAB. Pakistan Armed Forces shall befittingly respond to any Indian misadventure or aggression.”

India has violated ceasefire along LoC 3000 times, FM Qureshi tells UNSC

Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has urged the United Nations Security Council to play its rightful role in averting any Indian threats to peace and security in the region as well as bringing an immediate end to the suffering of the Kashmiri people under occupation.

In a series of letters to UN Secretary General and President of General Assembly, the minister has consistently updated them on the grave situation in Indian occupied Jammu & Kashmir.

“Wrongful projection of the occupied territory of Jammu & Kashmir in the so-called “political maps” issued by the Indian Home Ministry recently is a continuation of the series of India’s illegal actions. As the Government of Pakistan has stated, these maps have no validity and are null and void, as they are in violation of the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions,” he added.

Qureshi said that India has stepped up unprovoked and deliberate ceasefire violations on the Line of Control (LoC) and is taking steps that are posing serious risks for regional peace and security. He also highlighted some of the important information like:

- Over 3000 ceasefire violations, targeting over 300 civilians, including women and children since January 2019 alone.



- Partial removal of fence on the LoC in five sectors. The reason could only be planning for some ‘misadventure’ across the LoC.



- Deployment of Brahmos Missile regiments, Anti-Tank guided missiles and Spike missiles for use across the LoC.



- Conduct of numerous missile tests since August 2019.

Meanwhile, the reign of terror unleashed by the occupation forces in IOJ&K continues unabated. Curfew and communications blackouts have now entered the fifth month. Kashmiri political leadership remains in custody, in jails, and in detention centers across India. Thousands of Kashmiri youth have been abducted, many of them tortured and maimed, often publicly. Kashmiri protests have been violently suppressed, including by using pellet guns and other forceful means. Mosques and other religious institutions remain shut. Food and medicines are running short, the grim humanitarian situation is bound to further exacerbate as winter sets in, he wrote.

The minister went on to say, “India’s claims of return of normalcy in IOJ&K are false and designed to mislead the world community. No independent observers, journalists or Indian opposition leaders have been allowed to visit Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and evaluate the situation. Yet, successive independent reports including by the international media and human rights organizations, attest to India’s massive ongoing repression in IOJ&K.”

In this backdrop, it continues to be our persistent concern that India may resort to a “false flag” attack to divert world attention, he further expressed concern.

FM Qureshi further said, “To report on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and prevent possible escalation, Pakistan has proposed strengthening of UNMOGIP’s presence in the region. A reinforced UNMOGIP could better observe and report on the situation along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir. It could serve as an important tool in the hands of the Security Council for maintenance of peace and security in the region. The Council must have this possibility in order to take informed decisions on ways to deploy tools of preventive diplomacy in case of further escalation and stop deterioration of the situation that could spiral out of control very quickly.”

Consistent with its responsibilities under the UN Charter, and relevant Council Resolutions on the Jammu and Kashmir dispute, the Security Council must remain seized of the matter and play a proactive role in peaceful resolution of this long-standing dispute on the Council’s agenda, he concluded.
