CAA: Vanar Sena versus Ram and a multitude in Bangalore

The 1,500-odd policemen could do nothing other than detain a few hundreds, including Guha and Congress MLA Rizwan Arshad, although there was no violence anywhere in Bangalore

Neither the BJP government of Karnataka nor the police had anticipated such an intense and spontaneous uprising against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and the National Register of Citizens when they abruptly withdrew permission late on Wednesday night for protests across the state.

At first it was a trickle. Then they came in waves, from all sides, converging peacefully at the heart of India’s IT capital, catching off guard the police and the administration who had imposed prohibitory orders just to prevent such a protest.

Around 9am, two hours before the protests were to begin, people started arriving in small groups at the Mysore Bank Circle and Town Hall area.

Around 10.30am, the police bundled the first batch of protesters into a waiting bus as the government had clamped prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 that disallows gatherings of five or more persons.

But the turning point came when historian Ramachandra Guha was detained while he was speaking to reporters at the protest venue. Five policemen surrounded and dragged him by the hand towards a bus, not allowing him to finish his statement.

Soon, the crowd of protesters began swelling. Thousands of people from all walks of life — men and women, college students, IT employees, lawyers, doctors — converged from all sides, catching the police unawares. People from more than 30 progressive groups and Opposition parties such as the Congress, CPM and the CPI joined in.

Sources said that at its peak, close to 8,000 people had gathered in the area. The 1,500-odd policemen could do nothing other than detain a few hundreds, including Guha and Congress MLA Rizwan Arshad, although there was no violence anywhere in Bangalore.

“I feel sorry for the police. The police are acting on behalf of their colonial masters. I feel sorry for them,” Guha said before being detained.

“Why is it that only BJP states have this (prohibitory orders)? Why does no other state have it? This is totally wrong. Look at how peaceful they are. These are ordinary citizens protesting,” Mahatma Gandhi’s biographer added. “I am sorry for the police. They are receiving orders from Delhi. They are paranoid. The rulers in Delhi are scared. Our home minister would not dare allow a peaceful protest.”

“Everyone should stand up. The entrepreneurs of Bangalore should stand up. We are here to assert our democratic rights. Of course, I am going to stay here. I am going nowhere,” Guha managed to say before being dragged away by the cops. He was released later.

As the police appeared flummoxed, people defied the prohibitory orders in front of the Town Hall, making a statement that would be remembered for time to come.

At simultaneous protests in front of Mysore Bank Circle hardly a kilometre away, over 100 IT employees took part. Over 50 of them were detained by the police and released after around six hours.

However, what numbed the law enforcers was an impromptu march by thousands of men and women, young and old, towards Silver Jubilee Park Road opposite the Town Hall.

By the time the police could mobilise backup, at least 3,000 protesters shouting “azaadi” slogans had gathered at the park. A few swings of the baton by a handful of policemen who had rushed there scattered the crowd for a moment, but soon more and more people arrived.

So spontaneous was the protest that the cops could do nothing to contain the swelling mass. Shopkeepers in the area downed their shutters and joined in, as did passers-by who parked their scooters and motorbikes and began marching.
