Republic Bharat debuts with a reach of 73 million

Even as BARC India has restrained its users from using viewership data until further notice in the wake of implementation of TRAI’s new tariff regime, which incidentally coincided with Republic Bharat’s launch, the channel has released its opening week’s performance numbers.

Launched on February 2, 2019, Arnab Goswami’s Hindi news channel recorded a reach of 73 mn in Week 6 of BARC data (Market: All India, TG: NCCS 15+, Time band: All time band).

Advertisement

Continuing his run of being the top news anchor in the country, Goswami’s own 7 pm debate show, Poochta Hai Bharat, garnered the highest reach in the genre.

Bharat’s extensive focus on big stories within its first week of broadcast created a massive impact with #MamtaBlocksCBI and #ShardaStings, which not only delivered blockbuster impressions on social media but also got Republic Bharat the No. 2 position in West Bengal.

Advertisement

Arnab Goswami

Terming it a brilliant start, Republic Media Network’s Editor-in-Chief and Managing Director Goswami said, “Republic Bharat has beaten six channels and has a reach of seven crore plus in week one. No Hindi channel has had such a start and it's a matter of time before we hit No. 1 now.”

Goswami’s Hindi news brand’s debut number has beaten all other launches within the Hindi genre in the last three years. The highest reach genre, which is Hindi movies, has seen two launches in the last three years with Rishtey Cineplex and Sony Wah and both the channels launched with a reach of 50 mn in their opening weeks and have grown today 3X of their entry reach numbers.

Advertisement

Vikas Khanchandani

Vikas Khanchandani, CEO, Republic Network, added, “We are extremely happy that Republic Bharat has opened the charts with a massive 73 mn reach in its maiden week. Our distribution and content teams have worked very hard to give us this fantastic start within the mass reach genre. The reach is the highest that any new Hindi channel launch has delivered in its opening week in the last three years. I am extremely confident that with this magnificent start, the channel will move into the top slot much faster than I anticipated. I am extremely grateful to our audiences and partners that have helped us with their support and acceptance within the Hindi news category.”

Info@BestMediaInfo.com
