Delhi court to decide ex-BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar's punishment in Unnao rape case today

The CBI has sought life imprisonment for expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, saying it was a fight for justice of an individual against the system. (Photo: PTI)

A Delhi court will hear the order for the quantum of sentence against expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, convicted for raping a woman in Unnao in 2017.

On Tuesday, District Judge Dharmesh Sharma adjourned hearing in the case till Friday.

The CBI has sought life imprisonment for expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, convicted for raping a woman in Unnao in 2017, saying it was a fight for justice of an individual against the system.

The probe agency urged the court to give maximum punishment of life term, prescribed under the law, to the politician.

The counsel for the CBI and the complainant sought maximum punishment for Sengar, saying the court must consider the "cry of the girls in heinous crimes".

While supporting CBI's submission, the counsel appearing for the rape survivor also sought adequate monetary compensation for her.

The counsel appearing for Sengar, however, urged the court to give minimum punishment to him, 10-year jail term, saying he had no prior criminal record.

"He had a political career without any blemish. Since 2002-till date he has been elected repeatedly as a member of the legislative assembly by the public," advocate Tanveer Ahmed Mir, appearing for Sengar, said, adding that the convict did not have a "depraved mentality".

The court had on Monday convicted Sengar for rape under the Indian Penal Code and the Pocso Act for the offence by a public servant committing penetrative sexual assault against a child. The rape survivor was a minor when she was assaulted.

Sengar convicted in one of 5 related cases transferred from UP to Delhi

The case in which a Delhi court on Monday convicted expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar for the rape of a woman in Unnao in 2017 when she was a minor, is one of the five related cases that were transferred from Uttar Pradesh to the national capital.

The four other related cases are -- framing of the rape survivor's father in an illegal firearms case and his death in judicial custody, a conspiracy of Sengar with others in an accident case of the rape survivor and a separate case of her alleged gang rape by three others.

The woman's father was allegedly framed in an illegal firearms case and arrested on April 3, 2018. He died in judicial custody on April 9, 2018.

The court is conducting a joint-trial in both cases. It has framed murder and other charges against Sengar, his brother Atul Sengar, three ex-UP policemen and six others in the case.

The statement of all the accused has been recorded in the cases and the defence will submit a list of their witnesses on Tuesday.

The rape survivor was allegedly kidnapped and gang-raped by three others -- Naresh Tiwari, Brijesh Yadav and Shubham Singh-- on June 11, 2017, in Unnao.

The court has framed charges against the three and the trial is yet to commence in the case.

The fourth related case rose out of an alleged accident of the rape survivor on July 28 this year.

She was severely injured and two of her aunts died when the car in which they were travelling was hit by a truck. Her family alleged foul play by Sengar and nine others in the car crash.

The CBI has named 10 people as accused, including the MLA, in the case but the probe agency had said in its charge sheet that it was a case of accident and not murder as alleged in the FIR.

(with inputs from agencies)
