Capital CAAos: Stir over Citizenship (Amendment) Act grips Delhi again

Normal life was thrown out of gear in the National Capital as the agitation against the citizenship law peaked and protesters defied prohibitory orders imposed under Section 144 of the CrPC to come out in large numbers on the streets.

INTERNET SNAPPED

For the first time, mobile Internet, voice and messaging services were suspended for about four hours in several parts of the National Capital, only to be resumed on Thursday afternoon as the city saw anti-citizenship law protests. A notice was sent to the nodal officers of service providers by the Special Cell of the Delhi Police a day before, in the wake of protest calls.

According to a Delhi Police directive, voice, SMS and mobile Internet services were asked to be shut in Walled City areas of north and central districts, Mandi House, Seelampur, Jaffarbad, Mustafabad, Jamia Nagar, Shaheen Bagh and Bawana between 9 a.m. and 1 p.m. "Modi government is dictating provocative policies. It is shutting down the Internet. What is the meaning of democracy?" asked Syed Shiraz, a student of Jamia Millia Islamia, who came to Jantar Mantar for protest.

Senior officials, requesting anonymity, claim that they might have to suspend the services in future if needed. "As seen in the Jamia incident, we have witnessed several rumours doing the rounds. We had concrete information that outsiders and miscreants will use these rumours again. Therefore, we have suspended Internet services at a few places in Delhi," MS Randhawa, Delhi Police spokesperson, said. The move was criticised. "It is a completely unconstitutional exercise of power by the Delhi Police," said Apar Gupta, executive director of Internet Freedom Foundation.

ROAD, AIR TRAFFIC HIT

Commuters driving between Delhi and Gurugram were most affected due to the anti-citizenship law protests as they were stuck in a seven-kilometre-long traffic jam on the Delhi-Gurugram expressway 8 a.m. onwards after the police blocked the entry into the National Capital to prevent mobilisation of protesters. Vehicles were seen piling up at Delhi's borders along with DND flyway.

At least 19 flights were cancelled and 16 more delayed because the airline crews were also stuck in the traffic jams that stretched up to seven kilometres on the national highway from Gurugram. IndiGo was forced to cancel those flights as its crew, which is accommodated in Gurugram hotels, could not reach the airport due to the traffic restrictions at the border by Delhi. The airline has issued a statement about the cancellation of 19 flights due to the same reason. Delhi Police had put barricades on one side from Gurugram-Delhi road at Rajokari border from 5 a.m. as a preventive measure.

Policemen said the Delhi Police had intel reports about large numbers of protesters, from Mewat and Alwar in Haryana and Rajasthan, heading toward Delhi in solidarity with the protest against the alleged beating up of Jamia Millia Islamia University students on Sunday.

Many commuters claimed that they were stuck in the traffic jams for more than two hours. After 11 a.m., the Delhi Police have opened two more lanes to ease out chaos which did not even help till 2 p.m. The traffic on this stretch normalised after the barricades were removed by the Delhi Police around 4 p.m. Shaheen Sherwani, a resident of Mumbai who landed Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport, said, "I was unaware of traffic jams when I landed in Delhi. I booked a prepaid taxi to Gurugram. When my cab got stuck in a traffic jam I decided to book a room in a hotel in Aero City. I hope the traffic will normalise tomorrow."

Himanshu Garg, the DCP of Gurugram Police (Traffic), said that the Delhi Police did not give any alert about the barricading on the Expressway in time. "Had Delhi Police alerted us in time about the barricading, we had several options to divert traffic to other routes," he said. Elsewhere in the Capital, traffic jams were reported in Old Delhi Chandni Chowk, Jama Masjid, Red Fort, Jamia Nagar, Shahin Bagh, Seelampur and Jafrabad where protesters defied restrictions imposed by police under CrPc Section 144.

METROS SHUT

With reports of people joining the protests, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) shut the entry and exit points at 20 metro stations throughout the day as a preventive measure. Among those shut included Khan Market, Central Secretariat, Mandi House, Vasant Vihar, Barakhamba Road, Rajiv Chowk, Jamia Millia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Munirka, Lal Quila, Jama Masjid, Chandni Chowk, Vishwavidyalaya, Patel Chowk, Lok Kalyan Marg, Udyog Bhawan, ITO and Pragati Maidan.

WORK FROM HOME

Some multinational companies in Gurugram asked their employees to remain vigilant when venturing out and cautioned them against engaging in social media debates and demonstrations. Many were allowed to work from home and an early leave from office. "My office has suspended the work and allowed all the employees to go early to their respective houses. When we checked social media (Twitter), we learnt about 20 stations of Delhi Metro being shut down. Such information has a hint of something ugly going on in those places," said Ragini Jha, an employee of Rites, IFFCO Chowk.

THE PROTEST

Braving cold, people from all walks attended anti-citizenship law demonstrations at several places in the Capital defying restrictions. The protesters converged near Sunehri Masjid in Old Delhi after being pushed back by police from the historic Red Fort, to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) on Thursday. Owing to the prohibitory orders, the police detained protesters who reached the Red Fort for the protest and placed barricades to stop others from reaching there. After being pushed back, they converged near Sunehri Masjid, where slogans of 'Hum Honge Kamyaab' and 'Inquilab Zindabad' filled the air. Slogans of 'CAA Se Azaadi and NRC Se Azaadi' were also raised by the crowd, which included locals from Old Delhi and East Delhi and students.

The protesters were carrying the national flag. After mass detentions and a police crackdown dispersed the protesters from Lal Quila and Mandi House, demonstrators in Delhi convened at Jantar Mantar to continue their march. Lawyer-activist Prashant Bhushan and former civil servant Harsh Mander were among the detained and brought to the Model Town police station.

A number of protesters have also been detained near Red Fort in Delhi, including Swaraj India's chief Yogendra Yadav. Left party leaders including D Raja, Sitaram Yechury, Nilotpal Basu, Brinda Karat, Congress' Ajay Maken and Sandeep Dikshit, and activists Yogendra Yadav and Umar Khalid were among those detained near the Red Fort and Mandi House where the two demonstrations were planned to be organised.

POLICE VERSION

"Several organisations have asked for the permission to hold a protest march from Red Fort to Shaheed Park on Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. We have denied their permission in writing as it is not a traditional route and there are important hospitals on this route. We have asked them to protest at the designated places, like Jantar Matar," said MS Randhawa, Delhi Police spokesperson, adding, "Local police, senior officials, special units and 52 companies including RAF, CRPF were deployed. No untoward incident was reported on Thursday. There was information that mass movement from neighbouring states could be possible, accordingly police force was deployed at the outskirts of Delhi that caused traffic snarls."

THE OTHER SIDE

Anti-citizenship law protesters offered roses to security personnel at Jantar Mantar, saying police can baton charge them as much as they want but their message is "love in return for hatred". Delhi Police shared photos of the police personnel offering refreshments at Surajmal stadium to protesters, who were later detained. Delhi Police personnel were seen offered refreshments to those detained, including Yogendra Yadav.

(inputs from Poulomi Saha in New Delhi)
