CAA fire spreads: Stir turns violent in Lucknow, leaves 1 dead

It is an epic failure of security arrangement by police in Lucknow in view of protest over the Citizen Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC). Protests led to major violence in Lucknow as protesters went on a rampage, pelting stones at the police, setting vehicles on fire and ransacking two police outposts in Madeyganj and Satkhanda area of old Lucknow.

The police in return fired tear gas shells and lathicharged to control the mob in several areas in Lucknow.

The violence first broke out in Khadra area of old Lucknow. Khadra is one of the most sensitive zones where police were deployed in heavy numbers following the ruckus. Suddenly protesters started pelting stones around 2:30 pm. They set dozens of motorbikes and cars on fire and ransacked two police outposts. In return, the police fired tear gas and lathicharged protesters.

The protests in Lucknow were part of several such demonstrations that are being held in cities across the country since Thursday morning.

This all happened when Section 144 was imposed in Lucknow and UP DGP OP Singh shared a video assuring that everything is in place. But the fact was entirely different from the claims. Protesters not only created ruckus in a different part of old Lucknow but also they succeeded to reach Pariwartan Chowk area of central Lucknow. This is the place which is hardly 3 km away from UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence. The maximum police force was deployed there and all the senior officers of UP Police and administration were present there since morning. Despite tall claims and arrangements, maximum damage done at this place. Three media OB vans including TV Today Network OB and half a dozen media vehicles set on fire and police could not control it. Protesters in hundreds of numbers gathered at Pariwartan Chowk around 4 pm and they damaged everything in view.

After such a mammoth violent protest, Adityanath sent a strong message saying that whatever property is damaged by protesters, recovery will be done from them at any cost.

As per police statement, more than 100 protestors were arrested in Lucknow and cases have been registered against them. Three senior police officers including ADG SN Sabat got injured and are admitted in civil hospital in Lucknow.

This is also evident that Friday, which is known as 'Juma' in Muslim-dominated areas in Lucknow, is going to be more crucial as sources suggest that people are still planning to protest once again on Friday.

The protest in Uttar Pradesh's Sambal turned violent on Thursday as protesters set state transport buses on fire. Several media persons were also attacked during the protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

Thousands of people were protesting on the streets when four buses and police vehicles were vandalised. Section 144 was imposed in the state last night.
