CAA protests: Internet services suspended in Lucknow, Ghaziabad; other cities affected as well in UP

CAA protesters clashed with Police and pelted stones in Lucknow's Hazratganj locality | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Mobile internet services was suspended in UP’s Lucknow, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Prayagraj, Bareilly, Meerut, Mau, Sambhal and Kanpur CM Yogi warned the protesters against committing violence and said he will recover losses by auctioning properties of individuals who commit arson and vandalise vehicles On Thursday, massive anti-CAA protest rocked several cities across the state and reportedly one person died during the protests in Lucknow

Lucknow: Amid protests across the nation against the amended Citizenship Act, internet services have been suspended in several cities of Uttar Pradesh, including the state’s capital Lucknow.

Lucknow, Aligarh, Ghaziabad, Prayagraj, Bareilly, Meerut, Mau, Sambhal and Kanpur are facing a cut in mobile internet services as a precautionary measure to avert the spread of any information that might incite violence or worsen the situation.

The services were curbed after Thursday’s protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) turned violent in Lucknow and Sambhal. The protester in Lucknow’s Hasanganj set vehicles on fire. Reportedly, one person lost his life during the violent protest in the state’s capital.

CM Yogi Adityanath warned the protesters against committing arson and vandalising vehicles in the name of protests and said he will recover the losses by auctioning properties of these individuals after identification.

Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Avanish Awasthi informed that the cellular data service will remain suspended till midnight of December 21. All the private telecommunication operators banned the services after the government issued instructions to do the same.

“It was found late on Thursday night that the violent protests on Thursday were being live-streamed on the social media which aggravated the situation”, said a senior police official, reported news agency IANS.

In Lucknow, a private telecom manager stated, "Apart from the internet, SMS and messenger services have also been blocked. We are trying to inform our customers about this."

On Thursday, anti-CAA protests rocked the national capital also and the mobile networks were instructed to clamp down their services in several parts of the city. Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code was invoked in several places. The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) closed entry and exit points at as many as 19 metro stations. However, DMRC, on Friday morning, notified that normal services have resumed at all stations.

Security Update



Entry & exit gates at all stations have been opened.



Normal services have resumed in all stations. — Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (@OfficialDMRC) December 20, 2019

On Thursday night, in Karnataka, the mobile internet services were cut-off in Dakshina Kannada district from 10 pm for the next 48 hours after two people died in the police firing during violent protests in Mangaluru.

However, in Bengaluru, the cellular services were not suspended, but Section 144 of CrPC was imposed in the city to quell the protests against CAA and maintain law and order.

In Assam, mobile internet services have been restored today. The mobile and broadband services were curbed in Assam on December 11 after violence erupted against CAA. The broadband services were restored earlier.
