Assam: 43 arrested for anti-CAA violence in Dibrugarh

Clock Tower at the Chowkidinghee Square damaged by protesters

DIBRUGARH: In the aftermath of the violence that rocked Dibrugarh district during the recent anti-CAA protests, police have arrested 47 persons for indulging in acts of vandalism. Dibrugarh SP Sreejith T said the persons were arrested from various parts of the district on the basis of incriminating video evidence collected from CCTV cameras and mobile video clips. Meanwhile curfew, which is still in force in Dibrugarh district, was relaxed from 6am to 8pm on Thursday. There were anti-CAA protests in Dibrugarh, Lahowal and Tinsukia during the day.

“We have so far arrested 47 persons for indulging in violence, vandalism, arson and destruction of public properties. We have clinching evidence against them, which have been collected from video footages and CCTV cameras. Further collection of evidence is going on and there will be more arrests in the days ahead. Moreover, we will reward anyone who can provide us video evidences,” the SP said. “All cases will be properly supervised and proper legal action will be taken against the instigators of violence. Even the Duliajan OC was shot at by miscreants during protests which points to the involvement of a third party,” he added.

Dibrugarh, which is chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal’s home district, had witnessed the deadliest violence during the anti-CAA protests that erupted across the state from December 9. The CM’s residence at Dibrugarh as well as the homes of several saffron party leaders, including Dibrugarh MP and Union MoS of food processing industries Rameswar Teli, Dibrugarh MLA Prasanta Phukan and Chabua MLA Binod Hazarika, were attacked by angry protesters.

While Teli’s residence was attacked with petrol bombs, the Chabua legislator’s house was torched by angry mobs. The officer incharge of Duliajan police station Dibyajyoti Dutta was critically injured after being hit by bullets fired by miscreants during the anti-CAA protests. Similarly, the officer in-charge of Chabua police station Tulumoni Dowerah was critically injured during stone-pelting by protesters.

In Dibrugarh district, as many as 43 government properties including offices were damaged during the recent spate of violence. The properties which were destroyed by the protesters include the Assam State Transport Corporation (ASTC) bus terminus at Dibrugarh, Chabua circle office, Chabua post office, Chabua railway station, United Bank of India (Chabua branch), Chabua town committee office, Chabua ASTC counter and Chabua BSNL office. Even the iconic Dibrugarh clock tower situated at the Chowkidinghee Square was damaged by protesters.

On the other hand, four students from the Delft University of Technology in Netherlands, who were stuck in Dibrugarh during the recent protests, e-mailed Dibrugarh DC Pallav Gopal Jha on Thursday, thanking the district administration for helping them out and ensuring their safe return. The students had come to Assam to work on a research project. They returned to Netherlands on December 17.


