Container Ship Safety Forum sets course for better firefighting capacity

The Container Ship Safety Forum e.V. (CSSF) focused on firefighting and safe access to cargo areas on container vessels at its meeting in Copenhagen from 19 to 20 November 2019. 30 representatives of 20 member companies, four observers from other shipping companies plus five guest speakers discussed how to build capacity for safety and shared their experiences to enable industry wide learning. The meeting took place at Danish Shipping, whose CEO & Director General Anne H. Steffensen held the welcome speech.

Firefighting: nozzle holders, fires on top of the stack and a training video

Several CSSF members have spent the last months on identifying improvement opportunities for firefighting on board their ships. One member used its recent learnings from a cargo fire to manufacture quick and easy to use fire nozzle holders and presented same to the forum following the idea: hands freed from boundary cooling can be used on board for other firefighting measures.

How do we effectively fight fires in containers at heights? Different equipment has been tested by several member companies, results were shared, and an innovative solution shown during an offsite demonstration. Another member presented an elaborately produced training video asking for comments and suggestions. The insightful final version will be made available to all CSSF members. There was consensus on the importance of onboard emergency preparedness training and drills.

Safe access to cargo area: cooperation with external partners is long-term goal

Depending on the vessel type, different risks exist when accessing the cargo area. Unsafe catwalks, lashing bridges, handrails, and ladders but also inappropriate PPE and unsafe operations repeatedly cause personal accidents that also involve external parties. CSSF members aim to continuously improve these areas and to engage with other industry bodies on the subject – e.g. terminal operators or organizations representing them in safety questions.

The forum welcomes Synergy Group (India) as its 25th member. The members represent about 40 percent of the TEU capacity of the global container ship fleet. Thanks to the growing number of members, the annual membership fee is reduced from 4.000 to 3.500 USD. Companies managing less than 10.000 TEU benefit from a reduced fee of 500 USD but including unrestricted member rights and obligations. The next biannual meeting takes place from 13 to 14 May 2020 in Rotterdam.

Source: Container Ship Safety Forum e.V. (CSSF)
