7-year-old girl gagged, sexually assaulted inside temple, parents of victim tell Pune Police

Pune Police are yet to identify the suspect (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights This is the second crime against a minor being reported from Chaturshringi locality of Pune this month An FIR has been registered against the unknown suspect under relevant sections of IPC and POCSO Act The matter came to light only on Wednesday when the girl complained of uneasiness

Pune: Days after a creche owner was arrested in Chaturshringi locality of Maharashtra's Pune city for the rape of a 7-year-old, yet another appalling case has come to light from the same area. Police are on the lookout for a man who sexually assaulted a 7-year-old girl inside a temple in the Sutarwadi area.

The incident took place on Monday night. However, an official complaint in this regard was registered with the police only on Wednesday. According to the girl's mother, the child was playing with other kids from the locality inside a temple on December 16 when she was lead away to a corner and sexually assaulted by an as yet unidentified man.

It was only on December 18 that the girl complained of uneasiness and her parents took her to a hospital where doctors informed them about signs of sexual assault. The girl further told her parents that she tried to scream for help but the accused gagged her and dragged her into a corner. He even pretended to pray when he saw a priest coming towards him, said the girl.

Chaturshringi police have registered an FIR under section 376(2)(1)(j) and relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, against the unknown assailant. An officer familiar with the investigation said that the temple area is surrounded by CCTV cameras and footage from December 16 is being examined for any clues that might lead to the identity of the suspect who was wearing a black shirt and blue trousers while committing the heinous crime.

The girl's residence is located a stone's throw away from the temple. She lives with her two younger sisters and parents. Her father is employed with a private firm while her mother is a housewife. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is underway.
