Anti-CAA protests turn violent in Varanasi, Bhadohi

VARANASI: The anti-Citizenship (Amendment) Act protest took violent turn in Bhadohi and Varanasi districts following Friday Namaj while minor protest was also evident in Jaunpur district of east UP region. Internet services also remained suspended in Varanasi.When police used force to disperse violent crowd in Bajardiha protesters started running helter skelter, which led to stampede like situation. In this incident eight persons suffered injuries while condition one minor boy was serious said, SSP Varanasi Prabhakar Chawdhary adding, all injured persons had been rushed to hospital by police..Talking to TOI ADG Varanasi zone Brij Bhushan said, “Violent protests were evident in Varanasi and Bhadohi. In Varanasi police had to use force in Bajardiha locality to pacify situation while in Bhadohi tear gas shells were triggered to disperse the mob of protesters.”In Varanasi, police used force in Bajardiha locality when anti-CAA protesters started brick batting following massive sloganeering against government. In view of Thursday’s protests in Chetganj and Naisadak areas district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma and SSP Prabhakar Chawdhary along with heavy police force marched in Dalmandi and Naisadak areas since early morning. Heavy police and paramilitary forces were deployed near Langda Hafiz mosque in Naisadak. Following Friday Namaj the people of locality returned their places peacefully.But, on getting reports regarding heavy crowding on road following afternoon Namaj in Madanpura area forces led by DM and SSP reached there. The divisional commissioner Deepak Agrawal and IG Varanasi range VS Mina were already camping in this locality. The officials requested the people standing on road to return home. Accepting the request they returned to their places.However, massive crowd came on road in Bajardiha locality under the limits of Bhelupur police station after Friday Namaj and indulged in lauding anti-CAA and anti-government slogans. On reaching there DM and SSP talked to the protesters and asked them to give their memorandum. However, the protesters did not pay attention to the request of officials and indulged in a scuffle with cops. In the meantime someone from crowd pelted stones on the cops.It led to cane-charge by police after which chaos prevailed in the locality. One policeman suffered injuries in this incident while some protesters also suffered injuries in police action. To maintain law and order extra forces were called in this locality.Immediately after the end of Friday Namaj at the mosque in Kazipur locality under the limits of Bhadohi police station hundreds of participants carried out a procession in afternoon. The procession had travelled about 300 mt only when heavy police and paramilitary forces stopped it near Girls School crossing on station road and asked the participants to return.However, it led to a scuffle between policemen and protesters involved in lauding slogans. Till then district magistrate Bhadohi Rajendra Prasad and SP RB Singh also reached there. On seeing it police waved canes to disperse their gathering. It led to chaos as protesters started running helter skelter. While running towards Kazipur the protesters indulged in brick batting. To bring the situation under control police triggered tear gas shells. After exercising hard for over two hours the cops succeeded in controlling the situation.In Jaunpur district a group of people started anti-CAA slogans after offering Namaj at Atala mosque in main city area. On noticing it senior citizens of community along with officials of district administration and police swung into action and succeeded in convincing the crowd to stop protest and return home. However, police had to use mild force at Malhani crossing when some protesters tried to indulge in brick batting. But, situation normalised there within few minutes due to timely intervention of senior citizens of community.The internet services in Varanasi were suspended by the DM in view of possibility of misuse of social media to fan trouble. As per the order of DM all service providers suspended internet services since 9am till 7pm. The internet services in Mau and Azamgarh district, which are suspended since Tuesday, could not be restored despite the fact that both districts remained calm. Amidst tight security arrangements the Friday Namaj also passed off peacefully in Ghazipur, Mirzapur , Ballia, Sonbhadra and Chandauli districts.
