Car rams into pedestrians, knocks down Army jawan

We will inquire to check who the car belongs to. The car has been seized by the Hoysala –A traffic official

Man loses arm during fight between rowdies According to police, Santhosh, a friend of Gangadhar, hails from Belagavi and has been working as a daily wage worker in the city for the past 8 years. Jagdeesh and Gangadhar had a long-standing rivalry and wanted to eliminate each other.

By Amit KumarWhen college student behind the wheel tried to flee, Army officials roughed him upTension prevailed on Old Airport Road, after a speeding Mercedes Benz swerved onto the pavement and rammed into a jawan, injuring him on Friday evening. A group of military personnel rounded up the driver, a city college student and roughed him up as he tried to flee from the spot.Some of the passersby alerted the traffic police, who came to the spot and tried to pacify the jawans. The accident took place around 5 pm near Command Hospital. Bharath Singh Chavan, an army hawaldar, was walking on the footpath accompanied with other army officials, when the car rammed into him. The silver colour Benz car came on the pavement, as it was being driven way over the speed limit.The driver has been identified as Sathvik (19), a first-year BCom student at a private college. He was going full-speed, because of which he is said to have lost control over the vehicle. After hitting the army official, the driver panicked and try to flee from the spot. People gathered at the spot and other army officials caught hold of Sathvik and took him to the army quarters.The injured Bharath was rushed to Command Hospital and is currently undergoing treatment. Doctors have declared him to be out of danger. Halasuru Traffic Police officials arrived at the spot and seized the Benz car.A traffic official told BM, “There was no major injury caused to the army officer. The driver will undergo a medical test to know whether he was under the influence of alcohol or not during the time of driving. We will inquire to check who the car belongs to. The car has been seized by the Hoysala.”A case of rash driving has been booked against Sathvik.
