March of brutality on students of Jamia, AMU

March of brutality on students of Jamia, AMU

SIGNS OF THE TIMES

Mind you, today their target are the students and minorities and ethnic groups but tomorrow they will target even those from the other communities and groups. They will use any alibi or excuse or opportunity to hound and much more …

A complete no to NRC and CAA. No to all possible divisive-destructive demolishing governmental tactics. Above all, a definite no to the fascist rulers of the day who are hell bent on destroying my country, my people, my very existence. They are raping my soul and my spirit. Yes, they are. And they are doing so, so very systematically, every single day.

I would further my stand by stating that these fascist rulers are worse than those Brit rulers of the Raj era, for at least that lot did not fake with labels of pseudo nationalism. Yes, they did indulge in massacres and killings but so is this government doing. They are killing our students, our children, our future. And doing so with all possible brutality, unleashing their police force on our unarmed young!

I have before me shots of police brutality on the campus of the Jamia Millia Islamia and also on the Aligarh Muslim University campus and each single shot leaves one shaken as the cops are turning out to be ruthless killers! Quite obviously, they would be doing so under orders and directions from the men manning the Union Home Ministry! Tell me, is the police force there to kill the young… any student who dares to openly resist, to speak out, to cry out! Any student who dares to speak out has got to be respected and not shot at or flung into police thanas.

Today, as an Indian Muslim, I feel more than threatened, apprehensive than ever before. My identity, my survival, my being, my existence is at stake. The Hindutva lot carry the tag of pracharacks and maha - pracharacks, they have RSS backgrounders and links, and with that they carry a certain set Hindutva Agenda which they are hell bent on implementing. They wouldn't give a damn if hundreds and thousands are killed or blinded or disabled or raped. Their only and only Agenda is to force Hindutva on the hapless citizens of my country.

Mind you, today their target are the students and minorities and ethnic groups but tomorrow they will target even those from the other communities and groups. They will use any alibi or excuse or opportunity to hound and much more …Killer rulers don't stop at one community. And these killers have blood on their hands - they have killed hundreds of innocent citizens in the various locales of the country, right from Gujarat to Kashmir to Assam to New Delhi …Today I'm targeted, tomorrow it will be you. Yes, there is a marked pattern to it. Fascists don't stop at one community or section. They carry on with their destruction of human forms, of structures, of age old norms and civilizations and culture.

Which Indian would be naïve enough to believe a word of what Home Minister Amit Shah insists on harping- that is, he is taking all this trouble of implementing the NRC and CAA in the country so that he can bring back those Indian origin men and women facing persecution in Pakistan and Bangladesh and Afghanistan!

The anarchy and distress and disgust spreading out are ample signals that the people of this country are well aware of the Agenda of these fascist rulers - by their propaganda tactics they want to uproot the minority communities and ethnic groups of the country and in those slots fit in their Right-Wing lot.

An extremely destructive exercise which will witness bloodshed and rapes and molestations and together with that also witness hundreds and thousands of genuine citizens of this country thrown into detention centres /camps… yes, semi -imprisoned, to be sitting languishing till death. In fact, when this government when can overnight convert the Kashmir Valley into an open prison so setting up of hundreds of detention centres/camps will be no difficult task for them. After all, they have the entire police force and the military and para military to kill and hound and imprison those who dare to resist. Who can withstand police torture and brutalities!

In fact, academic Dr Javed Jamil focuses on another apt argument -" If despite persecution, Muslims can remain loyal to their homeland,why Pakistani and Bangladeshi Hindus cannot to their homelands?...There is a long history of persecution of Muslims in India with thousands of riots …in recent past, they have faced mob lynching in the name of cows. Their representation in all national institutions has been less than their percentage in population There are many other discriminatory laws against Muslims and their religion in their country. Still, Muslims who decided to stay in India at the time of Partition have remained loyal to their homeland…"

Tell me, why should the likes of Amit Shahs take the trouble of carting refugees here, when the genuine citizens of my country are getting killed and hounded and uprooted, under any possible alibi. Also, who should decide who is a genuine citizen and who,in words of the Right-Wing rulers, is an intruder 'ghus paithiya!' How I hate and detest this word. It sounds evil and eerie… Also, it reminds me of the ways and means this present Hindutva lot came centre-stage. By hoodwinking and conning and deceiving the people of my country by all those developmental theories and also by planting their RSS men in the various slots. So they are nothing short of political ghus - paithiyas, manipulating their way centre-stage!

Also, why should the Election Commission of India have insisted on the EVMs and resisted going back on the ballot papers. Is it by any chance because EVMs carry the chance of getting manipulated and fiddled with, paving way for political intruders- the Right - Wing ghus paithiyas into the world of centre stage politics!

Today, I can see my country getting destroyed not by the so called enemy countries but the Hindutva rulers of the day. They are using every possible divisive tactic to tear us into bits and pieces, into shreds. Killing us, blinding our children, breaking their bones, destroying the education structure…destroying our very future.

Mind you, if these tactics carry on, these Hindutva rulers will strip us of our very existence, of our ancestral heritage, of our very distinct identities, of our very home land.

Azaadi from these Hindutva rulers ruining my country…let them not ruin us any further! Let them not fling us into open prisons and camps. And then sit back and lie to the world at large - all's normal … all's going good!

*(Humra Quraishi is a freelance columnist based in Delhi and is currently a visiting Professor in the Academy of Third World Studies in Jamia Milia University).
