Delhi Gate violence: Police detain women, children at Darya Ganj station, lawyers not allowed in

Delhi Police has allegedly detained women and children in the aftermath of the violence which took place at Delhi gate in New Delhi.

According to several activists outside the police station, the cops have not allowed the parents of the detained children or lawyers to go inside the station, citing law and order situation.

A woman named Aamna was spotted looking for her son Akram.

There is a woman at the Thana whose son Akram is missing. She wants to file a missinf person’s report but is not being allowed inside Dushyant (@atti_cus) December 20, 2019

Advocate and activist Dushyant, who is also at the Darya Ganj police station said that the police had stopped lawyers from entering Daryaganj police station and from finding out details of the detainees.

"Doctor confirms- 8 minors, aged about 14-15. Hands swollen. One with head i jury sent to LNJP hosp. Kids shivering. Cops promised blankets 1 hour back (sic), " the lawyer said in a later tweet.

Several protesters also alleged that several women and children had been injured during the lathicharge by the police.

Protesters sitting on dharna at Police Headquarters in Delhi against the detention of protesters at Delhi Gate (India Today image)

The protests against the amended Citizenship Act turned violent in the evening as the protesters were on their way back from Jama Masjid. According to the police, the protesters were dispersing peacefully when a few reassembled near Delhi Gate.

"...suddenly some anti-social elements in the gathering started breaking the barricades and indulged in stone-pelting in a bid to march towards Jantar Mantar against the police advice. Police used water cannon and absolutely minimum force to push them back," the police claimed in an official statement.

"While the protesters were being pushed back, a private car parked at Subhash Marg, Darya Ganj was set ablaze. The police staff immediately doused the fire using water and handy fire extinguishers. Some police personnel including senior officers were injured in stone-pelting. Around 40 persons have been detained. Strict legal action will be taken against those who have been found involved in the violence and arson," the statement said.
