Protests in India: 6 dead in anti-CAA protests in UP; violence in Delhi: Top developments & reactions

Six dead in UP violence, protesters clash with cops in several districts

Thousands protest over citizenship law in multiple locations in Delhi

Priyanka Gandhi joins protesting students at India Gate

Stone-pelting in central Maharashtra, CM appeals for calm

Govt showing utter disregard for people's voices, has unleashed brute repression: Sonia Gandhi

Nitish Kumar says NRC will not be implemented in Bihar

BJP holds

in Chennai, Coimbatore

Bharat Mata ki Jai

MP: Curfew in Jabalpur, internet shut for 6 hours in Bhopal

Sonowal takes out padayatra,

Anti-CAA protests in Manipur

Govt says those born before July 1, 1987 or whose parents were born before are Indian citizens

What is citizenship law and why are

people protesting against it

The anti-citizenship protests claimed at least 6 lives in Uttar Pradesh (UP). Sporadic violence was also reported from several parts of Delhi, Maharashtra and Karnataka-Kerala border areas. Authorities resorted to curbs on mobile internet as well as SMS services in various regions. Here's a round up of all that happened and the top reactions.Six people were killed as anti-citizenship law protesters clashed with police after Friday prayers at several places in Uttar Pradesh, hurling stones and torching vehicles, officials said. Director General of Police OP Singh, however, confirmed only five deaths during the violence in about 20 districts. Singh said that two people lost their lives in Bijnor and one each in Meerut, Sambhal and Firozabad. Some other sources reported a death in Kanpur as well. The cause of death would be known after a post-mortem on the victims, officials said. Singh maintained that none of the deaths were due to police firing. Several people were injured. The DGP said 50 policemen were seriously hurt. Read full story The national capital witnessed a wave of fresh protests with a car being set on fire during one of the several demonstrations by people in their thousands who took to the streets shouting anti-government slogans over the contentious citizenship law. The epicentre of the protest was the locality around the Jama Masjid in Old Delhi where large number of people held a massive protest after the Friday prayers at the mosque, defying prohibitory orders and police clampdown. Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad, holding up a copy of the Constitution, was leading the protesters in a march from Jama Masjid area to Jantar Mantar but they were stopped at the Delhi Gate where large number of barricades were erected. Read more Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra joined the students protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and a proposed countrywide National Register of Citizens (NRC) at the India Gate, saying the measures are "anti-poor". She said the government wants every Indian to stand in line to prove one's citizenship in the same manner in which they did after note ban. Priyanka Gandhi was accompanied by her daughter Miraya at the protest. This is the second time the Congress leader protested at the India Gate this week against the law. She earlier protested in a sit-in at the India Gate in support of Jamia students who were allegedly attacked by the police on Sunday. "This is basically anti-poor. The most affected will be the poor. If someone has to take out old documents about their land, will they be able to do that? Will your grandparents be able to show? Read here Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act took a violent turn in Beed, Parbhani, Nanded and Hingoli districts of Marathawada region of Maharashtra, with at least a dozen persons injured in stone pelting. Miscreants also targeted State Transport (ST) buses, even as chief minister Uddhav Thackeray appealed for peace and assured that no citizen would be deported when the CAA is implemented. At Ambajogai in Beed district, protesters pelted stones at an ST bus. Another bus was damaged in stone pelting in Basheergunj area of Beed city following a protest march in the afternoon, Superintendent of Police Harsh Poddar said. "The march was taken out from Basheergunj to Beed Collector Office. Around 3.30 pm, miscreants pelted stones at an ST bus and some shops in Basheergunj area," he said. Read more In a scathing attack against the BJP over anti-citizenship protests, Congress president Sonia Gandhi on Friday accused the government of showing "utter disregard" for people's voices and said it has unleashed "brute repression" which was "unacceptable" in a democracy. Condemning the government's action, she expressed Congress' solidarity with students and citizens in their "just struggle". In a televised message, she asserted that people have the right to raise their voice against wrong decisions and policies of the government, and register their concerns. Read full story Bihar chief minister Nitish Kumar has declared that the planned National Register for Citizens(NRC) will not be implemented in the state, becoming the first major NDA ally to reject the measure that has been stoutly opposed by several non-BJP chief ministers. As the JD(U) veteran lends weight to the chorus against imposition of the NRC, the Centre sought to allay any fears about this massive exercise. A top official of the ministry of home affairs (MHA) said anyone born in India before July 1, 1987 or whose parents were born before that date are bona fide Indian citizens according to law and need not worry due to the Citizenship Amendment Act, , 2019 or a possible countrywide NRC. Read more The BJP's Tamil Nadu unit held state-wide pro-Citizenship Amendment Act demonstrations and hit out at opposition parties, including DMK, for 'misleading' Muslims, among others. Around 500 BJP cadre converged at Valluvarkottam here holding party flags and placards which read "I support CAA." They raised slogans like '' and 'we will strengthen India's democracy.' Hitting out at the opposition parties for their anti-CAA stand, BJP National secretary H Raja said "a perfect Act has been introduced by home minister Amit Shah." "The Congress and DMK are desperate and are trying to gain mileage by misleading people, Muslim brothers and students on CAA. It is wrong," he said.Protests were held across Madhya Pradesh against the controversial CAA and NRC, though prohibitory orders under the Code of Criminal Procedure banning gathering of more than four persons are in force in 50 out of 52 districts, police said. "Mobile internet was suspended for six hours starting from 1pm in Bhopal which has a sizable Muslim population," an official of the police's intelligence cell said. Broadband internet was working.Assam chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal along with his ministers and BJP workers took out a silent padayatra for peace. The state also saw protests by AASU and other organisations against the Citizenship Amendment Act. Sonowal, accompanied by ministers Himanta Biswa Sarma, Chandramohan Patowary, Bhabesh Kalita, BJP state party president Ranjeet Das, Bodoland People's Front Rajya Sabha MP Biswajit Daimary, AGP and BJP workers took part in the peace rally here. AASU on the other hand organised a massive protest meeting calling it 'Bajra Ninad' (War Cry) here. The chief minister addressing the people before the rally appealed to the people to maintain peace and harmony so that "we can take Assam to greater heights". He later tweeted that the rally was a "call for peace and harmony, a call that the people of Assam want to continue on the path of development and progress".Hundreds of youths converged at the Khwairamban keithel area, the main business centre of the Manipur state capital to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. The demonstrators shouted slogans and carried placards against the CAA. They demanded that all the northeast states including Manipur be exempted from the Act.Anyone born in India before July 1, 1987 or whose parents were born before that date are bona fide Indian citizens according to law and need not worry due to the Citizenship Amendment Act or a possible countrywide NRC, a top government official said. According to the 2004 amendments of the Citizenship Act, people of the country, except those in Assam, whose one parent is an Indian and neither is an illegal immigrant are also considered Indian citizens. The clarification came amid ongoing protests against the amended Citizenship Act and several versions of the recently enacted law being circulated in social media about. In case of Assam, the cut off date for identification of an Indian citizen is 1971. Asked about the possibility of rolling out the NRC for the whole country, the official said it was pre-mature to say anything on it as there has been no discussion on it.The bill that is now an Act makes it easier for the non-Muslim immigrants from India's neighbours - Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan - to become citizens of India. Though the Bill doesn't spell it out clearly, but the fact that it entitles Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians facing religious persecution in the three nations, to seek Indian citizenship, highlights the exclusion of Muslims. The Act says the refugees of the six communities will be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of 11 years earlier. There are two distinct rallying points of protests against the Act. In the northeast, the protest is against the Act's implementation in their areas. Most of them fear that if implemented, the Act will cause a rush of immigrants that may alter their demographic and linguistic and cultural uniqueness. In the rest of India, like Kerala, West Bengal and Delhi, people are protesting against the exclusion of Muslims, alleging it to be against the ethos of the Constitution. Read more
