Indian politician given life sentence for rape of teenage girl

NEW DELHI—A court in India sentenced a regional politician to life imprisonment Friday for raping a teenage girl, bringing partial resolution to a case that transfixed the nation and raised troubling questions about the cost of justice for women.

The politician, Kuldeep Singh Sengar, had been jailed since last year on charges of having brutalized the young woman in 2017, when she was 17. He was convicted Monday of luring her to his home in northern India with the promise of a job interview and then sexually assaulting her.

The ruling came a few months after the teenager was critically injured in a car crash on a rural highway that killed two of her aunts. The police suspect that Sengar plotted the collision, in which a truck with a blacked-out license plate rammed into the vehicle carrying the women. A verdict in that charge, and in other cases related to the rape of the teenager, is pending.

For months, the teenager, whose name has not been released, maintained that Sengar, who is thought to be in his 50s, had repeatedly threatened to kill members of her family for speaking out. The teenager’s father was beaten to death last year after discussing the case.

Sengar, who was expelled from the governing Bharatiya Janata Party in August, was serving his fourth term in the state legislature of Uttar Pradesh when he was jailed.

Dharmesh Sharma, a judge on the Delhi High Court, where the verdict was reached, said Friday, “Sengar was a public servant and betrayed people’s faith.” The judge added that the case “epitomizes the fear ingrained in the mind of a young girl in the countryside” when “reporting issues of sexual assault by powerful adults.” Sengar was also ordered to pay a fine of about $35,000.

Sengar, who denied having committed the crimes, broke down in tears when the sentence was read. His lawyers said that they planned to file an appeal. A person accused of taking the woman to Sengar in 2017 was acquitted.

After the car crash in July, a wave of fury spread in India. Protests gathered momentum and politicians staged walkouts in Parliament, calling the assault a blatant abuse of power.

The response evoked the outrage that followed the gang rape and murder of a woman on a bus in New Delhi in 2012. That case set off a national reckoning on how sexual assaults were handled in India, which was named the most dangerous country for women last year by the Thomson Reuters Foundation.

This month, four men who were accused of raping and killing a young woman near the southern city of Hyderabad were taken under a bridge by police officers and shot dead in the early hours of the morning.

And in Unnao, the city where Sengar was convicted of the 2017 assault, another woman was set on fire this month as she made her way to court to testify against men whom she had accused of rape. The woman eventually died from her injuries.

On Monday, while detailing Sengar’s conviction, the judge called the woman’s testimony “unblemished” and criticized India’s national investigators for a “patriarchal approach or inherent outlook to brush the issue of sexual violence against children under the carpet.”

“She comes from a village, not a cosmopolitan area,” the judge said. “She had moments of anxiety and despair and was pitted against a powerful person.”

The other cases related to the rape of the teenager that are awaiting verdicts include ones dealing with Sengar’s alleged involvement in the car crash; the death of the teenager’s father, which occurred in judicial custody; and the gang rape of the teenager by three other people shortly after Sengar had assaulted her in 2017.

Read more about:
