Surat police arrest father of one for sexually assaulting 4-year-old girl

The minor girl was sexually assaulted by the accused in an abandoned bus (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The arrest was made by Surat police and crime branch from Sachin GIDC area Police identified the accused as a labourer employed at a textile firm He has been charged under sections of the IPC and POCSO Act

Ahmedabad: A 26-year-old man was arrested from Surat for the sexual assault of a minor girl. He has been identified as Sashwin Nishad, a daily wage labourer. Nishad was detained by crime branch and local police and is currently being interrogated in connection with the incident from December 15.

The suspect was detained within five days of the girl's parents registering a complaint in this regard. In their statement to the police, father of the four-year-old child said that she had accompanied him to the Ramlila ground in Surat on Sunday evening. She was taken by the accused as her father turned towards prayers being offered at the venue.

According to a report by Times of India, she was taken to an abandoned bus where the accused sexually assaulted her. Despite their relentless attempts to find her, the girl's family could not locate her until 4 am when she returned home by herself. The minor's home was less than 50 metres away from the ground where she had been kidnapped.

On the basis of a police complaint, police officers registered a case and launched an investigation in this regard. Examination of CCTV footage from the area led them to Nishad, a resident of Sachin GIDC area. An official familiar with the investigation told the national daily that it was difficult to trace the suspect because he had changed several jobs over the years. He works as a labourer in a textile mill and lives with his wife and son, added the officer.

In November, a 30-year-old man was arrested in Surat for allegedly raping his 11-year-old stepdaughter. The girl told investigators that the accused also thrashed her younger brother, often mercilessly, and threatened to do the same to her. He was charged under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
