6 killed in UP’s anti-CAA protests

Chandigarh, December 20

Six people are believed dead as protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in Uttar Pradesh on Friday, television reports said.

Two were reported killed in Bijanor, one each in Sambhal, Firozabad, Meerut, and Kanpur. Most of the deaths were reportedly in firing incidents.

Protesters went on a rampage in several districts in Uttar Pradesh, pelting stones at the police, setting vehicles on fire and ransacking a number of police outposts.

The protests led to major violence in Kanpur, Firozabad’s Lalganj area, Bijnor’s Naya Bazar area, Hapur, Muzaffarnagar, and Gorakhpur.

The protesters pelted stones at the police in Firozabad, Gorakhpur, Bhadohi, Bahraich, and Sambhal and set motorbikes and cars on fire and ransacked police outposts in Hardoi and Farrukhabad.

In return, the police fired tear gas shells and lathi-charged protesters.

In Deoband, though, the protests were relatively non-violent.

In Gorakhpur, police fired teargas shells to disperse the violent protesters outside Anjuman Islamia in the Khoonipur area.

Tension prevailed in Ghantaghar, Shahmaroof, Nakhas, Khoonipur and Ismailpur areas, police said.

At nakas, police lathi-charged protesters.

In Bulandhshar, protesters torched an SUV, prompting the district administration to suspend internet services.

The order for internet suspension was issued to contain the spread of rumours and misinformation on social media, District Magistrate Ravindra Kumar said.

“In order to maintain law and order and communal harmony, all mobile internet services are being suspended from 3 pm on December 20 in entire Bulandshahr. Internet-related loop lines and lease lines too shall remain suspended,” he said in an order.

A stationary police SUV was torched on Friday afternoon in Bulandshahr, police officials said, adding that no personnel or civilian was injured in the incident.

“It was a stationary police vehicle with no occupants that was torched by protestors. No policeman or civilian was injured. We are trying to identify those involved in the violence and action would be taken against them,” Senior Superintendent of Police Santosh Kumar Singh told agencies.

Mobile internet and text messaging services remained suspended in several districts of Uttar Pradesh, including Lucknow, Aligarh, Ghazibad, on Friday in view of protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.

CrPC Section 144, which bars assembly of more than four people at a place, is already in force across the state, even as violent protests unfolded in several regions of UP.

In Delhi, television channels flashed images burning vehicles in Daryaganj on Friday. PTI reported that protesters resorted to arson near Delhi Gate and that police baton-charged them. A car set on fire in Daryaganj, the agency reported.

Delhi Police on Friday said “outsiders” were involved in the violence near Delhi Gate during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act.

“We used mild force and water canons but didn’t lathicharge protesters or lob tear-gas shells. Many of our personnel have been injured. Some people have been detained,” Delhi Police PRO Mandeep Singh Randhawa said. “We have detained some of them, and investigation is underway,” he said later.

He said that a private car was set on fire by the miscreants and an investigation is underway.

Violence was also reported in Madhya Pradesh and parts of Maharashtra.

The protests were part of several such protests that have seized cities across the country since Sunday. Protests were being held in scores of cities, including Delhi, Gujarat, Patna, Bengaluru, Mumbai, Bhopal, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Patna.

Security has also been beefed up across Uttar Pradesh, as police have registered 19 FIRs against unknown people, of whom 17 are ‘named’ including Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Shafiqur Rahman Barq in Sambhal district in connection with the violence during Thursday’s protest.

At least 3,000 people across the state, including 350 in Lucknow, have been arrested since Thursday night in connection with the violence against the recently amended citizenship law, police officials said on Friday.

There are 3,037 Facebook posts, 1,786 Twitter posts and 38 Youtube videos (scenes of violence) were deleted since Thursday’s protests over the CAA.

Internet services have been shut down in 15 districts, including the Capital, even Direct-to-Home (DTH) services were also snapped for some time, police added.
