26-year-old man arrested for rape of 4-year-old girl

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

SURAT: Reverse tracking of the CCTV camera footages helped the Surat crime branch and local police nab a 26-year-old man on Friday from Sachin GIDC area for the alleged rape of a four-year-old girl.After failing to trace the accused, the police did the reverse tracking of the CCTV footages and traced the persons to whom the accused had spoken.The police succeeded in cracking the case on the fifth day after the crime was reported.The cops picked up the accused, identified as Sashibind Vishwanath Nishad, a labourer, during early hours on Friday when he was preparing to leave the city. He was packing luggage to catch the train to his native in Kanpur of Uttar Pradesh The police investigation revealed that the accused not only raped the minor but subjected her to unnatural sex as well.The accused is married and the father of a one-and-a-half-year-old son. His wife and son live in Kanpur. Employee of a textile weaving unit, Nishad had changed jobs frequently which delayed his arrest. The police were checking at industrial units with the sketch and the CCTV grab of the accused, but due to his habit of changing workplaces in short time, very few people knew him at work.The police also carried out door-to-door checking in the locality of Sachin GIDC police station limits, but the accused could not be identified.Then the police did the reverse tracking of the CCTV camera footages in which the accused was seen chatting with some men. One of them was tracked down and detained by the police. The man initially refused to cooperate, but later admitted to know Nishad.The man is the cousin of Nishad, and Nishad had met him before committing the crime.“The police identified the accused through reverse tracking of CCTV footages. We first identified two men who were seen chatting with the accused. Their questioning helped the police identify the accused,” said city police commissioner R B Brahmbhatt.“It was a tough case to crack for the police, but with the combined efforts by various teams, we were able to nab the accused,” said Brahmbhatt.An SIT headed by Vidhi Chaudhary, deputy commissioner of police, zone III, checked over 1,000 homes and industrial units. The investigation was supervised by D N Patel, joint commissioner of police, sector II.The survivor was with her father when she was kidnapped from a ground around 50 meters away from her home at around 11.45 pm on Sunday. They had gone to see Ramlila and the father had gone to take aarti for couple of minutes when the minor was kidnapped. The accused had taken her into the bushes at a nearby location and committed the crime. The family searched for her till 2.30 am but failed. The minor returned home on her own at around 4 am.The accused too had gone to watch Ramlila on Sunday night and he was noticing the minor for some time. He stood up and pressed the minor between his two legs as soon as her father went to take Aarti. The girl was searching for her father. He later forcibly took the minor away from the location into the bushes. After committing the crime the accused dropped her at the road from where the minor walked to her home.
