Yogi Adityanath: Vandals’ assets to be confiscated to pay for damages

‘Anti-national’ SP, Left fuelled rumours: Yogi

LUCKNOW: Hours after violent protests erupted in Lucknow and Sambhal against the new citizenship law, Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath said the state administration would confiscate assets of those who had indulged in arson and vandalized public property on Thursday.“Is hinsa mein lipt pratyek tatva ki property ko zabt karenge aur us zabt se sarvajanik sampatti ko hue nuksan, ya kahin pe public property ko jo damage kiya gaya hai, yeh sabhi ki bharpayi bhi hum unhi upadraviyon se karenge, kyonki sab chinhit chehere hain. Ve sab videography mein aa chuke hein, CCTV mein aa chuke hein. In sab ki property ko zabt kar ke inse iska badla lenge aur sakhti se nipatne ke liye maine kaha hai. (We will confiscate the properties of those involved in violence to compensate for the damage. The rioters have been identified. They have been captured on CCTV footage. We will seize their property and make them pay for the loss. I have issued directions to deal with them strictly),” the CM said.He said the properties of the rioters would be auctioned and added that violence in the name of protests won’t be tolerated. The CM said Section 144 of CrPC had been in place in the state since November 8 and nobody had the right to protest without permission.We will fix accountability of those responsible for arson. Around 12 vehicles were set ablaze in Lucknow, including eight two-wheelers, three vans and one roadways bus,” he said.Accusing the opposition Congress, SP and Left of fuelling rumours and instigating protests, the CM said their actions were “anti-national”. He said despite knowing that CAA was not against any caste, community or religion, these parties had pushed Uttar Pradesh into anarchy.The CM said he had earlier appealed to people not to indulge in violence or rumour mongering.“I said any problem can be resolved through dialogue and there is no place for violence in a democracy. However, people are being misled by opposition parties, who do not have any issue to talk about. People should stop believing in rumours. Instead, they should get actual information,” he said. The CM directed police and administration to keep vigil on those spreading rumours. “Also, you should determine who all indulged in violence and destruction of property,” he was quoted as having told the police brass.
