Citizenship Act protests: 15 arrested for violence in Old Delhi's Daryaganj, more arrests likely

The protesters torched a private car parked at Subhash Marg area on Friday evening | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The cops said that more arrests in this matter are likely Delhi court has directed the Delhi police to allow lawyers to meet the people detained and provide them legal remedies Protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in Daryaganj

New Delhi: Fifteen people have been arrested by the Delhi Police in connection with violence in Daryaganj during a protest over Citizenship Act yesterday.

According to a police official, the arrested men have been charged with rioting and using force to deter cops from doing their duty.

The protesters torched a private car parked at Subhash Marg area on Friday evening. However, the fire was immediately doused.

Forty people were detained in connection with the protest and violence out of which eight were minors. The minors were released early Saturday.

The cops said that more arrests in this matter are likely.

Meanwhile, a Delhi court has directed the Delhi police to allow lawyers to meet the people detained and provide them with legal remedies.

Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Arul Verma issued directions to the station house officer of the Daryaganj police station late Friday night after lawyers approached him at his residence, seeking permission to meet the detainees.

Verma also directed the SHO to provide necessary medical care to the detainees who were injured.

Delhi Police also got court rap for detaining minors with the Magistrate saying if any minor who is allegedly in conflict with the law, then he or she should not be detained in the first instance but should be dealt with as per the provisions of the law if the need arises.

"Detention of minor in a police station is a flagrant violation of the law," the judge said.

The protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act turned violent in Daryaganj in Old Delhi on Friday with protesters pelting stones at police and torching vehicles in front of the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Central and near the Delhi Gate.

Later, several people gathered at the Delhi Police HQ at ITO and shouted slogans demanding the release of around 40 persons detained during for violent protest in Daryaganj.
