Aramco CEO tops ICIS Power Players ranking list

Saudi Aramco said its CEO Amin Nasser has been selected to take the top slot in the ICIS Top 40 Power Players in 2019, a global ranking of the leading CEOs and senior executives making the greatest positive impact on their companies and the industry.

ICIS is the trusted source of Independent Commodity Intelligence Services for the global energy, petrochemical and fertilizer industries.

It is a division of RELX, a FTSE 20 company with revenues of £7,492m in 2018 and an employee base of over 30,000 experts across 40 countries.

The ICIS Top 40 Power Players ranking is based on selections by the global ICIS senior editorial staff.

In the ICIS Top 40 Power Players 2019 ranking, Dow CEO Jim Fitterling came in second, followed by LyondellBasell CEO Bob Patel.

“The level of petrochemical project activity for Saudi Aramco is unprecedented for any company. This will reshape the global landscape for many years to come,” remarked Joseph Chang, the global editor of ICIS Chemical Business.

“In what could be a global technology game changer, Aramco is also working on multiple technology tracks for crude oil-to-chemicals that would offer greater competition to US shale gas-based crackers,” he added.

Saudi Aramco is undertaking two massive projects in Saudi Arabia - a crude oil-to-chemicals (CTC) project in Yanbu with Sabic and the 1.5m tonne/year cracker joint venture project Amiral with France-based Total in Jubail.

Outside the kingdom, Aramco is nearing completion of the PRefChem joint venture refinery/cracker project with Peteronas in Malaysia. In China, Aramco is planning a joint venture refinery and cracker with Norinco and Panjin Sincen in Liaoning.

Aramco is also planning a massive refinery and petrochemicals complex in Raigad, India with a consortium of Indian oil companies as well as Abu Dhabi National Oil Co (Adnoc).

On the merger and acquisition front, Aramco’s planned $69 billion acquisition of a 70% stake in Sabic is expected to close in the first half of 2020, which would bring even more petrochemical projects under the Aramco umbrella.-TradeArabia News Service

Copyright 2019 Al Hilal Publishing and Marketing Group Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info).
