Anti-CAA protests in Delhi: 26 violence accused sent to judicial custody

Fifteen people, who were arrested on Friday in connection with the violence in Daryaganj in Old Delhi during a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act, have been sent to judicial custody for two days. The bail plea of the accused in the Daryaganj violence will be heard on Monday.

The accused have been identified as Ashfaq, Irfauddin, Abbas, Athar, Atif, Shabbir Ahmad, Danish Malik, Rehan Khan, Haider Ali, Zaid, Furkan, Danish, Shamsher Shan, Mohd Ali, and Aamir.

Meanwhile, the Karkardooma Court has also sent the 11 accused in the Seemapuri violence to judicial custody for 14 days. Rejecting the bail pleas of the accused, the court said that serious sections, including Section 307 (attempt to murder), are involved in the Seemapuri violence case.

The accused in the Daryaganj violence case on Friday were produced before the Tis Hazari Court on Saturday. During the hearing of the case, a lawyer appearing for the accused protesters asked for a copy of the remand application which, the lawyer said, was not shared with him.

During the arguments, the lawyer said, "Even assuming that any of these men had anything to do with the incident, the allegation is that a car parked on the side of the road was set on fire. They have invoked sections relating to assault on public servants. That is punishable by a maximum of 3 years. Section 3&4 of public property act contains provisions of up to 5 years imprisonment. Public property is a property owned by the government. How is this Act being invoked? What building was damaged?"

"These are daily wagers who had gone to the mosque to pray. What's the individual role attributed to these men? The police even kept minors in detention. There was no common intention between these people. You [the Delhi Police] pick up whoever you want to and then invoke offences. Is there any allegation against any specific person?"

The lawyers also asked about the other detainees who were not produced before the court on Saturday. One of the detainees is Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan. The lawyers appearing for the accused have also alleged that the persons, including a minor, were detained by the police when they were in the area to offer Friday Namaz.

The police have, however, not said anything about the other people who were detained after the Daryaganj violence.

Application for the state read: "There were serious offences. Public property was damaged. Police officials were injured. It was a planned and premeditated attack. Police officials have been injured seriously. There is a need of an in-depth investigation. These men should be kept behind bars while investigation is ongoing." The application also mentions the number of cars that were set ablaze in Daryaganj.

The lawyers objected to the accusations and said the "FIR itself says only one car damaged". "SHO himself is the complainant in the case," the lawyers said.

Questions were also raised on the whereabouts of Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad Ravan who was detained on Saturday morning from outside the Jama Masjid in Delhi. He was inside the mosque in protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.
