Contractor forces construction worker to drink alcohol, rapes her on pretext of job offer

The accused has been sent to judicial custody (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Keesara police arrested the accused, Galipally Nasaiah The woman was heading home from a construction site in Neredmet when she was approached by the accused He has been charged under 302 and other sections of the Indian Penal Code

Hyderabad: Police in Keesara area of Hyderabad arrested a man on Friday over the alleged rape of a daily wage labourer. Identified as Galipally Nasaiah, the accused is a plumbing contractor who lured the woman to an isolated area on the pretext of a job and sexually assaulted her on Wednesday evening. A case has been registered against him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

According to inputs, Narsaiah approached the woman who works as a construction worker when she was heading home from a site in Neredmet. He asked her to accompany him while offering her a job to fill cement. He then took her to an isolated area where he forced her to consume alcohol before sexually assaulting her on the night of December 18.

The woman returned home and narrated the incident to family members who approached Keesara police and lodged a complaint in this regard against the unknown accused. A preliminary investigation led them to Nasaiah who was detained and questioned in connection with the crime. He has now been sent to judicial remand after police told the court that they have evidence linking him to the rape of the construction worker.

Similar incidents of sexual predators luring women on the pretext of jobs continue to be reported from across the country. In May of this year, a 19-year-old girl from Kurukshetra in Haryana who was working in Sonipat was summoned to Gurugram by an acquaintance who offered her a job. Upon her arrival, she was taken to a hotel room near Sikanderpur metro station where three men took turns raping her. All three men were booked and later arrested after the woman approached the Gurugram woman police station and registered a case against them. Other such instances where women have been targeted on the pretext of jobs come to light each day.
