Surat: ‘Rapist could have fled two days earlier’

SURAT: The accused of the four-year-old girl’s rape , Shashibind Nishad (26) would have fled the city two days earlier after the crime, had his salary not been delayed , said police on Saturday.The police investigation revealed that Nishad had demanded due salary from his employer two days after committing the crime but was refused. He stayed two more days to get his salary and got caught.The police produced Nishad in a court on Saturday after arresting him on Friday. The court remanded him to police custody till December 30.The police sought the custody of Nishad for 10 days in order to carry out the reconstruction of the crime and to recover a knife with which he had threatened the survivor.The police arrested Nishad after rewinding the CCTV footage in which he was seen in conversation with two persons, one of whom was his cousin who was traced and detained. After initial refusal, Nishad’s cousin identified him and provided the police with the address of his workplace.“Police checked CCTV footages of over 300 cameras after which the accused was traced. Police teams checked over 4,000 rooms as well,” said J K Pandya, assistant commissioner of police.Nishad worked at Ramkrupa Textile in Sachin GIDC as crepe machine operator. When the cops went to the textile unit, Rasanand Behra, a senior employee of the unit, took them to Nishad’s home from where he was nabbed.“Nishad had worked a few months ago with me. He had asked me to find him a job, one and a half months ago, after which I brought him to this unit. However, I could have never imagined that he would stoop down to do something as heinous as this,” said Behra (51).“Nishad was working in the unit till 8 pm on December 15, but he did not come on the following day. He came on December 17 and asked for the due salary which I refused to pay. When he returned on the evening of December 19, I paid him Rs 14,840 at around 6.30 pm after which he left,” said Ashwin Kapadiya, the owner of Ramkrupa Textile.On the night of December 15, Nishad kidnapped the girl from the ground where Ramlila was being performed and sexually assaulted her. The minor returned home on her own at around 4 am.Due to the delay in getting salary, Nishad stayed back for two days and had packed his luggage to leave the city in 3 am train to his native in Kanpur of Uttar Pradesh, but the police nabbed him couple of hours before he could catch the train. He had packed a packet of biscuits, some snacks and two pair of clothes in the bag. He told Kapadiya that his relative had died at his native place for which he had to go.Nishad was sleeping when the police reached his room where he stayed with four other men.The police questioned 75 tea stall owners and employees, 17 tailors and 17 barbers.
