RJD-led bandh against CAA cripples Bihar, 1,500 held

PATNA: The state-wide shutdown in Bihar called by the main opposition RJD and its allies against the amended citizenship law paralysed life across the state on Saturday. Rail and road services came to a halt as hundreds of bandh supporters put up road blockades and squatted on the railway tracks.In Patna, six people suffered gunshot injuries in clashes between two communities, while a police station was attacked in Nawada district and around half-a-dozen police personnel were injured in stone-pelting in Aurangabad. In contrast, in Saran and Gaya districts the bandh supporters presented roses to local residents and businessmen to seek their support for the agitation and carried out protest marches.Police detained more than 1,500 protesters across the state and arrested 13 people. RJD chief Lalu Prasad’s son and leader of the opposition in the state Tejashwi Prasad Yadav led the protest at the head of a large procession from the RJD office at Bir Chand Patel Marg to the Dak Bungalow crossing in Patna, throwing traffic out of gear.Train services were severely affected as trains were stopped at Ara (Bhojpur), Buxar, Jehanabad, Sasaram (Rohtas), Chhapra (Saran), Muzaffarpur, Samastipur, Laheriasarai (Darbhanga) and Begusarai districts.Although the state police headquarters had made elaborate arrangements, vandalism of public property was reported from most parts of the state. Windshields of vehicles were smashed, drivers thrashed for defying the bandh call and tyres of many auto-rickshaws and other private vehicles deflated by bandh supporters, who described the Citizenship (Amendment) Act as antidemocratic and anti-people.Tension gripped Katihar, close to the India-Nepal border, after clashes broke out between bandh enforcers and those in support of the CAA. Katihar SP Vikas Kumar said five people suffered serious injuries in stone-pelting. In Aurangabad, the police had to lob tear gas shells to disperse a mob indulging in stone-pelting, vandalism and arson. The situation worsened after bandh supporters forcibly tried to shut shops.Protesters in Nawada attacked a police outpost. Police had to use force to disperse the rampaging mob at Sadhvawna Chowk. Similarly, police resorted to a lathicharge in Muzaffarpur to quell mobs indulging in brick-batting, road blockades and arson. Half a dozen police personnel suffered minor injuries in stone-pelting.Protesters used buffalos to block NH-22 connecting Hajipur with Muzaffarpur. In Vaishali, former minister Shivchandra Ram and former MLC Vishnudeo Rai were among the 80 people detained. “The identity of those involved in subversive activities is being ascertained with video clips,” said ADGP (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar.
