Anti-CAA stir: Delhi Police reaches out to people in several areas as part of confidence-building measure

Jamia Millia Islamia students pelted stones on security forces | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights 'We are thankful to you for cooperating with us' Police said that such an exercise will be conducted in more areas in the next few days The national capital has been witnessing a number of violent protests for the last seven days

New Delhi: After New Delhi witnessed a series of violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act in the recent days, the Delhi Police on Saturday launched an exercise to reach out to more people in several areas as part of its confidence-building measures.

According to an official, groups of police personnel arrived at Seemapuri, Geeta Colony, Jagatpuri, Krishna Nagar, Gandhi Nagar and other places and thanked people for maintaining peace in these areas.

In a video of the exercise held in East Delhi's Geeta Colony, a police officer was seen thanking people on a mic, standing in a busy street.

"Delhi Police thanks all the residents of the Geeta Colony police station area for maintaining peace. We are thankful to you for cooperating with us," the official said.

Further appealing the residents to maintain peace and solidarity in the future as well, the cops said they were assured if people of Geeta Colony remain helpful and assist them in such a law and order situation.

We thank you again for your cooperation, said the official.

Police said that such exercises will be conducted in more areas in the next few days.

The national capital has been witnessing a number of violent protests for the last seven days. On Friday, Old Delhi’s Daryaganj witnessed a series of violent protests leading to the arrest of 15 people from the area.

The angry protesters set a car on fire, damaged several vehicles and pelted stones near the Delhi Gate area after police personnel baton-charged them and used water cannon to disperse the crowd.

Earlier this week, violence also erupted in Northeast Delhi's Seelampur, Jafrabad and Southeast Delhi's New Friends Colony and Jamia Nagar during which several vehicles were set on fire and public property worth crore was destroyed.
