8-year-old among 15 killed in UP; Kanpur on the boil again

anti-citizenship protests

A vehicle that was allegedly torched by protesters in Kanpur; police personnel lathicharge protesters elsewhere in the city

Action Force

Samajwadi Party

Aligarh Muslim University

AMU sets up probe panel



A police post was torched in Kanpur on Saturday amid fresh incidents ofin Uttar Pradesh’s several districts, including in Rampur and Aligarh, as the toll in the violence since Thursday rose to 15.Among the fatalities was an eight year-old boy, who was killed in a stampede in Varanasi when a violent mob was being chased by policemen.Over 260 policemen were also injured, of whom 57 received gunshot wounds, said IG (Law and Order) Praveen Kumar.“Women and children were used as shields by the protesters,” Director General of Police OP Singh said, maintaining that the police did not open fire. “All the deaths that took place have been in cross firing and this will become clear in the postmortem examination… We are clear and transparent in this. If anyone died due to our fire we will conduct a judicial inquiry and take action. But nothing happened from our side.”The police had no option but to resort to a lathicharge to chase them away, he said, adding that tear gas shells were used for dispersing the mob.In Kanpur, protesters on Saturday set the Yatimkhana police post on fire and indulged in heavy violence, leading to injury to some people. Around 400 to 500 people gathered in Kanpur to protest against the Act amid a bandh call and five of them were taken into preventive custody, they said.The police lobbed tear gas shells and used canes to chase them away, and fire tenders were rushed to the spot. ADG (Kanpur) Prem Prakash said the Rapidwas called along with Vajr vehicles to control the situation.MLA Amitabh Bajpai and former party MLA Kamlesh Tewari were arrested as a precautionary measure and their vehicles seized.Officials said crowds gathered in areas like Babupurva, Nai Sadak, Moolganj, Dalelpurva and Haleem College and police in large numbers was deployed to keep a watch over the situation. Around 400-500 had people gathered for a protest amid a bandh call and five were taken into preventive custody, said officials. Five protesters were hospitalised, one of whom was critical, said District Magistrate Aunjaneya Singh. He alleged that the stone-pelters included children aged 12-18. A dozen other protesters suffered minor injuries after the police fired tear gas, said Singh.He claimed that the police “did not open fire anywhere, yet one protester had a gunshot injury”.Thealso witnessed protests, after a lull of four days, with hundreds of nonteaching staff joining hands with teachers’ association.In the western UP district of Kasganj, internet services were suspended following tension, but the police described the situation as under control.Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, who Friday night issued an appeal not to pay heed to rumours and help maintain peace and order, is reported to have cancelled all his programmes outside Lucknow. “None indulging in violence will be spared,” Adityanath said in a tweet.The Aligarh Muslim University has set up a one-man judicial panel to conduct an internal inquiry into violent incidents that rocked the campus earlier this week. “The inquiry into the violent incidents that took place on the campus on December 15 and 16 will be conducted by former chief justice of Chattisgarh High Court, Justice VK Gupta,” said AMU Vice Chancellor Tariq Mansoor.
