CAA protests: Vadodara turns normal, eight held for stone-pelting

Cops claim enough evidence that Friday’s incident was preplanned.

VADODARA: Eight persons were arrested on Saturday in connection with stone pelting on policemen in Hathikhana area on Friday afternoon.

Police said that the eight accused - Mohammed Rizwan Sheikh, Mehtab Pathan, Darvez Malek, Mohammed Sharukh Sheikh, Mohammed Salaudin Deriwala, Shabbir Hussain Sheikh, Asif Memon and Mohammed Yasin Pathan - were among those who had allegedly provoked some people from the crowd and had pelted stones at cops. All rioters are residents of Hathikhana area and work as vegetable vendors, handcart owners and auto-rickshaw drivers.

"More rioters are still being identified, but we have enough evidence that the incident of Friday afternoon was a well-planned conspiracy," said deputy commissioner of police Jaydeepsinh Jadeja. "After containing the situation, when cops searched the area, buckets full of stones and water were found," Jadeja added. He said that stones used to pelt at cops and the water was accumulated well in advance to douse the tear gas shells. Cops had lobbed 30 tear gas shells to disperse the mob.

During investigation of Friday's incident, cops have also found that the rioters had changed the directions of some of the CCTV cameras installed in the area and some CCTV cameras were covered using clothes. "The owners of private CCTV cameras had also deleted the data from the rioting time from their recorders," he said.

Refuting the allegations made by the rioters that the cops were recording them when they were coming out of the mosque, Jadeja told TOI that the police videographer is always there. "We have videographer to collect evidence. So allegation made by protesters are is false," Jadeja added.

Police sources said that there were reports from the intelligence agency that a rally was planned in the area after the afternoon prayers so a team of cops from city police station was stationed there as a preventive measure.

The situation had turned ugly when some people objected to the police videographer who was recording the crowd coming out of the mosque after the Friday prayers. About a dozen men created ruckus after which the videographer walked away and began shooting from some distance, but the same men again objected and police gathered there sensing trouble. Later, a mob resorted to stone pelting within a few minutes and tension gripped the area. Three policemen were injured and three police vehicles and some motorcycles were damaged by the rioters.


