No let-up, violent protests in UP, Bihar

Tribune News Service

New Delhi/Lucknow, Dec 21

There was more violence in Uttar Pradesh on Saturday during anti-CAA protests with a mob torching a police post in Kanpur, while large-scale vandalism and disruption of rail and road traffic were witnessed in Bihar during a bandh called by Opposition Rashtriya Janata Dal against the amended Citizenship Act.

At least 15 persons, including an eight-year-old boy, have been killed in violence during protests in Uttar Pradesh since Thursday. The state police said over 260 personnel were also injured, 57 of whom had received gunshot wounds. “Women and children were used as shields by protesters,” said OP Singh, UP DGP, maintaining the police did not open fire.

Talking to reporters in Lucknow, the DGP said, “All deaths that took place have been in cross-firing…. If anyone died due to our fire, we will conduct a judicial inquiry and take action. But nothing as such has happened.”

Protesters set ablaze Yatimkhana police post in Kanpur and indulged in heavy brickbatting, leading to injuries to many people, including policemen, a senior official said.

Samajwadi Party MLA Amitabh Bajpai and former MLA and SP leader Kamlesh Tewari have been arrested as a precautionary measure.

Clashes broke out in Rampur between anti-CAA protesters and police, resulting in injuries to many, the police said. A mob of around 400 to 500 people had gathered for a protest amid a bandh call.

The UP Police said three persons died today in Firozabad. On Friday, four deaths were reported from Meerut district and two each in Kanpur and Bijnor. The eight-year-old boy was killed in a stampede in Varanasi when a violent mob was being chased by policemen. Besides, violence claimed a life each in Sambhal and Firozabad.

The situation in Delhi remained largely peaceful. Protests were organised outside Jamia Millia Islamia campus and at India Gate. Security was tight in violence-affected areas of Old Delhi and Seemapuri in the Capital.

The situation in Assam, where protesters carried out rallies against the amended law, and West Bengal was peaceful while mobile internet services were restored in Meghalaya.

Protests continued in parts of south India, including Chennai where CPM activists tried to block trains at the railway station but their attempts were foiled by police. The Congress in Kerala led by its top leaders held demonstrations in all district headquarters. There were scuffles at several places in Tamil and Kerala between police and protesters who tried to break barricades.

100 lawyers protest outside Jamia varsity

New Delhi: Over 100 lawyers gathered outside the Jamia Millia Islamia on Saturday to lodge their protest against the amended citizenship act and the National Register of Citizens for India (NRC). The lawyers gathered outside the varsity with posters that said ‘We advocates condemn brutal attack on students’, ‘Stop dividing India, boycott CAA & NRC’, ‘NRC narak (hell)’, ‘Uphold the Constitution’. PTI
