Man stabs wife to death, hangs self in Delhi's Dwarka; probe underway

Sudesh was an engineer by profession and had even travelled to the US for work. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that the man first stabbed his wife The woman was stabbed dozen times so much that even the knife broke, said police officials The couple had children aged 15 and 13, both were inside the house when the crime took place

New Delhi: A woman and her husband were found dead in their house in Dichaon Kalan area of Delhi's Dwarka on Saturday morning. During the preliminary investigation, the police found out that the man first stabbed his wife and then he hanged himself to death.

The police officials stated while there were stab injuries on the woman's body, her husband was found hanging from the ceiling. The deceased were identified as 40-year-old Sneha and her 45-year-old husband, Sudesh. The couple had children aged 15 and 13, both were inside the house when the crime took place. According to a report by The Times of India, Sudesh told his children to stay in their respective rooms as he wanted to have an important discussion with his wife on Friday night.

Preliminary investigation revealed that Sudesh was under a debt of Rs 13 lakh and since last some months he was in depression and was undergoing treatment. Reportedly the woman was stabbed dozen times so much that even the knife broke.

At around 11:30 am on Saturday, the police officials received a call and a team was rushed to the spot. Police found the woman lying in a pool of blood while the man was in another room hanging with the ceiling. A senior police official told a media person that it seems like the couple, who got married in 2002, had a fight on Friday night, following which Sudesh stabbed his wife to death and later hanged himself.

Reportedly, Sudesh was an engineer by profession and had even travelled to the US for work. But from the last six months, he was in depression. Recently he was even admitted to a hospital for around two weeks and was under medication for the same. However, the police probe in the matter is still underway.
