UP Govt Starts Process To Seize Properties Of Protesters Involved In Anti-CAA Violence

The Yogi Adityanath-led Uttar Pradesh government has started the process of sealing the properties of those involved in vandalism and violence during the anti- Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protests across the state.

The state government plans to recover the cost of damage to public and private properties during demonstrations that turned violent with fines collected from those responsible.

Numerous protesters have been identified in Lucknow and notices have been sent to them administration.

According to a report by India Today, “Lucknow district magistrate Abhishek Prakash has set up a four-member panel that will evaluate damage to the property during the violence in anti-CAA protests.

The panel will identify troublemakers and impose fine on them. Should they fail to pay the fine, their properties will be confiscated.

AFP

On Thursday, CM Yogi condemned the violence and protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act in parts of Uttar Pradesh and parts of the country, Yogi Adityanath said people cannot indulge in violence in the "name of protests".

He said strict action will be taken against those resorting to violence.

"I have called a meeting over this. You cannot indulge in violence in the name of protest. We will take strict action against such elements. Will seize the property of those found guilty and compensate damage to public property," Yogi Adityanath was quoted as saying by ANI.

AFP

Yogi Adityanath also accused the Congress and the Samajwadi Party (SP) of "misleading" people on the Citizenship Amendment Act. An order regarding this has been issued to the home secretary and the DGP.

Death toll rises in UP

Violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act raged on across Uttar Pradesh on Saturday taking the death toll to 16 in the state.

One person died and several people were injured in clashes between anti-CAA protesters, who pelted stones and indulged in arson, and police in Rampur in UP, officials said. Protestors set ablaze Yatimkhana police post in Kanpur and indulged in heavy brick batting, leading to injuries to many people including policemen, a senior official said. Police used cane-charge and tear gas to chase them away.

UP police said as many as 705 persons have been arrested and 4,500 were detained for the violence during the last two days. They said 260 security personnel were injured, of whom 57 suffered gunshot wounds.
