Respect Your Education, Read About CAA, NRC: PM Modi Slams Congress, 'Urban Naxals'

New Delhi :

Elaborate security arrangements have been made for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's rally at Delhi's Ramlila Maidan today amid protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The venue is a little over a kilometre away from Old Delhi's Daryaganj that was hit by violence on Friday. The Delhi Police is in close touch with the SPG and the Bharatiya Janata Party for the security arrangements during the programme. The Delhi BJP has also deployed volunteers as part of its security arrangements for the rally.

Check Live Updates Here:

15:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress, others worried if Muslims across the world support me so much, how long can they frighten Indian Muslims: PM Modi

15:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The entire Left front, that is left in just small pockets in the country, is opposing this as well. Prakash Karat, their senior leader, had also asked for support for religiously persecuted people coming from Bangladesh: PM Modi

15:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I am very confident that those who are standing with the tricolour in their hands will also raise voice against Pakistan sponsored terrorism. They will inspire people to do that: PM Modi

15:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress and its allies upset due to the support I received from Muslim countries: PM Modi

15:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Who understands the pain of refugees better than people of Delhi? CAA is not taking away anyone's citizenship. It, in fact, provides citizenship to the religiously persecuted minorities from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh: PM Modi

14:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We are doing what they (Congress) had promised but could not do due to vote-bank politics: PM Modi

14:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi quotes ex-PM Manmohan Singh's remarks in support of giving citizenship to persecuted minorities from Bangladesh.

14:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Infiltrators never come in light. They never ask for help from the police, never give interviews and just hide. They live via corrupt means through agents. Refugees never hide their identities and infiltrators never reveal themselves: PM Modi

14:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Girls are religiously converted and forced to marry in Pakistan. It is well-documented. It only happens because they follow a different religion. These people have come to India only due to such religious persecution: PM Modi

14:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In NRC came at the time of Congress. Were they sleeping then? We neither brought NRC in cabinet nor in Parliament. If we're passing a legislation to give you ownership rights, in the same session will we bring a legislation to send you out? PM Modi

14:44 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We had a chance to expose Pakistan's discrimination against minorities but it was lost due to our rivals' politics: PM Modi

14:40 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I request the youth of the country to read the Act in detail and not to fall prey to the rumors of detention-centers being spread by Urban Naxals and Congress. It's a lie and is dividing the nation: PM Modi



I request the youth of the country to read the Act in detail and not to fall prey to the rumors of detention-centers being spread by Urban Naxals and Congress.



It's a lie and is dividing the nation: PM Modi #DilliChaleModiKeSaath

— BJP (@BJP4India) December 22, 2019



14:39 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Citizenship law and NRC have nothing to do with Indian Muslims: PM Modi

14:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rumours over detention centers spread by Congress and Urban Naxals are all false, says PM Modi.

14:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Now that the people of the country have dismissed them, they have gone back to their old measures of divide and rule. The Citizenship Amendment Act is not applicable to any citizen of India irrespective of his religion: PM Modi

14:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Politicians belonging to 100-year old political parties are not voicing for peace. They are mum on the violence being meted out on policemen and other people. It clearly shows you agree with this: PM Modi

14:31 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Amended citizenship law has nothing to do with Indian citizens: PM Modi

14:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In In swipe at AAP, Modi says no appeal for peace from seven-year-old party, it shows violence has its indirect approval.

14:28 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In 33,000 police personnel laid down their lives during work since independence but now being attacked mercilessly: PM Modi

14:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi accuses rivals of creating fear and chaos, and trying to defame India abroad.

14:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In My rivals should burn my effigy if they hate me but they should not target the poor: PM Modi

14:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Schools were attacked, buses were torched, public properties were vandalised due to politics, says PM Modi on protests over Citizenship Act

14:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Muslims being misled, I have always ensured that documents will never come in way of development schemes and their beneficiaries: PM

14:16 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I dare rivals to find anything discriminatory in my work, says PM Modi, citing his govt's various development programmes.

14:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Lie being spread that I brought law to snatch people's rights, it will not stand: PM Modi

14:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians all were befitted, everyone who lives here was benefitted. Why did we do this? Because we live for the love of the country. We are dedicated to the mantra of 'Sabka saath, sabka vikas': PM Modi

14:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Some political parties are spreading rumours, they're misleading people & inciting them. I want to ask them, when we authroised the unauthrosied colonies, did we ask anyone their religion? Did we ask which political party they support? Did we ask for documents from 1970,1980? PM Modi

14:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Misinformation, fake news being spread by some people to provoke others, says PM Modi on CAA protest.

14:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In People were incited, those in high positions shared fake videos: PM Modi on protests against citizenship law.

14:07 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Citizenship Amendment Act 2019 has been passed by India's Parliament. Please respect the Parliament, respect the MPs: PM Modi at Ramlila Maidan

14:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi govt completely indifferent to city's biggest problem, which is availability of drinking water: PM Modi

14:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We built peripheral expressways, opened hundreds of CNG stations to curb pollution: PM Modi

14:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In 25 km of new metro route added annually in last five years, it was 14 km earlier, AAP govt hindering work: PM Modi

14:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Had the Delhi govt not politicised the phase 4 project of Delhi metro, its work would have started much earlier. That is why I say that those who do politics in your name, never understood your pain, they never intended to do that: PM Modi.

13:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi targets AAP govt, says it gave over 2,000 bungalows in posh Delhi locations to 'VIPs' close to it in an illegal manner.

13:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi attacks rivals for not doing enough for unauthorised colonies, says he decided he cannot let this go on.

13:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We promised, we delivered: PM Modi while kicking off BJP's Delhi poll campaign from Ramlila ground.

13:51 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Even after several decades after Independence, a large section of population in Delhi had to face fear, uncertainty, deceit & false electoral promises. Illegal, sealing, bulldozer & a cut-off date - life of a large population in Delhi' was confined around these words: PM Modi



13:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Happy that there is a new dawn for 40 lakh people who now have rights to their homes: PM Modi

13:44 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi raises slogan of 'vividhta me ekta, Bharat ki visheshta' (Unity in diversity is India's speciality) at Delhi rally.

13:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi addresses a rally at Ramlila Maidan in Delhi.

13:32 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Not only me, but over 1.25 lakh people present here want to welcome PM Modi: Manoj Tiwari

13:30 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrives at Ramlila Maidan. He will address 'Aabhar Rally' shortly.



Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrives at Ramlila Maidan. He will address a rally here, shortly. pic.twitter.com/fRitz3C5IE

— ANI (@ANI) December 22, 2019



12:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP MPs Gautam Gambhir and Hans Raj Hans addressed the ‘thanksgiving rally’ at Ramlila Maidan, Delhi.

12:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Several BJP leaders have reached at the venue.

12:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi to shortly address rally at Ramlila Maidan.

11:14 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP MP Gautam Gambhir reaches at Ramlila Maidan.

11:13 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In A police official said 20 companies of outside force have been deployed, each company comprising 70-80 personnel.

10:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Traffic will be affected on Barakhamba Road, Tolstoy Road and Ranjit Singh flyover during PM's rally, says the advisory.

10:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi Waqf Board announces it will give financial assistance of Rs 5.5 lakh each to families of those killed during violent protests against Citizenship Amendment Act.

10:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In No commercial vehicle will be allowed from Raj Ghat to Delhi Gate ahead of PM Modi's rally at Ramlila Maidan. Restrictions on DDU Marg towards Kamla Market Chowk via Vivekanand Marg.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
