Citing in-action, rape victim who set herself ablaze outside police station; succumbs to injuries in Kanpur

Due to severe burns, the doctors referred to the Lal Lajpat Rai hospital in Kanpur. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The victim died on Saturday night The incident took place on December 16, when the woman had reached the SP office in Unnao and poured kerosene on herself and set herself on fire the woman was in a relationship with the accused of several years and he kept sexually exploiting her on pretext of marrying her

Kanpur: Days after the Unnao rape victim was set on fire, triggering nation-wide protests, a 23-year-old rape victim had set herself on fire outside the office of Superintendent of Police (SP) in Unnao on December 16, has succumbed to injuries in a Kanpur hospital.

The victim died on Saturday night. She had set herself on fire due to police in-action in the complaint against the accused rapist Avadesh Singh. The accused had reportedly promised to marry the victim but he later refused to acknowledge the relationship.

In connection with the woman's complaint, the police lodged a rape case against Avadesh Singh, but the latter had obtained anticipatory bail from the court. The police had also filed a charge sheet against the accused. The woman had reportedly suffered 70 per cent burns and was admitted to the Lala Lajpat Rai hospital in Kanpur on December 16. Since Saturday morning, the doctors claimed she had developed swelling in her abdomen and respiratory organs and her condition was worsening.

The incident took place on December 16, when the woman had reached the SP office in Unnao and poured kerosene on herself and set herself on fire. Somehow the cops immediately doused the flames and took the woman to the district hospital. Due to severe burns, the doctors referred her to the Lal Lajpat Rai Hospital in Kanpur.

According to SP Unnao Vikrant Veer, the woman was in a relationship with the accused of several years. She had lodged a complaint against the accused on October 2, accusing him of having sexually exploited her over these years. However, further investigation in the case is underway.
