Oppn instigating people against CAA, says Modi at rally in Delhi

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, December 22

In a hard-hitting attack against the Opposition, including the Congress, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday accused it of lying and instigating violence by spreading rumours through social media for political gains and vote-bank politics.

Some parties are lying to Muslims, he said, referring to the Citizenship Amendment Act that was passed by Parliament with thumping majority. The NRC rules have not yet been formulated/drafted or cleared by the Cabinet and still lies are being spread about it, the Prime Minister said.

“The Congress and urban Naxals are spreading lies that Muslims will be sent to detention centres. At least, read CAA to see if NRC is part of it,” he said.

“There is no connection between CAA and NRC, they are lying,” he said, slamming the Opposition.

The advantage of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property Rights of Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) Bill, 2019, is that it seeks to grant ownership rights to residents of Delhi’s unauthorised colonies, which was cleared in the same session as CAA, for all religions, Modi said.

Can we bring an Act in the same session that will discriminate on basis of religious, he questioned.

“When we never asked religion or origin of any person while launching our pro-poor policies, then why the Opposition is lying,” he said, slamming “fear-mongers” and adding that “aim of such false allegations is to belittle India in the World”

“Hate me, abuse me... burn my effigies, not India’s property...,” he said also extending support to the police

“Does the police need your respect or not,” he said, paying homage to martyrs of the force.

He also asked people to “stand up and show your respect for the Parliament of India and its MPs”, adding that he too would like to thank the two Houses of Parliament for clearing the Bill.

“Does the Bill giving right to home to all the communities divisive,” he questioned, giving a list of all the policy decisions benefitting all communities.

“Did we ask religion or certificates while doing so, he said, accusing the Opposition of “telling lies and misleading people”.

“Vividhta main ekta, Bharat ki visheshta (unity in diversity, the uniqueness of India),” he gave slogan right at the beginning of his speech at the iconic Ramlila Maidan near Old Delhi area, adjacent to Dariya Ganj and Delhi Gate areas which saw massive protests against the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act.

Several speakers, including party’s Lok Sabha MPs Manoj Tewari and Meenakshi Lekhi and senior BJP leader Vijay Goel, sought to ally people’s apprehensions on the issue.

Accusing the Opposition of spreading misinformation and fomenting trouble, they said the turnout at the rally was the proof of endorsement of people’s support. On one side is truth and on the other lies, they claimed.

They also highlighted other steps taken by the Narendra Modi government, including removal of special status to Jammu and Kashmir, Ram Temple, ‘triple talaq’ at the “dhanyavad/abhaar’ rally.

The speakers, including Union ministers Prakash Javadekar and Harshvardhan, also slammed Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal and his party for not doing sufficient to combat air pollution and other issues before the National Capital.

The rally was aimed to showcase to Delhi the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property Rights of Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) Bill, 2019, that seeks to grant ownership rights to residents of Delhi’s unauthorised colonies and launch the BJP’s campaign for the upcoming Delhi Assembly.

Pushed by his government and passed by the Parliament earlier this month, the BJP believes it will be the ultimate game changer in Delhi, which has been out of its reach since late 1990s.

The Bill is expected to benefit 40 lakh people in the Capital

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was presented 11 lakh signatures from the residents of 1,731 unauthorised colonies to thank him for this “historic decision and for proving their full trust in the BJP”.

Modi called it the beginning of a new dawn in the lives of people in unauthorised colonies, sounding the poll bugle for the elections to the Delhi Assembly.

Here is a world of difference between a refugee and intruder, he said, adding that CAA is not meant to wrest citizenship of anyone but grant citizenship to those who deserve.

Indian Muslims don’t need to worry, he added.

PM Modi also quoted Mahatma Gandhi to those using "Gandhi surname". “We are fulfilling promises made decades ago,” he said, adding that Gandhi said those who wanted to come to India later could do so

He also quoted former PM Manmohan Singh to stress his point. "Is Modi guilty if he delivers what Manmohan Singh wanted," Modi said.

He also attacked West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee "who till a few years back was demanding in Parliament that infiltrators from Bangladesh" be stopped".

"Why have you changed Mamata didi? Why are you spreading rumours? Why are you so scared? Are elections so important that you have stopped believing in people of West Bengal? The entire country knows who Mamata is supporting," Modi said, attacking Banerjee.

Educated youth will soon realise what is the truth, he said in an address aimed at allaying all fears regarding CAA and NRC.

"Some CMs are saying they will not implement CAA. You are holding important Constitutional positions and are saying such things. At least ask legal experts, advocate generals of your respective States, is it possible?" Modi said.

“Despite all their conspiracies your sevak will never step back from his responsibilities,” Modi said. “For past two decades I have been targeted with names like ‘maut ka saudagar’,” he said

“Even if they lynch me like a ‘gidh’ (vulture), I will continue working for you. The more they target me, the more love I will get from the people,” he said

He ended his marathon speech with a promise from people to maintain cleanliness in Delhi.

“We should welcome the new year with cleaner Delhi. We must stay away from violence, this country is ours, its people our ours,” he said, asking people to stay away from violent protests in the marathon speech focused on dispelling notions about CAA and NRC, which Home Minister Amit Shah said would also be implemented

Clearly the government has been forced to take a step back from the NRC after the violent protests.

HIGHLIGHTS

15:15: Mamata didi went from Kolkata to UN. Few years back, she was pleading before Parliament that infiltrators coming from Bangladesh should be stopped. Didi what has happened you? Why did you change? Why are you spreading rumours? Elections come and go. Why are you scared: PM

15:10: Congress and its allies upset due to the support I received from Muslim countries: Modi

15:05: Two weeks ago, a daughter was born at Majnu-ka-tila who was named 'nagarikta'. I want to ask miscreants & people engaged in remote control politics, if lives of 'nagarikta' & her parents become easy, if problems of any citizen of country is solved, why does it pain you: PM

15:00: There is a very simple difference, an infiltrator never reveals his identity and a refugee never hides his identity. Many of these infiltrators are coming out and speaking. Why don't they speak the truth? They are scared that their reality will come out: PM

14:32: The NRC was formulated under the Congress, but not one word was said about it then. And how you're making a big thing about it: PM

14:30: This law is neither for Hindus nor Muslim citizens of the country. This isn't for them, and has nothing to do with them: PM

14:25: Police don't ask for your religion, they just protect you: PM

14:20: Throw chappals at my photos, burn my effigies, but don't set public properties on fire: PM

14:15: Public properties set ablaze because of politics: PM

14:10: Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians all were befitted, everyone who lives here was benefitted. Why did we do this? Because we live for the love of the country. We are dedicated to the mantra of 'Sabka saath, sabka vikas': PM

14:10: Did we ask you for proof of your religion when we brought the Ujawala Yojna: PM

14:07: Some political parties are trying to instigate people: PM

14:06: I tell people---Respect the Parliament, respect the laws the Parliament has passed. Respect people's mandate: PM

14:04: You can see how divisive these people are. Last week, they circulated fake videos to scare people about the Citizenship Amendment Bill: PM

14:03: Most people still don't get drinking water in the city: PM

14:02: If that is true, why are people buying water purifiers? And what about those people who can't afford it: PM

14:01: Delhi government has done nothing about the biggest problem the city faces---that of drinking water. If you were to believe them, they would tell you that they're giving clean drinking water to every house in Delhi. Do you believe them: PM

14:00: We have tried to decongest Delhi, and have tried to make sure that pollution levels are controlled in Delhi: Modi

13:56: These people have been trying to stall our work: PM

13:53: These people gave such people in these bungalows the freedom to do whatever they wanted. But when I wanted to do something, they put roadblocks. But they didn't know they were dealing with Narendra Modi: Narendra Modi

13:52: You should know what these people did. They have bungalows in Delhi's poshest parts to people close to them: PM

13:51: We do not procrastinate. It's not our way: PM

13:50: We have demarcated 1700 colonies with the use of technology: PM

13:47: A large population of Delhi lived in fear of bulldozers. These people never found a way to relieve you of this burden in so many years of independence: PM

13:46: This has happened for the first time since independence: PM

13:45: It shows what happens when people are relieved of a huge burden: PM

13:42: I am glad to make a difference to Delhi's 40 lakh people through Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna: PM

13:41: This Ramlila maidan is a historic place: PM

13:28: Modi on the rally stage

13:22: PM arrives at Ramlila Maidan
