A Suitable Boy actress Sadaf Jafar arrested and beaten by Lucknow police amid CAA protest

Sadaf Jafar gets arrested by Lucknow police | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Actress and former teacher Sadaf Jafar was allegedly beaten by Lucknow police during anti-CAA protest The actress will be seen in Mira Nair's upcoming project, A Suitable Boy Sadaf shared a live video on Facebook as the police arrested her

With several reports pertaining to protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act across the country, actress and former teacher Sadaf Jafar has been arrested. On December 19, Sadaf was part of the protest against CAA but was allegedly beaten by the police and arrested in Lucknow. The actress was among the many protesters who were rallying in the UP capital at Parivartan Chowk.

Sadaf shared a live video on Facebook on Thursday where she was part of a rally when miscreants threw stones at the police station in Partivartan Chowk. However, since she was part of the protest rally, the police arrested her. In the video, she can be seen asking the police why they were not arresting the real culprits who were being violent.

"Why are you not stopping them? When there is violence, then you’re standing and watching the show. What’s the use of the helmet? Why aren’t you doing anything?” she can be heard saying in the video.

Take a look at the video below

Director Mira Nair shared the news on her official Twitter handle, demanding for Sadaf's release. She wrote "This is our India now - Appalling: our #SuitableBoy actress, Sadaf Jafar, beaten and jailed for peaceful protest in Lucknow! Join me in demanding her release."

Meanwhile, on the work front, A Suitable Boy is a BBC series, helmed by Mira Nair which also stars Ishaan Khatter, Tabu, Tanya Maniktala, Rasika Duggal, Namit Das and Gully Boy fame Vijay Varma. The series is based on Vikram Seth's novel. The series is written by Andrew Davies. The director has been sharing updates about the film from time to time. Ishaan Khatter recently wrapped up the series after completing the Madhya Pradesh schedule. He shared a post on his Instagram account.

Stay tuned for more updates!
