Despite tall claims, BJP only deported 1,000 Bangladeshi immigrants: Congress's Rajeev Shukla

As the nation continues to simmer in flames over the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), senior Congress leader and former Union Minister Rajeev Shukla on Sunday said despite tall claims, the Narendra Modi government has only managed to deport 1,000 illegal immigrants from Bangladesh in the last five years.

"Despite the tall claims, only 1,000 Bangladeshis were deported in the last five years. The Congress party never stopped the deportation of illegal Bangladeshis," said Rajeev Shukla said.

The Congress leader also said that clashes in the country have so far not been communal and the protesters have only clashed with police personnel.

"The clashes reported so far are not communal in nature. The protesters clashed with police only, Rajeev Shukla said.

Shukla’s comments come at a time when the entire country continues to remain on edge as innumerable protests take place over the citizenship law that aims to expedite non-Muslim immigrants who faced religious persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. The new amended act has reduced the number of years of residing in India to 5 years from 11 in order to prove citizenship.

On BJP's claim that the new act will not affect Muslims in India, Rajeev Shukla said, "BJP is trying to differentiate people on the basis of religion. Muslims are facing discrimination in the so-called Muslim countries like Pakistan as well. NDA allies Biju Janata Dal and Akali Dal are also against CAA and have demanded inclusion of Muslims, Ahmedia Muslims in particular."

Violence over CAA has been reported in many parts of Uttar Pradesh--Bulandshahr, Lucknow, Rampur, Meerut--which has left more than 15 people dead. The Uttar Pradesh government has also suspended internet services in many districts, citing security concerns.

In Assam, anti-CAA stir has reportedly left more than 5 people dead.

In Mangaluru, Karnataka, two people have been reported dead in police firing during violent protests against the controversial citizenship law.

Students across the country--Kolkata, Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai, Aligarh, Lucknow -- have been staging protests against CAA and police brutality that left many students injured in Jamia Millia Islamia University on December 15.

On December 15, the national capital turned into a battlefield as stones, bloodstains and torched vehicles were seen at Delhi’s Jamia Nagar following protests over CAA.
