Police inaction allegedly leads minor rape victim to commit suicide; MP police denies allegations

The police have booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Minor victim was raped by a man named Bachu Sukhram Bundela Police officials denied to register the victim's complaint against the accused The victim consumed pesticide and died during treatment at the district hospital

Bhopal: A 15-year-old rape victim committed suicide in Madhya Pradesh's Khargone district after the police allegedly refused to register her complaint.

The victim's father told a news agency that his daughter was abducted and raped by Bachu Sukhram Bundela, a resident of the Ashapur village. While after the incident took place, when he and his daughter went to the Kakadda police post to lodge a complaint against the accused the police officials denied to register a complaint in the matter. Subsequently, they went to the Maheshwar police station where the officials allegedly questioned the character of his daughter.

ASP (Additional Superintendent of Police) Khargone, S Kankane: A woman police officer had gone for investigation in connection with rape incident, the girl was asked to come to police station to report but she didn't come. We have registered a case&accused has been arrested. 2/2 https://t.co/yTWFMAUBit — ANI (@ANI) December 22, 2019

Reportedly, the police department have refused all allegations levelled by the minor's father. Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP) Shashikant Kankane told media outlets that a woman police officer had gone for investigation in connection with the rape case, meanwhile, the officials called the victim to the police station to report but she did not come.

However, the police have registered the case, and the accused (Bundela) has been arrested in the matter. Due to police in-action in the matter, the victim consumed pesticide and died during treatment at the district hospital. The police have booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further probe in the matter is underway.
