The Best Shows Of The Year

The Family Man

What is it about: Starring Manoj Bajpayee and Priyamani in the lead roles, the show follows the life of a middle-class man working for a fictitious branch of the Indian National Investigation Agency called the TASC.

What we liked: Adequately funny at times, The Family Man is a welcome addition to the Indian spy series. Of course, like with his previous work, Bajpayee doesn’t fail to surprise with his talent and passion for his craft. The show itself is socially and politically aware but doesn’t end up being preachy or newsy.

Made In Heaven

What is it about: The show tells the story of Karan Mehra and Tara Khanna who run a wedding planning agency called Made In Heaven and all the people that the two come in touch with.

Why we liked it: Brilliantly directed by Nitya Mehra, Zoya Akhtar, Prashant Nair and Alankrita Shrivastava, the show focuses on numerous socioeconomic issues that are prevalent in our society and it does so with style, finesse and panache

Typewriter

What is it about: Directed by Sujoy Ghosh, this Netflix horror web series revolves around a haunted house and a book that a group of ghost hunters come across.

Why we liked it: The narrative is fluid despite the numerous complexities and manages to keep you glued to your seats. The story is intriguing and a charming departure from traditional horror.

Criminal Justice

What is it about: The story focuses on a cab driver who has a one-night stand with his passenger, only to wake up and find her murdered. His lawyer manages to free him of rape charges but doesn’t succeed in acquitting him of murder charges.

Why we liked it: The series has a multitude of witty lines and is replete with great performances by Vikrant Massey, Pankaj Tripathi and Jackie Shroff. The numerous twists and turns can be a downer but for those interested in crime-based dramas, Criminal Justice is a must watch.

Delhi Crime

What is it about: Set in the aftermath of the infamous and brutal Delhi gang rape of 2012, the series follows Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), Vartika Chaturvedi, who is tasked with finding the culprits.

Why we liked it: Shefali Shah as Vartika Chaturvedi is absolutely superb and despite being based on a premise that has been covered in the media before, the story manages to stay fresh and engaging. The show is also gritty and suitably grim.

Kaafir

What is it about: The show follows the life of Kainaaz Akhtar, a woman from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir who finds herself on the wrong side of the Line of Control. She is arrested under suspicion of being a militant and ends up giving birth to a child while she is under imprisonment.

Why we liked it: Dia Mirza’s sensitive portrayal of Kainaaz is a joy to watch. Set in Jammu & Kashmir, the series also helps highlight the trials of the people who live there and the underlying story of the people of the Valley.
