Unnao rape case convict Kuldeep Sengar's constituency loses Rs 1.10 crore MLA development funds

Kuldeep Singh Sengar has been sentenced to life imprisonment for raping a minor in 2017 | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Sengar had floated proposals worth Rs 4 crore However, proposals worth Rs 90 lakh could be passed, while the remaining Rs 1.10 crore lapsed due to his conviction

New Delhi: The constituency of Unnao MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who has been convicted in the Unnao rape case, has lost over Rs 1.1 crore from MLA development funds. According to reports, Sengar had proposed works over Rs 4 crore over the past two financial years, however, tenders only worth Rs 90 lakh could be issued.

In 2017, Sengar won from Bangarmau seat as BJP MLA. His constituency was assigned Rs 2 crore per year for the past two years under MLA development funds. The proposals sent by Sengar for area development included 32 projects. Interestingly, however, his approvals on letter pads signed from the jail were rejected by the prison authorities, as a result of which the proposed projects could not reach a logical conclusion.

Sengar, now a convict in the sensational Unnao rape case involving a minor, was expelled by the BJP following massive outrage over his involvement in the case. Serving a life sentence, Sengar's MLA funds will now cease to exist and will be returned to the government, reports said.

A Delhi court, last week, awarded life imprisonment to Sengar in the 2017 case. “The convict Kuldeep Singh Sengar is hereby sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of his natural biological life in terms of Section 376 (2) Indian Penal Code,” said the court order.

The court also imposed a fine of Rs 25 lakh on Sengar and said that Rs 15 lakh from the fine will be paid to the state government for prosecution and trial. He also faces charges under another case for the alleged murder of the victim's father when the latter was in judicial custody in April 2018.

The court also directed the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to provide protection to the victim and to monitor the threat perception to her family. The victim has been asked to stay in a rented accommodation provided by the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) and the rental charges of Rs 15,000 will be paid by the Uttar Pradesh government.
