Pakistan rejects link to Pulwama attack, says ‘it is a matter of grave concern’

Pakistan on Thursday said the militant attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district is “a matter of grave concern” even as it strongly rejected Indian media and government’s allegations of the country’s link to the strike “without” probe.

In one of the deadliest attacks in Jammu and Kashmir’s three decades of militancy, a suicide bomber from the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) militant group rammed an explosives-laden vehicle into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district on Thursday, killing at least 44 personnel and leaving many critically wounded. Attack in Pulwama in Kashmir is “a matter of grave concern”, the Pakistan Foreign Office said in a statement.

Asserting that Pakistan has “always condemned acts of violence” anywhere in the world, it said, “We strongly reject any insinuation by elements in the Indian media and government that seek to link the attack to Pakistan without investigations.”

In a tweet, FO spokesperson Mohammad Faisal said, “We have always condemned heightened acts of violence in Valley.” Meanwhile, India slammed Pakistan over the Pulwama attack and asked the neighbouring country to stop supporting terrorists and dismantle terror infrastructure operating from its soil.

India also strongly reiterated its appeal to all members of the international community to support the proposal to list ‘terrorists’, including JeM chief Masood Azhar, as a designated terrorist under the 1267 Sanctions Committee of the UN Security Council, and to ban terrorist organisations operating from territories controlled by Pakistan. This heinous and despicable act has been perpetrated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based terrorist organisation proscribed by the UN and other countries, it said.

This militant group is led by the international terrorist Masood Azhar, who has been given full freedom by the Pakistani government to operate and expand his terror infrastructure in territories under Pakistan’s control and to carry out attacks in India and elsewhere with impunity, the MEA said. Countries from across the globe also condemned the attack in Pulwama, with global leaders like the US, Russia and France asserting that they stand with India in combating the menace of terrorism.

“The US Mission in India strongly condemns today’s terrorist attack in Jammu & Kashmir. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims,” US Ambassador to India Kenneth Juster tweeted. with PTI (inputs)
