Duo gives high five for ‘panchas’ cause

Vadodara: Drawing a ‘punchnama’ of seizures details of crime spots , narration of an incident by an accused and other procedures during investigations is a standard practice by police. But finding witnesses or ‘panchs’ who would remain present and then testify in the court remains a difficult task.Two youths from the city have, however, since long been go to persons whenever the city police were dealing with serious crimes like rape, murder or seizure of narcotics. They were roped in even for Navlakhi gang rape case.The two youths started becoming ‘panchas’ eight years back when they came to know of a rape of a baby girl that had left her badly injured and bleeding. Since then, whenever they come to know about a gory crime, they do not hesitate to help the investigators. The fact that they are Congress workers has never come in their way when such crimes take place.Jitendra Solanki and Dev Patel had rushed to the aid of the baby girl who was raped by a relative in Fatehgunj police station area. “I was shocked on seeing her condition and we decided to help the police in the case. I knew some policemen as I used to work for an anti-piracy investigations agency. Patel was with me and we became ‘panchas’ for the first time,” said Solanki. Since then the duo’s services have been used in a series of cases.Later, Solanki said he became a ‘panch’ for a couple of more rape and murder cases. “The police used to contact us whenever they needed help. In some cases, we volunteered to help the police,” said Solanki. These include the murder of gangster Rafiq Gai.When the duo was called for Navlakhi rape case, they volunteered to become ‘panchas’. “We had remained witnesses during reconstruction of offences earlier,” said Solanki.Patel said many people used to stay away from helping the police as they may have to face hassles of court hearings. “But we take time out and try to do our best. The police and prosecution also appreciate the fact that we stand firm on what we say. In fact, on one occasion when a defence lawyer was trying to rattle us, the judge appreciated that we were standing our ground and asked the lawyer to stop troubling us,” said Patel.Patel said a major hassle was waiting for long hours in court for their turn to testify. “A senior police officer of the crime branch said the duo was selected for the ‘panchnama’ of the reconstruction as they had experience of narcotics and other important cases.“While government officials were ‘panchas’ for other aspects, they were present for the recreation of the incident,” said the official.
