Rajasthan: ‘Fiancée’ files rape complaint against trainee IPS officer

Both are from same community

(The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme court directives on cases related to sexual assault)

JODHPUR: The ‘fiancée’ of an IPS officer, who hails from Bikaner and is undergoing training, has filed a complaint of rape against him.The officer is undergoing training in Hyderabad after he was selected for Indian Police Services (IPS) this year. He refused to continue the relationship with the complainant after allegedly getting engaged.Police have registered a case and initiated investigation into the matter, followed by the medical examination of the complainant. Jodhpur police commissioner Prafulla Kumar said, “We have registered a case and irrespective of the fact that it is against a trainee IPS officer, we will follow the same protocol as followed in any other rape case. We are investigating the matter but will have to check the veracity of the complainant’s claims as the alleged assault took place in April 2018. We will also probe the reasons for the delay in lodging the FIR.”ADCP (Jodhpur west) Umesh Kumar Ojha said that the girl has stated that she was engaged to the undertraining officer, who broke with her after being selected for IPS.Jodhpur: According to the complaint filed at the city’s Dev Nagar police station, the girl stated that she was engaged to the IPS aspirant from Bikaner when he was preparing for the exam in Jodhpur. Both of them belong to the same community. She further stated that he took her to an isolated house in April 2018 and forced her to have physical relation with him.Initially, police declined to share the rape complaint against the under-training officer. Right from the Devi Nagar SHO to the head constable concerned, all officers turned down TOI’s attempts to confirm the case. TOI called SHO Satya Prakash twice and also sent a text message, all of which were ignored.The telephone attendant at the thana admitted that a complaint had been filed but said he cannot provide details and advised TOI reporter to speak to head constable Manoj Kumar. The head constable declined to give the details and advised to collect the same from the police station.
