Raped For Money: Father Arrested For Allowing 30 Men To Rape His 12-Year-Old Daughter

Malappuram, Kerala: A 12-year-old girl, who is in class 7, was raped by over 30 people at Chelari in Kerala with the support of her father.

Connected to the incident, the Tirurangadi police have arrested 2 people and have filed a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children From Sexual Offences (POCSO) act.

Authorities arrested 36-year-old Ashraf, the son of Muhammed Kutty, who is a resident of the Mele Chelari, 38-year-old Shyju, son of Jaruppan, a resident of Chenakkalanagdi.

The incident came to light when local residents alerted the PTA members of the school, where the 12-year-old girl was studying.

The teacher realized that the girl was frequently missing classes and was not in the right mental state.

An investigation was launched and the Childline Authorities were called.

Investigations revealed the details of the sexual abuse and the authorities counseled the girl.

The 12-year-old girl was produced before the CWC (Child Welfare Committee) Malappuram on Saturday and was sheltered at a children’s home in Malappuram.

The child was later produced before a magistrate court so her statement can be recorded.

The 12-year-old girl’s identity was not shared with the public so her privacy can be protected.

The supreme court of India prohibits authorities to release the identities of people (victims) related to sexual assault.

Anwar Karakkadan, a member of the Child-Line Malappuram, said the girl is the only child in the family.

The family was staying at the rented house.

Anwar said, “The girl has revealed that she has been abused for the last two years. Their house was frequented by many persons including her father’s friends.”

Anwar added, “The number of people increased during school holidays.”

The girl was also forced to skip school days as men were sexually abusing her.

What Happened?

Every weekend for 2 straight years, men would come to the house of the 12-year-old girl’s home and would rape her.

The girl said some men where known to her father and some were not.

It all first started when the girl was just 10-years-old when her father would invite his friends for a drink at their house. The men would tease and grope the girl in front of her parents.

Sometimes, the men would disappear into their single musty bedroom with her mother.

The girl recalled the first time it happened.

The 12-year-old girl said her father pushed her into the bedroom with one of his friends one day and locked the door from outside.

The man raped her.

The girl said her father would call up men, booked her for sexual activities, and would take money from them.

Authorities believe that the girl was raped by at least 30 men in 2 years.

The girl also admitted that the men used condoms when they raped her.

Halfway into the conversation with the child welfare authorities, the 12-year-old girl admitted that she had sex.

The 12-year-old girl said, “Men would come and take my mother into the bedroom. I thought this was normal. And then my father pushed me into the room with strangers.”
