Three death-row convicts in 2012 Nirbhaya case to file curative, mercy petitions

Nirbhaya's parents (File Photo) | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights All four accused are lodged at the Tihar Jail in New Delhi The mercy plea will ultimately be presented before the President of India Reports hinted that preparations were being made at Tihar Jail to carry out the executions

New Delhi: Lawyers for three of the four men convicted in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case told media outlets on Tuesday that they will be using the legal remedies still available for them. This will include both curative and mercy petition. The four men are on death row for the gang-rape of a 23-year-old girl on the night of December 16, 2012.

Earlier this month, all of the four convicts were informed by the Tihar Jail that they have seven days to decide whether or not to file a mercy petition. On December 19, the Delhi High Court rejected a plea filed by one of the convicts, Pawan Kumar Gupta. In his plea, Gupta's lawyer claimed that his client was a minor at the time of the incident and should be prosecuted under the Juvenile Justice Act.

Similarly, Akshay Kumar Singh's petition was also rejected by the Supreme Court last week. Singh's lawyer had argued in the plea that air and water pollution is already shortening the lives of Delhi's residents and in such a time, it is impractical to award the death penalty to anyone.

Others on death-row for the heinous crime that shook the nation are Akshay Kumar Singh, Vinay and Mukesh. Since one of them was moved from Delhi's Mandoli jail, all four are currently being kept under heavy surveillance at Tihar Jail. Another accused in the case, Ram Singh had committed suicide inside his jail cell in Tihar in 2013. Meanwhile, the sixth accused was sent to a remand home and released after three years because he was a juvenile.

Now, the only last remaining legal recourse available to the death-row convicts is a curative petition which is usually followed by mercy for computation of death penalty to life imprisonment. These petitions are sought from the President of India.
