Pune: 9-year-old girl raped by uncle multiple times in a month; accused sent to police remand

The accused has also been booked under various sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Uncle rapes 9-year-old girl repeatedly in Pune Victim herself dialled 100 to inform police about the crime Accused has been sent to police remand till December 27

Pune: In a shocking incident, a 9-year-old was raped by her maternal uncle four times in a month in Pune district of Maharashtra. The girl finally called the police and narrated her ordeal.

The accused has been arrested by Pune rural police on Monday. He has been remanded to police remand till December 27.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the complaint against the man was filed by the victim's grandmother. The girl herself informed the police about the rape and threats by her uncle.

According to police, the child herself called up the police control room number and informed the cops about the crime.

"More details emerged after we talked to the girl during the course of the investigation. According to the girl's grandmother, she was violated by her uncle on December 15 when she was alone at home. The accused also raped the girl thrice in the past," said Krishnadev Kharade, police inspector from Manchar police station.

The officer investigating the case also said that the child's uncle also threatened to kill her when she resisted the rape attempt.

The victim lived with her uncle and grandmother. Kharade also informed that the victim's mother had left the family and her father was away for work.

Manchar police have registered a case under section 376 (rape), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The accused has also been booked under various sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) Act.

In another incident, an18-year-old girl was allegedly raped by her uncle in Fatehpur district of Uttar Pradesh. The accused allegedly set the girl ablaze after raping her. The incident took place on December 15 afternoon in the Ubhipur village.

According to Superintendent of Police, Prashant Verma, the survivor was alone at home when the incident took place.
