Ugandan woman offered lift on motorbike, gang-raped by two men in Pune

The police later filed a case against the two unidentified accused based on the description by the Ugandan national. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Pune: A 28-year-old woman from Uganda, who is on a tourist visa in the country, has alleged gang-rape after a youth offered her a lift on a motorbike in Pune district of Maharashtra.

In her complaint to the police, the victim said, "I had gone for dinner on Monday night. I left the restaurant after midnight and was booking a taxi when a youth came and offered me a lift to my home. I agreed and sat on the motorbike. After a few minutes later, the youth called another guy and he joined us on the bike. I was made to sit in between the two youths."

According to a report in Indian Express, the two accused later took the woman to a deserted spot in Lohegoan and gang-raped her. The victim also alleged that she tried to resist the accused but was beaten and raped.

The woman later requested the accused to drop her to the main road so that she can reach home taking a cab. The two accused agreed and took her to the main road. As the accused reached the main road, the woman saw some youths and screamed for help.

As the youths rushed to help the woman, the accused panicked and fell down from the motorcycle. Later, the two fled from the spot on their two-wheeler. The woman has suffered injuries in her knees in the incident.

The youths later helped the woman to inform the police about the crime. The police reached the spot at around 3.30 am. The cops later took the woman to a hospital for treatment. Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) (zone 4) Pankaj Deshmukh also reached the spot to inspect the crime scene. The victim told police that she is a businesswoman and arrived in India in August this year on a tourist visa.

The police later filed a case against the two unidentified accused based on the description by the Ugandan national. The accused were booked under section 366, 376 (d), 323 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Police say they are in the process of identifying the accused and arrest them.


