21-year-old engineering student from Bengaluru found dead in Hyderabad hotel

The parents of the victim are yet to reach Hyderabad to take custody of the body. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Bengaluru student found dead in Hyderabad hotel Student is identified as Samhith M Srivatsa Police suspect the student may have consumed poison

Hyderabad: A student from Bengaluru has been found dead at a hotel in Hyderabad on Tuesday. The engineering college student was identified by the I-D card found in his bag.

The 21-year-old victim drove from Bengaluru on his bike and checked into a Oyo hotel in Hyderabad the wee hours on Tuesday.

According to a report in India Express, the victim has been identified as Samhith M Srivatsa. The student was found lying unconscious on his bed and was frothing from his mouth. The door was broke open in the morning as it was locked from inside.

"The youth had come to the city alone on his two-wheeler. He just carried a bag, some college books and a helmet. The hotel staff broke open the room after there was no response from inside. As the door was opened, the youth was found lying in an unconscious state," said P Vijay Kumar, Inspector, RGI Airport Police Station.

Police say they haven't found any suicide note from the victim. Cops suspect that the youth may have consumed poison and committed suicide. According to the preliminary probe by police, the youth was suffering from depression over some personal issues.

The body has been sent for post-mortem. The parents of the victim are yet to reach Hyderabad to take custody of the body. Meanwhile, a case has been registered by police under section 174 Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC).

In a similar incident, a 49-year-old woman from New Zealand was found dead at a hotel in New Delhi on November 16. The deceased had checked into the hotel with her husband. The victim was identified as 49-year-old Tuialli Polly.

The woman was said to be suffering from high blood pressure. Some reports suggested that the woman was accompanied by an Australian national and the two came to India to get married according to Indian traditions.
