Student accuses lab in-charge at Hyderabad college of raping her on campus

The recent rape and murder of a veterinarian in Hyderabad has sparked outrage (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The alleged incident took place at the college campus on Monday A complaint was registered by the 19-year-old at Petbasheerabad police station Her medical examination was conducted once a case was registered against the accused

Hyderabad: A man employed as a lab in-charge at a prominent college in the city has been booked on charges of rape. Police officers familiar with the matter revealed that a case was registered against the accused on the basis of a 19-year-old college student who accused him of forcing himself on her.

In her complaint to the police on Tuesday, the student alleged that the lab in-charge summoned her to the campus on Monday. She reached the campus at around 4 pm which is when the accused bolted the lab door from inside and sexually assaulted her. Traumatised, the girl gathered the courage and approached Petbasheerabad police the next day and lodged a complaint against the accused.

A case was registered against him under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which corresponds to charges of rape. Once her complaint was registered, the girl was sent for a medical examination. Further details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is underway. Reports in the media suggest that the college in question is owned by the Telangana Labour Minister.

This distressing incident has come to light less than a fortnight after a beautician was allegedly raped and murdered in Ramayampet area of Medak in Hyderabad. A 26-year-old man from Nizamabad was arrested for his involvement in the heinous crime. Further investigation into the matter had revealed that the accused lured the victim to a farm in Kothacheruvu where he raped her and murdered her before setting her body ablaze.

In November, the rape and murder of a veterinarian whose charred body was found under a bridge near Shadnagar had left the entire nation in shock. Four men accused of committing the unspeakable crime were killed in an exchange of gunfire with Cyberabad police during a re-creation of the crime scene and recovery of the victim's personal belongings.
