Ugandan national gang-raped in city

Two men allegedly took woman to an isolated spot in Lohegaon on the pretext of offering her a lift and committed the crime; case is filed in Vimantal PS



In yet another gruesome crime against women, a Ugandan national was allegedly gang-raped by two men on Monday night. The incident took place around 10 pm on December 23 after the woman was picked up by one of the accused outside a restaurant in Mundhwa. The 28-year-old woman, in the city for work, was apparently approached by the accused, who was passing by on his bike, on the pretext of offering her a lift. Being new to the city, she was unaware of the city roads, the woman said. After finishing her dinner at the restaurant, she came out to hail a cab, but was unable to find any, she said. That is when she accepted the culprit’s offer to drop her home, she said in her complaint. The woman has lodged a complaint in Vimantal police station in this regard.



According to police, the woman had come to India on tourist visa in August this year. Around 7.30 pm on Monday, she had gone for dinner. She has been residing with her sister in the city, who owns a garment import-export business. On Monday evening, the woman went out for dinner in Mundhwa. After dinner, she came out and first looked for a rickshaw. Unable to find one, she tried booking a cab to go home. While she was waiting outside the restaurant, a young man on a bike approached her. Seeing the woman standing alone, the accused stopped his bike and struck a conversation with her in English and offered to drop her home when she said that she was unable to find a mode of transport back home, the complaint states. On his way, the culprit allegedly made a call to one of his friends and asked him to come to Lohegaon area. When the friend showed up, the trio rode triples, with the woman sandwiched between the two men, the complainant said. The accused took her to an isolated spot near a college in Lohegaon and allegedly raped her.



She tried raising her voice to seek help and even made an attempt to escape, she said. However, since it was pitch dark with no one else in sight, she was trapped, she alleged. The accused allegedly also beat up the woman, tore her clothes and raped her. After conducting the crime when both the accused were preparing to leave the spot, the woman apparently requested them to at least drop till the main road. The men seemingly obliged and gave her a lift. That is when the woman saw afew other men and asked for help. She jostled her way and the bike skidded and all three fell on the ground. While the woman sustained an injury on her right foot and knee, the duo picked up the bike and fled from the scene. One of the men from those came forward to help her gave her clothes to wear. The woman somehow called up her sister, after which she filed a complaint in Vimantal police station.



Gajanan Pawar, senior police inspector attached with Vimantal police station, told Mirror, “The woman raised an alarm when she saw some people on the street. The biker lost balance and all three fell down. The accused fled when the youths approached them. Later, the woman lodged a complaint with the police. A case has been registered under sections 366 (kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage), 376 (D) (gang-raping) and 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt) of the Indian Penal Code against two unknown persons.”


