Eyes glued, throat slit: Chennai woman murders man who sexually assaulted, blackmailed her for years

The woman was sent to jail by a local court after police arrested her. (Photo: PTI/Representational image)

A Chennai woman has murdered an elderly man who was blackmailing her after he sexually assaulted her on several occasions in the past.

A Times of India report said the woman killed the 54-year-old man on Monday by slitting his throat after she applied a strong glue to shut his eyes.

She was arrested by police the following day and a local court has sent her to jail. Preliminary investigations in the case revealed the identity of the man as Amman Sekar of Thiruvottiyur.

Police also found out that the incident occurred in the Washermanpet area after the man allegedly threatened to make intimate photos of the 24-year-old woman public, added the report.

It has also come to light that the woman was a friend of Sekar's daughter and he had been sexually assaulting her for more than four years.

However, Sekar started blackmailing the woman after he got to know that she was getting married. When he began to blackmail her actively, she planned to end it for good by killing him.

It all started on Monday night when police found a dead man with his throat slit on Cross Road in Washermanpet.

A police team rushed to the spot and sent the body for post-mortem. After his identity was ascertained, initial inquiries revealed that Sekar had been last seen with a woman in the same locality.

Police immediately arrested the woman, following which she told the cops about her ordeal. She said her family members knew about how Sekar sexually assaulted her for four years but kept silent as he financially supported her family.



But when the woman decided to get married, Sekar was not happy. The TOI report stated that Sekar was pressurising her family to call off the marriage and even threatened them. Sekar said he would post some of her intimate pictures with him online.

However, it was too much for the woman who told police that she was left with no choice but to kill Sekar. According to the report, she asked Sekar to go out with her to Adyar and also promised to give him a gift after they return to Washermanpet, where they usually met.

After spending time together and returning to Washarmenpet, she told Sekar to close his eyes as she pretended to give him a gift. As soon has Sekar closed his eyes, she poured strong glue on his eyes and slit his throat with a knife.
